16256 eup sherratt:Layout 1   5/11/09    14:27    Page 1




                                    A n d r e w                   S h e r r a t t                                                                                      A n         d r e   w   S h   e   r   r   a   t   t

                                 ECONOMY AND


                                                                                                                               ECONOMY AND SOCIETY
                                   SOCIETY IN
                              PREHISTORIC EUROPE


                                                                                                                               IN PREHISTORIC EUROPE
                                           C h a n gi n g Per sp ect i v es
                  This book brings together a classic collection of Andrew Sherrat’s work on the economic
                  foundations of prehistoric Europe, which have put forward important new ideas about the
                  development of farming, early technology and trade. In a series of contributions that have
                  included wide-ranging syntheses and detailed local studies, he discusses their implications
                  for the understanding of settlement-patterns, social structures, material culture, and less
                  tangible aspects of prehistoric life such as the spread of languages and the use of narcotics.

                  While the author’s earlier studies concentrated on topics such as subsistence and demography,
                  the later ones have sought more sophisticated ways of dealing with consumption and value.
                  One of the most interesting aspects of the volume is the way in which he looks back over these
                  changes, and sets them in the context of Europe’s image of itself as it has altered over recent
                  decades and centuries.

                  Andrew Sherratt teaches archaeology and anthropology in the University of Oxford and is




                                                                                                                                   Andrew Sherratt
                  editor of The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Archaeology (Cambridge University Press. 1980),
                  Archaeological Theory: Who Sets The Agenda? (Cambridge University Press. 1993), and
                  Consuming Habits: Drugs in History and Anthropology (Routledge. 1995).




                                                                                                                                                                      ECONOMY AND
                  ‘Andrew Sherratt has with consistent perspicacity and success tackled many of the
                  major issues facing European archaeology in the last quarter of the twentieth century ... the
                  whole represents a richly insightful tour d’ horizon of Europe from the sixth to the second




                                                                                                                                                                        SOCIETY IN
                  millennia BC.’ Roger Mercer, Secretary, Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical
                  Monuments of Scotland

                  ‘Andrew Sherratt is among the foremost authorities in European prehistory and this




                                                                                                                                                                   PREHISTORIC EUROPE
                  important volume of essays covers the whole range of his thinking ... It is a work of
                  significance for all students of the early past of Europe.’ Lord Renfrew of Kaimsthorn,
                  Master, Jesus College, Cambridge’.

                  EDINBURGH UNIVERSITY PRESS




                                                                                                                                                                    C h a n gi n g Per sp ect i v es
                  22 George Square,
                  Edinburgh EH8 9LF




                                                                                                                                    Edinburgh
                  www.euppublishing.com
                  ISBN 978 0 7486 06467
                  Front jacket illustration: Chalco pot design. Ornament on the
                  interior of a graphite painted bowl from Devetaki Cave.
                  Bulgaria, c.4000BC

                  Jacket Design: M Squared Design                                                    This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:39:45 UTC
                                                                                                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
E C O N O M Y AND SOCIETY
IN PREHISTORIC EUROPE




  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:39:45 UTC
                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:39:45 UTC
                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
ECONOMY AND SOCIETY
IN PREHISTORIC EUROPE
       Changing                 Perspectives




          Andrew Sherratt




   E D I N B U R G H U N I V E R S I T Y PRESS




      This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:39:45 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               For my teacher
            DAVID L. CLARKE
               1937-1976

                 Hinc lucem




          © Andrew Sherratt, 1997
       Transferred to digital print 2004
         Edinburgh University Press
        22 George Square, Edinburgh
               Typeset in Sabon
           by Nene Phototypesetters
    Printed and bound in Great Britain by
CPI Antony Rowe, Chippenham and Eastbourne

    A CIP record for this book is available
           from the British Library

              ISBN 0 7486 0646 7

 The right of Andrew Sherratt to be identified
  as author of this work has been asserted in
   accordance with the Copyright, Designs
            and Patent Act (1988)




 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:39:45 UTC
                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                CONTENTS

                                    Preface        vii
                            Acknowledgements               xi
     Introduction     Changing Perspectives on European Prehistory                    1

           SECTION I        CYCLES OF INTERPRETATION                        35
 1     V. Gordon Childe: Archaeology and Intellectual History (1989)                      38

           SECTION N          ECOLOGICAL IMPERATIVES?                       67
2     Socio-economic and Demographic Models for
      Later Prehistoric Europe (1972)                                                     70
 3    Water, Soil and Seasonality in Early Cereal Cultivation (1980)                      85
4     Resources, Technology and Trade: An Essay on
      Early European Metallurgy (1976)                                                102
5     Social Evolution: Europe in the Later Neolithic and
      Copper Ages (1984)                                                              134

                  SECTION HI DISCOVERING THE
              SECONDARY PRODUCTS COMPLEX     155
6     Plough and Pastoralism: Aspects of the Secondary
      Products Revolution (1981)                                                      158
 7    The Secondary Exploitation of Animals in the Old World
      (1983, revised)                                                                 199
 8    Wool, Wheels and Ploughmarks: Local Developments or
      Outside Introductions in Neolithic Europe? (1987)                               229
 9    Two New Finds of Wooden Wheels from Later Neolithic
      and Early Bronze Age Europe (1986)                                              242

         SECTION IV          PATTERNS ON THE GROUND                         249
10    Mobile Resources: Settlement and Exchange in Early
      Agricultural Europe (1982)                                                      252




                    This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:41:38 UTC
                                     All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 CONTENTS


11   The Development of Neolithic and Copper Age Settlement
     in the Great Hungarian Plain                                                 270
      I: The Regional Setting (1983)                                              270
     II: Site Survey and Settlement Dynamics (1984)                               293
12   Neolithic Exchange Systems in Central Europe,
     6000-3500 BC (1987)                                                           320
13   The Genesis of Megaliths: Monumentality, Ethnicity and
     Social Complexity in Neolithic North-West Europe (1990)                       333
14   Instruments of Conversion? The Role of Megaliths in the
     Mesolithic-Neolithic Transition in North-West Europe (1995)                   354

           SECTION V INVISIBLE FLOWS: LANGUAGES,
                 CULTURE AND DRUGS      373
15   Cups that Cheered: The Introduction of Alcohol to
     Prehistoric Europe (1987)                                                     376
16   Sacred and Profane Substances: The Ritual Use of Narcotics
     in Later Neolithic Europe (1991)                                              403
17   Metal Vessels in Bronze Age Europe and the Context of
     Vulchetrun (with T. Taylor, 1989)                                             431
18   Troy, Maikop, Altyn Depe: Early Bronze Age Urbanism and
     its Periphery (1991)                                                          457
19   The Archaeology of Indo-European: An Alternative View
     (with E. S. Sherratt, 1988)                                                   471

     SECTION VI      A CONVERSATION WITH CHILDE                             487
20   Gordon Childe: Right or Wrong? (1995)                                         490

                           Bibliography           506
                               Index         552




                                        vi




                This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:41:38 UTC
                                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 PREFACE

      'Meine Absicht ist nicht, zu beweisen, dafi ich bisher recht gehabt habe,
      sondern: herauszufinden, oh.'
                                           Bertolt Brecht, Leben des Galilei

T h is book consists of papers written, roughly one a year, over the first two
decades of my academic life. They are largely concerned with the great
changes which affected the cultures of the western Old World in the fourth
millennium BC: a time which saw the appearance of the first civilisations
in the Near East, and a fundamental transformation of life in prehistoric
Europe. They range, however, rather widely, exploring the history of archae-
ology and the origins of farming, prehistoric uses of narcotics or the spread
of Indo-European languages, as well as early trading systems and the
changing uses of domestic animals. Disparate though these aspects may
appear to be, they are all interlinked in sometimes surprising ways; and that
is the justification for publishing them together.
    Although part of my argument is that these pieces have stood the test of
time, they are nevertheless easily attributable to their respective dates of
composition, or at least to a sequence of phases within the recent develop-
ment of prehistoric archaeology in the English-speaking world. This in itself
provides an interesting exercise for the typologist and intellectual historian.
But there is a deeper and more fundamental interest which I hope that this
historical sequence of essays will demonstrate. The volume carries the sub-
title Changing Perspectives because, in those decades since I first went into
print, archaeological interpretations have changed very considerably. Topics
which were once at the centre of debate have been displaced by others;
explanations which once seemed convincing have been abandoned or
revised. Only in part is this due to the growth of knowledge by new
observations; rather it is due to changes in the way that these observations
are approached - in archaeology as in the humanities and social sciences in
general, and indeed in society at large. Such shifts are summed up in the
polemical labels adopted by the schools of thought which claim responsi-
bility - 'processualist' or 'post-processualist' - and in the changing pro-
portions of certain key words in the texts of their publications. (The main
title that I have chosen, Economy and Society, is itself deliberately emblem-
atic of the period in which these papers were composed.) Broadly, this shift
has been manifested in a move from economic calculations about how the

                                         VLL




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:42:46 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                     PREFACE


bulk of the population acquired their food, to a more nuanced concern with
how individuals manipulate their positions and symbolise their thoughts.
   One effect of this fashionable shift in interests is that whole areas of
knowledge can fall into relative neglect in the general archaeological com-
munity, and become confined to specialists. There is thus a danger that
topics such as the beginnings of farming or its later developments will be-
come ghettoised among archaeo-osteologists and palaeobotanists. This
would be a disaster: for while reconstructions of prehistoric activities must
rest on specialist techniques and knowledge, in the end the processes
involved can only be understood by combining all of the insights available
to the prehistorian. We should never abandon the interpretation of the
economy to economists, or 'economic' prehistory to biologists. This prin-
ciple works both ways: archaeologists interested in symbolism can only
grasp the potential meanings of prehistoric phenomena by understanding
their material effects. To succeed in his or her trade, the prehistorian must
always be a generalist. That is perhaps the most important message of the
book.
   There is, then, a particular advantage to looking backwards at changing
interpretations of important episodes in prehistory: for shifting perspectives
can reveal the three-dimensional structure behind the cardboard-cutout
caricatures which deceive the eyes of a single generation. Looking back on
my interpretations of the fourth millennium, for instance, it is perhaps only
now - fifteen years after publication of 'Plough and Pastoralism' (Chapter
6) - that I can claim to understand it in a three-dimensional way. That is why
the essays on megaliths and narcotics are as fundamental to this volume as
those on farming and settlement-history; and why increasing age (as well as
its penalties) really does bring its advantages. Paradoxically, an approach
via culture and value makes the idea of a secondary products complex more
viable and useful as a concept than one based simply on calculations of
energetics and economic efficiency. On the other hand, a purely 'cognitive'
approach can only confess defeat in the face of larger questions about the
reasons for farming and urbanisation. The way forward lies in combining
the different insights of successive generations in the most sophisticated way
possible.
    It is in the belief that archaeology makes it feasible to write a coherent
history of prehistoric times that these essays have been compiled. Never-
theless, it is perhaps too soon to write a seamless narrative as if all archae-
ologists were agreed on the conclusions presented. I have sometimes been
horrified in the past to see the secondary products revolution treated as a
tangible fact rather than as a mental construct, or to see myself quoted as
(or criticised for not being) an authority on soils or sheep. I am neither of
these things, only an intelligent generalist. These accounts are rhetorical and
dialectical, in that they are intended to change a prevailing set of assump-
tions and to challenge an accepted picture, and my tone throughout is one


                                         viii




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:42:46 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                     PREFACE


of advocacy. That is why I have tried to maximise their usefulness to
students by preserving their fidelity to the time and objective of their compo-
sition, while at the same time pointing out new facts, revised interpretations,
and the interconnections between papers. I have therefore left the texts
themselves largely unaltered, save for editing out overlaps and digressions,
and removing ambiguities or inaccuracies in wording; and I have indicated
new material by the use of square brackets. Introductions - to the volume
as a whole, to its constituent sections, and to individual papers - express my
current views and how these papers relate to them.
    This series of contributions covers what have been exciting times in
archaeology: from 1960s optimism to 1990s uncertainty as the turn of the
millennium approaches. It seemed right, therefore, both to begin and end
with Gordon Childe and his position in the streams of archaeological
thought. One of the better by-products of uncertainty is a search for in-
tellectual roots, and an attempt to situate archaeology within the other
dialogues that have accompanied and made possible its growth. Childe saw
the landscape of European prehistory all the more clearly because it was not
then covered with the forests of information which now sometimes obscure
the view; and the clarity of his vision often compensates for a lack of facts.
The first chapter is a study of his role in the history of archaeology, the last
one an attempt to relate these papers to his own conception of the prehistory
of Europe and the Near East. Between these two polar points, I have
grouped the essays roughly by chronology and theme, moving from the eco-
logical emphasis of a processualist outlook, through the analysis of patterns
in space, to a more recent set of topics concerned with consumption and
larger patterns of emulation and interaction.
    What is common to these papers is an attempt to go beyond the
archaeological evidence. To deal only with what survives is to espouse a
naive positivism; but to leave the evidence in favour of pure imagination is
to go into free fall. The alternative to both is to develop a sensitivity to time
and an awareness of anachronism, and to realise how different things were
at successive stages in the past. It was this attitude which fuelled my interest
in how different early farming systems were from those when secondary
products had become important; and it is this awareness which must inform
any attempt to reconstruct the less tangible aspects of human culture
and society. This outlook, above all, I owe to my teacher David Clarke at
Cambridge, to whose memory these essays are offered.
    While the factual basis of these arguments grows increasingly robust as
observations accumulate, the interpretation is always open to new insights
from unexpected quarters. These papers are therefore presented in the spirit
of Bertolt Brecht's Galileo quoted above: my intention is not to prove that I
have been right up to now, but to find out whether I have been. Or not.

                                                       Witney, Oxfordshire, 1996

                                         ix




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:42:46 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:42:46 UTC
                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

A book such as this one has accumulated many debts over the years. It was
on the shelves of my father's study that I first discovered Gordon Childe's
What Happened in History and Herbert Spencer's First Principles; and I am
sorry that he did not live to see this fruition. Professor Sir Grahame Clark,
whose generosity made it possible for me to study pollen analysis with
J. Troels-Smith in Copenhagen before taking up a history scholarship at
Peterhouse, has also passed on; while David Clarke, who taught me so
much there, died twenty years ago. Requiescant. Among those who were
acknowledged for their stimulus and help in writing the original papers,
I note certain recurrent names: Betchen Barber, Richard Bradley, Cyprian
Broodbank, David Clarke, Joost Crouwel, Robin Dennell, Gyorgy Gold-
man, Fred Hamond, Ian Hodder, John Howell, Nandor Kalicz, Kristian
Kristiansen, Jim Lewthwaite, Mary Littauer, Roger Moorey, Joan Oates,
Sebastian Payne, Stuart Piggott, Colin Renfrew, Neil Roberts, Mike
Rowlands, Steve and Sue Shennan, Sue Sherratt, Nick Starling, Tim Taylor,
Istvan Torma, Michael Vickers and Norm Yoffee. To all these (and many
others), thanks - but no responsibility for my errors and opinions.
   I am especially pleased to include here two pieces of work done in
collaboration, one with my wife Susan Sherratt and another with Timothy
Taylor. I must make special mention of Colin Renfrew for his unflagging
liveliness in making European prehistory exciting and interesting, and for
his personal interest in my sometimes wayward interpretations. When
I contemplate how consistently I have controverted his views (while
sympathising with his intentions) in the papers that follow, I realise what
an exceptional debt I owe - and how much I learned at the 'University of
Sitagroi'. I have been especially fortunate, too, in the head of my Depart-
ment in the Ashmolean: Roger Moorey is a scholar whose knowledge
I could not hope to equal, but from whom I have received constant and un-
stinted help.

The papers collected here were published for the first time in the volumes
listed below.
  1 'V. Gordon Childe: Archaeology and Intellectual History', Past and
     Present 125 (1989), 151-85.
  2 'Socio-economic and Demographic Models for Later Prehistoric

                                        XI




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:43:23 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                           ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


   Europe', from D. L. Clarke (ed.) Models in Archaeology (London:
   Methuen, 1972), pp. 477-542.
 3 'Water, Soil and Seasonality in Early Cereal Cultivation', World
   Archaeology 11 (3) (1980), 313-30.
 4 'Resources, Technology and Trade: An Essay on Early European
   Metallurgy', from I. Longworth, G. Sieveking and K. Wilson (eds)
   Problems in Social and Economic Archaeology (London: Duckworth,
   1976), pp. 557-81.
 5 'Social Evolution: Europe in the Later Neolithic and Copper Ages',
   from J. Bintliff (ed.) European Social Evolution (Bradford University,
   1984), pp. 123-34.
 6 'Plough and Pastoralism: Aspects of the Secondary Products
   Revolution', from N. Hammond, I. Hodder and G. Isaac (eds) Pattern
   of the Past: Studies in Honour of David Clarke (Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press, 1981), pp. 261-305.
 7 'The Secondary Exploitation of Animals in the Old World', World
   Archaeology 15 (1) (1983), 90-104.
 8 'Wool, Wheels and Ploughmarks: Local Developments or Outside
   Introductions in Neolithic Europe?', Bulletin of the London University
   Institute of Archaeology 23 (1987), 1-15.
 9 'Two New Finds of Wooden Wheels from Later Neolithic and Early
   Bronze Age Europe', Oxford Journal of Archaeology 5 (1986), 243-8.
   'Mobile Resources: Settk ment and Exchange in Early Agricultural
10 Europe', from A. C. Renfrew and S. J. Shennan (eds) Ranking,
   Resource and Exchange (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
   1982), pp. 13-26.
   'The Development of Neolithic and Copper Age Settlement in the
11 Great Hungarian Plain (Part I: The Regional Setting; Part II: Site
   Survey and Settlement Dynamics)', Oxford Journal of Archaeology
   1(3) (1983), 287-316; 2(1) (1984), 13-41.
   'Neolithic Exchange Systems in Central Europe, 6000-3500 BC', from
12 G. Sieveking and M. Newcomer (eds) The Human Uses of Flint and
   Chert (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987), pp. 193-204.
   'The Genesis of Megaliths: Monumentality, Ethnicity and Social
   Complexity in Neolithic North-West Europe', World Archaeology
13
   22 (2) (1990), 147-67.
   'Instruments of Conversion: The Role of Megaliths in the Mesolithic-
14 Neolithic   Transition in North-West Europe', Oxford Journal of
   Archaeology 14(3) (1995), 245-60.
   'Cups that Cheered: The Introduction of Alcohol to Prehistoric
15 Europe',   from W. Waldren and R. Kennard (eds) Bell Beakers of the
    Western Mediterranean: The Oxford International Conference 1986
    (BAR Int. Ser. 331, 1987), pp. 81-106.
16 'Sacred and Profane Substances: The Ritual Use of Narcotics in Later

                                        xii




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:43:23 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                          ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


   Neolithic Europe', from P. Garwood, D. Jennings, R. Skeates and
   J. Toms (eds) Sacred and Profane: Proceedings of a Conference on
   Archaeology; Ritual and Religion, Oxford University Committee for
   Archaeology Monographs 32 (1991), 50-64.
17 'Metal Vessels in Bronze Age Europe and the Context of Vulchetrun',
   with T. Taylor, from J. Best and N. de Vries (eds) Thracians and
   Mycenaeans (Leiden: Brill, 1989), pp. 106-34.
18 Troy, Maikop, Altyn Depe: Early Bronze Age Urbanism and its
   Periphery' (written 1991), to appear (in Russian) in V. M. Masson
   (ed.) Majkopskaya Kultura-fenomen Drevnej Istorii Kavkaza i
   Vostochnoj Evropy (St Petersburg).
19 'The Archaeology of Indo-European: An Alternative View', with
   E. S. Sherratt, in Antiquity 62 (no. 236) (1988), 584-95.
20 'Gordon Childe: Right or Wrong?' (written 1995), to appear (in
   Polish) in Jacek Lech (ed.) Conference volume on Gordon Childe,
   Warsaw; English version also in Archaeologia Polona (1997).




                                      xiii




                This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:43:23 UTC
                                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:43:23 UTC
                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                            INTRODUCTION

               Changing Perspectives
              on European Prehistory

During the fourth millennium BC, the western Old World underwent a
series of changes which were in many ways comparable in magnitude to the
beginning of farming there some five millennia previously,1 and were in
large part a consequence of it. In a roundabout way, this book is about how
those changes are best described. To understand what difference they made,
it is essential to define what went before and to characterise the nature of
the earliest forms of farming. To describe how and where the differences
became evident, it is necessary to look for the often indirect traces of
innovation and to track the patterns of their spread. Over and above these
tasks, however, is the need to come to terms with what kind of changes we
are talking about. Were they primarily economic advances, either forced on
a growing population by sheer necessity, or alternatively constituting a
breakthrough in production which allowed population to expand? Or were
they essentially changes within society itself: either in social relationships,
or in the way in which the world was perceived, which then came to
have material effects? Were they, on the other hand, primarily concerned
with material possessions - in effect, a consumer revolution in which people
discovered a need for things they had never before experienced? All of these
descriptions have some appeal, and yet fall short of a full characterisation -
in part because they are presented as exclusive alternatives, either/or. They
relate to habits of thought developed in the unusual circumstances of the
western world after the Industrial Revolution, when these aspects of life
have assumed a certain autonomy - a division which is a positive hindrance


This opening essay reviews how the themes treated in the following chapters have
been conceptualised by archaeologists, and offers a viewpoint which reconciles
economic and symbolic interpretations. It offers an assessment of the role of the
Near East, and an outline of the structure of European prehistory from 7000-
2000   BC.




                                         1




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               INTRODUCTION


in understanding an earlier world. This introduction is an attempt to bring
them back together again.


FROM SUBSISTENCE TO SYMBOLS: FALSE DICHOTOMIES
That these interpretations present themselves as such stark alternatives, with
party labels attached (economic, processualist, diffusionist, autonomist,
cognitive, etc.), is itself an interesting phenomenon of intellectual history
which it is worth stopping for a moment to ponder. Each generation con-
siders that its predecessor made fundamental interpretative errors, which
can now be expunged. In part this is simply the dynamics of factionalism
and the challenge for power; but it is made easier by the fact that the real
world changes and time moves on - the questions of the new generation are
unlike those of their predecessors because their world is not the same. When
gender roles are being renegotiated, it is not surprising that interest focuses
on what they have been like in the past, for instance, to a far greater degree
than when they are stable and apparently self-evident. At certain times -
usually periods of prosperity - great abstract schemes seem a natural way of
summarising knowledge; at others, when the world seems to be coming
apart, such schemes seem an artificial imposition. Thus one generation
emphasises abstract principles, the next one the reality of material con-
ditions. In this way the circumstances of the present time give rise to the
prevalent metaphors for the past.2
   Such principles can be seen at work in the period over which the essays
in this volume have been composed.3 The movements which had their
origins in the 1960s (various forms of New Archaeology) represented a kind
of abstract sociological system-building with natural science as its model
and endogenous change as its mechanism. Explanations favoured demo-
graphic pressure and environmental carrying capacity, within a metaphor of
diversification and integration. The papers in Section II, and to some extent
in Section III, show the influence of this background. This is not necessarily
a bad way of accumulating observations about important aspects of life in
the past, but it does not lead to the most sophisticated explanations. It
verges on Panglossianism ('everything works for the best, in this best of all
possible worlds'), and it encourages a certain naivete of interpretation, for
instance the belief that prehistoric cemeteries provide a direct reflection of
living social structures. After the 1970s Oil Crisis, we were much more
ready to believe that elites could be exploitative as well as benevolent,
and indeed that culture itself could lie - in the sense that cemeteries and
grave-goods, as much as wall-paintings and praise-songs, are attempts at
self-definition and contain an important element of negotiation and propa-
ganda. The movements which broke surface during the 1980s were
explicitly concerned with individualism, expression, symbolic structures
and contextual relativism with a concern for historical specificity. The


                                         2




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
         CHANGING     PERSPECTIVES        Ort   EUROPEAN      PREHISTORY


papers of Section V show a much greater awareness of this dimension. But
while its best exponent has retained the ability to write on a broad canvas
and engage large themes (Hodder 1990), some of his students and imitators
have espoused a more nihilist outlook and explicitly condemn such wider
vision, in favour of a personal engagement with particularities and the spirit
of place.
   Although some accounts of recent interpretative changes in archaeology
by 'post-processual' archaeologists tend to cast them, quite against the
letter of their own relativistic pronouncements, as straightforward, uni-
linear advances in understanding, I am myself more struck by the extent to
which they replay a classic cycle in intellectual history (see Chapters 1 and
20). Its paradigm is the Enlightenment/Romantic succession, but this
Auseinandersetzung has been regularly repeated and has manifested itself
for instance as the swing from Positivism to Nationalism at the end of the
nineteenth century, and only most recently as the move from Modernism to
Postmodernism in our own times. Figure 0.1 presents the succession of
intellectual movements in modern European history as a dialectic between
these two polar models of intellectual activity, related to the social and
economic circumstances of the societies which gave birth to them (see
Chapter 1). Each of these cycles shows the oscillation between system-
building and deconstruction, between attempts to create general models and
the desire to create interpretative metaphors. That this cycle is so con-
tinuously repeated suggests to me that both approaches have elements
which are useful and necessary, and that each acts to correct the excesses of
the other. Together, they convey an essential truth: history must be under-
stood both from the outside and from the inside, as a set of constrained
possibilities and as a sequence of meaningful actions. We should beware,
then, of simply following interpretative 'fashion' (or rather the dictates of
the Zeitgeist) in choosing either a purely demographic or alternatively a
symbolic explanation - the Neolithic as a response to population pressure
or as a drama of culturing the wild; for the prominence given to these
features is no more than a reflection of cyclical changes of interest within our
own society. Rather, we should address posterity by trying to integrate the
benefits of approaches which up to now (for the purposes of rhetoric or
academic politics) have largely put themselves forward as being mutually
exclusive. Genuine progress can come from their integration - not in a
soggy compromise,4 but in a critical combination of their respective
merits.
   We are thus faced with a confrontation between generalisation and
particularism, models and metaphors, grand recit and petites histoires.
Do we simply shift our attention from the large phenomena such as the
origins of agriculture or urbanism which dominated the '60s agenda, to the
meaning of particular pieces of rock art in Arizona or Scandinavia; or do we
attempt to rethink the nature of these larger processes using the insights

                                         3




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                THE EUROPEAN CULTURAL DIALECTIC
   AD

  1300



                      RENAISSANCE
  1400                 (Classical revival)
                              M

  1500



                                                              REFORMATION
  1600                                                         (Roots of northern
                                                                             peoples)
                                                                      M

  1700
                     ENLIGHTENMENT
                     (Comparative ethnography)

  1800
                             M                                 ROMANTICISM
                                                                 (Volksgeisl)
                             V
                       POSITIVISM
  1900                 (Biological science)                    N A TIONA
                                                                       ALISM
                                                               (Siedlungsarchdologie)
                                                                    ngsarch

                       MODERNISM
  2000                  (Processualism)                       POSTMODERNISM
                                                                (Post-processualism)



                                        ..INTERPRETATION..,

  Attitudes:           "ENLIGHTENMENT"                    "ROMANTIC"

  MODE                      comparative                   contextual, relativist

  MODEL                     deterministic                 interpretative

  THEMES                    order, hierarchy              meaning, action
                            progression, stages           growth, descent

  METANARRATIVE             evolution                     genealogy


0,1 Intellectual currents in modern European history as an alternation of attitudes
and intellectual traditions. The modernist9 or Enlightenment stance is character-
istic of established and economically dominant regions, the \postmodernist5 or
Romantic one more typical of less self-assured (rising or declining) cultures on
their margins. The former emphasises equilibrium, the latter; disruption of
established patterns.

                                              4




                This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        CHANGING      PERSPECTIVES        Ort   EUROPEAN      PREHISTORY


which we have gained in contemplating the smaller ones? It seems to me that
the latter presents the greater and more worthwhile challenge.
   How might we proceed? A useful beginning would be to examine some
of the categories within which we work and to remove the artificial con-
trasts which have been built into them. Our entire vocabulary is suspect.
The common word 'settlement', for instance, contains an implied contrast
with a time of ceaseless wandering - literally how prehistory was conceived
in the nineteenth century. Perhaps 'habitation', therefore, would be a better
word. Our opposition of 'settlement-site' and 'cemetery' is also an ethno-
centric one, for the construction of symbolic spatial order and the elabor-
ation of structures sheltering either the living population or the remains of
the dead are particular conjunctions and not universal regularities (see
Chapter 14). The terminology collapses as soon as we press it. The common
usage of 'trade' and 'exchange', where the former is taken to imply a profit
motive and the latter a socially embedded network of gifts, can easily lead
to a prehistory in which there are no gainers from material transactions. The
conceptions which are embodied in these choices of words impoverish past
worlds by constructing them in antithesis to the present. By far the most
culpable term in our vocabulary, however, is the word 'subsistence'.
   It was economic anthropologists who drew a distinction between market
economies and subsistence economies. The former were linked to inter-
national patterns of trade; the latter were supposed, by contrast, to have no
external links and no production beyond that required for survival.5 Clearly,
this picture is a caricature, based largely on heavily-taxed peasantries in
third-world countries which are themselves the victims of global capitalism.
It was in any case an artificial division between activities that were already
intertwined, trying artificially to reconstruct the 'primitive condition'; but
the label has stuck. 'Subsistence' farming, by definition, seems to be con-
cerned only with scratching a living, and any changes it might undergo
should thus be concerned only with improving the provision of staples. This
assumption simplifies energetic calculations, since it deals only with a few
crops and principally those which provide the calories; but it is a funda-
mentally misleading conception of human behaviour to accept even for the
present day, and still less to project backwards across the millennia. Popu-
lations exist; most persist; only a few (mostly as a result of international
exploitation) merely subsist: the word should be banned from the archae-
ological vocabulary. It creates a fundamentally misleading dichotomy
between the activities of getting food and exchanging items between pro-
ductive units - 'subsistence' versus 'trade' - and in so doing has driven a
wedge between two fundamental and closely related aspects of human
activity. The concept of consumption is so important because it remakes the
link, and emphasises the importance of the rarer items, for which people
negotiate, in creating what is actually consumed (Goodman, Love joy and
Sherratt 1995).6 What this reformulation does is to remove the barrier

                                         5




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                INTRODUCTION


between the processualist, calorie-based models of optimised mass behaviour,
and the individualist, meaning-sensitive contextual analyses of motivation
and value, which have been artificially held apart by our very terminology.
   This realisation fundamentally transforms the nature of the inquiry, for it
becomes clear that it is no longer possible to parcel up the questions into
a set of conventional categories. The problem of 'escaping the Malthusian
trap' 7 raised (though not in those words) in Chapter 2 is an artificial one,
if population levels are not autonomously generated but rise in relation to
economic activity, and food is found by intensifying production in response
to this stimulus. The core of the question is thus concerned with con-
sumption and its motivation as much as production and its constraints. It is
thus misleading to conceptualise any human situation simply in terms of the
relationship between population and food resources, without adding a
middle term for those non-staple items which people desire, and for which
they often compete: organic items such as spices or drugs, or inorganic
materials used for ornaments. Nor can clothing and shelter be considered
neutral 'necessities', for they likewise have an expressive dimension which
goes far beyond protection from the elements: hence the long-term elasticity
in demand for them, over and above the effects of demographic growth.
Even what are now staple crops were once rare and desirable items to be
acquired by trade (see Chapter 10). Curt Runnels and Tjeerd van Andel
(1988) have come nearest to this viewpoint in their discussion of 'Trade and
the origins of agriculture', when they assert: 'In a sense we are saying that
"cash crop" farming was a phenomenon as old as, and perhaps older than,
subsistence farming' (1988, 97). In effect, all crops are potentially 'cash
crops', even in a cashless economy; the beginning of the Neolithic was the
original Consumer Revolution, and the secondary products revolution
(Chapter 6) was its second round.


A SECONDARY PRODUCTS SCENARIO 8
With these considerations in mind, it is perhaps appropriate here to sketch
how I currently envisage the phenomena discussed in the following chapters.
Since these chapters themselves describe the nature of the evidence, the account
given here will be an exercise in pattern-recognition as well as evaluation.9
   My description of the nature of early farming from 9000-7000 BC (PPN
A and B) in Chapter 3 seems to me still to be broadly correct: though my
narrative accounts of how it came about (Sherratt 1980b; 1996a) now
appear deficient in discussing only calories and population pressure rather
than trade (for instance in obsidian and cowries) and the possibly ante-
cedent traffic in plants yielding fibre, oil, sugars or natural drugs - but that
is another issue. Pulses may have preceded cereals as domesticates, and
sickles may have been used to harvest cereals because the stems were used
for basketry - of a type known from PPN B Nahal Hemar, along with

                                         6




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        CHANGING      PERSPECTIVES        Ort   EUROPEAN       PREHISTORY


evidence of linen (Kislev and Bar-Yosef 1988). As Runnels and van Andel
point out (and as Barbara Bender had earlier implied), cereal grains
themselves would have been 'luxury' items of trade, quite differently per-
ceived from the staple commodity they were to become. The 'dispersal' of
cultivated forms would have been, like that of the domestic cattle discussed
in Chapter 10, a social process of economic transaction and negotiation,
and not just a passive 'spread'. Cultivation seems to have started in the
southern Levant, and may even have begun specifically in the uniquely
propitious conditions at Jericho. For these two thousand years, during
which (in somewhat more humid conditions than today) village-based
cultivation spread over an area from southern Anatolia to western Iran,
sites remained scattered and restricted to locations with the narrow set
of conditions suitable for simple cereal-growing. Hunting sites, marked
by kite-shaped stone-built traps, proliferated in adjacent desert regions.
Domestic animals, principally ovicaprids, were slowly integrated into the
farming system from PPN B onwards, but still showed little evidence of
selective breeding (and they only appeared in the desert area after 5000 BC,
in the Chalcolithic, when more specialised breeds may have been available).
This early farming must still be reckoned as having been of a most primitive
kind; and in the Levant it seems to have ended in a phase of crisis or
catastrophe which was not due to climatic change but which may reflect
over-exploitation of this narrow range of habitats.
    The seventh and early sixth millennia were a phase of rapid adjustment
which saw the expansion of farming villages into the Balkans and as far
as Baluchistan, and the appearance of complex, pottery-using sites like
Qatalhoyiik in central Anatolia or the onager-hunting site of Umm
Dabaghiyah in Assyria. The full integration of domestic animals into the
farming economy now took place, including larger species such as cattle;
 and free-threshing wheat was now becoming available in addition to
the more primitive varieties of cereals. In the later part of the seventh
millennium there was a remarkable proliferation of sites within the Fertile
 Crescent - on the Assyrian steppes and the alluvial fans spreading from the
 Zagros foothills - belonging to the painted pottery complex of Hassuna-
 Samarra-Halaf. Free-threshing wheats of durum type now became domi-
 nant in the Near East.10 Farming settlement of the Mesopotamian floodplain
 was also well advanced, though massive alluviation has obscured the
 picture. Excavations at the Samarran site of Choga Mami near Mandali in
 eastern Iraq revealed irrigation canals to spread water across the fan. Since
 the more northerly sites are rain-fed and not suitable for simple irrigation,
 the implication is that they were supported by some comparable technique;
 and use of the plough is a plausible inference for this specific arc of northern
 Mesopotamia. As well as still plentiful quantities of obsidian, small copper
 objects circulated well beyond their source areas.
    In the later sixth and fifth millennia, as European farming spread across

                                          7




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
10 00© BC cal.    FERTILE           CRESCENT


                          (Younger Dryas)


9 000                         (Holocene)


                     EARLY CULTIVATION
                    OF PRIMITIVE CEREALS...

8000
                   ...AND FIRST INTEGRATION
                      OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS


                      - CRISIS TRANSITION -
7000
                      SPATIAL EXPANSION
                  & SPREAD OF INNOVATIONS
                   (cattle & free-threshing wheat)

                         DEVELOPMENT OF
6 000                 PLOUGH CULTIVATION
                          AND IRRIGATION
                   (first farmers in the delta plain)
                                                        0.2 The emergence of secondary
                         DIVERSIFICATION                farming; innovations in plant and
                           OF PRODUCTS:
SOW                   (tree crops and secondary         animal husbandry, 9000-2000 BC:
                         live animal products)
                                                        (a) chronological chart; (b) map
                     DENSE NETWORK OF
                 EXCHANGES OF NEW PRODUCTS
                                                        sequence. The first three maps
 4 000
                  AROUND FERTILE CRESCENT
                                  o
                                                        indicate the growing diversity of
                   RIVERINE BYPASS TRADE                crops around the Fertile Crescent
                     (centrality of plain/delta)
                                                        in the periods leading to the
                      GENESIS OF CENTRE/
                    PERIPHERY INTERACTION
                                                        emergence of urbanism in
 3000                      (colonies)
                               o
                                                        Mesopotamia; the last, con-
                   RIVAL SECONDARY STATES               temporary with the spread of city-
                      AND MILITARISATION
                                                        centred trading networks, shows
                          FIRST EMPIRES
 2000                                                   the domestication of new animals
                                                        for transport (see Chapter 7).




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        CHANGING       PERSPECTIVES       Ort   EUROPEAN       PREHISTORY


the loess-lands and consolidated its position there, the expansion of cereal
cultivation around the inner rim of the Fertile Crescent made possible a
process of diversification and interaction which by 4000 BC had given rise
to major innovations. Arguments set out in subsequent chapters point to
a series of areas, arranged apparently around the edge of the zone where
advances in cereal cultivation had occurred (Figure 0.2), in which new plant
and animal products, often capable of being stored or processed, were
pioneered. Several of these were new tree-crops, propagated vegetatively
to fix desirable strains: olive, fig and almond in the Levant; vine and
pomegranate in the Upper Euphrates and Tigris catchments in south-east
Anatolia; perhaps dates in the extensive natural palm-groves at the head
of the Persian Gulf (dates were found in Ubaid levels at Eridu). One, in
particular, was an animal product: wool-bearing sheep seem to have had
their origin in western Iran, perhaps in Kermanshah where the upland
valleys are most conveniently linked to the Mesopotamian plain. Such
articulation is likely to have been a critical stimulus to specialisation - not
at the level of bulk transport, but at the level of exchanging innovations that
were valuable because of their very novelty, and because they contributed to
a wider range of consumable products. It is the variety, not the bulk, that
explains the interest. These innovations were thus propagated around the
network, so that at Nahal Mishmar in Israel there is evidence for olives,
dates and wool by 4000 BC. It is not accidental that these finds occurred in
association with a hoard of spectacularly innovative metal objects (arsenical
copper, cast by the lost-wax process), for the circulation of metals would
have provided economic liquidity to such a series of exchanges. With the
incentive to keep greater quantities of livestock, milk and its products
apparently became more important, and could also provide special
products, storable and to some degree negotiable as trade items with neigh-
bouring groups (cf. Lees and Bates 1974; Bates and Lees 1977; for the grow-
ing literature on ancient cheese, see Nissen et al. 1990; Stol 1993; Teuber
1995; Englund 1995). Even cereals were discovered to have a new potential,
and for similar reasons. Two new micro-domesticates, Lactobacillus and
Saccharomyces, made possible on the one hand the production of yoghurt
and cheese (the latter requiring salt as a preservative), and on the other hand
the making of beer and leavened bread (see Chapter 15). It seems likely that
yeasts from the fruit crops were important in the latter instance (Figure 0.3);
and the drinking of beer is first evidenced on a sealing from Tepe Gawra,
c.4000 BC. All this contributed to the diversification of desire. The in-
creasing networking of these areas into a regional interaction sphere is
indicated by the spread of the pottery complex termed Ubaid, from southern
Mesopotamia around the Fertile Crescent and in local versions into Iran;
and the willingness to travel is summarised in a clay model of a boat with a
mast-socket from a grave at Eridu (then on the coast), implying use of the
sail also by 4000 BC. Ubaid pottery made its appearance at several points


                                         9




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 INTRODUCTION




                FRESH $ DRIED FRUIT                 DATE WINE
                                                    GRAPE WINE



                                                   FERMENTATION




           UNLEAVENED BREAD                            LEAVENED
                                                         BREAD




      10,000         8,000            6,000               4,000    2,000   B.C.
  •      1      1     1     1      I     I      I     I      I      .
0.3 Dietary changes as a result of secondary farming: the interaction between
cereals and tree-crops (Sherratt 1985, unpublished).

along the Gulf coast down to Qatar and Oman, indicating a sphere of
maritime interaction as well as the extensive overland contacts.
   The potential for a fundamental transformation in the way of life of the
populations of greater Mesopotamia is thus evident; and the major shift
came about in the fourth millennium - during the period in which, in
Europe, farming first spread into the North European Plain. Two related
processes were principally responsible. One is what Tom Beale (1973) has
neatly termed the 'bypass phenomenon' - the concentration of multilateral
contacts into a few principal channels - best exemplified in the increasingly
axial role of the great rivers themselves, especially the Euphrates, which
drew a chord across the arc of the Fertile Crescent, effectively linking the
sub-tropical Gulf with the Mediterranean hilly flanks. This focusing of
traffic made possible, and was itself promoted by, a second phenomenon
which I have called (1995, 17-20) the principle of intervening opportunity:
in an otherwise rather unattractive region (the lower Mesopotamian plain)
the opportunity arose to concentrate on added-value production, princi-
pally in the form of textiles, supporting its labour-force by an expansion of
irrigated farming. This created an increasing contrast (as Childe had per-
ceived)11 between a manufacturing core area and a raw-material supplying
hinterland, altering the economic and political character of the interaction.
Within the core, it produced a technological explosion as a whole range of
new manufacturing processes were explored, from the mass-production
of wheelmade pottery to more elite products such as wheeled vehicles or


                                              10




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
         CHANGING     PERSPECTIVES        Ort   EUROPEAN      PREHISTORY


granulated goldwork. These, in turn, required increasing quantities of raw
materials from the (mostly highland) periphery, which could only be
acquired by the active setting up of colonial stations to alter local tastes and
mobilise supplies. This was what happened in the Uruk period, which saw
the emergence of true cities, writing systems and the formal characteristics
of civilisation (Algaze 1993; Frangipane et al. 1993). The scale of this ex-
pansion, which drew in valuable materials like lapis lazuli from as far afield
as eastern Afghanistan, began to involve two new alluvial agrarian cores
which rapidly developed into independent centres of activity with their own
immediate peripheries: Egypt and the Indus valley. In the dry spaces which
separated these three nuclear areas, two new forms of overland animal
transport came into use - the donkey and the camel - which spread rapidly
around different parts of the urbanising area to complement the riverine
routes and their boats, which, at least in certain directions, made use of the
sail (see Figure 0.2). Where this network of routes met the sea, in the (then
unalluviated) bay of the lower Orontes in the Amuq, a cradle of maritime
activity was created in the Mediterranean.12 The scale of this expansion had
repercussions on all the surrounding areas (see Chapter 18), and in my view
gave the stimulus to horse-domestication on the Pontic steppes;13 and it was
at this time that the features of secondary farming appeared more generally
in the western Old World. It is this fusion and explosion of the constituent
elements of this complex which give it its revolutionary nature.
   Such, in brief, is the story of the emergence of secondary farming,
secondary products and secondary consumption patterns. It was sum-
marised in a diagram that I prepared in 1984, and reproduce again here as
Figure 0.4. This emphasises the structure, which I had always envisaged, of
a multilinear emergence of secondary features in different parts of the Near
East, and their integration and further spread in package form - just like the
original spread of primary farming. (Chapter 20 considers whether this was
'revolutionary', and what kind of revolution it was.) All of the crucial
developments before 4000 BC (with the possible exception of horse domesti-
cation) seem to have taken place within the theatre of greater Mesopotamia:
the Tigris/Euphrates catchment and its hilly flanks (including the Levant);
though their appearance beyond this focal area seems to have taken place
very rapidly after 3500. In my view of things, that looks like a nuclear/
margin process: that is to say, it seems that these features did not develop
indigenously in areas like temperate Europe (though given time they might
have done), but in fact appeared as a result of external intervention. It is to
this more controversial aspect that I now turn.

H O W MUCH CENTRICITY?
One of the issues which seems to fire up European prehistorians more than
any other is the question of autonomy. It relates to a long debate within

                                        11




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                INTRODUCTION




OA The origins and spread of secondary farming: note the multiple origins,
integration, and explosive spread (from Sherratt 1987b, corrected).

European prehistoriography (and the split between 'classics' and oriental
studies: see Chapter 1 and Bernal 1987) between indigenists and diffusion-
ists. Despite the fact that 'Europe' appeared as an ideological entity only
with the spread of Christianity, and has only the faintest geographical
justification as a physical unit, a set of myths going back to the Trojan War
(reinforced both by the Persian invasion of Greece and the Turkish takeover
of Byzantium) have set along the Sea of Marmara an imaginary line which
marks the division of Europe from Asia. It has thus sometimes (e.g. Reinach
1893) seemed to be a matter of honour, emotion and continental pride
whether any population movement or cultural influence has crossed the
Aegean or not.14 The issue is still one of contemporary interest because
the ecological orientation of New Archaeology took it as axiomatic (see
Chapter 2) that local conditions were crucial to explaining change, and that
diffusionism had too easily invoked typological similarities to tell a tale of
missionaries and colonists in deep prehistory. This seems to me to be largely
true; but it does not preclude the possibility that processes outside the region
may have played a crucial role in determining the nature of local oppor-
tunities. I have argued elsewhere (1995b) that the belief in autonomism is
closely associated with a form of evolutionism involving a stadial model of


                                         12




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
         CHANGING     PERSPECTIVES        Ort   EUROPEAN       PREHISTORY


change, and I have suggested instead that important innovations more
usually start at particular* unusual points on the Earth's surface where rare
sets of conditions coincide, and spread outwards from there. It seems
inherently probable that the unusual conditions of the Fertile Crescent have
consistently given rise to innovations in a way that the more uniform
landscapes of forested Europe have not (Sherratt 1996a; in press b). This
is the picture that I would wish to suggest for the features of secondary
farming described in the previous section. The proposal can only be
evaluated by considering the alternatives.
   It leads at once to questions of methodology. All of the features of
secondary farming which spread to Europe, although important as inno-
vations, are inherently quite hard to demonstrate.15 Evidence for milking is
probably so ambiguous that until extensive biochemical analysis of food-
residues trapped within pottery fabrics has been undertaken on a large scale
(and it will revolutionise archaeology in the early twenty-first century), it is
practically impossible to tell; and so far only plant-lipids have been detected
on the ceramic sieves sometimes interpreted as milk-strainers (Rottlander
1995). The arguments are set out in Chapter 7, but it seems likely that
milking only took place on a large scale when animals were kept in large
numbers, and often for other reasons. Wool is rather more tangible in the
archaeological record, though its remains are rare. A spread to Europe
during the third millennium is accepted by experts (Ryder 1983; Barber
1991), though its abundance at that time is harder to gauge. Domesticated
horses seem to have spread at about the same time, and new studies of
faunal assemblages by various methods are introducing greater precision.
Chapter 7 again summarises this. The features that we can most easily
identify seem to have been essentially third- or late fourth-millennium intro-
ductions. Whilst milking is a practice that might be taken up anywhere that
domestic cattle and ovicaprids were kept, both riding and wool production
depended, to the contrary, on the introduction of a new species and a new
subspecies respectively, and are therefore inevitably exotic. The crucial test
for indigenism is the plough.16
   Evidence for use of the plough is in fact surprisingly common (Thrane
1989; Tegtmeier 1993). More than a hundred third- and second-millennium
round-barrows with plough-marks are known in Denmark alone, along
with similar evidence from twelve Middle Neolithic passage graves from the
second half of the fourth millennium, and ten attributed to EN C17 or Fuchs-
berg from the middle of the fourth millennium. There are none under earlier
long-mounds, though these are admittedly rarer. This excellent sequence
seems to suggest a rather precise date, of the order of 3500 BC, which fits
well with the half-dozen pieces of iconic evidence for animal traction from
Hungary and Poland, which date to 3500-3000 BC (Boleraz and Classical
Baden). Indeed, the very interest in representing them could be seen as
symptomatic of their novelty and social importance (cf. Hodder 1988).


                                         13




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                INTRODUCTION


Why, then, the reluctance to recognise this horizon (e.g. Midgley 1992,
388-90), shortly before the appearance of wool and horses? To some extent
it reflects an ignorance on the part of European prehistorians of any wider
setting for their studies. One constantly quoted reason, however, is the single
mid-fifth-millennium radiocarbon date18 from an ambiguous ('complex')
stratigraphic context for the possible furrows under a Wiorek long mound
at Sarnowo in central Poland. The fragility of this straw obstacle suggests
that the real reason is a prior expectation that the plough should be older,19
because indigenous; and it is this expectation which underlies Chapman's
belief that it appeared in the Balkans in the early fifth millennium. His
principal reason for seeking it at this date is the widespread horizon of
settlement-pattern change associated with the beginning of Vinca-Plocnik
and the Tisza culture, which is discussed in Chapter 11 and interpreted there
as a culmination of earlier trends towards settlement nucleation, and the
northwards extension of tell-building. It is not the most marked change in
settlement patterns, however, better candidates for which would be the local
mid-fifth-millennium shift to a 'Copper Age' dispersed pattern of small
settlements and large cemeteries, or on a much more radical scale the
fundamental shift of the mid-fourth millennium, which affected both local
and regional patterns. It was, in fact, the scale of this latter phenomenon
which first attracted my attention (Sherratt 1976).20
    Yet even if a fifth-millennium date were to be demonstrated for Balkan
ploughing, it could still be seen as the extension of an innovation originally
made in the heartland of western Old World agriculture, extending to
Europe at a time of inter-regional linkup (northern Ubaid) in greater Meso-
potamia, and perhaps accompanied to the Balkans by the first use of copper
and a fashion for dark-faced pottery that is perhaps symptomatic of some
other new material technology. This alternative seems to me to be less
appealing, however, because the plough does not seem universal at that time
in the Near East. (Tom Levy has denied its existence in the Chalcolithic of
the southern Levant, for instance, making it improbable in Egypt; the most
radical changes in Anatolian settlement patterns are also later: Figure 2.3.)
The most probable scenario on an inter-regional scale would still be the
massive extension of contact-radius which took place during the fourth
millennium, when many other innovations reached Europe. Metallurgy, for
instance, having developed in south-east Europe along entirely indigenous
lines in terms of the technique and design of its products, was transformed
by the arrival of Near Eastern innovations like the the two-piece mould
(Chernykh 1992). These seem to me to be strong reasons for accepting the
empirical indications offered by Danish ploughmarks.
    The choice of an interpretative framework nevertheless seems in the end
to depend as much on quasi-metaphysical assumptions about the nature of
change (stadial versus spatially punctuated) as it does upon empirical
evidence; those who believe that the plough came into existence whenever

                                         14




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        CHANGING     PERSPECTIVES        Ort   EUROPEAN       PREHISTORY


it was made necessary by the pressure of population (following the model
elaborated by Boserup in 1965) will not be impressed by the apparent
coincidence of the first ploughmarks with the arrival of new elements of
material culture from Anatolia, and they would in any case deny the element
of diffusion even were it possible to demonstrate a perfect pattern of
concentric extension, by postulating a common demographic threshold
which required intensified production. What might decide the issue, how-
ever, is a shift of perception: if these various features which I have grouped
as parts of a secondary products revolution are seen, not as features of more
efficient farming practice adopted under pressure, but much more as ex-
pressions of a demand for new consumables and new elements of what was
primarily elite display.


CONSUMING SYMBOLS AND SUSTAINING HABITS
My outburst against 'subsistence' in an earlier section now becomes central
to the argument. The concept of populations 'on the breadline' is one which
relates to social systems involving large-scale exploitation - relatively
massive transfers of resources from one part of the population to another,
whether it is within a class relationship or one of regional dependency.
Whilst famine and disease were ever-present dangers (at least at certain
times), it may be doubted whether this constant penury was the permanent
condition of humankind before the rise of urbanism and the state. Without
elaborating a myth of primordial sufficiency, it may nevertheless be asserted
that life has only rarely been so dire as actually to compel the adoption of
new ways of life; more usually they have been initially chosen because they
presented opportunities in which certain people saw an advantage, and only
later were they taken over (perhaps under pressure) by whole populations
who thus become locked in to such practices.21 These advantages have been
both bodily, in terms of taste and nutrition, and social, in terms of what
Wolfgang Schivelbusch has called 'performance in the process of enjoy-
ment': in a word, they were concerned with consumption - whether in the
literal sense of consuming food or in the derived sense of consuming auto-
mobiles and ox-carts.
    One of the apparent associations in the European evidence is the
contemporaneity of the first evidence for ploughs and that for wheeled
vehicles. Whilst both employ yoked oxen and require an appropriate herd-
structure to supply them, these two machines do not necessarily have any
further association, unless they were in some sense perceived as being closely
related. It is unlikely that such expensive items as carts and waggons were
initially simply pieces of everyday farming equipment (even if they eventu-
ally became so), and the association of wheeled vehicles with elite burials
indicates that they were seen as prestige equipment (Piggott 1992), either
belonging to individuals or in outer Europe perhaps under communal

                                        15




                This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                INTRODUCTION


ownership (as certain contrasts between Baden and the megalith-builders
would hint: Chapter 16). What, then, of ploughs: prestige ploughing?
Ostentatious cultivation? The concept does not seem to me to be inherently
absurd in the context of the Baden culture, any more than the idea of their
ritual significance in northern Europe. Even in Mesopotamia, the plough
was recognised as a minority instrument, confined to those prosperous
enough to afford it - as discussed in the Sumerian literary text called 'The
disputation between the plough and the hoe'.22 In northern Europe, it so
happens that there has been a continuing discussion (Patzold 1960; Rands-
borg and Nybo 1986; Rowley-Conwy 1987; Rausing 1988; Kristiansen
1989) of 'ritual' ploughing as part of Neolithic and Bronze Age funerary
ceremonies, on the assumption that this was the opposite of some 'secular'
usage. Could it be that these were in fact one and the same? Whilst neither
'ritual' nor 'prestige' fully convey the nature of what is involved, neither
does the simple instrumentalist23 conception of the plough as the solution to
a technical problem of preparing the soil. That is not to deny that it had
practical usefulness, which probably became increasingly apparent as it was
employed more widely; but initially it was particularly powerful because of
its combination of mental and material qualities. It was no doubt the focus
of social and religious practices connected with fertility (since the simile of
the ard-share as penis is unlikely to have been lost on Neolithic minds), and
its adoption was as much a conceptual and performative change as the
adoption of the cart with which it was apparently associated. One corollary
of this is that the invention of wheeled vehicles, with their universal appeal
to the human (male?) psyche, was a significant factor in the spread of the
plough to Europe.
    This immediately begins to make much better sense of the pattern of
evidence. As Chapter 6 indicates, the scatter of early (late fourth mil-
lennium) indications of paired draught in Europe largely falls along the axis
which was to become the first trans-continental route of contacts at the
beginning of the Reinecke Bronze Age (late third/early second millennium:
Sherratt 1993, fig. 6). Not merely do the figurines and paired-cattle burials
mark out the route, but certain items like the Oldenburg vases and the Bytyn
ox-figures imply long-distance contacts, the latter apparently as far back as
Anatolia (Chapter 7). Even the Bronze Age pattern of fortified sites on
important passes through the mountain chain (Sherratt 1993, fig. 7) is pre-
figured in the existence of impressive sites like Hlinsko on the upper Morava
with its elaborate defences and evidence for textile production. Moreover,
the Baden paired-cattle burials are particularly associated (Chapters 8 and
15) with drinking-sets, which specifically resemble metal vessels (Chapter
17) that were manufactured in Anatolia but not in the Balkans; and the most
explicit cart-models are in fact cups. The common characteristic of these
elements is their restriction to privileged social groups. There could hardly
be clearer indications of the fact that paired draught was associated with


                                         16




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        CHANGING      PERSPECTIVES        ort   EUROPEAN      PREHISTORY


new, exotic consumption-habits, and that these spread among what must
have been a relative minority of literally well-connected people (Figure 0.5).
   The reason for the explosive dispersal of such features at the time of
the Uruk colonies thus becomes clearer: while the direct search for raw
materials to supply growing lowland cities was directed to the immediate
mountain periphery, it was part of the strategy of acquiring them to impress
the 'natives' with large temples like those on Jebel Aruda, and with new
practices, consumption habits and consumer needs: wheeled vehicles,
alcoholic drinks, textiles, metalwork. The dynamic of core and periphery
depended on the export of added value and the stimulation of new needs.
The features of secondary farming and the manufacturing technologies of
the new urban communities came together to transform the material
environment of the areas around the Fertile Crescent. This new material
culture, however, had its own dynamic; and it spread in a material trans-
formation of life in a zone beyond this periphery - what I have called,
following Jane Schneider, the margin - including much of temperate Europe.
What is impressive, and must surely have been preceded by even earlier
networks of contact which we can only dimly discern, is the speed and
directionality with which innovations spread across Anatolia and up into
central Europe. In south-east Europe within the Carpathian arc - the area
of the Balkan-Carpathian Copper Age - there was an instant transformation
of culture and settlement-pattern: the Baden-Cernavoda-Ezero complex, the
beginning of the Bronze Age in Balkan (but not Carpathian) terminology.24
Despite the continuing rapidity of their spread to the north as far as
Denmark, these features did not cause such a discontinuity in the megalith-
building cultures of the North European Plain and western Europe.25
Instead, the existing pattern was elaborated, before being decisively altered
with the spread of the Corded Ware culture some 500 years later (see below,
and Chapter 16).
   All of the introduced novelties are likely to have been relative luxuries,
restricted to elite groups in society: woollen clothes, the consumption of
alcoholic drinks, the use of traction- or riding-animals.26 In south-east
Europe all these features may have been more or less coincident, along
with some tree-crops in the Mediterranean parts and perhaps the donkey
too; the horse was slightly later. (Tree crops remained confined to the
Mediterranean, and their subsequent westward spread was closely con-
nected to the extension of trade, social complexity and the mobilisation of
capital; the plough and cart, however, had spread to northern Italy by 3000,
as shown by statue-menhirs from the Adige region.) Beyond the Carpathians
the appearance of these elements was less closely synchronous, with the
plough appearing before the others, in the middle of TRB. AS noted above,
there is disagreement amongst faunal experts as to when milking began, and
when it became widespread. In northern Europe most of the other features
appeared with Corded Ware, and further west with Bell-Beakers; though

                                         17




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  INTRODUCTION




                             Hi
                                                               O.S The spread of
                                                               secondary farming in
                                                               Europe: above, re-
                                                               constructed routes for
                                                               the spread of the
                                                               traction complex
                                                               (plough and wheeled
                                                               vehicles; cf. Fig. 6.7) in
                                                               the fourth millennium
                                                               BC; below, estimated
                                                               dispersal-patterns for
                                                               other secondary live
             rvT                                               products, 4000-500 BC.

wool in particular seems to have remained a relative rarity for a long time
in the far west. Wheeled vehicles seem also to have lagged behind the plough
in spreading to north-west Europe. The notion of a European 'horizon'
therefore applies particularly to the plough, which was accompanied in the
Carpathian Basin and the Balkans by a major change in settlement patterns.
A shift of comparable magnitude only occurred half a millennium later in
northern Europe, and up to a millennium later on the Atlantic coastlands to
the west. These major social and economic shifts in each area, successively
from 'inner' to 'outer' Europe, each marked the inception of a pattern of
settlement and burial type that was to characterise their development for
much of the Bronze Age, down to around 1300 BC.
   The sharpness of this threshold serves to point up particularly clearly the

                                           18




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        CHANGING      PERSPECTIVES        Ort   EUROPEAN      PREHISTORY


'otherness' of what had gone before - a continent whose culture was much
closer in many respects to those which Europeans would encounter in the
New World in the sixteenth century AD, in its manual cultivation systems,
its lack of riding and draught-animals, and less tangibly in a smoking of
narcotic substances rather than a widespread use of alcohol, and religious
beliefs which might broadly be described as shamanism. If I am correct in
my model, these changes were not simply the result of inherent trends in
earlier prehistoric European practices, but came about because of a specific
historical conjunction. It is not satisfactory, therefore, simply to tell a tale
of local developments: change, when it came, was a surprise and could not
have been predicted from antecedent local conditions.


T H E PATTERNING OF EUROPE
As a final element in this introduction, to provide a framework within which
to insert the various studies which follow, a brief sketch of 'what happened
in Europe' is perhaps of use. Chronology is of the essence, for the world
moves on and each period is different from its predecessor; but spatial
contrasts, especially in the Neolithic and Copper Age, were striking, too,
and it is important to establish the spatio-temporal limits of a generalisation
(Figure 0.6).
   Farming first spread to Europe in its phase of diversification and
elaboration in the seventh millennium BC, which saw the effective in-
tegration of livestock (and the continuing domestication of cattle in several
different areas) but preceded the development of ploughing and irrigation
which subsequently took place in greater Mesopotamia. The first European
farming was still, therefore, a relatively simple form of cultivation, best
described as horticulture, and spreading in a series of rapid leaps because of
the limited spatial extent of land to which it could be successfully applied:
the restricted areas of high surface- or ground-water within a Mediterranean
environment.27 Neil Roberts (1991) has seen the somewhat different settings
of £atalhdyuk and Hacilar - respectively on an alluvial fan and beside a
seasonally enlarged lake - as a microcosm of the larger contrast between the
Near East,28 where the use of river-waters was to be extended by irrigation,
and south-east Europe, where a series of Balkan lake-basins offered
stepping-stones to central Europe. In this latter zone, probably in the
Carpathian Basin,29 a new pattern of rain-fed horticulture, appropriate to
temperate Europe, had emerged by the middle of the sixth millennium, at
about the same time as some Near Eastern farmers were also turning to rain-
fed cultivation, but probably using the plough. Europe thus conserved and
propagated older forms of hand-cultivation, pioneered in the formative
phases of farming; which is why the introduction of more advanced
methods was to come as such a radical change in the mid-fourth mil-
lennium.

                                         19




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                                                                                                                   z
                                                                                                                                   H
                                                                                                                                   73
                                                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                                                   O
IS                                                                                                                                 G
                                                                                                                                   n
                                                                                                                                   H
                                                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                                                   Z




     0.6 A chronological diagram of European prehistory, 6500-2000 BC. The diagram is arranged as a latitudinal section across the centre
     of the continent, to show the symmetry between developments on the eastern and western sides, following the introduction of farming.
     The thicker line encloses 'intrusive' cultures; the widening spread indicates successive incorporation and cultural transformation of
     indigenous populations. Influences from the Near East and from the steppe region interrupt the course of these local developments.
                                  (LBK = Linienbandkeramik             A.V.K. = Alfoldi Vonaldiszes Keramia
                                 STBK = Stichbandkeramik               K.A.K. = Kugelamphorenkulturj




                                         This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                                          All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        CHANGING      PERSPECTIVES        Ort   EUROPEAN      PREHISTORY


   In a recent article (1995), van Andel and Runnels have summarised the
model expounded in the early chapters here, and fitted calibrated radio-
carbon dates to a pattern of spread through southern Anatolia by 7500 BC
and across the Aegean by 7000 BC. Equally importantly, they report the
results of geomorphological investigations in Thessaly (see also van Andel
et al. 1994), which confirm the suggestions put forward in Chapters 2 and
3 concerning the nature of floodplain farming;30 some tells had actually
been situated on actively aggrading floodplains. The same is true of central
Anatolian sites like Qatalhoyiik and its contemporary neighbour Can Hasan
hi (Roberts 1991). This pattern of association with very specific environ-
mental niches suggests relatively low (though locally concentrated) popu-
lation densities, and makes plausible a dispersal model in which small-scale
population movements played a critical part. This is certain in the cases of
Cyprus and Crete, and very likely true of Thessaly. On the mainland, these
populations were inserted into finite spaces within already occupied lands,
but in parts which were often of secondary interest to hunters (some, indeed,
probably so disease-ridden that only the greater fecundity of farming popu-
lations allowed their colonisation: see Chapter 2). Recent research has
begun to reveal traces of such Mesolithic populations in certain parts both
of Hungary and Thessaly. On the other hand, it is likely that in optimal
areas indigenous populations achieved some density, especially on the
coasts; and it should be remembered that the Black Sea was only fully united
with the Mediterranean after 5500 BC, when waters flowed across the
spillway of the Bosphorus to drown extensive coastlands which are now
under 200m of water. Here, surely, was the focus of a Mesolithic population
which is at the moment evident as much by its negative effects as by its
demonstrable artefactual presence (much of which is presumably now
underwater): the way in which Neolithic penetration - just as in the Baltic
region - conspicuously avoids the Black Sea coasts of Anatolia, Bulgaria and
Romania, where Neolithic cultures are later and which even in the fifth and
fourth millennia retained a distinctive character, partly due to their own
independent network of external maritime contacts.
   A whole spectrum of relationships with such indigenous Mesolithic
groups may therefore be expected. Small numbers of hunters, on lands
where farming had a decisive advantage, may have been immediately
absorbed into farming populations; others, in more remote locations, no
doubt continued as a small and relatively isolated minority. Between these
two extremes, various patterns of symbiosis with farming groups are likely,
and some selective adoption of their innovations. This can be most clearly
seen, on a larger 'external' scale, with the 'Sub-Neolithic' groups of the
Pontic steppes like the Dnepr-Donets culture (whose heartland was pre-
sumably in the now drowned northern Black Sea coastlands); and their
'internal' equivalents are exemplified in settlements like Lepenski Vir, con-
temporary with the first farmers but in locations where they had the

                                        21




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                INTRODUCTION


advantage, and from which they could transact with farming groups to
some extent on equal terms. As farming populations increased, however, the
balance of this relationship began to alter and such groups were increasingly
absorbed - retaining, however, a certain regional distinctiveness, like
Hamangia and subsequently Varna in coastal Bulgaria, with its own
ostentatious burial habits even when using similar items of material culture
to those of its inland Chalcolithic contemporaries (Price 1993). Some
contribution of older traditions (e.g. in the making of organic containers)
may be evident in the changing decorative syntax of painted pottery; but the
dominant process was nevertheless one of accommodation to the introduced
pattern. Habitation-monuments (tells), with their more formal patterns of
existence such as the use of chairs and tables and elaborate painted
pottery, tended to spread even to those areas whose initial Neolithic had
been marked by a strong continuity with indigenous lifeways, like Koros/
Cri§.
   Farming thus spread by a balance between these two processes of
insertion and adoption; and the preponderance of one or other of them
affected the regional character of the cultures that were created. Both were
social processes, one based on internal reproduction and the other on
external recruitment. Broadly speaking, insertion dominated along the axis
from Anatolia through the Balkans to the loess-lands of central Europe;
elsewhere, adoption by existing populations played a larger part. This was
the dominant mode in the Mediterranean, where many caves occupied both
in Mesolithic and early Neolithic (Cardial) times testify to such continuity.
It was also the pattern in the outer arc of Europe, along the Atlantic coast-
lands, the Baltic and the lakes and rivers of eastern Europe. Western and
northern Europe were distinctive, however, in that the spread of farming to
the dense indigenous populations which had grown up there by the fifth and
fourth millennia BC continued to propagate the structure of farming com-
munities as it had spread across the central European axis of the loess-lands:
that is, a pattern centred on permanent artificial points inscribed in the land-
scape. Instead of 'habitation monuments' of timber longhouse villages, the
structure was continued by the building of megalithic funerary monuments
(see Chapters 13 and 14). It may be that 'farming', too - in the sense of
cereal cultivation and domestic livestock keeping - also became somewhat
ritualised and token, with much food still coming from the wild; only later
(perhaps with the arrival of the plough) did cereals and livestock become
the staple: the Mesolithic communities of outer Europe were initially re-
structured, rather than being immediately transformed economically. The
distribution of megaliths picks out those areas of western and northern
Europe where indigenous populations were densest, and made their greatest
demographic and cultural contribution to the emerging pattern; and they
were mirrored, in the east, by the Sub-Neolithic groups on the Pontic
steppes who developed in a quite opposite direction - not by espousing a


                                        22




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        CHANGING      PERSPECTIVES        Ort   EUROPEAN      PREHISTORY


sedentary monumentality but by embracing increased mobility - through
hunting, and ultimately domestication, of the horse.
    This balance between the two processes was important in creating the
character of different regions of Europe, and their receptiveness to new
influences from outside these regions. Within the Carpathian Basin and in
south-east Europe where a single cultural pattern predominated, the tell
cultures reached their climax in the early fifth millennium, and the south-
east European Copper Age developed after 4500 BC. It was in this region
that renewed contacts with the expanding Near Eastern world system had
such instantaneous and many-sided effects a millennium later, around 3500
BC. Beyond this region, however, the pattern was much more complicated
by relationships with the often numerous Mesolithic populations, and
the possibility of forming 'alternative' networks amongst 'outsiders'. This
rather dialectical pattern of cultural change continued to characterise this
area until the Bronze Age.31 The initial spread of farmers across the loess-
lands had been in many respects a pioneer extension of a Balkan (and
ultimately Near Eastern) pattern, accommodated to the rather different
conditions of central Europe but still based on a highly selective use of a
rather similar set of landscapes (Figure 0.7a), and avoiding areas of dense
Mesolithic occupation. It was initially reinforced after 4500 by the spread
of elements from further south, most conspicuously in the form of small
quantities of copper; these impulses spread north-westwards, in the foot-
steps of the Bandkeramik pioneers, and also by demographic expansion on
a new axis north-westwards from the Carpathians along the forest-steppe
margin towards Kiev, in the form of Cucuteni-Tripole groups. Both move-
ments intruded increasingly on to territories where Mesolithic groups lived
in larger numbers; but the reactions were very different. Around the western
and northern margins of the loess-covered plains - from the Paris Basin to
Poland - loess-land farmers increasingly merged with their neighbours and
embraced a much greater diversity of food-getting practices, though unified
socially through the common symbolism of funerary monuments which
seems to have been an essential element of this process of cultural fusion.
The thin strip of loess-covered territory ceased to be the lifeline to cultural
innovation, and it now became more integrated with surrounding areas
(where former Mesolithic populations were in the majority) as new cultural
blocs formed on the basis of this neolithicisation of outer Europe (Figure
0.7b). In Moldavia and the Ukraine, however, no such accommodation
could be observed: indeed, quite the reverse, as increasingly nucleated and
defended Cucuteni-Tripole settlements protected a provincial version of
Balkan culture from Sub-Neolithic (becoming Sub-Copper Age) steppe
neighbours such as Sredni Stog and its contemporaries.
    In the early centuries of the fourth millennium, closely connected with the
first spread of farming to Scandinavia, a chain of connections developed
from the Balkans through the Carpathian Basin to Denmark. It is evident in

                                        23




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                INTRODUCTION


a continuum of Balkan and Carpathian cultures with connections reaching
up into Poland, and characteristically including sets of drinking-vessels
(Chapter 15).32 It is possible that this series of links began in Late Chalco-
lithic northern Anatolia, connecting with these others through the Cerna-
voda i culture in the lower Danube. These links mark the first emergence of
an axis which was to become a dominant feature of European development
down until the mid-second millennium: a chain of connections along which
news of the traction complex seems to have travelled. This latter event, in
the middle of the fourth millennium, can thus be seen as the impact of a
specific style of elite culture (metal vessels, wheeled vehicles) on a pre-
existing set of relationships and already-spreading practices. Its direction-
ality (along a line from Turkey to Denmark) is shown by the way in which
the Tripole block in the Ukraine did not participate in these developments,
and after 3500 BC remained for a whole phase (en) isolated between Baden
and Pit-Graves, gradually splitting into local groups and losing the co-
herence of its already old-fashioned painted pottery style.33
    The reception of new elements was very different north of the
Carpathians from that south-east of them, where a relatively homogeneous
set of cultures underwent a rather uniform set of changes. In the North
European Plain, even a novelty as radical as the plough was absorbed (and
its usage no doubt transformed) within a pre-existing pattern - either that
of TRB villages within the loess-lands, or megalith-centred communities
beyond. True, the monuments became more elaborate (like Nordic passage-
graves); but the really radical change in culture, behaviour and settlement-
patterns was deferred for another half-millennium (Chapter 16). It seems
likely that already initiated processes of change were still continuing: en-
claves of Mesolithic hunting populations were still being absorbed, and
beyond the margins of farming cultures a further belt of Sub-Neolithic
groups was also being generated. As well as regional differences in culture,
therefore, some diversity in lifestyles between partly symbiotic groups was
probably coming into existence, as a complex pattern of often inter-
digitating cultural distributions between TRB and new groupings would
suggest. In the centuries following 3500 BC, a broad band of related
communities developed across much of the North European Plain, from
Hamburg to Kiev, called after its distinctive liquid-container, the globular
amphora. The territory of the Cucuteni-Tripole culture was now divided
between the Globular Amphora culture and the Pit-Grave culture (created
on the steppes from Sub-Neolithic groups by the transmission of Near
Eastern innovations via the Caucasus), bringing the two into direct contact;
and the eastern, mobile, steppe model played an important part in trans-
forming certain groups within the North European Plain into the new
pattern of dispersed, tumulus-building Corded Ware cultures, with their
characteristic single-graves containing drinking-cups and battle axes. After
the predominantly north/south pattern of contacts in the fourth millennium,


                                        24




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                                         S      :
                                                             PIONEER                                                                MESOLITHIC
                                                             FARMING P                                                            INCORPORATION


                                                                                                          tPfjZj PIT&
                                                                                                                    COMB
                                                                                                      RLY" VK\ V\(ARtS
                                                                                          EN kNE6LITHIC                                               n
                                                                                   1C OMPLEX                                                          x>
                                                                           IBERIAN
                                          _ _ IS T 1
                                                                         [NEOLITHIC '                    rBALKAN           /( r COASTAL                z
                                 Twi™ l//° ^x^.1                                           y ITALIai^TV C| OPPER- r         ^J\MESQLITHIC J           o
                                                                                 v» ^ ^NEOLithicNI AGE                                                S
                                                                                                                                                      o
                                                                                                                                                      "d
                                                                                                                                                      w
                                                                                                                                                  (   pa
                                                                                                                                                      </5
              6500-                                                         4500-
             4500 BC                                                       3500 BC
                                                                                                                                                      m
                                                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                                                                      H
                                                                                                                                                      <
                                                                                                                                                      pi
I to                                                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                                                      25
                                                                                                                                                      W
                                                                                                                                                      c
                                                                                                                                                      O
                                                                                                                                                      w
                                                                                                                                                      >
                                                                                                                                                      Z

                                                                                                                                                      tn
                                                                                                                                                      as
                                                                                                                                                      c/J
                                                                                                                                                      H
                                                                                                                                                      O
                                                                                                                                                      s*o

       0.7 Sketch-maps of European cultural development: (a) the spread of farming, 6500-4500; (b) the formation of new cultures by
       interaction with indigenous populations, 4500-3500; (c) spinoff effects from Near Eastern urbanisation and interactions with steppe
       groups, 3500-2500; (d) the spread of these innovations in the west, as south-east and central Europe became indirectly linked to
       maritime networks centred on the Akkadian Empire, 2500-2000 (cf. Fig. 18.1).
                                INTRODUCTION


therefore, the third millennium was characterised by a broadly east/west
pattern of interaction, in which the new pattern extended both westwards
into Germany, eastern France and Switzerland, and also eastwards towards
Moscow (Figure 0.7c). In many respects the spread of Bell-Beakers in the far
west can be seen as an extension of this process, carrying a new pattern of
mobility into the heartlands of megalithism, and setting up its own network
of riverine links within the Continent (Figure 0.7d). Even as this was
happening, however, further impulses along the north/south axis via the
Danube, starting from an Anatolian town now established on the threshold
of Europe, at Troy (Chapter 18), began to introduce fresh novelties and to
initiate the changes which central European archaeologists recognise as the
beginning of the Bronze Age.
   Although my account of fourth-millennium cultural changes emphasises
the importance of new long-distance contacts, it is very far from 'diffusion-
ism', in the sense in which the term has fallen into disrepute through its
neglect of local conditions and contexts. Even the spread of farming into
Europe, undoubtedly a process which began in the Near East, can only be
understood by reference to the different reactions of the indigenous popu-
lations. So, equally, with later contact-episodes, contact and context must be
evaluated together: it takes two to tango. Many changes came about as
consequences of the spread of farming itself - the demand for raw materials
like stone, and especially axes for forest-clearance, the growing formality of
the domestic setting, with tables and flat surfaces - while even the pro-
pensity to experiment with metallurgy was inherent in the pyrotechnology
of potting and the interest in brightly-coloured stones (Sherratt 1994b). The
Copper Age pattern, therefore, with its network of elite exchanges for
particularly desirable materials, seems to have been essentially independent
of any further input from outside. (The counterpoint between 'successional'
and 'contact-induced' changes is explored in Chapter 5.) Indeed, what is
remarkable is the relative independence between phenomena like the use of
the plough, and the sort of individualising, copper-using, prestige-goods
society which tempts us to call it Chalcolithic - whether fifth-millennium
like Tiszapolgar or third-millennium like Bell-Beaker. Plotted on a chrono-
logical chart, the two horizons cut across one another: one steeply sloping,
one relatively flat (Figure 0.8). The south-east European Copper Age is
metallurgy without the plough, the Danish Middle Neolithic is the plough
without metallurgy; Baden and Corded Ware have both, and witnessed the
more profound transformation: it was the combination of a source of
capital and a medium of exchange which gave these cultures their potential
for growth, and allowed their cultural patterns to spread so widely. By
the early second millennium, many of the regional contrasts which are so
characteristic a feature of the fourth and third millennia had become much
less evident. The diverse origins both of the populations and cultural
elements which came together in Europe had been submerged in what


                                        26




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        CHANGING      PERSPECTIVES        Ort    EUROPEAN     PREHISTORY



          NORTH-WEST                            SOUTH-EAST
            EUROPE                                EUROPE




of introduction of selected features of secondary farming. The rapid introduction
of innovations in the fourth millennium cuts across the slower pattern of social
and cultural developments.
was now a common inheritance: a pattern of mixed farming and herding
over a variety of landscapes, whose elites espoused similar objectives and
used what was to a remarkable extent a common language of material
culture. Seen from this perspective, the fourth millennium was the climax

                                        27




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                INTRODUCTION


of regional diversity, resulting both from internal processes and new ex-
ternal contacts.


T H E EMERGENCE OF 'MODERN' EUROPE
What sort of story, therefore, emerges from this discussion and the pages
that follow? It is one which requires a broad spatial setting, for only within
such a large framework does the local detail make sense. But the local detail
cannot just be read off from the abstract generalisations: it is what con-
stitutes the larger processes and determines their outcome. The story is
'evolutionary' not in the Spencerian sense of evolutionist gradualism with
predictable stages of progress, but in the Darwinian sense of constrained
genealogical paths with often unpredictable conjunctures and unexpected
outcomes - which nevertheless, with the benefits of hindsight, show some
regularities both of form and of direction. It is necessary to stress that the
regularities are retrospective: they are not principles which are manifested in
development, like a constant search to maximise energy, or population, or
whatever; nor, therefore, can they be used to explain it. Rather, they are the
structured outcomes of choices made from recognisably human motives.
The structure is created, in a particular environment, by the potential of
what has been invented, as it is realised in a set of emergent properties which
were not necessarily apparent at the beginning of the process. It is important
not to over-rationalise the past: the philosophy of history as a chapter of
interesting accidents is more convincing than one which sees it as planned
progress.
    Important, also, to recognise how different it all was: in L. P. Hartley's
famous phrase, the past is a foreign country, and things are done differently
there. At the beginning of the Holocene, no-one had ever farmed before.
Everything had to be worked out from scratch, and at first things changed
only slowly. To give two small, but symptomatic examples: until quite
recently, cows would only let down their milk in the presence of a calf; and
horses, as herd animals, needed to stay in a group. Hence, perhaps, the
famous transitional sequence, recorded on Assyrian reliefs, from paired
horses as draught animals for chariots, through paired animals for riding
(both being controlled, as in a chariot, by a groom, whilst the warrior looses
his bow), and finally to our 'logical' expectation of single animals controlled
by single riders (Littauer and Crouwel 1979, 136). Whether this slow
development depended on equine psychology or simply on the way in which
concept and practice were limited by previous experience, change was not
simple. To go from A to C requires an intervening B, which is often an
unstable, transitional phase that is probably an 'extinct practice' which is
nowhere represented in the contemporary spectrum of human behaviours.
This was certainly true of the earliest farming, with its incongruous
combination of cereal-cultivation and gazelle-hunting. Ethnography, which


                                        28




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        CHANGING      PERSPECTIVES        Ort   EUROPEAN      PREHISTORY


necessarily describes situations that are themselves the outcome of long
developmental sequences, is often not a good guide to the deep past.
The mobility of many recent hunting groups, for instance, relates to their
relatively recent occupation of marginal habitats, and in some cases actually
depends on techniques acquired from farming or pastoral groups. Animal-
based societies, whether hunters or pastoralists, have probably become
more mobile during the Holocene; intensive collectors, in the same way as
agriculturalists, have probably become more sedentary. The only universally
valid generalisation is probably that global diversity has tended to increase
-until the sixteenth century AD, when that trend began to be catastrophically
reversed.
   When, therefore, did Europe acquire the distinctive character that it was
later to impose on much of the rest of the world? Surely the answer must be:
in the fourth millennium BC, as part of the general transformation of the
western Old World. Much of the cultural distinctiveness of this area can be
summed up in two words: animals, and alcohol. Animals first: one of the
most telling illustrations in Fernand Braudel's Civilisation and Capitalism
is a graph (taken from Pierre Chaunu) of the populations of Indians, cattle,
goats and sheep in Mexico after 1500. While the indigenous human popu-
lation fell, in a steep, hollow curve following the Spanish conquest, the
numbers of introduced ungulates climbed in a classic logistic growth
pattern. As they said in England in the fourteenth century, 'sheep do eat up
men'. Europeans used their domestic livestock to create 'Neo-Europes' in
the lands they conquered overseas - usually at the expense of the natives
(Crosby 1986). These large numbers of domestic animals relative to human
populations are an Old World characteristic, and typical especially of the
western rather than the eastern part, since in east Asia there is a sharp
division between the agrarian Chinese, with few animals (mainly pigs and
water-buffalo, and otherwise beans for protein), and their specialised
pastoralist neighbours on the steppes. The western Old World has a more
intimate mixture of arable and pastoral, either as symbiotic (often ethnically
distinct) groups in the Near East, or as mixed farming (sometimes with
transhumance) in temperate Europe. These large numbers of animals make
sense in the system because of the variety of products they yield, both food
and non-food. Animal labour replaced human labour, with the added
advantage of the labourers being edible.34 Domestic livestock extended the
power of the family and lineage, almost like fictitious kin, and simultane-
ously provided capital capable of generating growth. As Peter Bogucki has
pointed out in a thoughtful article (1993), these properties became in-
creasingly evident in European societies after the fourth millennium. The
growing numbers of animals, as well as people, are fundamental to under-
standing the social changes of later European prehistory (cf. Halstead
1995).
   Finally, alcohol: arguably the most fundamental constituent of western

                                        29




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                     INTRODUCTION


civilisation, inebriating drink is at the core of its culture (see Chapter 15;
also Goodman, Lovejoy and Sheratt 1995). Wine is the life-blood of the
Mediterranean, and its proscription by a conquering Islam is eloquent
testimony to its deep symbolic significance, both secular and religious. What
makes the civilisations of the New World seem so alien, despite their
outward similarity in possessing criteria such as cities, monumental archi-
tecture, writing etc., is the nature of their religion, which resembles a scaled-
up version of the shamanism of native American tribal society. One aspect
of this is the consumption of psychotropic substances and a consequent
ecstatic emphasis. Such practices have some echoes in Old World civi-
lisations, but they are memories of a world long passed. It was alcohol, that
is both drug and food, which domesticated the ecstatic experience and
converted it from private trance to public conviviality. Archaeology shows
that the uses of traction animals and the conspicuous consumption of liquid
refreshment were essentially co-eval. Alcohol and animal traction, drinking
and driving - associated then and forever after35 - were the most powerful
of the cultural attractions which impinged on Europe in the mid-fourth
millennium BC; and the images of the Alsonemedi graves and the
Szigetszentmarton waggon-cup, which recur throughout the papers which
follow, are symptomatic of a Europe which, though still prehistoric, is
increasingly recognisable to its present-day inhabitants.


NOTES

 1. Extension of a calibrated radiocarbon timescale to the beginning of the Holocene and
    tentatively beyond it (the former on the basis of the European pine sequence and the
    latter from marine carbonates) has given a new realism to estimates of time in this period
    (Stuiver and Reimer 1993). Since the offset between 'raw' and calibrated radiocarbon
    estimates is of the order of a millennium in the earlier Holocene, and even more at its
    onset, currently acceptable dates may differ substantially from some earlier published
    estimates.
 2. This is well illustrated in the search for 'rank' and 'hierarchy' in the archaeological
    record; presumably there will soon be a discovery that prehistory was full of flexible,
    task-oriented workteams. Plus ga change, plus c'est la rneme chose!
 3.1 have explored these ideas more fully in Sherratt 1990b and 1992b, and in a recent
    David Clarke Memorial Lecture - Sherratt 1995b - and will do no more than sketch
    them here.
 4. One example of which is, I feai; Braudel's stratified degrees of determinacy, from long-
    term geological processes to political events: this is too simple. It is paralleled by some
    recent American pronouncements.
 5.'Subsistence farming: farming which directly supports the farmer's household without
    producing a significant surplus for trade' (Shorter OED).
 6. The current emphasis on consumption is, of course, a child of its time and reflects the
    contemporary economics of the supermarket and hypermarket; just as the emphasis on
    production in a previous generation reflected the relative deprivation of the Great
    Depression and post-war rationing. Clearly, both parts of the cycle need to be considered
    in a balanced account.
 7. I.e. how to prevent population growth from eating up increased productivity: but what is
    productivity for if not to be eaten up? The real question is: who eats it?


                                              30




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
           CHANGING         PERSPECTIVES          Ort   EUROPEAN        PREHISTORY

 8. In Greenfield's (1988, 573) concise definition: 'Secondary products are products for
    which animals may be utilised repeatedly over the course of their lifetimes. In contrast,
    animals used for primary products (meat, bone and hide) rtiust be slaughtered, yielding
    the product only once.' In saying that animals before the secondary products revolution
    were used 'primarily for meat', I naturally do not exclude other uses of the carcase (as
    at least one over-literal reader has assumed) nor even ad hoc uses such as carrying or
    dragging loads; the contrast I am drawing is with maintaining an appropriate population
    structure for milking, wool-bearing, draught, etc.
 9.1 hope that this formulation will make explicit features of my model which were perhaps
    not sufficiently emphasised in Chapter 6, and gave rise to the following comment from
    L. K. Horwitz and E. Tchernov (1989, 283): 'In two highly stimulating articles, Sherratt
    (1981; 1983) has proposed that in the fourth millennium BC, the Old World underwent
    what he terms a "secondary products revolution". This revolution marks the intro-
    duction of a wide range of activities and uses to which animals had not been put before
    then such as ploughing, riding and the exploitation of their secondary products such as
    milk and wool. However, Sherratt's hypothesis has met with some criticism ... The
    innovations noted by Sherratt do not in fact occur within a circumscribed time period,
    but rather cover a long span of time and as such do not qualify to be called a revolution
    but rather a long-term trend or process. Sherratt has combined his data without reference
    to the historical context of many of these features, i.e. the rise of urban societies.' In fact,
    Sherratt (1983) - the article reprinted here as Chapter 7 - does just that.
10. Though hulled tetraploid forms - heavy, hard and probably spring-grown - were to
    continue in Europe and were only slowly displaced by the arrival of bread-wheat (a free-
    threshing hexaploid) from further east. This process was only completed in western
    Europe in the first millennium BC.
11. 'In fact not only the products of urban industry, but the new economy that produced
    them, spread and was bound to spread. To persuade their possessors to exchange the
    needed raw materials for manufactures, they must be induced not only to demand the
    lattery but also to adjust their economy to absorb them' (1942,124).
12. It was probably from here that 'foreign ships' with sails reached Egypt, to be recorded
    in Protodynastic art. During the third millennium the capacity of maritime shipping
    increased, and the carriage of larger quantities of goods by sea reduced the importance
    of some of the early long-distance land-trails; these topological changes caused shifts of
    urban activity both in the Levant and Iran. The Gulf saw a great density of traffic during
    the later third millennium. The emergence of secondary states around these networks
    altered the social and political nature of contacts, in which chains of independent
    political units passed goods between them. Maritime activity in the Mediterranean
    expanded greatly in the second millennium, when the sail came into use on the east/west
    route along south Anatolia, between the Aegean and the Levant.
13. Domestic horses only spread into Europe and the Near East in the third millennium, but
    until recently were considered to have been domesticated just before 4000 BC on the
    Pontic Steppes. The evidence is, however; contentious, and is discussed in Chapter 7.
    Whilst a late fifth- early-fourth-millennium date would make horses perhaps the only case
    of secondary (non-nuclear) domestication in the Old World that did not form an intimate
    part of this wider interactive network around the Fertile Crescent, this is not ipso facto
    impossible. On the other hand (as I come to believe), we have perhaps been over-hasty
    in inferring the domestic status of horses in the Sredni Stog culture, when in fact the
    domestication process really took place in the following (Pit-Grave) period, when Near
    Eastern input is evident from the use of wheeled vehicles. See Chapter 7 for details.
14.1 have recently been taken to task for supposedly using the occasion of a review of Ian
    Hodder's Domestication of Europe to support neo-diffusionist views! This anxiety about
    the cultural integrity of Mother Europe can only find its explanation in the concepts
    expounded by Mary Douglas in Purity and Danger; it has little to do with the adjudi-
    cation of evidence. In any case, the landscapes of Turkey seem to me to have rather
    more in common with Balkan Europe than Mesopotamia, and there is a strong case for


                                                31




                      This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                     INTRODUCTION

    considering the Taurus as the south-east border of a common entity (e.g. of the area using
    the vertical, as opposed to the horizontal, loom) in Neolithic times. The burst of new
    information coming from Turkey is helping to break down the insulating ignorance
    which separates European from Near Eastern prehistorians.
15. In an exemplary attempt, Margaret Glass (1991) has systematically examined faunal
    assemblages in central Europe from 5500-2500 BC in an attempt to define patterns of
    animal exploitation. Her painstaking work is vitiated by a number of factors: (1) by
    taking a large number of sometimes mediocre assemblages rather than a few good ones;
    (2) by making a bipolar contrast between 'early' and 'late' - the latter defined as 4000-
    2000 and thus cutting across the crucial transition; and (3) by analysing diversity as a
    factor of time rather than location. As a literature-based study of faunal remains, without
    reference to other classes of evidence and within an evolutionary metaphysic, it never-
    theless demonstrates important temporal contrasts. Haskell Greenfield's study (1986;
    1988, with CA comments) of Balkan assemblages is more focused and better articulated
    with culture-historical considerations, though its samples are small and rather uncertain.
    Its conclusion that there was a relatively sudden shift in exploitation patterns in the later
    fourth millennium is welcome, though not conclusive, support for the models proposed
    here. Kenneth Russell's splendid compendium of information (1988) has the merits and
    disadvantages of cultural materialism: a welcome search for modern comparative data,
    but a rather deterministic use of them. It does not bear directly on present questions. In
    a pioneering paper, Smith and Horwitz (1984) attempted to demonstrate milking from
    changes in bone structure due to calcium mobilisation; this technique awaits systematic
    application and evaluation. Finally, Chang and Koster (1986) have reviewed 'pastoralism'
    from the point of view of ethnographers of modern transhumant minorities in the
    Mediterranean. Their lightning tour of the subject contains useful references, but few
    insights for prehistorians.
16. Unless explicitly indicated otherwise, I speak of the light plough (technically an ard),
    rather than the heavy plough which was invented in temperate Europe in the early
    Middle Ages.
17. This term has now disappeared in the typological reform of the Danish Neolithic, being
    subsumed into EN II, but seems to be largely contemporary with Fuchsberg in areas
    adjacent to it. Fuchsberg has southern connections, reaching down the spine of Jutland
    into central Germany, and the pattern of early plough-marks (Thrane 1989, fig. 4)
    supports a picture of an initial Fuchsberg introduction in east Jutland, spreading to the
    Islands in M N i b , along with the construction of Passage Graves. Whittle's assertion (1985,
    210) that 'the earliest ploughmarks under barrows in Denmark are now dated to ENC,
    and so substantially before 2700 bc [i.e. 3500 BC]' is thus misleading, since they are at
    most only a century sooner. The pattern actually fits together very well.
18. GrN-5035, 5570 ± 60 bp (Bakker, Vogel and Wislanski 1969), calibrating to 4530-4340
    BC. The mound itself (like the other example overlying plough-marks, fcupawa 15) is
    from the TRB Wiorek phase, comparable to Salzmiinde and Fuchsberg, and dating to
    c.3600-3300 BC. Jankowska and Wislanski (1991, 64) see this clearly: 'Eine deutliche
    Veranderung in der Wirtschaftsweise der Trichterbecherkultur wird erst in deren letzten
    Abschnitten erkennbar.'
19. Midgley suggests (1992, 390) the mid-fifth millennium BC, when Lengyel elements
    indicate contacts with Hungary, though there is no evidence for the plough there either,
    at this date.
20. As argued below, introduction of the plough may not in fact coincide immediately with
    a radical change in settlement-pattern, though it stores up the potential for a large-scale
    change in the future.
21. Such an assertion is not to deny the obvious fact that, for instance, farming can support
    greater numbers of people than hunting; it is simply to dissociate its ultimate effects from
    the reason for adopting it in the first place. The two aspects should not be conflated.
     Farming, for instance, may well have begun at Jericho because of its crucial position on
     routes of contact and exchange ('trade'); this localised, humanly created demographic




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
          CHANGING         PERSPECTIVES         ON    EUROPEAN        PREHISTORY

    pressure could long have preceded the regional pressures caused by climatic change,
    which may well have been the reason for the general adoption of farming.
22. The god Enlil defends the superiority of the hoe, which is equally effective, does not
    break so easily, is more easily repaired and can be used throughout the year - and by all
    people, not just the wealthy with their draught animals. See Potts (1994, 164) and further
    references therein. Even with the plough, however, secondary hoeing was apparently
    necessary in European cultivation systems, since Val Camonica rock-engravings of plough
    scenes show the plough-team followed by 2-5 people with hoes.
23. That is why it is misleading rhetoric to claim, for instance, that the domestication of the
    horse had 'an effect comparable in scope to that of the introduction of the steam loco-
    motive or the private automobile' (Anthony and Brown 1991, 22); all these inventions
    ultimately (and especially in conjunction, and in an appropriate socio-economic context)
    had a revolutionary effect on human cultures, but these were usually emergent properties,
    not an instant effect following their initial introduction, which was often their adoption
    by a minority. Equally, however; it is important not to fall into the trap of assuming that
    'prestige* equals 'useless for practical purposes': in most societies, prestige accrues to
    effective performance.
24. It is a constant pitfall of European prehistory that terms are used in different ways even
    for the same material on different sides of a national frontier. Mediterranean usage begins
    the Bronze Age (well before tin-bronze!) in the mid-fourth millennium; central Europe
    starts the Bronze Age (following Paul Reinecke) in the mid-third millennium. Caveat
    lector.
25. One of the mistakes of my original attempt (Chapter 6) was to look for a major horizon
    of change in settlement patterns comparable in magnitude to that in the Carpathian Basin
    at the onset of Baden. I therefore saw the beginning of TRB as in some way related to use
    of the plough (e.g. Figure 6.18). This can now be seen as part of a quite different process,
    the fusion of loess-land Neolithic and indigenous populations in the North European Plain
    (see Chapter 13). The first use of the plough after 3500 was associated with relatively
    little change in settlement patterns; only after 3000 did a truly radical change occur.
26. Neither 'luxury' nor 'elite' are quite the right terms, but there is nothing equally
    comprehensive but more precise for such minority use.
27. Many of these micro-environments had become available at the beginning of the Holo-
    cene, because of increased runoff and the creation of fine alluvium on fans, or the regular
    seasonal rise and fall of lakes. It was this, rather than a straightforward fall in the levels
    of lakes (which had come into being largely as a result of low evaporation rates in the
    Pleistocene), which provided soils suitable for farming. These changes merely created the
    possibility of farming; they allowed, but did not determine, its adoption.
28. Because of its intimate association with seasonally abundant streamflows, the earliest
    farming probably involved some minimal forms of water-control, and was itself a kind of
    proto-irrigation. Formal types of channel-irrigation, however, emerged in Iraq and Iran,
    and also in the Levant, but not apparently to any great extent in Turkey. In this respect,
    Turkey resembles Europe rather than her eastern neighbours. Nevertheless the contrast
    between west- and east-central Anatolia noted by Roberts in the Neolithic also extended
    to differing livestock emphases: sheep/goat around Lake Bey§ehir (as in Balkan Europe),
    cattle in the Konya plain.
29. The Koros/Crif culture looks like the last attempt to apply a Mediterranean pattern at its
    northern limits, supplementing unreliable cereal yields with a variety of collected wild
    foods; the Bandkeramik culture, on the other hand, looks like the rapid expansion of a
    group which has just worked out a new pattern, suitable for central Europe. It was still,
    however, very closely related to the river network and to fine-grained, fertile soils.
30. 'Our observations on early floodplain farming were predicted long ago by Sherratt (1980)
    ... His view was rejected by Barker (1985) based on a geomorphic study by Bintliff
    (1976) which, however; rested on a model of Holocene alluviation that has since proved
    unworkable' (van Andel et al. 1994, 140). 'Sherratt... had realised much earlier (1972;
    1980) that Neolithic farmers might have chosen floodplain soils for the water they




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                     INTRODUCTION

    stored after the floods of spring. He was ignored because of a pervasive belief that the
    traditional farming methods of Greece and the southeastern Balkans illustrate prehistoric
    agricultural practice' (van Andel and Runnels 1995,483). Commentators working in the
    Higgsian tradition had failed to realise the extent to which geomorphological change had
    fundamentally altered the Neolithic landscape (cf. Sherratt 1987f).
31. E.g. TRB / Globular Amphorae / Corded Ware / Bell Beaker: each seems to have been
    conceived in part in explicit reaction to its predecessor and neighbours, and distribution
    patterns often show considerable overlap, even at the same period.
32. Ian Hodder (1990, 93, commenting on my diagram reproduced here as Figure 15.6)
    interprets the proliferation of small, individual serving-vessels as the result of an
    endogenous long-term trend. This is not necessarily in conflict with the idea of a specific
    external model: the same developmental potential underlay farming societies in both
    areas, which broadly developed from small, scattered, intensive forms of cultivation to
    large and extensive ones, with similar social consequences. What I am suggesting,
    however, is that older-established areas got there first and provided a pattern for the
    others.
33. The Usatovo group, around Odessa on the Black Sea coast, did however have direct
    maritime links to north-west Anatolia and the north Aegean, as shown by its arsenical,
    riveted daggers.
34. Slavery only took root in areas where insufficient bovids were available, or for intricate
    tasks (like cotton picking) which required skill as well as power.
35. Down to the present day when, needless to say, the combination is a lethal one.




                                              34




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 05:59:32 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                             Section          I

          CYCLES OF
       INTERPRETATION




 Ornament on the interior of a graphite-painted bowl from Devetaki Cave,
          Bulgaria, C.4000 BC (after Mikov and Dzambazov).




A preliminary conception, indefinite but comprehensive, is needful as
   an introduction to a definite conception. A complex idea is not
communicable directly, by giving one after another of its component
parts their finished forms; since if no outline pre-exists in the mind of
            the recipient, they will not be rightly combined.
                                                     HERBERT SPENCER        (1862)




               This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:01:34 UTC
                                All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                          C Y C L E S OF I N T E R P R E T A T I O N


T h e study of prehistory requires an approach which owes something to
'history' and something to 'evolution', but in fact must go beyond both.
Unmodified, either one of these ways of conceptualising the past is in-
adequate when faced with the archaeological record. Study of the European
Iron Age, for instance, can be simply a hunt for the material correlates of the
tribes described by Caesar; projected back into the Bronze Age and the
Neolithic (or even the Palaeolithic!), this attitude gives rise to an absurd
pseudo-history in which typological tribes are invested with ethnicity and
become the equivalents of European nations in old-fashioned nationalistic
history textbooks. This approach, while dying, is still not yet dead. On the
other hand, however, the evolutionary attitude is equally inadequate, and
can be positively harmful. It is easy to treat Palaeolithic populations as
automata, predictably responding to climatic change; but the same
approach can also be applied in later periods, leading to ecologically re-
ductionist accounts of the beginnings of farming or urban life.
   While both approaches co-exist and have long intellectual ancestries,
there is a tendency for prehistory to be colonised either from one side or
from the other, from the humanities or the sciences, so that at any particular
period there is clearly a dominant outlook. Such episodes are not arbitrary,
for they correspond to the needs of their time - either to find some under-
lying progressive regularity to human history as a whole, or else to trace the
specific genealogies and experiences of particular groups. Such cycles can be
traced in many disciplines: even in biology, for instance, from the abstract
'transformationism' of Erasmus Darwin in 1791, through the genealogical
specificity of his grandson Charles Darwin's concept of natural selection in
1859, back again to the abstract, high-Victorian orthogeneticism of Herbert
Spencer's version of evolution in 1862. Darwin's vision was in fact a
Romantic deconstruction of Enlightenment progressivism, that was in turn
lost in Spencer's liberal optimism. These movements thus mirror other
aspects of cultural and intellectual history, and the social and economic
circumstances behind them; and this insight has a contemporary relevance,
in that the interpretative shift which archaeology - in parallel with many
other subjects - has recently experienced, from the comparative and
deterministic approach of New Archaeology to the cultural particularism
of the post-processualists, has many of the characteristic features of the
Romantic revolt.
    Both approaches have their corresponding advantages and dis-
advantages, and the success of prehistoric archaeology as a sphere of human
knowledge can be gauged by the extent to which it has succeeded in
integrating these two enterprises. The prize to be gained from uniting them
is nothing less than a comprehensive vision of the whole panorama of nature
and culture, and the place of human society within the natural world. This
may seem a distant prospect, but there is no doubt that an understanding of
prehistory is absolutely central to its achievement. That is why the writings

                                             36




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:01:34 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                          C Y C L E S OF I N T E R P R E T A T I O N


of V. Gordon Childe can be seen to play a crucial part in the intellectual
history of the twentieth century. Childe was effectively the first prehistorian
simultaneously to see early history in evolutionary perspective and pre-
history in historical perspective. Although his works are mainly narrative or
methodological rather than theoretical, his constant rewriting of west
Eurasian prehistory and early history both defined a field of research and
successively tested a whole range of ideas - genealogical, diffusionist and
evolutionary - which had been applied to it. Moreover, in developing his
own extension of Marxism, he created a model whose coherence could pro-
vide a paradigm for the elaboration of many different kinds of explanation.
This gift to his chosen subject was perhaps more appreciated by his
successors than by his archaeological contemporaries, among whom there
were few thinkers of comparable calibre; but it was a precious inheritance
to the generations which followed.




                                            37




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:01:34 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                              1

     V. Gordon Childe: Archaeology
         and Intellectual History
                                        (1989)

If archaeology is the study of the past through its material remains,
prehistory is one of its most important branches. Yet prehistory is a very
young subject, its very name being little more than a century old (Chippin-
dale 1988). In the story of its development, Gordon Childe occupies a very
special place, not only as the most distinguished European prehistorian of
the twentieth century, but also as one of the first to combine a professional
mastery of the subject with a wider vision of its significance.1
   Of course there were others before him who studied prehistoric archae-
ology, under whatever name; but by and large they were concerned with a
single period or area - usually that in which they were engaged on ex-
cavation. Perhaps because he was not primarily a fieldworker, Gordon
Childe had no such encumbrance. As a result of his appointment to a chair
at Edinburgh in 1927, he was able to range widely over the prehistory of an
area from Scotland to northern India, from the Stone Age to the end of
Antiquity. Almost single-handedly he moulded a series of site reports and
regional studies into a comprehensive view of the pre- and proto-history of
Europe and the Near East. But he did more than merely bring together
disparate branches of the same subject, divided by different origins and
institutional commitments. In writing a comprehensive prehistory of
Europe, he had to choose an appropriate narrative model for the kinds of
conclusions which could be distilled from raw archaeological observations.

Gordon Childe was one of the founding members of the board of the historical
journal Past and Present, and this paper arose from a Past and Present Open
Lecture delivered at the Institute of Archaeology, London, in November 1987,
thirty years after his death. I tried to convey not only the broad intellectual
currents which were expressed in his work, but also the sense of idealism and
commitment expressed to me by his former colleagues and pupils: Sinclair Hood,
Stuart Piggott, Peter Gathercole, Humphrey Case, Cecilia Western, Rachel
Maxwell-Hyslop and the late Lady Mallowan.

                                             38




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             ARCHAEOLOGY             AND    INTELLECTUAL            HISTORY


For archaeology in Childe's hands was more than just 'piecing together the
past' (to use the title of one of his own books [1956] about the craft side of
his subject): it was a means of finding answers to some of the great questions
about the early history of human societies, which had been central to the
European intellectual tradition long before there was any conception of
prehistoric archaeology at all. Childe's contribution was to set a growing
body of factual material in the context of long-standing debates on matters
such as evolutionary models of social development, the relationship between
Europe and the Orient, and the significance of technological change, which
had been conducted (from the Enlightenment onwards, but pre-eminently
by Marx) largely in isolation from firm archaeological knowledge. By
placing his work in this larger setting, it may be possible to see why - despite
the transformation in prehistoric studies which has taken place since he
wrote - he occupies such a crucial position in the history of the subject.
   Childe's output, by any standard, was massive. He wrote some twenty
substantial books, many of them successively rewritten and updated, and
some translated into a dozen languages; and a rapid count of his published
articles comes to something around 240: a daunting total.2 In his writings,
he had two audiences in mind: a technical, archaeological one (not only in
this country, but also more widely in Europe), and a more popular but edu-
cated audience reached by people like Julian Huxley, J. D. Bernal, J. B. S.
Haldane, Lancelot Hogben and Hyman Levy through the medium of
publishing houses such as the Cobbett Press, the Watts Thinker's Library or
Pelican Books. This serious and perhaps rather self-consciously intellectual
forum (in which Childe, as a Marxist, found sympathetic company) was
viewed with a certain amount of suspicion by many of his archaeological
colleagues, but it must be seen as an enterprise in its own right, and not just
an exercise in popularisation - of the kind which, with coffee-table books
and television, has now grown to industrial proportions. It was an attempt
to engage in reasoned debate with a wider world of scholarship than was
immediately available in his own subject. As Jaquetta Hawkes put it in
1963, 'Professor Gordon Childe has long been the sole prehistorian with
both the ability and the will to draw his subject from its rustic and academic
backwaters and make it contribute to the main streams of thought'.3 In
combining these roles he became the natural choice of editors needing a
comprehensible account of prehistoric developments in volumes such as the
Cambridge Economic History, The European Inheritance, or the (Oxford)
History of Technology (Childe 1952; 1954a; 1954b). Through works such
as these, his name became widely known beyond his own subject, and still
today he is one of the archaeologists most frequently cited in the early
chapters of general historical summaries.
   In tracing the progress of his thought, it is important to follow it on both
levels. Although in terms of his archaeology there is a certain sameness
about his output over his last thirty years of work, and Professor Grahame

                                             39




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               V.   GORDON         CHILDE:


Clark has gone so far as to say that 'He had achieved what he was going to
achieve [in the discipline of prehistoric archaeology] essentially by 1930'
(Clark 1976, 4), it is in his more general writings that one can see the way
in which he wrestled with the wider significance of his subject. While his
professional interests remained circumscribed by the problems in European
and Near Eastern archaeology which he set out to tackle in his B.Litt. days,
it was in his exploration of new ways of thinking about prehistoric social
changes that the larger story lies.
   Yet despite the fact that many current schools of archaeology still hail
him as a founding father, much of his writing about prehistory has been
completely superseded. The progress of archaeological discovery since his
death has been remarkably rapid. New information has accumulated at an
ever-increasing rate, and with the help of new methods many of his funda-
mental ideas have been put to the test. The results have not been kind to his
theories. It would not be unfair to say that many of his principal conclusions
about the European Neolithic and Bronze Ages have been shown to be
largely incorrect. One by one, his major postulates about prehistoric Euro-
pean societies have been knocked over. After a generation, not much of his
detailed explanatory edifice is left. What remains, however, is his commit-
ment to archaeology as a social science (Childe 1947): if not exactly in the
way which he envisaged (for the social sciences have themselves moved a
long way from the works in which he found inspiration), at least in a way
far removed from the antiquarian condition of archaeology as he found it.
It is because his enterprise has been continued that we can now, with
hindsight, more clearly discern both the failures and inconsistencies in his
position and the positive elements of his achievement.


CHILDE'S CAREER: ARCHAEOLOGY AND POLITICS
It is unnecessary to do more than briefly rehearse the facts of Childe's life,
since they have been admirably set out in Sally Green's biography (1981).
He was born in 1892 in New South Wales, and had a somewhat oppressive
upbringing as the son of the Anglican rector of a parish in north Sydney,
a man of High Church sympathies who had emigrated to Australia in 1878.
This gave Gordon Childe both an interest in books and an entrenched dis-
like of established religion which was later to colour his views both of Near
Eastern civilisation and the megalith builders of Neolithic Europe. His
growing interest in radical politics was thus something that he nurtured in
private. He was rather shy, conscious both of his unprepossessing appear-
ance4 and somewhat indistinct speech, and his academic achievements
helped to compensate for a certain social awkwardness. His rebellious
attitudes were expressed in a rather idiosyncratic style of dress, a studied
shabbiness or - as recorded in later photographs - incongruous com-
binations of broad-brimmed hat, waistcoat and shorts. At the University of

                                             40




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
              ARCHAEOLOGY            AND    INTELLECTUAL            HISTORY


Sydney Childe excelled both in Greek and philosophy, and was awarded a
graduate scholarship in classics tenable at Oxford.
    He arrived in 1914, at the age of 22, in a University increasingly emptied
by the War, and perhaps manifesting many features of the world which he
so much disliked. Yet academically, he had come home. He began work for
the diploma in Classical Archaeology, taught by Professor Percy Gardner
and J. D. Beazley, famous for his painstaking studies of Greek vases; but
much of the excitement in the study of Greek archaeology was coming from
the emerging story of the prehistoric Aegean, and specifically from the
presence of two scholars of notable vision and archaeological achievement:
Professor J. L. (later Sir John) Myres and Sir Arthur Evans, Extraordinary
Professor of Prehistoric Archaeology and formerly Keeper of the Ash-
molean. Evans' excavations at Knossos had won him world fame; but he
was equally notable for the breadth of his knowledge of the surrounding
areas - the prehistoric Balkans (where he had travelled widely as correspon-
dent of the Manchester Guardian) and the contemporary civilisations of the
east Mediterranean.5 His friend Myres, who was Wykeham Professor of
Ancient History from 1910 to 1939, was no less polymathic. Trained in
both classics and geology, he had organised the archaeological collections in
Cyprus and excavated in Greece before taking up academic posts in Britain.
Of his influence on Childe I shall have more to say later on; in fact for much
of the War he was on special operations in the east Mediterranean, collect-
ing intelligence and directing Greek irregulars in cattle raids on the Turkish
coast, for he combined his scholarship with an intimate knowledge of the
realities of life in the Aegean (Myres 1980).
    Childe at first took part in military exercises, but already in 1915 he made
known his anti-war views and in 1916 moved out of his college, Queen's, to
share lodgings with Rajani Palme Dutt, a founding member of the British
Communist Party. Childe was an active member of the University Socialist
Society and supported the No-Conscription Fellowship, as well as other
radical causes. Nevertheless he continued to work hard at his academic
studies, and transferred from the Diploma to do a B.Litt. under Myres on
'The influence of the Indo-Europeans in Prehistoric Greece'. Its combination
of archaeological evidence with a wider perspective from comparative
philology is characteristic of his early work. At the same time he took the
examinations for Greats, and was awarded a First. With these achievements
he returned to Australia in 1917.
    He spent four years there; first, in attempting to find an academic post,
which was blocked because of his political views, and then actively engaged
in politics as private secretary to the newly elected Labour Premier of New
South Wales. Then, in 1921, he was sent to London as Research and Pub-
licity Officer to liaise with European labour movements and prepare press
releases; but within two weeks of landing the Labour government had
fallen. Childe, seen as a political appointee, was dismissed. He remained in

                                             41




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               V.   GORDON         CHILDE:


London, searching for a job in either the political or the academic world.
Indeed, he pursued the two activities in tandem, writing How Labour
Governs (1923), translating archaeological works in French, Italian and
Russian, and visiting continental museums. In 1925, through Myres' good
offices, he was appointed Librarian to the Royal Anthropological Institute
and published his first book, The Dawn of European Civilisation (1925),
soon to be followed by studies of The Aryans (1926) and The Danube in
Prehistory (1929). It was largely on the strength of The Dawn (as it was
inevitably known) that Childe was appointed, now thirty-five, to a newly
created chair at Edinburgh, and given the security to pursue his research.
The chair had been established by a bequest from Lord Abercromby, and it
might have been designed for him in its stipulation of a knowledge of Euro-
pean languages and a grasp of European prehistory as a whole. Childe spent
nearly two decades in Edinburgh, in a job whose teaching responsibilities
were not onerous and where he could largely devote himself to research. He
took the opportunity to travel more widely, including visits to the Near East,
North America and the Soviet Union, and he continued to write with the
same industry as before. He revised The Dawn, wrote a companion volume
on the Near East (1928, revised 1934), summarised the Bronze Age (1930),
explored Scottish prehistory (1931; 1935), and wrote his two masterpieces
of popular scholarship, Man Makes Himself (1936) and What Happened in
History (1942). Increasingly his thoughts were directed towards the growth
of fascism and the approach of war; What Happened in History was a direct
response to the conflict, which cut him off from continental contacts and led
him to reflect on the vicissitudes of civilisation.
   The end of the War coincided with an opportunity to move back to
London (where in any case he had spent as much time as possible during the
years in Edinburgh). Mortimer Wheeler had since 1927 been trying to set
up an Institute of Archaeology as part of the University of London, and it
finally took shape a decade later in the august setting of St John's Lodge in
Regent's Park (Evans 1987). With Wheeler as its part-time director, it
accumulated an impressive range of expertise - albeit on a rather shoestring
basis - which successively embraced the fields not only of British, Near
Eastern and environmental archaeology, but also the technical disciplines of
conservation and photography necessary for a fully professional approach.
When Wheeler was appointed Director General of Archaeology in India, the
committee charged with finding a successor unanimously put forward
Childe's name, and he became the first full-time Director of the Institute in
1946.
   It was a happy move. At the Institute there was a full archaeological team
and an enthusiastic group of students, in contrast to his lonely archae-
ological presence in Edinburgh. London also gave more immediate access to
a wider network of stimulating friends and the intellectual life of the capital.
In his inaugural lecture, 'Archaeology as a Social Science', he stressed the

                                             42




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             ARCHAEOLOGY             AND     INTELLECTUAL            HISTORY


general significance of archaeology to wider concerns. In this period he
discovered a common enterprise with other Marxist scholars and was
involved in the founding of Past and Present (Hill, Hilton and Hobsbawm
1983), and wrote his contributions to general histories of economy and
technology (1952; 1954a; 1954b). He wrote accounts of archaeological
methodology (1956), and explored ideas of social evolution (1951). His
interest in the history of science led him to write a general book on epistem-
ology, Society and Knowledge (1956), and he continued to revise his classic,
The Dawn (1957). These various threads he drew together in his last
synthesis, The Prehistory of European Society, published in 1958, the year
after his death (Piggott 1958).
   He was not, perhaps, a natural administrator - an activity which more
resembled his style of driving than his skill at writing prehistory.6 His
driving, indeed, was as legendary and as idiosyncratic as his taste in clothes.
Edward Pyddocke recounts an incident when Childe, giving him a lift,
stopped at a set of traffic lights. After several cycles of red and green he
gently intimated that it was perhaps time to move off. 'Oh, sorry - 1 thought
you were driving' was Childe's reply. When the lease on the Institute's
premises in St John's Lodge ran out and the move to construct the present
building in Gordon Square was contemplated, it was clear that the Institute
was entering a new phase, and perhaps needed more practical steersman-
ship. With characteristic generosity, Childe agreed to give up his post a year
before his official retirement, in order to allow his successor to manage the
move.
   After a climactic year in which he received a Festschrift7 and the Gold
Medal of the Society of Antiquaries, he donated much of his library to the
Institute and sold off the rest, and moved to the Athenaeum to contemplate
retirement. He visited several of his ex-students abroad, and planned a visit
to Australia. Leaving the Institute was the end of a lifetime's work; and as
Professor John Evans, its present director, has recently written, 'with his
post he gave up, quite literally, his reason for living' (1987, 19). There was
also a sense of personal loneliness: in the words of Peter Gathercole, 'he
remained to the end quite unreconciled to his bachelorhood' (1982, 198).
When he left for Sydney, thirty years after taking up his chair in Edinburgh,
it was with a sense of finality; as we now know, he had made a conscious
decision to end his life.
   Nevertheless, he was not idle. He completed his last book on the voyage,
and a recension of it for Past and Present (1958c; 1957a). He lectured, and
visited old friends in Australia; received an honorary degree and broadcast
on Australian Radio. Yet he did not like much of what he saw, and wrote
scathingly of Australian society in letters home. He also composed three
documents: an autobiographical note, later published under the title
'Retrospect' (1958a); another, giving his view of the main tasks confronting
archaeology in Britain, which was given the title 'Valediction' (1958b) -

                                             43




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               V.   GORDON        CHILDE:


parallel, as we now know, to a letter which he had written to Soviet archae-
ologists (mainly about methodology) before his departure from England,
and which caused an embarrassed silence among its recipients (Klejn 1994).
Finally, there was a personal letter to his successor accompanied by a
memoir to be read in ten years' time (later published by Glyn Daniel in an
Antiquity editorial: Childe 1980). In it, he set out his personal attitude to
life in general, and his own in particular. 'Now I have seen the- Australian
Spring; I have smelt the boronia, watched snakes and lizards, listened to the
"locusts". There is nothing more I want to do here ... Life ends best when
one is happy and strong'. That life ended in the Blue Mountains, near to his
childhood home.
    Childe was unusual in combining an interest, and even starting careers in,
politics and prehistory. Both were expressions of his interest in human
affairs. His approach to the prehistory and early history of Europe was thus
more than an antiquarian curiosity. Although it is a commonplace to assert
that, coming from the antipodes, he saw European prehistory as an outsider
(not unlike the metaphorical observer from Mars), quite the reverse is true.
As the product of a colonial culture - an Anglican rectory and a department
of classics - he was, like many others, in search of his European roots. In a
famous sentence in the preface to the first (1925) edition of his otherwise
highly technical work on The Dawn of European Civilisation he defined its
theme as 'the foundation of European civilisation as a peculiar and indi-
vidual manifestation of the human spirit'. It is a theme, conceptualised with
increasing sophistication, that runs throughout his work. As Michael
Rowlands has made clear in a brilliant essay (1984), it was an attempt to
push back into prehistory the familiar story of 'The Rise of the West' - a
story which goes back to the beginning of European historiography and
continues to occupy historians as diverse as W. H. McNeil, Hugh Trevor-
Roper, and J. M. Roberts. Childe's answers began with the intellectual
assumptions of the Romantic movement, the Aryans and Indo-Germanic
philology, and ended with the answers of the Enlightenment - Oriental
despotism and the progress of science. To translate these ideas into archae-
ology, with a raw material of broken potsherds and partial house-plans, was
an act of outstanding imagination - the wonder is not that it was done well,
but that it was done at all.


STRUCTURING THE PAST: ANCESTRY AND EVOLUTION
While histories of archaeology conventionally describe, in classic Whig
fashion, a series of discoveries that lead up to the present sum of knowledge,
a more sophisticated view must attempt to describe the forces which create
and structure knowledge of the past. It is thus necessary to put Childe's
attempt into a longer perspective, and to situate it within a broader
intellectual context.

                                             44




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             ARCHAEOLOGY             AND    INTELLECTUAL            HISTORY


   The growth of a consciousness of the past is one of the features of
European development since the end of the Middle Ages, and is intimately
connected with three important processes: global expansion, industrial-
isation, and the creation of ethnically coherent nation states. Each of these
has given rise to questions of identity - national, social and cultural - on
several different levels. Such identity can be defined in relation to immediate
predecessors or neighbours (the French, the Celts, the Germans, the Slavs);
in relation to other civilisations (the Classical world, Egypt, Islam, the East
in general); or in relation to more distant societies, the 'other cultures' of
ethnology and anthropology. These successive encounters and their percep-
tion in terms of identity or otherness by dominant groups within western
societies (including their use as metaphors for other social conflicts) were
instrumental in forming the academic categories within which we still
organise our knowledge, as Hugh MacDougall (1982), Martin Bernal
(1987) and Edward Said (1978) have recently pointed out in relation re-
spectively to English history, classical studies and orientalism (cf. Thapar
1975). While world encounters have been important in raising general
questions such as the definition of 'civilisation', territorial disputes within
Europe have focused more immediate attention on ethnic origins and
nationality.
   The importance of such questions of identity for models of the past lies
in their implications for development through time. Such relationships can
be visualised in various ways, all of which require some concept of time
depth. They may be conceived in terms of common ancestry, expressed as a
family tree: identity is here seen in terms of the genealogies of peoples.8 A
different (though sometimes complementary) image is that of superimposed
layers, in which a superior or inferior position may take on a moral aspect,
with higher groups more worthy of respect than lower ones. These meta-
phors have not been confined to human identities. Overseas expansion
brought about an encounter not just with other societies but with other
species as well: the global variety of the animal and plant kingdoms whose
systematic classification prompted the questions of relationship and
ancestry that were answered by Darwin, and that had their physical ex-
emplification in fossils from different layers of rock. Each of these sets of
ideas has interacted with, and provided models for, the others - not always
with happy results, as when the confusion of biological and cultural tax-
onomies produced intellectual racism, and the idea of social stratification
gave human inequality an apparently geological permanence.
   In translating patterns of contemporary variety into reconstructed
relationships in time, however, social theorists were handicapped more
severely than biologists. For when evolutionary biologists came to look for
exemplification of their theories, they could appeal to the fossil record, long
studied in its own right by antiquarians, and increasingly systematised by
geologists. Social theorists had access to no such well-ordered body of

                                             45




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               V.   GORDON         CHILDE:


observations about the remote past. While Biblical narrative and ancient
history provided some information about earlier civilisations, it contained
only mythological references to events such as the origins of farming or the
beginnings of urban life. Social theorists could thus only speculate on these
matters; and, as a result, speculative prehistory long preceded the actual
evidence of prehistoric archaeology.

Study of the past: Science or Romance?
These multiple questions of relationship did not, of course, all present
themselves simultaneously; local problems alternated with a growing scale
of external encounters. A consequence is that at some periods attention has
been focused on European national problems, as in the early nineteenth
century or the early twentieth century; at others, it has been directed
outwards to a wider range of overseas questions, as in the mid-eighteenth
century or the later nineteenth century. Reflecting these attitudes, writers
about the past have alternated between two approaches: a retrospective
approach to questions of cultural identity, working backwards to solve
problems of immediate ancestry (Who were the Celts? Who were the
Greeks?); and a more abstract approach, arguing forwards from first prin-
ciples to formulate more global questions ('In the infancy of society ...').
Each has produced its own kind of history and archaeology. The first group
is characterised by a Romantic attachment to place and often by a direct
(and often nationalistic) involvement with the areas of their concern; while
the second group is more typified by 'scientific' attitudes and positivist
assumptions. Neither side, needless to say, has had a monopoly of truth, and
both embody often hidden political assumptions. One emphasises cultural
specificity and tradition, the other is more willing to prise its specimens
loose from their context for comparative study. Individual disciplines may
swing between these attitudes, and the current state of any subject (as with
archaeology today) is the result of a continuing dialectic between alternative
approaches.
   What this means is that, in tracing intellectual history, the threads often
seem to skip a generation. There is a nationalist thread, from Luther
through Herder to Kossinna and early Childe, interwoven with a rationalist
thread, from Montesquieu through Morgan and Marx to later Childe. The
following excursion attempts briefly to disentangle them.

From fictitious genealogy to philosophical            prehistory
In the Middle Ages, questions of national relationship and ancestry were
expressed literally in the form of a family tree.9 These were the pedigrees of
rulers, not peoples, for it was they that defined the polities. The genealogies
of leading dynasties were traced back to the Romans, and beyond them the
Trojans: hence Geoffrey of Monmouth's interest in Brutus, son of Aeneas,
who gave Britain its name and its first national mythology. A shift of

                                             46




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             ARCHAEOLOGY             AND    INTELLECTUAL            HISTORY


emphasis towards ethnicity, however (with a particular concern for
language), first became evident at the time of the Reformation, which pro-
duced some of the themes that would later serve as arguments for more
specific kinds of nationalism: religious reformers and German humanists
combined to emphasise the importance and antiquity of the Germanic
tradition, hoping thereby to emancipate northern Europe from its depend-
ence on Italy and the Mediterranean. They combined Tacitus' idealised view
of the ancient Germans (written as propaganda in his own time) with an
extrapolation of Biblical narrative.10 Luther himself traced the origin of
the Germans to Ashkenaz, great-grandson of Noah; Abraham Ortelius held
the Teutonic tongue to be the true language of Adam. It is no accident that
philology was later to strike such strong roots in German soil.
   Biblical narrative and accounts by ancient authors long remained the
basis of conceptions of life in earlier times.11 Speculation about a more
remote past, and a more systematic attempt to define the character of early
civilisations, came to prominence in the Enlightenment, when European
cultures became more aware both of their oriental neighbours and of the
inhabitants of their overseas possessions.12 External observations were again
linked to internal concerns, in terms of the idea of progress and the notion
of civilisation, defined as the increase of knowledge and the advance of
social conditions and morals. This involved investigation of problems such
as the origins of language, the early condition of humanity, and the develop-
ment of laws. In elaborating a universal history, Enlightenment writers
sought to bring together both the newly known primitive world and the
older civilisations of the Mediterranean and the Orient in the light of their
own political agenda. This had important consequences for the way in
which the role of ancient cultures came to be viewed.
   One aspect of this is the beginnings of the idealisation of Greece. As
Michael Vickers has recently pointed out (1985/6), the values of the ancien
regime were closely bound up with the idea of imperial Rome. As a counter-
point to this, revolutionary interest began to appeal to the republican and
democratic ideals of classical Greece. Winckelmann's aesthetic studies gave
a new status to Greek art, appropriate to the idealisation of its politics.
This libertarian view of the Greeks articulated with another characteristic
attitude of the time: the theme of the Orient as other. While this conception
had its origins with the Greeks themselves in their confrontation with Persia
(and accounts for the longevity of the theme of the Trojan War), it was given
contemporary relevance in eighteenth-century Europe by its congruence
with the situation of the western powers and the Ottoman Empire, giving
new meaning to the old opposition of Europe and Asia, the West and the
East, Christianity and Islam, liberty and despotism, industry and stagnation.
For behind the egalitarian rhetoric and the universalist interests of the
Enlightenment was a firm conception of the superiority of European culture.
Seeking a rational explanation of these differences, Montesquieu (Uesprit

                                             47




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               V.   GORDON        CHILDE:


des lois, 1748) found it in climate and geography - the beginning of a long
tradition of environmental determinism (Shklar 1987). He pointed particu-
larly to the role of the state in organising irrigation works in Oriental
societies, and its consequences in terms of slavery, state ownership of land
and despotic rulership. This he contrasted with the relative liberty of
Europe, whether under republican or monarchical government. This line of
thought has its heirs in Marx's Asiatic mode of production and Wittfogel's
Oriental Despotism (1957), both of which have coloured interpretations of
early Near Eastern societies down to the present time.
   Equally significant as an intellectual framework pre-dating the recovery
of direct evidence by archaeology was the emergence of ideas of successive
types of society derived from the comparison of contemporary primitive
peoples. This was particularly a feature of the Scottish Enlightenment, and
is well exemplified in Adam Smith's [1776] categorisations of 'hunters, the
lowest and rudest state of society, such as we find it among the native tribes
of North America', 'shepherds, a more advanced state of society' and 'a yet
more advanced state of society ... husbandmen who have little foreign com-
merce' (1893, 541); and in Thomas Pownall's more picturesque description
(1773, 241) of the succession of the 'Woodland-Men' and the 'Land-
Workers' who 'as at this day, eat out the thinly scattered race of Wood-
Men'. Here, in embryo, is the outline of an evolutionary view of stages of
social and economic progress, from savagery to civilisation, through des-
potism to liberty, that will become important in the scientific social and
economic writers of the nineteenth century, including Marx.

Romanticism and the search for roots
What separated Marx from the Enlightenment, and interrupted the
continuity of a comparative and relatively deterministic approach, was
Romantic nationalism. Here the ethnic concerns raised at the time of the
Reformation were again to the fore, this time in the context of empire and
of the consolidation of nation states from a polyethnic basis. These interests,
combined with other features of the Romantic Movement (such as the re-
action from industrialisation and an interest in rural landscapes) brought
about the genesis of a systematic study of prehistory. For although Enlight-
enment speculations about the primitive condition of man seem to cry out
for archaeological exemplification, there was, in fact, no systematic archae-
ology to put to them. It was the Romantic concern with origins, especially
local origins and national roots, which led to a methodology capable of in-
vestigating prehistoric times, and which was in turn to contribute to the rise
of a new science of prehistory in the succeeding phase of later nineteenth-
century positivism.
   Intellectually, the new attitude can first be discerned in the writings of
Johann Gottfried Herder (Berlin 1976, 165ff). Although closely linked to
earlier, Enlightenment interests, he had a new conception of the relationship

                                             48




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             ARCHAEOLOGY            AND     INTELLECTUAL            HISTORY


between peoples and places. Human nature is not uniform. It manifests
differences of race and national character. Particular peoples have an in-
herent genius or spirit which derives in part from the land they inhabit, but
is not simply determined by it - it is an immutable essence that they carry
with them. It is no coincidence that these views were developed in Germany,
with its crisis of identity in relation to France and its own disunity, and with
an older tradition of ethnocentric concern. Now, in a wider world, this was
to be generalised into Rassenkunde, the investigation of the varieties of the
human species: their physical types, their manners and their customs - the
old unity of anthropology.
   This gave a new meaning to the metaphor of the family tree. As Martin
Bernal has written, 'Trees ... provide the ideal Romantic image. They are
rooted in their own soils, and nourished by their particular climates; at
the same time they are alive and grow. They progress and never turn back'
(1987,205). The classic application of the tree model is Indo-European phil-
ology, part of the Romantic concern with language. The relationship be-
tween Sanskrit and the European languages had been explicitly recognised
by Sir William Jones in 1786, and interest in it was fuelled both by European
nationalism and a growing involvement with India. This discovery was
seized with enthusiasm in Germany, where much of the detailed com-
parative work was done; and indogermanisch was used more or less synony-
mously with Indo-European. The superiority of Indo-European as a vehicle
for thought became increasingly explicit in German writings, as a natural
extension of the idea of the distinctiveness of cultures and their different
roles in world history. Although anti-Semitism was not yet explicit, the two
branches of Old World culture - the Indo-European and the Semitic - were
often consciously counterposed.
   As well as these philological concerns, there were also opportunities for
the development of practical archaeology. For Britain and France, the
seaborne struggle for the east Mediterranean territories of the decaying
Ottoman Empire brought a closer acquaintance with the lands of ancient
civilisation, and the beginnings of systematic investigation of their antiqui-
ties (Silberman 1982). Napoleon's invasion of Egypt was a comprehensive
exercise in cultural and political imperialism, and the plans, drawings and
crates of antiquities which he sent back marked a new phase in Egyptology.
British intervention in Palestine initiated a similar practical interest in
Biblical archaeology, and led to successive waves of military, missionary and
academic activity. The strategic importance of Naples to naval activity in the
east Mediterranean also gave an opportunity for archaeological work: the
British envoy Sir William Hamilton dug at Pompeii and collected 'Etruscan'
(actually Greek) vases. Like the Rosetta stone and the Elgin marbles, these
ended up in the growing collections of the British Museum.
   These strands of political involvement and academic interest coincided in
Greece. English Philhellenism fitted well with the Romantic aesthetic and its

                                             49




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               V.   GORDON         CHILDE:


taste for the cultures and scenery of remote, mountainous and exotic places,
and paralleled the enthusiasm for Celtic culture in Scotland and Wales.13
Libertarian identification with the Greek people brought Romantic in-
volvement in Greece to a new pitch with the outbreak of the War of Inde-
pendence in 1821, and the commitment of Shelley and Byron. German
scholarship canonised a scarcely less Romantic view of ancient Greece, insti-
tutionalised in the German university system by Humboldt's reforms which
gave Altertumswissenschaft a cardinal role in education and the formation
of a new ruling class. This new, professional German classical scholarship,
building on the tradition of Indo-Germanic philology, began to stress the
northern roots of Greek culture, as transmitted by the northern Dorians or
their mythical precursors, the Minyans.14
    Similar ethnic concerns also played a major part in promoting anti-
quarian and archaeological inquiry within mainland Europe, both as part of
the consolidation of empire (the French enthusiasm for the Celts as an in-
digenous civilisation distinct both from the Germans and the classical
world) and as a focus for the aspiration of national minorities in Austria and
Prussia.15 Here the lack of coincidence between national and ethnic or
linguistic boundaries began to create increasing tensions, and the post-
Napoleonic map of Europe took little account of nationality. Substantial
minorities such as the Czechs and Magyars aspired to some degree of
autonomy within polyethnic empires: the middle classes were vocal in their
protests against alien rule, and in their claims to use their own languages.
Germans and Poles, on the other hand, aspired to unification. Both of these
factors led to an interest in national origins and national culture, and
produced a burst of enthusiasm for Europe's pagan past.
   Prehistory was thus explored in the spirit of Goethe's exhortation to
'nurture love for our common fatherland and for the memory of our great
forebears'. The French sought out their monuments celtiques, the Germans
and the Slavs sought a more direct continuity between the historical nations
and their prehistoric predecessors with the help of new philological tools, in
order to support territorial claims. Each side also exploited classical authors
such as Tacitus to the full, and the Czechs supplemented them with forged
Old Slavonic epics. Both produced images of an ideal society and its folk
heroes, which owe a great deal to the contemporary theatre. One example
in a more permanent medium is the gigantic statue of 'Hermann the
Liberator' (Arminius the Cheruscan) near to where this Germanic chieftain
had defeated three Roman legions in the Teutoburger Wald (Figure 1.1).
   These nationalistic motivations were accompanied by a more generalised
Romantic concern with the strange and picturesque. There was a great
interest in graves, pagan shrines and idols, and sacrificial stones, in much
the same spirit as the growing fascination with Gothic architecture and
medievalism. Moreover, the soil of Europe was being turned over as never
before by quarrying, building and agricultural operations, so that finds of

                                             50




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             ARCHAEOLOGY            AND    INTELLECTUAL            HISTORY




1.1 The gigantic statue of'Hermann the Liberator9 (Arminius the Cheruscan) in
the Teutoburger Wald, designed 1838-46 and completed in 1875 (photo: Heinrich
Harke). There is a copy in New Ulm, Minnesota.

archaeological material were increasingly common. Collectors accumulated
quantities of prehistoric stone and bronze artefacts, local societies for the
study of antiquities were founded, as well as regional and national
museums. The sheer quantity of new material made possible a more system-
atic classification and study, including the recognition of different periods
of prehistory. It is significant, however, that it was in Denmark, unaffected
by competing nationalisms and with a long pagan period lacking literary
sources before the Middle Ages, that these methods were taken furthest. The
result was a recognition of three successive 'Ages' in European prehistory,

                                            51




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               V.   GORDON        CHILDE:


of Stone, Bronze and Iron, used in organising the newly founded National
Museum in Copenhagen. This 'Three Age' system was nevertheless met by
hostility from German (especially Prussian) archaeologists; and its accept-
ance outside Scandinavia had to await a less nationally committed
prehistory.

Positivist science and 'national sciencey
Prehistory (though not yet given that name) was thus an offspring of the
Romantic movement; but it was a conceptually unsophisticated kind of
prehistory, which has left its legacy in popular concepts of the Ancient
Britons, or Asterix and Obelix. What was to transform it, or at least to give
it a slightly schizophrenic existence (which it still has), was the growth of
later nineteenth-century science, particularly biology, and the attitudes of
positivism. In reaction to nationalistic and historical models, archaeology
found a place among the natural sciences under the rubric of anthropology,
and with an ahistorical, comparative emphasis. The science of prehistory
(prehistoire, Vorgeschichte) was counterposed to humane, nationalistic
history. Often this was associated with the rise of new institutions or depart-
ments - in Oxford, for instance, the Ashmolean was joined by the Pitt Rivers
Museum. Prehistoric archaeology formed part of a growing scientific en-
deavour, based in laboratories and closely associated both with physical
anthropology and geology. This reflected both the growing success of
science and industry at home, and the changing nature of the colonial en-
counter, as it moved from adventurism to systematic exploitation. Com-
parative studies of the native peoples of the colonies began to flesh out some
of the generalisations of the Enlightenment: recent hunting and simple
farming peoples became evidence for successive transformations of human
economy and society.
    Of particular importance to these new ideas was the recognition of the
high antiquity of the human species and the definition of an early phase of
the Stone Age, the Palaeolithic. This extended the prehistoric timescale,
and gave scientific status to prehistory by bringing it into relationship
with geology and evolutionary biology: recognition of the Ice Age replaced
the Flood as a suitably dramatic backdrop of environmental change, and
skeletal remains previously dismissed as pathological were recognised as the
bones of 'fossil man'. Study of the Palaeolithic was centred in France,
whose river gravels and limestone caves provided abundant evidence for a
vast period before the lake-villages and megaliths of the later Stone Age, the
Neolithic.
    Perhaps because of the image provided by geological stratigraphy and
the patterns of palaeontology, the idea of successive strata or steps -
Stufentheorie - became a common motif in both the natural and social
sciences, usually allied to the idea of progressive change: from hunting
to farming, from household economy to national economy, from magic

                                             52




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             ARCHAEOLOGY             AND    INTELLECTUAL            HISTORY


and religion to science, Gemeinschaft to Gesellschaft, status to contract,
mechanical to organic solidarity. The Three Age system received widespread
acceptance because of its congruence with these ideas; yet these schemes
were elaborated largely without reference to archaeology, by comparing
ethnographic observations and treating 'primitive5 societies (Naturvolker)
as representatives of earlier stages of human progress. In Berlin, Eduard
Hahn investigated the contribution of domestic animals to human econ-
omies and speculated on the origins of agriculture and the plough (1896);
from New York, Lewis Henry Morgan synthesised the variety of human
family systems into a series of stages that correlated with advances in
material culture - the bow and arrow, pottery, farming, metalworking - and
marked the progress from savagery to barbarism and civilisation (1877).
   Marx himself, in creating a materialist science of society, was not much
concerned about the earlier periods of prehistory; and for the historical
periods he drew on earlier conceptions in defining a series of material pro-
ductive forces and their property relations: 'In broad outline, the Asiatic,
ancient, feudal and modern bourgeois modes of production may be des-
ignated as progressive epochs of the socio-economic order'.16 He was, how-
ever, interested in Morgan's ideas, and made extensive notes on Ancient
Society, which after his death were elaborated by Engels in The Origin of
the Family; Private Property and the State17 as a materialistic (and largely
technologically determined) conception of history. So strong was the idea of
progressive evolutionary stages that Darwin's model of descent with modi-
fication, which was essentially a tree model, was often accommodated in
popular perception to Herbert Spencer's view of evolution as a progression
from simple to complex (applied not only to sociology but to sciences as
diverse as cosmology and psychology). These assumptions underlay not
only the classic works of late nineteenth-century anthropology and pre-
history,18 but also Darwin's own treatment of human evolution in The
Descent of Man. Nevertheless, the idea of phylogeny did find reflection in
anthropology, in Taylor's 'lines of culture' and Pitt Rivers' studies of the
ancestry of tools. It was more directly applied in physical anthropology,
where a new science of skull-measuring came into being to define the pedi-
grees of races, with a pseudo-geological classification of 'higher' and 'lower'
- which in less scrupulously scientific hands might be translated into 'dear'
races and 'cheap' races. In this way biological ideas of human phylogeny
reinforced the continuing Romantic belief in a congruence between
language, culture and race. The comparative philologist Max Miiller,
lecturing on 'the science of language', reconstructed an Aryan culture that
lay behind the Greek, Roman and Teutonic achievements, allowing his-
torians like E. A. Freeman to trace English liberties to a common root with
those of the Greeks themselves (MacDougall 1982,120; Burrow 1981,174,
191). And Heinrich Schliemann, Homer in hand, carried the heroic age of
Greece (at least to his own satisfaction) back into the Bronze Age.

                                             53




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               V.   GORDON        CHILDE:


   From 1890 onwards, such nationalistic trends again took over from the
wider concerns of comparative anthropology. The term Vorgeschichte,
indicative of an ahistoric, disinterested, geological approach, began to be
replaced by Urgeschichte, stressing again the continuities with modern
nations. Archaeological images, like those of nos ancetres les Gaulois,
became part of the 'mass production of traditions', often by the state itself
(Hobsbawm 1983).19 German imperialism, increasingly conscious of its late
arrival in the colonial enterprise and lacking a history of national unity,
placed great stress on patriotism and early Germanic history. Relations
between the Germanic tribes and the Romans on the imperial frontier were
investigated by a Limeskommission, and celebrated in the new Romisch-
Germanisches Zentralmuseum at Mainz. The Slav peoples of the Austro-
Hungarian empire also looked to their roots, to define their identities in
opposition both to Germans and Magyars. In direct reflection of current
territorial questions, much energy was expended on defining the supposed
boundary in prehistoric times between the Germans and the Slavs, a critical
role being played by the Lausitz culture - a Late Bronze Age group occu-
pying the area between the middle Elbe and the Vistula. The general in-
terests of the German Anthropological Society were overtaken by those
of the new German Society for Prehistory, whose aims were exemplified
by its founder Gustav Kossinna in his definition of prehistory as 'eine
hervorragende nationale Wissenschaft' (1912).20
   These trends were paralleled in other areas of German scholarship.
There was a tendency for the homeland of the first Indo-Europeans
(Urindogermanen) to be shifted from central Asia or the Caucasus, where
the Romantics and positivists had looked for it, to Germany itself where it
could be sought among the various Neolithic groups now recognised on the
basis of their pottery. In somewhat similar fashion, the classicist Julius
Beloch stressed the indigenous, European nature of Greek culture and its
background, independent of the Semitic east Mediterranean; and such
academic suspicion of the Semitic contribution to European culture was
fuelled by populist anti-Semitism following the mass immigration of east
European Jews. Nor were these attitudes confined to Germany. In a widely
read article in UAnthropologic for 1893, Salomon Reinach - himself an
assimilated Parisian Jew - condemned both the theory of an eastern origin
of the Aryans, and the idea of Semitic influence, as two aspects of what
he called le mirage oriental. He asserted the independence of European
civilisation, 6a revindication of the rights of Europe against the claims of
Asia' (Reinach 1893).

European archaeology at the beginning of the
twentieth   century
While there were many common currents affecting the different branches
of European archaeology, therefore, there was no consensus on the in-

                                             54




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             ARCHAEOLOGY             AND    INTELLECTUAL            HISTORY


terpretation, or even the basic structure, of European prehistory. Moreover,
differences of interpretation corresponded to a significant extent with
national (though not always nationalistic) attitudes. It may be useful here to
summarise this intellectual geography.
   In France, with its wealth of Palaeolithic material (including the spec-
tacular cave-paintings), prehistory continued its alliance with geology and
evolutionary anthropology, and its loi du progres de Vhumanite. Reinach's
attitudes reflect a more general tendency to see important developments as
autochthonous, and prehistoric archaeology as the record of indigenous
evolution and achievement. French thought was long to be dominated by
Gabriel de Mortillet's conception of prehistory as a geological sequence,
with its succession of ages, periodes and epoques named after European
type-sites - a practice which still to some extent survives in Palaeolithic
studies. Its more general application was ensured by the loi du
developpement similairc, which predicted that other areas would essentially
conform to the French sequence. Some movement of peoples was allowed,
on the analogy of palaeontological migrations, to account for sudden
irruptions: the Romans, Celts, or - in the Bronze Age - the supposed
ancestors of the gypsies.
   Germanic scholarship, however, occupied the heartland of continental
Europe, where migrations were of the essence. Kossinna's own training
was in philology, and he translated its methodology into prehistory.
His retrospective method, which he termed die siedlungsarchaologische
Methode (i.e. reconstructing the process of occupying a landscape by a
particular people), was based on the definition of distinctive sets of artefacts
representing particular ethnic groups whose roots could be traced back into
the past. Archaeological assemblages could be used to define cultures, which
represented peoples. His journal Mannus published excellent local studies in
the new, detailed manner; technically, much of the new work was of a very
high order, yet its generalisations inevitably involved successive waves of
Germanic expansion from northern Europe. These attitudes were also
manifested even by a moderate German prehistorian, the outstanding
figure of Carl Schuchhardt, who was an old enemy of Kossinna.21 From
his position in the Berlin museum, in charge both of Schliemann's Aegean
collection and German prehistoric antiquities, he was able to survey the
whole of Europe and wrote a magisterial survey, Alteuropa.11 Yet its whole
structure was a description of 'die Indogermanisierung unseres Erdteils\ the
Indo-Europeanisation of our continent. The ancient Mediterranean was
vorindogermanisch, and dominated by the Iberians, originally from Africa.
Farming came about indigenously among the late Palaeolithic population
of Thuringia - there was no consideration of its exotic economic basis (of
the kind which Eduard Hahn, for instance, had done so much to illuminate)
- and spread south. The west European megaliths were the forerunners
of Mycenaean tholos tombs. Troy was an outpost of Europe, its Nordic

                                             55




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               V.   GORDON         CHILDE:


origins clearly indicated in its architecture, the Homeric megaton with its
predecessors in Bronze Age Brandenburg.
   In contrast to this continental hegemony, archaeologists in Britain and
Scandinavia maintained a different emphasis: the former reflecting a map
of Europe seen from the sea, the latter eager to articulate an alternative to
German nationalism. Both saw much more direct (and often maritime) links
to the Orient, especially via the Atlantic route and the Mediterranean.
Differing both from French evolutionism and German migrationism, they
espoused diffusionism.23 Danish archaeologists had maintained a critical
view of nationalistic archaeology in Germany (despite their central position
in the postulated Nordic Urheimat), preferring instead to refine the divisions
of the Three Age system. But this was never seen as a purely indigenous,
evolutionary succession: they looked elsewhere for the origins of these inno-
vations, especially to the ancient Mediterranean civilisations and Bronze
Age Greece. Rather than trace migrations of peoples, they looked instead to
the peaceful medium of trade as a mechanism by which to outflank the
militaristic models dominating central Europe. Instead of dealing with
whole cultures, they emphasised the stylistic development of individual
artefacts - the typological method - which could be traced across a network
of inter-regional contacts (and incidentally thus provide much-needed
chronological anchorage points in historically dated sequences). These
developments are associated particularly with the Swede, Oscar Montelius
(1899; 1903; 1910).
    In Britain, where there was a less intimate knowledge of Continental
archaeology24 and more concern with the Mediterranean, these ideas were
received sympathetically. The idea of maritime contacts was especially
appealing,25 and Arthur Evans agreed with Montelius' idea of an east
Mediterranean origin for the megaliths in the Neolithic period. It is sig-
nificant that his own work in Crete (and that of My res in Cyprus and
Woolley in the Turkish Hatay) were conceived as building up links along
the sea routes from the Near East. As with German nationalism, however,
this view could be taken to extremes: the lunatic wing of British archaeology
was represented by Grafton Elliot Smith and the Egyptocentric hyper-
diffusionists. They believed that the Egyptians (who were essentially Asiatic
rather than African) had carried civilisation all over the world, an 'exotic
leaven' which was responsible for all cultural change. European megaliths,
with their Atlantic distribution, were no more than reflections of the tombs
and obelisks of the Ancient Egyptians. Elliot Smith's disciple W. J. Perry was
to take this doctrine further, seeing Egyptians as setting out in boats to
prosyletise a heliocentric religion. Nonsense? Yet it was reissued under the
early imprint of Pelican Books, and was eagerly consumed by a British
public in the fading years of overseas colonialism (Perry 1937).
    This, then, is the somewhat schizophrenic intellectual environment
within which Gordon Childe undertook his early studies of prehistory.

                                             56




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             ARCHAEOLOGY             AND    INTELLECTUAL             HISTORY


There were many conflicting attitudes, some deeply rooted in earlier modes
of thought, and many bodies of knowledge which had never been con-
sidered in relation to each other. Above all, there was a growing archae-
ological record which could be interpreted in very different ways in relation
to radically different ideologies.


CHILDE'S SYNTHESES OF PREHISTORY
Childe's achievement was twofold: he brought order to a multitude of local
sequences of prehistoric cultures and integrated them into an overall picture;
and he explored some general principles of building social and economic
models to explain these patterns. Because he never quite overcame the in-
tellectual preconceptions of his background and training, he did not fully
achieve the satisfactory synthesis he was seeking; but he nevertheless gave
European prehistory a coherence that made systematic progress possible.
    His first achievement was based on an unrivalled knowledge of the
material evidence, the result of tireless visits to museums all over Europe:
The Danube alone records research visits to some sixty institutions. By
constructing local sequences of cultures and then tying them together over
longer distances using typological cross-datings, pivoting on relatively well
investigated areas such as Moravia and Bohemia, he was able to build up
a framework in a transect across Europe. This integrated account bridged
the dichotomies between northern Europe and the Aegean, and between
British and Continental scholarship. Without nationalistic preconceptions,
he made use of German methods and observations (notably the equation of
an archaeological culture with a prehistoric people), taking the best of
Kossinna and Schuchhardt without their excesses. In this way he was able
to define a succession of periods, and map contemporaneous developments
within them. This produced a standard framework, free so far as possible
from outside assumptions. The result was complex but objective, compre-
hensive and explicit; and it provided a means of defining patterns of cultural
change (Childe 1925; 1929). Having done this for Europe, he applied a
similar methodology to the Near East, using his synoptic viewpoint to
integrate observations made by the more diverse and specialised disciplines
of Assyriology and Egyptology and write a general account of their pre-
history and early history (1928; 1934). This was his technical contribution.
   In carrying out this reformation, he did not radically question the
assumptions of contemporary prehistoriography: his emphasis in successive
books down to 1930 shifted gradually from migration to diffusion, but he
invoked conventional archaeological explanations. In looking at the early
Near East, however, with its richer pictorial record, he became more aware
of technology and its social context, and saw how a Marxist approach to
prehistory might be applied. His later work was an elaboration of these
themes, in terms both of history and social evolution, through which he

                                             57




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               V.   GORDON         CHILDE:


attempted to see the significance of his reconstruction of European pre-
history. While the answers which he gave were unsatisfactory, partly because
of a flaw in his chronology and partly because he did not entirely emanci-
pate himself from earlier ways of thought, he showed how general models
could be used to illuminate the detail of prehistoric change.

The early synthesis: culture history
Childe's early approach owed much to J. L. Myres, whose scholarship pre-
served a Victorian breadth, but also a commitment to philology as the key
to history.26 His interest in ethnology (like his enthusiasm for Herodotus)
was based on a belief in the unity of language, culture and race, balanced by
a sensitivity to geography. His general writings (e.g. 1911; 1935a; 1935b)
were characterised by a reliance on the categories of physical anthropology
(Mediterranean, Alpine and Nordic 'races'), and a more fundamental
polarity between Indo-European and oriental cultures. The arrival of Indo-
European peoples - 'the coming of the North' - was the decisive turning-
point in European history, creating the condition for the new civilisations of
Persia, Greece and Rome, 'Eastern and Western in name, but held and
directed on both sides by long-lost brothers and true kinsmen'. The Indo-
Europeans had organisation and rationality, the Orientals had an aptitude
for trade but a tendency to religious obscurantism and political tyranny.27
The Mycenaeans - to Myres totally 'un-Hellenic' (1911, 165)28 - were part
of the earlier, oriental and Mediterranean, story.
   Childe's early work shows a tension between his fascination for the Indo-
European problem and his ambivalence towards it as an explanation of
historical differences. His work at Oxford was directly concerned with the
question of the Indo-Europeanising of Greece; he went more deeply into
the German and east European archaeological literature than Myres, and
favoured (correctly, as the decipherment of Linear B was to demonstrate) a
pre-Mycenaean date (Childe 1915; 1916).29 In writing The Dawn for the
'History of Civilisation' series, however, he carried this detailed evaluation
of continental scholarship much further but managed to set on one side
any talk of Indo-Europeans.30 Instead, he was more concerned to strike a
balance between Orientalists (who ignored prehistoric Europe) and Occi-
dentalists (who downplayed any oriental contribution). Some oriental in-
trusions, like that of the megalith-builders, he saw as too oriental to survive
on western soil; but some immigrants from south Russia, whom he in fact
believed to be Indo-European, had brought Mesopotamian metallurgy and
new dynamism. The West had thus received inspiration from the East, but
not by slavish imitation; they adapted it into a new and original whole, rep-
resented by the Bronze Age cultures of the Aegean, the Danube valley, and
northern Europe - in whose energy, independence and inventiveness he
recognised qualities distinctively European.
   But he had not completely exorcised the Indo-European Volksgeist. In

                                             58




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             ARCHAEOLOGY            AND    INTELLECTUAL             HISTORY


another volume in the 'History of Civilisation' series, entitled The Aryans,
he released his pent-up speculation about a problem which continued to
fascinate him to the end of his life. While he summarised opposing views
with admirable detachment, he showed the extent to which it still influenced
his thought; for in the epilogue he eulogised Greek and Persian achieve-
ments, and spoke of the Indo-Europeans' possession of 'a more excellent
language, and the mentality which it generated'. Appearing in the year after
the publication of Hitler's Mein Kampf, it was an embarrassment that
propelled him to find a materialist model more suited to his Marxism and
to seek in the social context of technology the answer to European unique-
ness.31

The later synthesis: revolutions and their beneficiaries
The book that best represents the originality of Childe's contribution in this
phase is Man Makes Himself, the fruit of his researches on the Near East.
Written during the depressed years of the '30s, it was also an assertion of a
deeper trend, underlying the surface events and partisan interpretations of
history, which might properly be labelled progress. Over the long term, the
increase in human numbers and in their independence from environmental
controls is some measure of man's evolutionary success; and just as the
Industrial Revolution marked a crucial turning point, so prehistory too was
punctuated by periods of sharply accelerated growth. Childe thus visualised
the transitions from hunting to farming, and from farming to urban life, as
two comparable 'revolutions', which he termed the Neolithic and Urban
Revolutions - separating savagery from barbarism, and barbarism from
civilisation. In this way he returned to nineteenth-century and Enlighten-
ment ideas: but with the addition for the first time of archaeological
evidence for these events.
   He was therefore able to describe the early movements of pottery-bearing
populations as part of the spread of farming from the Near East (where
plants and animals were first domesticated), and the colonisation of Europe
by agriculturalists. Farming made possible the first village communities, and
the development of crafts such as potting, carpentry and weaving. These
societies were relatively egalitarian, with no evidence for chieftainship. But
the Near East continued to produce innovations: the plough, the cart and
the sailing boat, as well as the cultivation of tree crops. The concentration
of fertile land in alluvial basins and oases limited its supply, but made it
amenable to improvement by irrigation. Economies became more special-
ised and reliant on exchange and trade; the settlements larger and more
permanent, containing craft workers such as metalsmiths and defended by
walls. A new level of social differentiation was now achieved, with rulers,
priests and craftsmen supported by the surplus from peasant farming; the
power of the temple and the state was expressed in monumental archi-
tecture, the complexity of their transactions recorded for the first time in

                                            59




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               V.   GORDON         CHILDE:


writing. Together, these led to a revolution in human knowledge and the
exploration of practical mathematics.
   This picture is very broadly correct, and acceptable today as a description
of the beginning of urban life. But to take it further, he developed a more
specific hypothesis about the role of metallurgy. Despite his use of the term
'revolution', it is clear that he did not see it in Marxian terms, as the
resolution of a contradiction: it is a consensualist model in which all parties
initially benefited - although unequally - from the change. He thought the
concentration of the agrarian surplus was a necessary precondition for the
genesis of a metallurgical industry. The contradiction arose later, as a
consequence of the relegation of the practical craftsmen to a lower class,
divorced from the theoretical expertise of the literary class which was
devoted largely to religion: science was thus fettered by subservience to
superstition. The result was stagnation and arrested growth; instead of
technical progress, a succession of unstable empires competed for control of
finite resources, their methods of internal control becoming increasingly
totalitarian.32
   His growing fascination with technology had in the meantime been
reflected in study of the developmental sequences of European Bronze Age
tools and the diffusion of new techniques (1930). Here he saw a more
dynamic picture, the result of free craftsmen able to innovate and experi-
ment. This gave him the clue to how the model might be extended to Euro-
pean prehistory, a theme that he worked out in increasing detail down to his
last book, The Prehistory of European Society. The Urban Revolution had
created the concentration of capital necessary for the formation of a bronze
industry; but, once created, its techniques and knowledge could be passed
on. Because metallurgical knowledge was diffused from the orient, Euro-
pean metalsmiths did not pay the price of subjection. Knowledge of metal-
working techniques was spread by oriental colonists and Mycenaean
prospectors; and metalsmiths - because no single community could con-
centrate the surplus to support them permanently - wandered freely, like the
metics of ancient Athens. The hoards of bronzes from prehistoric Europe
were their stock in trade, hidden in times of danger. The stimulus to trade
given by the need to acquire copper and tin was responsible for the opening
up of Europe, and the growth of an unfettered, proto-capitalist economy.
Archaeological ages were technological stages; but within those stages the
same technology could produce despotism or liberty depending on specific
historical conjunctures. Europe benefited from the mistakes of the Orient;
and its liberties were founded on the freedom of its craftsmen. That 'peculiar
manifestation of the human spirit' had a technological base.

Childe's work: an assessment
Childe's knowledge of his material was immense, and his vision of its
importance went far beyond that of his contemporaries. His pages sparkle

                                             60




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
              ARCHAEOLOGY            AND    INTELLECTUAL            HISTORY


with erudition and insight. Yet his answer to the problem which he set him-
self was already old-fashioned. He had come to a subject whose definition
was only half a century old, and whose basic information was still accumu-
lating, and gave it a maturity of expression which allowed it to be taken
seriously by its sister sciences; but his interpretations were still fixed in the
context of the nineteenth-century debates in which the subject had its
origins.
    One handicap in getting the story right was the lack of an independent
European chronology. We now know, thanks to radiocarbon dating, that
European Neolithic and Bronze Age cultures were much older - both
absolutely, and in relation to the Near East - than Childe thought them. In
this sense, Europe's peculiar character was no more than a consequence of
his dating: there was no 'slavish dependence' because the originals did not
then exist. Thus megaliths long preceded the pyramids, and European
bronze industries were already flourishing by Mycenaean times. But it is
significant that Childe consciously chose his chronology: in a presidential
address to the Anthropology Section of the British Association for the
Advancement of Science in 1938 (Childe 1938) he actually set out two
schemes, one of which strikingly resembles the present picture and antici-
pated by three decades the results of radiocarbon; but he rejected it on the
grounds that European cultures were always retarded in relation to Near
Eastern ones, using detailed and often dubious typological synchronisms.
Thus his chronology was already implicit in his choice of model.
    Another conceptual block, closely related to this, was the anachronism of
many of his models. His idea of the penetration of Europe by oriental
colonies has considerable validity as a description of the activities of the
Phoenicians in the west Mediterranean in the first millennium BC; but
this was quite different from the relationship of the second-millennium
Mycenaeans with their European hinterland. To project this picture back to
the world of the megalith builders was simply to continue a habit of thought
well established in the seventeenth century. Similarly the truly nomadic
Scythians were very different from the early inhabitants of the steppe lands,
while the metics of ancient Athens were no analogy for the craftsmen of the
Bronze Age. These ideas were projected back into very different societies,
for which there are no historical analogies, and for which better parallels
might be found in other parts of the world; but Childe was inhibited from
using ethnographic models by his Eurocentric preoccupation. To him, the
Maori or the Melanesians were not like the prehistoric Europeans, because
they had no role in the creation of European civilisation. Nor were the Incas
and the Aztecs, or even the Chinese, to be spoken of in the same breath.
Childe's archaeology, like his upbringing and education, were firmly Euro-
centric. The prophet that played him false (in Grahame Clark's phrase)33
was not Marx but Herder.
    Moreover, what he took from Marx was specifically his most typically

                                             61




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               V.   GORDON         CHILDE:


nineteenth-century aspect, the preoccupation with technology. Marx
appealed to him because his own views represented a similar translation of
Hegelian dialectic into industrial materialism, a vision of the relationship
between East and West expressed in the language of tools and economies.
To this Childe added his own anti-clericalism and a rather naive rationalism.
He was still fighting nineteenth-century battles, as is clear from his forays
into epistemology (Childe 1950):34 true knowledge is useful in changing the
world and therefore survives when error (magic and religion) is burnt out.
This stark dichotomy between the usefulness of technology and the en-
cumbrance of religion gives his otherwise sophisticated and well-informed
descriptions a painful simplicity: it was not so much technological determin-
ism, but a techno-centricity which caused him to over-emphasise its import-
ance in the societies he studied. It was as if the mystique which formerly
attached to the Indo-Europeans had been transferred to metalworking.
   As his ideas became more abstract, so his archaeology became more
mechanical, failing to do justice to the detail of the archaeological record.
The conclusion of his final summary, The Prehistory of European Society,
was allegory rather than explanation, as he perhaps realised. At the end of
his life, he had taken the wrong track too many times to go back. Having
surveyed his subject, both its raw material and the ideas which motivated it,
he could not go beyond his nineteenth-century inheritance. 'Now I confess
that my whole account may prove to be erroneous; my formulae may be
inadequate; my chronological framework - and without such one cannot
speak of conjunctures - is frankly shaky'. His final disillusionment was
intellectual as well as personal.

Archaeology since Childe
Childe died just as the post-war boom began to bring both a rapid growth
of archaeological work and the routine application of scientific methods of
analysis. New university departments brought an industrial increase in scale
to teaching and research, and now his ideas were tested in the field and the
laboratory. While everyone was now discussing models of the past, Childe's
explanations - the first explicit ones - were easy to criticise. Radiocarbon
dating seemed to confirm Europe's cultural autonomy in prehistoric times,
as Colin Renfrew hammered home in successive papers (1967; 1968; 1969),
and it did not take long for Childe's shaky chronological and intellectual
framework to be overturned. In a period of scientific enthusiasm, Childe's
humanistic concerns were pushed into the background. A new profession-
alism made Childe's efforts look amateur. Archaeology as anthropology
dealt ruthlessly with his caricature of savage society - the very name con-
signed it to a different age. Large-scale interdisciplinary work opened up
ecological perspectives and revealed sites in their landscapes, filling in a
whole dimension of prehistoric life missing from Childe's picture.
   This phase of posi ist enthusiasm culminated in the New Archaeology,

                                             62




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             ARCHAEOLOGY             AND    INTELLECTUAL            HISTORY


which - while respecting Childe's pioneering attempts to make sociological
sense of prehistory - was in many respects an inversion of his ideas. Vague
influences from far-off regions seemed less compelling reasons for pre-
historic developments than very tangible local processes of population
growth and environmental change, summarised in often deterministic
models derived from comparative ethnography. The new prehistory, too,
celebrated the independence and native inventiveness of Europe: but mega-
liths and Mycenae alike owed little to the Orient, and the answers lay in
endogenous processes of social change.35
    Inevitably, perhaps, in the perspective of intellectual history, such views
have also come to be seen as typical of their time. Recent years have brought
about a rediscovery of some of Childe's insights, in respect both of the in-
terpretation of archaeological material, and the wider setting of European
prehistory. As enthusiasm for the deterministic models of ecology and
systems theory has waned, interest has shifted back to the artefacts them-
selves, and how culture works. Childe's approach has been seen as fore-
shadowing a current concern with culture as a socially constructed reality,
and the historically specific conditions of its creation (e.g. papers in Hodder
1982). More practically, Childe's grasp of the meaning of archaeological
material has been appreciated again: for instance, his discussion of the
relation between ostentatious burial practices and political instability (e.g.
1944, 85-7) has been recognised as more fruitful than pseudo-scientific
attempts to 'measure' social differentiation from the evidence of burials as
if this were a simple reflection of living societies. Such insights have also
been applied beyond the field of prehistory, and his observations on the re-
construction of vanished classes of material from their imitations in other
media have found some sympathetic echoes even in classical archaeology.
    So also with Childe's fundamental concern: the relationship between pre-
historic Europe and the Near East. Now purged of the erroneous dis-
tractions resulting from a false chronology and anachronistic conceptions,
the core of his reconstruction again demands attention. European culture
cumulatively absorbed and reinterpreted many features whose origins lay
in the Near East, from agriculture to Christianity. A particular complex of
features, including the plough, wheeled vehicles, horses, woollen textiles
and alcoholic drinks, as well as some of the metallurgical features Childe
identified, arrived in Europe shortly after the Urban Revolution and argu-
ably as a consequence of it. This continuing transformation of European
culture, together with early commercial contacts by sea with the east
Mediterranean, created the conditions in which the societies of historical
Europe emerged. To understand this process, with a wealth of new infor-
mation from a further generation of fieldwork, is a major task for pre-
historic archaeology; and it is one that demands a vision as broad as Childe's
own.
    Childe thus stands t^lfway between the heroic age of later nineteenth-

                                             63




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  V.   GORDON         CHILDE:


century prehistory and the anonymous professionalism of the present-day
discipline. He combined the breadth of vision characteristic of a formative
period of European thought with the grasp of detail required to found a
systematic study of prehistoric times. His sense of the importance of the
past, derived as much from awareness of an older European scholarship as
from the narrower concerns of archaeology, created a subject which still
bears his imprint. The writing of prehistory is still a dialogue with the ghost
of Childe.

NOTES

 1. On Childe's life see Green (1981); for a careful evaluation of the development of Childe's
    thought and the influences on it, Trigger (1980); a useful survey of his views, McNairn
    (1980); also Piggott (1958a); for a sympathetic evaluation of his later thought,
    Gathercole (1971); for a contrary view, Clark (1976).
 2. For a list of Childe's publications, see Green (1981, 176-90).
 3. Quoted on the cover of the Fontana paperback edition of Social Evolution (London,
    1963). The book was first published by Watts in 1951.
 4. Attributed by Max Mallowan (1977, 235) to a childhood illness. Nevertheless, 'This
    impractical man, an innocent abroad, clumsy with his hands and an indifferent digger,
    through his imaginative mental powers shed lustre on any activity in which he was
    engaged' (ibid., 234).
 5. Childe's only fellow student on the Diploma course was Joan Evans, Arthur Evans'
    younger half-sister whose Time and Chance (1943) gives a history of the Evans family,
    including an account of her half-brother's archaeological career and that of their father,
    the eminent prehistoric archaeologist Sir John Evans. She recorded her personal
    impressions in her autobiography Prelude and Fugue (1954), including a poem which
    she wrote at the time, beginning, 'The science of prehistory's a mysterious kind of game,
    In which the winner's privilege is to invent a name ...' - a reference to the practice of
    naming prehistoric groups after eponymous sites.
 6. Wheeler spoke of his 'astonishing incapacity' in administrative matters (Hawkes 1982,
    321).
 7. Volume 21 of the Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society (1955).
 8. Or in more abstract form, through the idea of inheritance: for instance the Medieval
    scheme of the Four Empires, resurrected in Hegel; or the many metaphors of cultural
    succession: see Wolf (1982, 5).
 9. For this section see especially MacDougall (1982).
10. The megalithic tombs of northern Europe (the first prehistoric monuments to invite
    attention) were traditionally attributed to giants, after the description of the world before
    the Flood in Genesis VI: 'There were giants in the earth in those days'. This explanation
    was illustrated by J. Picardt in a description of Drenthe in his Korte beschryvinge van
    eenige vergetene en verborgene antiquiteten ... (Amsterdam, 1660).
11. In maritime western Europe, the Phoenicians were for long to play a role in historical
    imagination, because of their skills in seafaring; the idea of their trading for Cornish tin
    appeared already in the sixteenth century, and recurs constantly thereafter (Daniel 1962,
    13). This diffusionist paradigm thus grew up in parallel with the Germanic migrationist
    one.
12. This process had begun much earlier in Renaissance Italy, where early ethnographic
    observations had recalled Lucretius' description of a mythical Stone Age in De Rerum
    Natura, V, 1282, and even led to the recognition of stray finds of Neolithic axes as
    ancient artefacts. These speculations were known to French Jesuits in the seventeenth
    and early eighteenth centuries: see Clarke (1968, 4-7) following Cheynier (1936, 8-10).
    This was the germ of the evolutionist paradigm.


                                                64




                                  This content downloaded from
                128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                          All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                ARCHAEOLOGY            AND    INTELLECTUAL             HISTORY


13. See for instance Trevor-Roper (1983). Comparisons were explicitly made between the
    'folk' poetry of Homer and that of the bogus Gaelic bard, Ossian.
14. Notably    in the work of Karl Ottfried Miiller. The term 'Minyan' was applied by
    Schliemann to a type of Middle Bronze Age pottery, on which Childe was to publish
    his first article.
15. For the development of prehistoric archaeology in central Europe, see Sklenar (1983),
    with special reference to its social and political context; also Kiihn (1976); Jazdzewski
    (1984, Ch. 2).
16.
    Preface   to Contribution to a Critique of the Political Economy (1859). This formulation
    was essentially a continuation of Hegel's idea of world progress. Marx was equivocal
    about whether the Asiatic mode of production constituted a necessary step in the
    emergence of the others, reflecting a more general European ambivalence towards the
    orient.
17. Engels, Der Ursprung der Familiey des Privateigentums und des Staates, im Anschluss an
    Lewis H. Morgans Forschungen (Zurich, 1884).
18. For instance Taylor (1865), Lubbock (1870) and Pitt-Rivers (Myres 1906); these
    assumptions were perhaps a necessary precondition for developmental discussion of
    social change, in opposition both to 'degenerationist' views (advanced, for instance, by
    Archbishop Whately) and the cyclical view inherent in Lyell's uniformitarianism. See in
    general Burrow (1966) and Ingold (1986).
19. Note that Gauloises cigarettes still carry the image of a Late Bronze Age helmet - with
    added wings.
20. Kossinna was of Lithuanian extraction, born in Tilsit 'am Rande des Deutschtums, dort
    wo das Deutschtum im Kampfe gegen andere Krafte lag' (Kiihn 1976, 338): a syndrome
    neatly characterised by T. S. Eliot in The Waste Land in a snatch of Bavarian coffee-
    conversation - stamm* aus Litauen, echt deutsch. For a survey of Kossinna's career, and
    a systematic comparison with Childe, see Veit (1984).
21. Derided for his background in classical archaeology by Kossinna, who found his attitude
    to German prehistory 'pathological' (Kiihn 1976, 339).
22. C. Schuchhardt (1919, with successive editions to 1944). The emphasis on ethnicity only
    became dominant in the 1935 edition, however, and was perhaps a concession to the
    climate of the time rather than a personal view.
23. There was a parallel use of this term in ethnology, associated principally with the
    Catholic, anti-evolutionist Kulturkreislehre of Koppers and Schmidt in Vienna, but it
    made little contribution to mainstream prehistory. Its existence was one reason why
    Gordon Childe emphasised the concept of progress in the 1930s.
24. This is to put it mildly: in fact there was profound ignorance and provincialism.
25. The Phoenicians had long played a role in English visions of the past, where Romanticism
    had not bred xenophobia but even encouraged the image of exotic traders bartering for
    Cornish tin; and by the nineteenth century (in contrast to French attitudes) the
    Phoenicians were seen as models of maritime enterprise. The relative neglect of their
    archaeology until recently in Britain relates to the growing exclusiveness of classics from
    the 1930s onwards.
26. He was instrumental in the formation of a School of Geography at Oxford, and active in
    attempts to introduce the teaching of anthropology. It is characteristic that when his
    contributions to the first edition of the Cambridge Ancient History (1923) came to be
    revised fifty years later, it required six specialists to cover the ground.
27. Hence the curious (but still powerful) image of classical Greece as unconcerned with
    trade and immune to luxury, in which the irrational has to be explained as an anomaly.
28. Presumably because of the 'un-Hellenic' ostentation of the Shaft Graves, with their
    golden finery. It was only in 1953 that the Mycenaean (Linear B) script was recognised as
    an early form of Greek. To those who saw Mycenaean Greece as an extension, via Crete,
    of the Orient, no wonder this discovery was to prove hard to swallow.
29. Childe seems to have convinced Myres that Middle Bronze Age ('Minyan') Greece was at
    least Indo-European (Myres 1935b, 213).


                                               65




                                 This content downloaded from
               128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  V.   GORDON        CHILDE:

30. It is instructive to compare Myres' comprehensive, but relatively superficial, account of
    European prehistory in his Cambridge Ancient History chapter (1923) with Childe's
    detailed cultural sequences in The Dawn (1925); but for all that, Myres' higher dates
    (reflecting his geological knowledge) have proved nearer the truth.
31. In a lecture written in 1933, he defended the practical importance of prehistory precisely
    because it is 'just the objective and critical study of precisely those data on which the
    political theories of Houston Chamberlain and Adolf Hitler purport to be built'. The
    reaction to Nazism effectively ended general acceptance of the equation of race and
    culture. It is noteworthy that while 'national character' was a common subject for books
    in the 1920s - for example Ernest Barker, National Character and the Factors in its
    Formation (1927) - by the 1940s it was more common to find titles such as Hamilton
    Fyfe, The Illusion of National Character (1940). The Nazi abuse of prehistory
    strengthened Childe's belief in an eastern homeland for the Indo-Europeans, and may
    have contributed to his distrust of high chronologies for prehistoric Europe, which were
    advocated by German nationalist prehistorians.
32. The analogy with the events then taking place in Nazi Germany was made explicit in his
    description of the 'oriental centralisation' of the later Roman Empire (Childe 1942, 286).
33. 'Intellectually ... Marxism exerted a seriously inhibiting effect', 'at the end of his life he
    realised that his prophet had played him false' (Clark 1976, 3).
34. This was the Frazer Lecture for 1949 to the Royal Anthropological Institute: it is perhaps
    significant that Sir James Frazer; too, was influenced in his unfavourable view of religion
    by his clerical parentage.
35. This description applies to British and American writing on prehistory; in Germany the
    rejection of Kossinna and a suspicion of general theory in the post-war period led in
    effect to a revival of Montelius, and German prehistorians have only slowly accepted the
    validity of radiocarbon dating.




                                  This content downloaded from
                128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:03:06 UTC
                          All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                           Section           II

            ECOLOGICAL
           IMPERATIVES?




Scene from an Egyptian ceremonial macehead of (King Scorpion*, c.3200 BC,
      showing the king performing a ritual connected with irrigation
                        (Ashmolean Museum).




     Horticulture preceded field culture, as the garden (hortus)
                    came before the field (ager).
                                               LEWIS H E N R Y M O R G A N   (1877)




              This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:05:39 UTC
                               All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       ECOLOGICAL         IMPERATIVES?


It is hard, now, for subsequent generations to capture the sense of excite-
ment and optimism in archaeology (especially in Cambridge), and indeed in
life itself, which characterised the later 1960s and first few years of the
1970s, before the Oil Crisis gave the first intimation that a newer and post-
modern world was arriving. We had New Archaeology; but so did everyone
else - New Geography, New History, New Demography, even New
Math[ematic]s. It was a mini-Enlightenment, when the books that one
wanted to be seen with had titles like Thomas Kuhn's The Structure of
Scientific Revolutions or Alfred Sauvy's Theorie generate de la population,
or Levi-Strauss' Elementary Structures of Kinship. Historians had been first
off the mark in France, where BraudePs revival of the Annales school had
pointed to the structures and conjunctures below the surface of mere events;
though such history was not much read at that stage - even by historians,
but especially not by archaeologists, whose paradigmatic pattern was
sought in the life sciences (who had just cracked the genetic code) and the
earth sciences (who were just discovering plate tectonics). The Cavendish
Laboratory and the Sidgewick Museum neatly bracketed the Department of
Archaeology in Downing Street; Peter Haggett and Richard Chorley took
coffee just round the corner, opposite Emmanuel College, reinventing
geography; Peter Laslett and Tony Wrigley were revolutionising historical
demography; David Clarke wrote Analytical Archaeology, and a string of
key papers and edited books (Clarke 1968; 1979). Ecology and systems
theory provided a common language for these common enterprises.
    With the benefit of hindsight, the hard sciences were hard and stayed so,
while the soft sciences remained soft or got softer. DNA and plate tectonics
permanently revolutionised our way of looking at the world; the social
sciences swung in the opposite direction and spent the next twenty years
condemning the follies of functionalism, evolutionism and systems thinking.
The search for deterministic models of human behaviour was replaced by
voluntaristic models of human agency, the search for ecological advantage
by the search for meaning. Yet it would be wrong to decry the achievements
of archaeology in this period. It filled in huge areas of ignorance in our
cognisance of ancient times, of how people spent their lives; it invented
methodologies which have remained fundamental to all reconstructions of
the past; it created links between different branches of archaeology, and
between archaeology and neighbouring disciplines; and above all it asked:
why are you doing this, and what are you trying to prove? When, eventually,
archaeology rediscovered history, it was not the histoire historisante of
leaders and battles (still all too dominant in schools), but the transformed,
ecologically and socially conscious history of les Annales (Sherratt 1992).
We can recover what was lost, but not lose what was gained.
    The principal areas of advance were in the twin areas of investigation
which (especially in American parlance) came to be labelled 'subsistence and
settlement' and 'trade and exchange'. The former was essentially the dis-

                                        68




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:05:39 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                        ECOLOGICAL        IMPERATIVES?


covery for the first time of how people gained a living from the landscape
(by analysing their animal-borie and seed residues), and how they dis-
tributed themselves over that landscape (by searching more systematically
for their traces than archaeologists ever had before). The latter was the
detection of imported items (by new forms of petrological and metallurgical
examination), and the reconstruction of their circulation patterns, especially
by noting associations with particular classes of burial - sorted by age and
sex. Each of these operations involved certain naive assumptions (not least
that these were separate and unrelated spheres of existence, questioned in
Chapter 10 below), which have increasingly been made explicit and actively
controlled; but it is arguable that more sophisticated and worldly-wise
archaeologists would simply not have made the effort in the first place.
   The much more three-dimensional picture of prehistoric Europe
produced by this burst of new observations made many of Childe's
characterisations seem more like caricatures, and allowed a new range of
interpretations to be explored, which, with a rather more sophisticated view
of the social, are essential components of a balanced view.




                                        69




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:05:39 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                         2
  Socio-economic and Demographic
 Models for Later Prehistoric Europe
                                    (1972)

Until recently there was at least a measure of general agreement among
European prehistorians on the aims of archaeology and the appropriate
framework for its interpretation. The most explicit statements of these aims
and methods are to be found in the writings of V. G. Childe, in his series of
syntheses of European prehistory from 1925 onwards, and in various later
works devoted specifically to methodology (Childe 1925; 1956). Childe's
approach was based on three related concepts: the 'stages of culture' classi-
fication of Morgan and Engels, the key role of technology in relation to
these, and a model of technological change which assumed that innovation
was a characteristic of specific types of society. From this point of view, the
progress of European societies depended on their proximity to Near Eastern
civilisation through the mediation of the 'secondary civilisations' of the
Mediterranean, themselves only made possible by the 'Urban Revolution' in
the Orient. Thus the whole process depended ultimately on one or two
unique events - the achievement of a regular surplus by irrigation agri-
culture in the alluvial valleys of the Nile and the Tigris-Euphrates.
   Both the theoretical basis of this, and the usefulness of these ideas in
interpreting the evidence now available, have been questioned. In particular,
on the theoretical side, it has become clear that more consideration must be
given to factors which in the archaeological record are less obvious than
technological change. The use of economic concepts such as 'surplus' cannot

This was written while I was a graduate student at Peterhouse with David Clarke,
for his book Models in Archaeology. It was a heady time, when someone in their
mid-twenties was invited to contribute in this way to a major publication. I had
just returned from excavating in Turkey, at Can Hasan with David French and
Sebastian Payne, and was sharing a house with Robin Dennell. The extracts
reproduced here have been chosen to convey the excitement of exploring
a whole range of neighbouring disciplines for their relevance to archaeology,
and the delight at finding principles and processes of human ecology.

                                        70




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    FOR   LATER     PREHISTORIC        EUROPE


be separated from demographic questions, such as why this was not ab-
sorbed by population increase, or whether the productivity of Meso-
potamian agriculture really was inherently greater than contemporary
European systems. The role of technology must be assessed in the light of its
relation to specific agricultural and economic systems, as it is only in re-
lation to these that the significance of particular innovations can be judged.


RESOURCES AND POTENTIAL FOR GROWTH
Economic expansion, far from being a characteristic of all societies, is a
rather exceptional occurrence. Small-scale economies appear to be charac-
terised both by low levels of labour input and low population densities, even
though human populations possess the ability to make use of a great range
of food resources. The small fraction of these exploited at any one time
makes the use of calculations based on 'carrying capacity' a dangerous pro-
cedure. The only alternative is a detailed reconstruction of prehistoric
economies based upon evidence of food remains, technology and site
locations.
    One of the most important factors to be taken into account is the
fluctuation in the abundance of available resources. Not merely must
population levels be adjusted to the season of greatest scarcity in the year,
but the economic strategy must minimise the effects of differences in
yield from year to year. The effects of such fluctuations, however, can be
cushioned by reliance on a combination of resources which assures the
highest return under the most adverse conditions. This is particularly
important in determining the balance between animal and plant foods, and
accounts for the heavy emphasis on pastoralism in arid regions (Deschler
1965). Although animal resources are less productive than plant ones, being
one step higher in the food chain, they possess the advantage of mobility, so
that scattered flushes of vegetation in areas of variable rainfall, which are
too erratic to be predicted and thus used for cereal growing, can be used to
support moving herds. Even where the rainfall is more regular, but the area
is still subject to droughts, the use of plant foods such as cereals still needs
to be supplemented by a strong pastoral component, in case of crop failure.
The types of social organisation typical of such economies embody further
security precautions, based on the circulation of animals on loan.
    In less marginal areas, however, such considerations are not so important
in determining economic strategies and population levels. In particular,
there seem to be a number of stable patterns of small-scale exploitation. The
lack of complex techniques for storage, for instance, or for intensive forms
of cropping, places limits on the development of increasingly productive
ways of utilising many types of resources. Although shellfish may be con-
veniently gathered from beds exposed intertidally or in shallow water, any
more intensive method would involve a 'leap' in technological capacity,

                                         71




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             SOCIO-ECONOMIC         AND    DEMOGRAPHIC          MODELS


including for instance the construction of large-scale dams, cages, etc.
Similarly, the most productive method of exploiting an ungulate population
is by a ranching technique, in which large numbers of animals are raised to
a uniform age at which the gain in meat weight begins to be offset by the
continuing cost of providing grazing or fodder. In small-scale exploitation,
however, this is impossible: what is required is a regular supply of daily
food, which is best supplied by live animal products (blood, milk, etc.) if this
is possible, or by occasional culling.
    While an increase in yield is therefore possible, it is unlikely to be
attempted by most groups practising small-scale economies. Only where
there is a set of relatively simple transition possibilities, based upon a series
of small modifications to an existing system, are changes likely to occur.
Given the tendency of societies to 'fight to stay the same' (Schon 1971, 32),
by resisting innovations that would cause large-scale restructuring of estab-
lished patterns, such possibilities are limited in occurrence, and are con-
ceivable (a) only with resources with a high potential for expansion
(elasticity), and (b) with resource systems including complementary re-
sources which allow the problems created by the development of one
element in the resource system to be overcome by the provision of - for
example - a secure if low-yielding supply of food in case of the failure of the
main element.
    One of the most striking contrasts in patterns of growth is that between
cereal-based economies, and those based on animal resources such as ungu-
lates or shellfish. The root of the contrast lies in the relative elasticity of the
resources. With an ungulate population, cropping above a certain per-
centage of the population will impair the ability of the herd to reproduce
itself. The size of the total population can only be raised by drastic changes
in the structure of the ecosystem. With cereals, on the other hand, by
relatively small changes in the structure of the ecosystem - shifting plants
with an annual habit into niches occupied by plants more successful in com-
petition - the yield of useful products can be greatly increased. Moreover,
there is a more or less direct relationship between labour input and return:
clearance and sowing of small additional areas produces an immediate effect
in terms of increased output. Similarly, even relatively minor advances in
technology may have the effect of greatly increasing yield, both by allowing
more efficient cultivation methods and by making possible the use of hither-
to unused types of land.
    The significance of the Neolithic Revolution lies in the almost continuous
growth possible in cereal-based economies, and the increasing degree of
interference with the ecosystem that it entails. The domestication of animals
such as sheep provided a resource compatible with a sedentary pattern of
exploitation in a system in which settlements needed to be located for access
to cereal-growing soils, and provided not only additional protein but also
security in case of crop failure. Patterns of animal exploitation were thus

                                          72




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    FOR   LATER     PREHISTORIC        EUROPE


adjusted to complement an increased reliance on plant food. Despite the
difficulties involved in actually identifying 'domesticated' animals (Higgs
and Jarman 1969), the need for greater control over movement, breeding,
etc., in this situation is clear, and the distinction between agricultural and
'hunter-gatherer' economies remains valid.
   Patterns of growth in agricultural economies are thus closely related to
the amounts and distributions of fertile land, which affect both the capacity
for further expansion and the kinds of more intensive exploitation that can
be developed. In areas of heavy leaching such as the tropics, the potential for
growth with a pre-industrial technology is much smaller than in temperate
areas, even though in almost every zone there are alluvial soils whose
concentration of minerals and water retentive capacity makes them first-
class agricultural land. The capacity for further expansion thus depends
ultimately on the availability of 'middle range' soils which allow expansion
to continue when the first-class ones are filled to capacity. A second factor is
present in some areas where a diversity of different zones adjoin (or are
connected by easy transport links) and the integration of zones of specialised
production is possible through reciprocal redistribution and exchange net-
works.
   The phrase 'the colonisation of Europe' has often been used by historians
(e.g. Koebner 1966) to describe the extension of settlement in the Middle
Ages into hitherto uncultivated areas. Yet this marginal infilling is but the
final phase of a continuous process with its beginning in the Early Neolithic.
The demographic crises of the later Middle Ages reflect the increased diffi-
culty with which the extension of the margin of cultivation could be carried
out. In many documented instances, population was very close to the
ceiling. As Postan and Titow (1959) noted for the estates of the bishopric of
Winchester in the thirteenth century, poor harvests were directly reflected in
mortality figures. Wrigley (1962) has suggested that the ceiling imposed by
competing uses for available land caused a recession until the bottleneck
was broken by technical innovation - in this case the development of
machines based on coal and iron rather than wood. This was an essential
element in a solution involving radical changes in settlement location, land
tenure and more intensive systems of agrarian production, complemented
by the growth of an imperialist colonial system based on the export of
specialist manufactured products and the importation of food and raw
materials.

Systems of land use
The economies of prehistoric Europe and the Near East thus belong to a
class of economies characterised by the possibility of more or less con-
tinuous expansion. It might be expected from this that the economic, social
and technological developments that characterise the post-Neolithic
sequence could be explained in terms of this process of growth, and that the

                                        73




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
            SOCIO-ECONOMIC          AND    DEMOGRAPHIC          MODELS


different patterns that characterise the Near East, the Mediterranean and
inland Europe could be related to the geographical background - the dis-
tribution of soils, raw materials and transport routes.
   An important set of information for the analysis of subsistence agri-
culture is the labour requirements of the various crops. As there is great
variation in these, and as societies are generally unwilling to work harder
than is necessary, certain resources possess clear advantages for populations
of a given size. Thus it has already been noted that hunter-gatherer groups
expend relatively little effort on subsistence in comparison with agricultur-
alists. The same contrast is true for the various stages of agricultural intensi-
fication.
   An increase in output can be achieved by two means: either by an increase
in the area of land utilised or by intensification - the more productive use of
land already cropped. Both require changes in technology and both have
implications for social organisation, but intensification makes special de-
mands on labour input. Expansion in a given system proceeds by a balance
between the two processes related to the opportunities of an individual en-
vironment; but before introducing a spatial element into the model, some
characteristics of the intensification process should be noted.
   The most thorough discussion of this problem is by Boserup (1965). She
points out that with a small population, the most economic agricultural
system in terms of labour input is an extensive one, based on swidden (slash-
and-burn) cultivation with a simple technology. Intensification is measured
by the increased frequency of cropping of a given area, with a consequent
shortening of fallow periods. This process has several implications. In the
first place little preparation of the soil is necessary for long fallow systems,
where cropping is for short periods only and it is not necessary to maintain
fertility by manuring during this period, nor even worthwhile clearing tree
stumps. In consequence, the use of the plough is unnecessary and the culti-
vated plot is abandoned when weeds begin to compete seriously with crops
or when the nutrients released by burning off the forest are exhausted. For
short fallow systems, however, both manuring and ploughing become neces-
sary, as the land is cropped beyond the point at which initial fertility begins
to decline, and fallowing is only long enough to allow the growth of grass,
presenting problems in tillage. Further intensification, allowing even multi-
cropping, depends on the introduction of techniques such as irrigation or
terracing involving heavy capital investment.
    In an extensive agricultural system, a relatively small labour input
is sufficient to produce a good crop. As hoeing and weeding take a large
amount of labour time, any increase in these is particularly important in this
respect. It is these elements that become increasingly necessary with intensi-
fication. In addition, yields are likely to fall somewhat even with manuring.
With plough agriculture, considerations of scale are critical - draught
animals must be fed and sufficient beasts are required for manuring to make


                                          74




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    FOR   LATER     PREHISTORIC        EUROPE


cultivation profitable. In consequence of these, one of the corollaries of
intensification is an actual fall in output per man hour. Since labour is in any
case low in extensive systems, this is still a possibility, but intensification
does imply longer working hours if output is to be increased. Intensification
is thus not likely to be undertaken except in a situation where the popu-
lation cannot be supported by existing systems of cultivation and until other
possibilities have been exhausted - or would themselves involve a com-
parable increase in effort.
    Boserup's scheme is artificial to the extent that it neglects local soil
variation and presents only an economic analysis of the factors involved in
intensification. In the analysis of the agricultural development of a specific
area, the range of available land types and their distribution must be an
important element. The soils determine the degree to which intensification
can proceed with a pre-industrial technology without causing permanent
damage. Many tropical soils are easily overcropped, and in consequence the
widespread occurrence of extensive systems can be seen in part as due to
this. In other areas, however, extensive systems occur on land that would
sustain a shorter fallow period: here land is simply abundant in relation to
population and there is no need for a system involving higher labour input.
    On the basis of African evidence, Allan (1965) has produced a sixfold
land classification based on the ratio of crop time to fallow time. Although
based on the use of the soils, for the long-settled agricultural areas there is
a strong correlation between this and inherent fertility characteristics. An
important distinction can be drawn, for example, between permanent
cultivation soils, and others that require a longer fallow period. The latter
range through semi-permanent cultivation, recurrent cultivation, shifting
cultivation, and partial cultivation to wholly uncultivable soils, requiring
progressively longer fallow periods. Although Boserup's model does not
admit the existence of ceilings determined by soil type, it is clear that with a
pre-industrial technology they must exist. Certainly the more fertile areas
could formerly have been cultivated on an extensive system: but as popu-
lation grew, intensification proceeded only as far as the nature of the soil
allowed without artificial fertilisers.
   With a small initial population, the richest soils will be settled first,
especially permanent cultivation soils if they are available. The growth of
population leads to the spread of settlement to poorer and more difficult
soils, first on an extensive basis and then on to as intensive a system as the
soil will permit. As the good soils are filled up, a choice will open as to
whether local intensification or extension of the margin of cultivation is
more attractive. This depends on the character and availability of the
remaining land - whether it is only slightly less fertile than that already
cultivated, or much poorer - and thus on the relative cost-effectiveness of
the two possibilities.1
   The interrelatedness of different aspects of production introduces

                                        75




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
            SOCIO-ECONOMIC          AND    DEMOGRAPHIC                MODELS


                                                                                                FRUIT

                                                             HEATH                             "| KUTS |
                                                            PASTURE
                                                            COMMONS




                                                                                                VINES

                                                         STUBBLE GRAZING
                                                         (CLEAN FALLOWS)

                                                     _ _ J LIGHT JPLOUGH)
                                                     MANURING OF ARABLE, FRUITS i
                                                                                               U
                                                                        |    VINES
                                                                          ARABLE PR<

                                                                        nr
                                                                        SEED FOR CONSUMPTION
                                                                         JL

                                               Hnrrr                  CARBOHYDRATES


                                                      CLOTHING   J
                                                              PROTEIN



2.1 Diagram of the relationships between (a) north European and (b)
Mediterranean agrarian systems in the medieval period. In the former (here
diagrammed as a two-course rotation), arable and pastoral elements are closely
interlinked; in the latter they have greater independence (after C. T. Smith).
constraints on the range of possibilities for expansion. A series of well-
documented examples is provided by the farming systems of medieval
Europe (see especially Slicher van Bath 1963, 9-18; Smith 1967,191-256).
In an intensive system of north European kind, where manure is utilised and
the animals are overwintered largely on special crops and by products of
cereal farming (stubble, chaff, etc.), the animal component has to be ex-
tended at the same time as the cereal element, and the balance between the
two is closely defined. The network of rights over stubble grazing was there-
fore an important element in assuring maximum utilisation of animal
fodder. Figure 2.1a shows the connections between various parts of the
system. By contrast, the Mediterranean areas of Europe are characterised by
a system where different elements could be developed independently; large
areas of upland unsuitable for cereal growing encouraged the use of trans-
humance, while some lowland areas provided suitable places for fruit grow-
ing, often with small-scale irrigation (see Figures 2.1b, 2.2).
   For a given set of resources, and techniques for cropping them, there are
optimum sizes and locations for settlement units. Regularities in settlement
pattern represent the end result of decisions based on the need to minimise
unproductive travelling time and the costs of bulk transport; thus locational
decisions can be modelled in the same way as decisions on crop strategy.
As transport technology, exploitation pattern or social organisation
changes, so the factors affecting site location will alter. Stable patterns of
locational preference are thus valuable evidence for reconstructing these.
   The potential for growth in a particular area and its pattern of develop-
ment are determined in the first place by the range of soil types and their
distribution. For the analysis of specific situations, therefore, a spatial model

                                          76




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    FOR   LATER     PREHISTORIC        EUROPE




2.2 South-east Europe showing routes used in transhumance in recent times
(after Cvijic).

is essential, and data on archaeological site locations offer one of the easiest
methods of testing predictions derived from these. Over the last fifty years a
great mass of data on archaeological distributions has been collected, some
of it of outstanding quality and scholarship. Small-scale distribution maps
were not greatly used by Childe, and it is this lack of contact with the
pattern of prehistoric settlement 'on the ground', in a regional setting, that
is the root of the inadequacy of much of his models today. It is not neces-
sarily possible, however, to compare one kind of distribution map with
another, especially when maps of different periods may be constructed in
terms of different features - settlement sites, burials, stray finds of various
types, etc. What must be compared are the inferred systems of land use
deduced from various kinds of map, in conjunction with the analysis of food
remains from settlement sites.


T H E CHARACTER OF EARLY NEOLITHIC SETTLEMENT
The change to an economy based on planted cereals and pulses and the
adjustment of complementary exploitation and settlement patterns, despite
the slowness with which the various elements of this strategy were

                                         77




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
            SOCIO-ECONOMIC         AND    DEMOGRAPHIC          MODELS


integrated, marks a significant transition to new patterns of demographic
and economic growth for which Childe's description of a 'Neolithic
Revolution' is not inappropriate. In Europe particularly, the introduction of
new plant staples produced a sharply defined economic shift in areas of high
agricultural potential, even though this had no immediate effect in areas
where the exploitation of animal populations continued to be superior to
primitive farming.
   The restricted range of environments suitable for early farming systems
has not been sufficiently emphasised in discussions of the spread of agri-
culture, and in particular the significance of soil fertility and moisture
content in determining the pattern of occupation. Although the striking
correlation between Neolithic settlement and loess soils in central Europe
has been the subject of comment since Buttler, this phenomenon of close
association with particular soil types is not limited to the Danube region
but is a general feature of the initial agricultural colonisation of Europe.
A characteristic of early cereal assemblages from Neolithic sites in the Near
East is the presence of seeds of Scirpus, indicating a very moist immediate
environment for cereal cultivation. This evidence is supported by the strong
pattern of association between early village sites and permanent cultivation
soils near springs, and especially near the backswamps of large lakes or the
fringes of old lake basins (cf. Allan 1970). This strongly suggests that an
economic yield from cereal cultivation was generally possible only where
a sufficient area of such soils was available, and that the recent geological
history of the relevant areas should provide significant predictions about the
kinds of area where early Neolithic sites are likely to be found.
   Central Turkey and the areas of historic Macedonia and Thrace form an
ancient crystalline massif against which later sedimentary rocks were in-
tensively folded during the Tertiary mountain building phase, forming
chains to the north and south of the original massif. The downfaulted areas
of this were for a time occupied by arms of the sea, during which shallow
water limestones were deposited in the Tertiary period. The inland basins
were then cut off from the sea by further uplifting, and became freshwater
lakes - or in some cases saltwater lakes in the case of internal drainage
basins, e.g. Tuzgolii in central Anatolia. The levels of these lakes seem to
have fluctuated considerably in the course of the Pleistocene, related to
changes in temperature and humidity. In general the rise in temperature
during interglacial phases would have increased evaporation (Butzer 1970),
and a postglacial recession of lake levels has been documented in Anatolia
(Cohen and Erol 1969; Cohen 1970) and in the Dead Sea Rift (Vita-Finzi
1969). Similar phenomena are likely to have occurred in the large flat basins
of Thessaly and central Bulgaria, and in a multitude of small lakes in the
Balkans and Anatolia.
   The relationship between the areas of fine alluvium and backswamp soils
produced by the Late Glacial recession in lake levels, and the pattern of early

                                         78




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                           FOR   LATER        PREHISTORIC             EUROPE




       & 9 S < 1 Terrace     [ [ [ \ \ Marl               Upland      [ g T

                       Backswamp              Sandridge   I" ' .' •

2.3 The distribution of known prehistoric sites in the Cumra region of south-
central Turkey (between Konya and Karaman), after field-survey by Dr D. H.
French (1970), with soil boundaries after Driessen and de Meester: (a) seventh
millennium BC; (b) sixth millennium BC; (c) fifth millennium BC; (d) fourth
millennium BC [from Sherratt 1973, with dates corrected],

settlement, has so far been intensively investigated only in Anatolia (Cohen
1970; French 1970). In the Konya plain, Neolithic settlement seems to be
closely associated with backswamp soils, which, unlike the other soil types
also associated with the receding lake such as marls, are not subject to
strong seasonal desiccation. Although located for access to such backswamp
soils, the settlements themselves are typically sited on the edges of alluvial
fans which provide raised areas less liable to be flooded. The site of £atal
Hiiyiik, for example, occupies a highly favourable position on a spur where
the fan seems to have broken through a sandspit representing an old shore-
line, and the site has ready access to backswamp soils on three sides (Figure
2.3, top left).
   One piece of evidence which suggests that such areas were strongly pre-
ferred in spite of other disadvantages is the apparent incidence of malaria,
for example at £atal Hiiyiik and at Nea Nikomedia in a low-lying part of
Greek Macedonia. Angel (1968) has suggested that the incidence of porotic
hyperostosis in skeletal material from these two sites is associated with a
form of anaemia conferring resistance to this disease. Certainly the tectonic
basins of Macedonia occupied by the remnants of Pleistocene lakes were
until recently highly malarial, as the French and British forces discovered in
1916-18 (see Naval Intelligence Handbooks: Greece, vol. I, 272).

                                                    79




                      This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
            SOCIO-ECONOMIC          AND   DEMOGRAPHIC          MODELS


    TWO basic reasons lie behind this pattern of land occupation. First,
with low population densities, the model put forward in previous sections
suggests that there would be a strong selection for permanent cultivation
soils, and that excess population would move to other areas of similarly
high-yielding soil before tackling poorer-quality land or changing to a more
intensive system of exploitation. Secondly, in dry Mediterranean climates
frequent ploughing of land is necessary to prevent run-off and to encourage
moisture absorption in order to produce an adequate crop on land where
groundwater is not near to the surface (Clark 1952,100; Stevens 1966, 93).
It is most unlikely that the earliest agricultural communities in the Near East
and south-east Europe used the plough, in view of Boserup's arguments
summarised above. Instead, the initial stage of agricultural development
seems to be characterised by a pattern of rapid spread with relatively low
population densities, settlement systems being restricted to small areas of
land of high agricultural potential, with specialised satellites.
    This pattern of settlement has important implications for reconstructions
of the types of social regulation and mechanisms for the distribution of
goods, as well as being the unstable initial state of a system with great
potential for change.


INTERNAL EXPANSION IN ENEOLITHIC AND
B R O N Z E A G E EUROPE
While there was still an adjacent expanding frontier allowing surplus popu-
lation to emigrate, population levels in a given area would have remained
low. In south-east Europe the association of settlement with marshy areas
and the consequent prevalence of malaria would in any case have checked
growth to some extent. However, over a long time the build-up of popu-
lation continued, and resulted in changes in economy, settlement pattern
and social structure.
    Of particular significance is the point at which permanent settlement
began to be extended beyond the range of soils typical of the initial
settlement of the area. In the Konya plain third-millennium settlements are
found for the first time, in any number, on the drier terraces above the plain;
doubling the number of sites known from the previous millennium. In the
Balkans a shift in the preferred location of settlement occurs, typified by
sites on defended promontories on the edge of the basins. In Czechoslo-
vakia, similar hilltop settlements are found extending up the valleys from
the fertile Bohemian 'heartland'. In the north European plain, settlement
extends onto the sandy heathlands previously avoided.2 These movements
are not closely synchronous even within individual regions, but they repre-
sent critical points in a common process at work over the whole area.
    The process of agricultural expansion carried with it implications for
social organisation. One aspect of this was the competition for colonisable

                                          80




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    FOR   LATER     PREHISTORIC        EUROPE


land distributed between the existing centres of population, reflected both in
the selection of defensive locations and the development of effective metal
weapons as opposed to small copper knives. Another was the occupation of
a more diverse range of environments than the initial optimal ones, and the
increased necessity for the redistribution of basic products. Even though
some of the forested sandy soils taken into cultivation would originally have
carried brown earths suitable for cereal cultivation, the agricultural use of
these would rapidly encourage podsolisation and reduce their value as
arable. In this situation redistributive centres, even if only seasonal markets
or fairs under the auspices or protection of a local chief, would take on
increasing significance. The role of metal, increasingly a strategic raw
material, would in these circumstances have been important in securing low-
land cereal products, while the emergence of distributional centres and local
chieftains made possible the exchange of specialised materials and objects
between centres. In a similar way textiles - evidenced from the increased
numbers and size of sheep in the Bronze Age of south-east Europe and from
the appearance of loom weights and fittings - would have been an important
medium of exchange.

URBANISATION AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
In Neolithic and Bronze Age Europe, the relationship between population
and food supply can be expressed schematically as in Figure 2.3a (although
the actual course of the curve will of course be far from regular). The culti-
vated area increases as population grows, and production rises with it. Year-
to-year fluctuations produce a temporary surplus in good years: this is the
normal surplus of subsistence agriculture (Figure 2.3b; cf. Allan 1965).
There is little or no large-scale distribution of food over any distance, since
all sites are growing similar crops.
    By the later fourth millennium, however, certain communities in the Near
East had initiated a new pattern of exchanges between regions, notably
between the alluvial river-basins and their hinterlands. Such institution-
alised exchange introduced a new factor of production for manufacture. A
system involving urbanism necessitates the production of a standard surplus
(Figure 2.4a) by means of additional labour input, in which one region
exports specialised manufactured products (often textiles) in return for
grain and raw materials. Since the increase in grain production requires
considerable additional labour input, it is likely that some element of co-
ercion is needed to initiate an exchange system of this kind, even though the
system may then be maintained by local elites - the main consumers of
luxury products (Figure 2.5). The process of demographic and economic
expansion thus has sociological implications which are essential to the
general problem of growth, and particularly to the question of regulation of
production and exchange. As the maintenance of an agriculturally non-


                                        81




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
            SOCIO-ECONOMIC         AND    DEMOGRAPHIC          MODELS


                                food
                               SUPPLY




2.4 Surplus as the relationship between population and food supply: (a) the
normal surplus - the fluctuating yearly excess over subsistence requirements,
and (b) the standard surplus, a regularly achieved production for exchange,
requiring additional labour input.

productive class requires more work from those directly involved in agri-
culture, the development of social stratification can be seen as one of a range
of increasingly high-cost solutions to the problem of supporting further
growth, and the rarity of such systems in the course of human development
is therefore scarcely surprising.
    A true urban system, in which the central places are also centres of
population and have facilities for continuous storage and manufacturing,
is typical of state organisation with bulk interregional exchange. The actual
size of such 'cities', however, is a local problem, depending on the con-
centration of agricultural population. Where only a small agricultural
community is resident, these may more aptly be described as palace or
ceremonial centres. In Mesopotamia, by contrast, such centres seem often to
have been surrounded by a zone empty of villages (Adams 1970), implying
that the land was worked by labour from the city, and the difference in size
between central and non-central places is largely related to settlement

                                         82




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    FOR   LATER    PREHISTORIC         EUROPE


Political                                 Politically administered external trade
centre —
(king)                                                  with foreigners
Elite



Villages                                                External trade a t the local
or tribal •
segments                                                 level: I market or gift trad'e

2.5 Socio-economic transactions in the primitive economy, within a centralised
system of political authority (from Dalton 1969).

nucleation and concentration of population for defence. In other environ-
ments, however, this may not be a rational pattern of population distri-
bution. The true 'urban' functions of such sites are represented by the
magazines, storage areas, administrative and religious 'core', and specialist
manufacturing workshops. (The existence of a network of small 'market
towns' is related to the degree to which the villages themselves consume
specialist products, and such forms may be typical of a later phase either
than fairs or urban centres as defined above.)
   With the development of social differentiation and centres of power, new
phenomena emerge as it becomes possible for innovations to appeal to
sectional interests and emerging elites. Even more striking are the results of
changes in the communication infrastructure of societies with a need to find
external markets and sources of supply. With the growing disparity between
'advanced' and 'underdeveloped' countries, centre/periphery diffusion
systems (Schon 1971, ch. 4) become increasingly common and the scale of
their effects becomes increasingly wide. Even so, however, such effects are
largely limited to the areas in which they have a direct economic interest,
and large areas - even adjacent to the colonising country - may remain
relatively uninfluenced if they are outside this sphere of interest. The state
seems to be closely related to the degree in which long-distance bulk
exchange of products is critical to the functioning of the economy, and
typically state organisation begins at nodal points and extends along the
routes of trade (cf. Morton-Williams 1969). Historical geographers (e.g.
Deutsch 1953; East 1968; Whittlesey 1944) have elaborated models of the
genesis of states, which are in fact applicable, with modification, to less
centralised systems.3 State systems exist to cope with large-scale flows of
products; thus phenomena of this kind seem to be behind the growth of
large oppida in southern Britain in the later pre-Roman Iron Age with the
exports recorded by Strabo, a process of local development stimulated by,
and progressively amalgamated into, the formal network of an expanding
empire. This example illustrates the 'multiplier effect' (Hamilton 1967), by
which nodal areas propagate their organisation outwards.


                                        83




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
              SOCIO-ECONOMIC            AND    DEMOGRAPHIC           MODELS


CONCLUSION
The arguments set out in this paper are intended as much to indicate the
range of evidence that must be considered in interpreting prehistoric cultural
development as to advocate the use of specific models. Without an under-
lying framework of assumptions about the role of factors such as population
growth, there is no possibility of relating different aspects of prehistoric
culture to each other and producing a convincing explanation for the
contrasts in development between different areas. Only with this framework
in mind can relevant models be selected for specific problems.


NOTES

1. Many of the types of choice made by subsistence farmers in assessing the cost-effectiveness
   of various types of exploitation are conveniently expressed as programming models (e.g.
   linear programming, integer programming, etc.). These are techniques for finding the
   optimum allocation of labour on different resources with different degrees of productivity
   to give a maximum yield, and they make it possible to work out mathematically a solution
   found in practice only by trial and error (Joy 1967).
2. Most useful here is Mathiassen's careful study (1948) of the distribution of prehistoric
   finds in Jutland. The comparison of evidence from different classes of objects and
   monuments produces an interesting and highly significant pattern related to the three
   major facies of the Riss and Wiirm moraine landscape - hill sand, heath sand and clay.
   At the risk of oversimplification, it is almost possible to see a reflection of Thomsen's
   Three Age System* in the successive occupation phases of these soil types: Neolithic
   settlement is concentrated largely on the more fertile hill sand; the late Neolithic Corded
   Ware period sees the occupation of the poorer heath sand areas, and this pattern persists
   until the occupation of clay areas in Iron Age times.
3. Useful here is the distinction used by human geographers concerned with the genesis of
   states (e.g. East 1968) between 'core' and 'peripheral' areas.




                                              84




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                              3
          Water, Soil and Seasonality
          in Early Cereal Cultivation
                                     '     (1980)

T h e purpose of this paper is to review current ideas of agricultural develop-
ment in the sub-tropical and temperate parts of the western Old World and
to suggest that the small scale and restricted extent of early cultivation
systems gave them a unique character which has not been generally appreci-
ated. Recent studies of prehistoric settlement in the western Old World have
shown the basic role of soil moisture in early cultivation, and the association
of such sites with riverine and springside locations. The beginning of such a
cropping system marked a significant departure from earlier forms of cereal
exploitation in the natural habitat zone, and may have involved a difference
in growth cycle from that of the wild forms. The kind of cultivation which
can be reconstructed as the earliest stage of agriculture is best described as
a form of fixed plot horticulture dependent on ground- and surface-water,
which differentiated in succeeding millennia into various forms of dry
farming and irrigation agriculture. The former path involved the develop-
ment of cultivation techniques suitable for interfluvial areas, including
plough cultivation and swiddening; while the latter involved increasing
degrees of water management to enlarge the area suitable for intensive
cultivation.
   Because the evidence for early cultivation systems is so varied in character

The ideas of the previous chapter suggested that early farming, usually thought
of as shifting cultivation, had been fundamentally misunderstood. This paper -
written by invitation for a World Archaeology special volume on water manage-
ment - was an attempt to outline a systematic alternative: that agriculture had
begun as a transition from wild cereal populations to floodplain cultivation, and
that such horticulture was the primary form of farming. It was actually written
after Chapter 6, though published before it - in the same year as the Cambridge
Encyclopedia of Archaeology, where I used its conclusions in my chapters. It was
fuelled by comments from Jim Lewthwaite, Neil Roberts, Joan Oates and David
HartW. ;


                                             85




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      WATER,       SOIL    AND      SEASONALITY


and the arguments often speculative, three aspects will be considered
separately rather than treated in strict chronological or regional order. After
a short discussion of current schemes of agricultural development, the
problem is approached first from the settlement evidence, and then from the
viewpoint of crop ecology, before discussing the development of methods of
water-management. The final section sets these observations in a wider
context.


T H E CHARACTER OF EARLY CULTIVATION SYSTEMS
Recent discussions of agricultural development, notably those of Boserup
(1965), Wolf (1966) and Sanders and Price (1968), have stressed the tran-
sition from extensive to intensive forms of land-use. A major theme of this
analysis is the move from long-fallow systems, often involving 'slash-and-
burn' or swidden farming, to more intensive cultivation with shorter fallows
made possible by labour-intensive techniques such as manuring and irri-
gation. Such transitions have been studied notably in south-east Asia
(Geertz 1963) and in tropical Africa (Allan 1965). In applying these ideas to
archaeological material, swiddening has usually been seen as the 'primeval'
system, and assumed to be typical of the earliest farming groups. This idea
has a long history in Europe, where early Neolithic groups have often been
assumed to be 'slash-and-burn' cultivators (e.g. Clark 1952, 93). Yet the
very fact that swiddening is still widespread in many areas and was only
superseded in other areas in historical times should itself argue caution in
using this as a model for the systems which were in existence six thousand
years before.
    A further argument against seeing swidden cultivation as a feature of
great antiquity, especially in temperate environments, is its restriction in
recent times to the most marginal European habitats, usually under conifer-
ous forest. Its use is known mainly from the Boreal forest areas, for instance
in Finland (Sigaut 1975), or else from upland areas of coniferous forest in
central Europe such as the Carpathians (Lewicka 1972). In these areas it
occurs on soils so marginal that they were not cultivated before the Middle
Ages, as can be seen from the distribution of Late-Medieval clearance-names
(Smith 1967, 133). It could plausibly be argued, therefore, that far from
being a 'primeval' agrarian system, swidden agriculture was a characteristic
of the most recent phase of the internal colonisation of Europe, when settle-
ment spread to the least fertile soils which could not withstand any other
form of cultivation.
    While this phase may be more significant in the tropics, where low-
quality soils form a greater proportion of the landscape, the same arguments
apply: it is likely that the starting point of the Boserup scheme represents an
already developed system of cultivation which is no model for the earliest
farming systems.

                                             86




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       IN   EARLY     CEREAL        CULTIVATION


INFERENCE FROM PREHISTORIC SETTLEMENT PATTERNS

The above arguments receive further support from examination of the
archaeological evidence. The most striking feature of early farming settle-
ment is its restricted distribution. By comparison with the proportion of the
landscape under cultivation today, only a small fraction was used by early
agriculturalists. In the Near East this proportion has grown much larger
by the third millennium BC; but in Europe it did not attain anything like its
present spread until the first millennium BC or even the Christian era, and
the process of infilling continued well into the Middle Ages.
   Not only was the distribution of sites in the earlier phases restricted, it
was highly selective; and there are consistent patterns of association with
certain environments and situations. Alluvial, lake-edge and other locations
with high groundwater are characteristic of the Neolithic both in the near
East and in southern Europe (Allan 1972; Sherratt 1973).
   In the earliest stage of farming villages, many important sites like Jericho
and Mureybit fall outside the zone of possible dry-farming altogether.
Indeed, when evidence of cereal crops was first found at these sites it was
commonly assumed that the grain must have been traded from better-
watered hill-country nearby, or else that the climate must have undergone
radical alteration. What all such sites possess, however, are abundant
supplies of localised surface- or ground-water, such as the seepage area and
spring of Ain es Sultan at Jericho or the seasonal wadis and perennially
damp Euphrates floodplain at Mureybit. Similar observations apply to
the more developed phase represented at Beidha, Tell Abu Hureyra and
Bouqras, where local concentrations of surface-water permitted a limited
cultivation on suitable fine-grained alluvial soils, especially at wadi-mouths.
   The late glacial fall in lake-levels provided suitable terrain on the former
lake-margins in many parts of the east Mediterranean. In Anatolia, the
earlier Neolithic sites of the Konya Plain, including £atal Hiiyiik, cluster in
the backswamp region where rivers spread out in the otherwise arid plain;
while further west the fluctuating lakes in the upland basins of Pisdia are
ringed with sites like Hacilar and Suberde. Early sites in Greece and the
Balkans are concentrated in areas of high water-table in the tectonic basins,
either by springs at the valley-edge, by stream confluences, or on lower
terraces by rivers and seasonally-enlarged lakes. In central Europe, early
agricultural settlements occur on levees in the Middle Danube and Tisza
floodplains, and by rivers and streams within the loess area. All of these
locations give access to hydromorphic soils, and avoid the drier interfluves.
Contrary to expectations generated by the model of 'shifting cultivation',
such sites are usually long-lived, lasting for hundreds or even thousands of
years in some cases. This is as true for Bandkeramik sites in north-west and
central Europe as it is for the early tells of the Near East. Moreover, they
often represent surprisingly large communities; sites like Jericho and C^atal

                                             87




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       WATER,       SOIL    AND     SEASONALITY


Hiiyiik are only the most spectacular examples of a general phenomenon.
Clusters of agricultural settlement were often widely scattered, but within
them population was locally concentrated around critical resources such as
fine-grained, well-watered soils.
   The implication of all this is that early agriculturalists occupied only a
narrow zone of maximum productivity, in an essentially small-scale though
locally intensive system of cultivation. In places this was capable of support-
ing nucleated communities, though in others produced a pattern of hamlets
following the exploited zone. This zone of high water-table was of import-
ance not only for cereal-growing but for a variety of resources, including
water itself, fish and freshwater mussels, and the range of plant and animal
species characteristic of the unusual conditions of the alluvium - in the Near
East the game and exploitable perennials of wet conditions, and in Europe
the species which could flourish only in the more open conditions where the
Atlantic forests were interrupted by wet ground (Clarke 1976). In a sense,
therefore, 'Mesolithic' and 'Neolithic' adaptations were parallel rather than
successive: the main difference was the possibilities of expansion inherent in
systems using cereals (Sherratt 1972, 491).
   The characteristics of initial farming systems in Europe are best
demonstrated by comparison with the patterns which emerged in succeeding
millennia. The results of intensive regional surveys indicate the major
changes which took place in the fourth and third millennia BC. A classic
study of this kind is the work of Janusz Kruk and his associates in the loess-
covered uplands of Little Poland (Kruk 1973). Here the restricted catch-
ments of early Neolithic sites in the river valleys are a clear indication of the
focus of interest in this zone, in striking contrast to the pattern which
succeeded it in the later fourth and third millennia BC. Kruk notes the
restriction of the earliest (early fifth millennium BC) agricultural sites to the
lower parts of the valley slopes, immediately overlooking the floodplain -
a pattern which continued down to the early fourth millennium, with some
expansion to similar positions in small side-valleys. The main change
occurred in the fourth millennium with the TRB culture, when there was
a shift of activity to the interfluves and sites were located on higher ground
above the valleys.
   Kruk uses these regularities to reconstruct the economy of the initial
settlers (255): 'Because of the limited size of the zone where the activities of
the Danubian [fifth millennium BC] people were concentrated, the regular
use of burning economy seems virtually impossible. The characteristic con-
centration of settlements within relatively limited areas also seems to speak
against this possibility. Any extensive use of burning as a farming system
would involve also the interfluve ... However, the higher landscape zone was
not systematically exploited by the Danubian people.' Instead, 'it is possible
to assume with a fair amount of certainty that amongst the Danubian people
the plant cultivation was closely linked with the lowest-lying parts of the


                                             88




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       IN   EARLY      CEREAL       CULTIVATION


ground. Natural conditions of this zone, notably the considerable humidity
of soils and their productivity, favoured near larger settlements ... were
worked by hand ... Owing to the high and durable edaphic potential of the
soils that covered this zone it was possible to use the same portion of land
continuously even without fertilizing it.' Such a pattern, with its small
amount of forest-clearance and restricted possibilities for grazing, would
fit the lack of stone tools suitable for woodcutting and the suggestions of
stalled livestock in these early contexts.
    There is accumulating evidence (Chapter 6) that the late fourth and early
third millennia BC saw the widespread introduction of the plough, and that
the extension of cultivation and shift in the focus of settlement to the drier
interfluves was associated with plough-cultivation, extensive clearance and
increased quantities of livestock. Such observations can be made in most
parts of Europe. Their significance for our present purpose, however, is to
suggest some important characteristics of the preceding regime. A common
feature of early agrarian systems in the western Old World is their spatial
restriction and concentration on limited alluvial zones. Soil moisture was
evidently a critical feature of their cultivation system, and ground-water
as significant as rainfall in the growth of crops. Such environments,
while limited in extent, offered unusually high productivity and allowed
considerable continuity of cultivation and, in some areas, notable con-
centrations of population. Such a reconstruction prompts some further
speculations about the nature and origins of this type of cultivation.


CEREAL SEASONALITY AND GROWING-CONDITIONS
Wild cereals belong to the group of grasses which have adapted to strong
seasonal stress by an annual habit and the development of food-storage in
the seed. This allows succeeding generations to 'recolonise' seasonally bare
habitats by rapid growth with the onset of rain. Wild wheats and barleys
occur as members of open communities, particularly on limestone or basalt
slopes and plateaux in the submediterranean park-forest belt. Their mech-
anism of dispersal is a simple one, in which the spike shatters when the seeds
are ripe and they fall to the ground near the parent plant, where the sharp
spikelet helps implantation in cracks in the soil. The time of ripening and
localised area of dispersal prevent them from taking advantage of otherwise
suitable habitats, for instance on seasonally open areas of alluvium. They
thus grow mainly on dry hillslopes during the period of winter rainfall and
ripen around May, with some variation according to altitude (Zohary
1969).
   Under these dry upland conditions, their growing season is spread over
nine months. Such a long period is not, however, a physiological necessity:
wheat can be grown in only three months (90-100 days) in appropriate
conditions, as it was in certain places in antiquity. Such three-month wheat

                                             89




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      WATER,        SOIL   AND      SEASONALITY


is often called spring wheat, since it grows between March and May.1 The
principal sort of wheat grown in Europe and North America at the present
day, however, is winter wheat which is sown in the autumn and harvested
in summer. This has a higher and more stable yield than spring wheats
(Klages 1949, 345). In most areas of Europe this type of wheat actually
requires exposure to cold weather (vernalisation), though this is not so in
the Mediterranean. At the present time, spring-sown wheat with a three-
month growing season is only grown in any quantity on the northern
margin of cultivation where the winter climate is too harsh.
    Spring-grown wheat was, however, known in the Ancient World in the
Mediterranean. Semple (1932, 382) describes the hard, heavy spring wheats
as being typical of limited areas of southern Europe, by comparison with the
soft, light grains which were then preferred for food. 'The heavy Boeotian
wheat was doubtless spring-sown, as it is today, on the margin of the Lake
Copais basin as the winter floodwaters gradually receded and Lake Copais
contracted. The rich lacustrine soil and high water-table explained the
superior quality of the grain.' The rapid growth of this crop, which did not
have to rely on winter rainfall, was possible in the conditions of high
ground-water which existed in restricted areas near to bodies of water,
especially those subject to marked seasonal changes of volume.
    It is tempting to ask whether the system documented for the Copais basin
is not a relic of a much more widespread method of cultivation, that was
typical of the pre-plough agriculture of southern and eastern Europe and the
Near East. Is this not, in fact, the surface groundwater-based cultivation-
system inferred from the settlement evidence in the preceding section? Such
a form of cultivation would take advantage of the short period of optimum
water-availability between winter floods and summer desiccation, allowing
the three months' growing in spring which is necessary for a crop. Since less
soil preparation is needed with this system than in one using rainwater, and
little forest-clearance would be required, this pattern would make sense with
low population levels and a simple technology.
    This model suggests that the critical innovation in the cultivation of
cereals was their transfer from dry environments with a rain-fed, winter,
growth pattern to alluvial, lake-edge, riverine or springside locations in
which an accelerated (spring) growth cycle was possible. The wild cereals
themselves were precluded by their simple dispersal mechanism from
colonising such habitats without human aid. The cultivation of crops in
damp conditions is indicated by the presence of Scirpus seeds in early cereal
samples (Flannery 1969, 81), and such deliberate sowing in areas away from
their natural habitats was a necessary precondition (along with the use of
the sickle for reaping) for the selection of tough-rachis forms, since the
naturally-dispersed forms would always predominate in self-seeded popu-
lations. The early cultivation of cereals in such habitats was thus a quantum
change from other forms of tending and exploitation, in that it operated in


                                             90




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       IN   EARLY     CEREAL        CULTIVATION


effect as a new means of dispersal. It thus opened up a new range of highly
productive habitats for the species concerned without involving the massive
restructuring of the ecosystem which became necessary in later agriculture;
and it involved only a change in the growing-season. A minimum of culti-
vation, and no clearance of climax forest would have been necessary; and
moreover this system had the potential to spread very widely beyond the
natural habitat zone of the wild cereals, wherever such alluvial niches were
to be found.
   The term 'dry-farming', which is often used to describe the phase of culti-
vation before the development of formal canal-irrigation, is thus misleading:
indeed, in the model suggested here, 'dry' (rainfall-dependent) farming was
a specialised development parallel to that of irrigation itself. A small-scale
horticulture adapted to riverine and lacustrine conditions explains the
pattern of early Neolithic distribution in which even restricted areas of fine-
grained water-retentive soils were sought for settlement. With initially low
population levels, the still relatively sparse settlements could be supported
from very limited patches of suitable soil, which could sustain even quite
large villages. Such soils tend often to be neglected at the present day be-
cause of their small extent, their unsuitability for the cultivation of winter
cereals, and their equally important role in providing spring grazing where
large numbers of animals are kept and where much of the rest of the land-
scape is under cultivation.
   The technology which such a horticultural system would require is of the
simplest. In most cases major forest-clearance would not be needed. The
seed would be broadcast, and relatively little weeding would be necessary.
Virtually no preparation of the soil would be required, which in many cases
would hardly rank even as hoe- or digging-stick cultivation. Where soils are
subject to winter flooding and summer desiccation, the deep cracking caused
by drying-out would provide natural aeration and make them practically
self-cultivating. The labour-costs would thus have been trivial by com-
parison with later forms of agriculture, especially with the major forest-
clearance required by interfluvial expansion in third-millennium Europe
which is reflected in the emergence of effective axes and the widespread
trade in stone for these tools (Sherratt 1976, 563-7). Such early horti-
cultural systems would always have been spatially restricted, however, with
locally high population levels but wide intervening uncultivated areas and
with little potential for local growth without radical changes in technique.
The main pattern of growth would be first by rapid budding-off and export
of population, followed by expansion to smaller and smaller patches of the
appropriate high-yielding soils within the occupied area. This is precisely the
picture which emerges from studies such as those of Kruk (1973: see also
Sherratt 1972, 517, 524).
   The rapidity of early agricultural dispersal was not due to shifting culti-
vation, but to the pattern of restricted (and often linear) habitats suitable for

                                             91




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       WATER,       SOIL    AND     SEASONALITY


initial farming practices. The spread of cultivation in similar habitats would
have allowed a dispersal through a variety of environmental zones with
minimal adaptation. It has, for instance, been suggested (Butzer 1972, 580)
that the penetration of inland Europe would have involved a major shift
from winter-grown crops in the Mediterranean to spring-grown crops in the
temperate zone. If both were essentially spring-grown, then no such radical
change in the growth period would have been necessary, other than a slight
adjustment in the time of sowing.
    Developments beyond this initial stage of cultivation involved adaptation
to drier habitats which required more soil preparation and the use of fallow-
ing or systematic rotation. Such techniques are likely to have emerged in
areas where forest-clearance was not necessary. One of the first major steps
in this direction was the extensive appearance of sites on the deep brown
soils of the moist steppes of northern Assyria in the sixth millennium BC
(Oates 1980). Such cultivation would require extensive soil preparation
with the hoe, a fallow of one to four years and probably the development of
new strains of cereals as cultivation moved out of the zone of abundant
ground- and surface-water. Rainfall-dependent growth would have necessi-
tated a winter growing season, at least for the wheats, and it is likely that
there was a return to the pattern of seasonality characteristic of the wild
cereals. Such a move would favour the use of barley, as well as bread-wheat
(Triticum aestivum) - the 'soft, light grain' which replaced the older and
harder forms.
    The additional labour required for soil preparation under these circum-
stances would have given a powerful incentive to the development of new
techniques. As cattle were common domestic animals on these lowland sites,
it is possible that the plough came into use in this area by the fifth millen-
nium, even though it is only definitely attested from the fourth millennium
in southern Mesopotamia (Sherratt 1980). This could be used to pulverise
the soil to prevent loss of moisture through capillary action (Clark 1952,
100; Stevens 1966, 93). Only at this stage would the characteristic pattern
of 'dry farming' have emerged. While the extension of interfluvial culti-
vation in the Mediterranean would have required a winter growing-season,
in temperate Europe the higher spring rainfall would have allowed the
continuation of a spring-growth pattern (Figure 3.1). The major role played
by barley in late Neolithic and Bronze Age agriculture argues in favour of
a spring growing-season, as cultivation proliferated on sandy or other light
soils which warm up rapidly in spring. The frequency of millet (Panicum
and Setaria) in these contexts in southern Europe (Hartanyi and Novaki
1975) also supports this suggestion. Spring-grown crops would leave a
greater area for winter grazing, important in Bronze Age stock economies.
    The first definite indication of winter-grown crops in northern Europe is
the spread of spelt in the first millennium BC (Applebaum 1954, 104). By
this time it is likely that winter varieties of the other wheat species had also

                                             92




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      IN   EARLY      CEREAL         CULTIVATION




                                                             TEMPERATE            EUROPE


                                                           THIRD AND SECOND MILLENNIUM


                                                         spring cereals            light soils




                                                                                   light plough




                                                               FIRST MILLENNIUM


                                                         winter cereals            heavier soils




                                                                                   heavier plough
                                    Winter growth
                                    Spring growth
®                                                    ©
3.1 The seasonality of cereal-growing: (a) the spread of farming to Europe from
the Near East and the postulated shift from spring-grown to winter-grown cereals;
(b) growing-periods in relation to rainfall seasonality; and to flood regimes in the
major river-valleys; (c) implications of the shift from spring- to winter-grown
cereals in temperate Europe: an expansion of livestock-keeping (especially sheep
for wool) was a related development [(c) added from Sherratt, 1980, unpublished].




                                                93




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      WATER,       SOIL    AND      SEASONALITY


emerged, involving the evolution of vernalisation mechanisms. This was the
point at which the primitive original wheats such as emmer would have been
increasingly replaced in Europe by hexaploid species better able to with-
stand the cold, and barley became relatively less important. Rye also became
more common in eastern and central Europe, after a long period of sporadic
occurrence as a weed (Jankuhn 1969, 220). Spring-grown crops cultivated
with the ard would have survived on the northern margins where the winter
was too harsh for the longer growth-cycle. The pressure of grazing caused
by winter sowing could have been alleviated by the provision of hay, which
would have been increasingly important for the keeping of livestock.
   At this point also cultivation began to spread to heavier soils, and more
robust and ultimately sod-turning ploughs developed (Figure 3.2). This was
important in autumn ploughing, to form clods which would prevent the
formation of soil-caps and pans over winter, unlike the spring ploughing
where a fine tilth is required. The use of iron for plough-shares also pro-
duced a more effective instrument for land-breaking, especially on clays.
(Iron shares appeared in the Near East in the early first millennium BC, in
central Europe at the end of the first millennium BC, and in northern Europe
in the later first millennium AD.) A probable consequence of these changes,
and especially (as Susan Limbrey has pointed out) the existence of open
ploughed fields at the time of maximum winter rainfall, would have been the
massive increase in soil erosion indicated in the extensive accumulation of
valley alluvium in temperate Europe. The cropping-system which came into
use at this time would be essentially the same as that already in use in the
Mediterranean, with a two-course rotation of alternate winter crops and
fallow. This persisted until the later first millennium AD, when it was re-
placed in parts of temperate Europe by the three-course system in which a
further field of spring-grown crops - oats (for horses), barley and legumes -
was added, which suited the developing needs of animal husbandry (White
1962, 69). The fully-developed pre-industrial agricultural system of
northern Europe was by this stage able to sustain comparable population
levels to the intensive, though necessarily more restricted, irrigation-based
systems of the Near East, and it was associated with the large-scale urban-
isation of temperate Europe.


DEVELOPED SURFACE-WATER AGRICULTURE:
IRRIGATION
During the time that these developments in rain-fed farming were taking
place in Europe, a succession of irrigation-based systems had appeared in
various parts of the Near East. It is commonly assumed that irrigation
represented a major departure from earlier agricultural systems, involving
radical changes in technique. In the perspective adopted here, however, it
can be seen as an artificial extension of the conditions which characterised

                                             94




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     IN   EARLY      CEREAL        CULTIVATION




the earliest forms of cultivation. A much more continuous pattern of
development, by small additional inputs of labour and capital, can thus be
postulated (Figure 3.3).
   The earliest forms of irrigation are likely to be small-scale water-
spreading involving minimum amounts of investment in new facilities. Such
are indeed possible in pre-agricultural contexts, as with the Owen's Valley
Paiute who divert streams to water patches of self-propagating wild plants
(Steward 1929). Similar practices may have been employed from the
beginning in locations like that of Jericho. Without modifying the natural
drainage by channels, cultivation may also make use of the sheet-flow of

                                            95




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       WATER,      SOIL    AND      SEASONALITY




3.3 The differentiation of Old World farming systems: from simple floodwater
farming to plough agriculture and irrigation.


floodwaters. This system provided the basis of agriculture among some
groups of Pueblo Indians of the south-west of the United States, where the
rainfall is too slight to grow crops. As water seasonally overflows from high
ground, however, cultivation is possible either at the sides of valleys below
escarpments or on alluvial fans at the mouths of gullies (arroyos), or else on
the valley floor itself where streams overflow their floodplains (Bryan 1929,
445). Such floodwater farming supported communities of the Hopi and
neighbouring Indian groups, and was a determining factor in the location of
such villages, which might have a population of several hundred. This
method of cultivation, however, requires undissected valley-floors and is
very vulnerable to gullying in periods of stream-incision (Cooke and Reeves
1976). Vita-Finzi has suggested that suitable conditions for this kind of
cultivation obtained in parts of Jordan in the early Holocene during the
deposition of the Hasa formation (1969, 32).
   The earliest demonstrated examples of channel-irrigation in the Near
East are related to the braided streams which flow down alluvial fans on the
margins of the semi-arid basins. Cutting transverse trenches to carry the
water to a wider area is a simple but effective way of using the gradient to
maintain an adequate supply to the fields, either from floodwater or peren-
nial flow. Such a system has been documented at Choga Mami near Mandali
in Iraq and dated to the Samarran culture in the sixth millennium BC (Oates
and Oates 1976). This form of irrigation is typical of the Early Chalcolithic

                                             96




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       IN   EARLY     CEREAL        CULTIVATION


period in the Near East, when it was also employed on the fringes of the
Zagros and of the Kopet Dagh in Turkmenia. In the latter area it sustained
the settlements of the Geoksyur culture (Lisitslna 1969). It may also have
been used in Anatolia at this time, for instance at sites in comparable
positions in the Konya plain (French 1970; Sherratt 1973).
    This system is well adapted to the margins of lowland areas fed by
streams from nearby better-watered mountains. Similar techniques may
have been employed in other areas of low rainfall such as southern Spain
by the third millennium BC (Schiile 1967). They are, however, vulnerable to
erosion producing channel incision and gully formation. Major extensions
of the cultivated area by these methods, moreover, are difficult to obtain and
require more complex engineering and higher investment. The system of
underground channels or qanats in Iran and adjacent areas (e.g. the falaj
system of Oman) carrying ground-water from valley-edge fans, represents
a further attempt to extend these types of water-sources from the first
millennium BC onwards (Stronach 1980).
    In more marginal environments it was sometimes possible to make use of
ephemeral run-off and wadi-flow by the use of dams or small channels. In
Baluchistan and southern Arabia, where brief periods of stream-flow result
from melting snow in the mountains, the water and fertile suspended silts
were trapped by boulder-walls (gabarbands) across narrow valleys to allow
the growth of a spring wheat-crop (Raikes 1965; Leshnik 1973, 67). A
somewhat more sophisticated channel-based system dating to the fifth
millennium BC has been found in association with the major Late Chalco-
lithic settlement at Jawa in the basalt region in the arid zone of Jordan
(Roberts 1977). Here, three systems of channels were used to tap the short-
lived winter surplus, both by gravity flow from the main wadi and by
collecting local runoff, and these were used to supply both fields and
cisterns. Comparable systems supported the Bronze Age towns of Palestine,
and highly sophisticated methods for utilising runoff were developed in
the Levant and western Arabia in the first millennium BC (Evenari et al.
1971).
    The greatest opportunities for the extension of cultivation by irrigation,
however, lay in riverine environments, especially the major alluvial valleys
situated in arid plains but fed by exotic water, like those of the Tigris/
Euphrates, Indus and Nile. Despite the environmental similarities of these
three basins and the hydraulic civilisations which they produced, however,
there are significant differences between them. Most important is the timing
of their flood-periods (Figure 3.1). The Indus and Nile both have an
essentially autumn inundation, allowing crops to be sown as the waters
retreat in time for a winter growing-season, but the Tigris and Euphrates are
characterised by inconvenient spring floods.
    In the Indus basin, on the south-eastern edge of the distribution of the
west Asiatic cereals, crops such as wheat and barley with a winter/spring

                                             97




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      WATER,       SOIL    AND      SEASONALITY


growth cycle (rabi crops) could be grown in the dry winter season only
in low-lying areas where they could make use of residual soil moisture
from the autumn flood and monsoonal rains (Lambrick 1964, 75). Alluvial
silts along the rivers thus provided the basis for Harappan agriculture.
Cultivable land could be easily extended by simple methods of inundation
irrigation (sailaba), especially along inlets and creeks or on the inner sides
of river-meanders (Leshnik 1973, 73). 'Thus the whole operation involves
an absolute minimum of skill, labour and aid of implements' (Lambrick
1964, 76), and this limited but productive land could support the develop-
ment of Harappan cities even before the introduction of the complementary
summer/autumn (kharif) crops such as sorghum.
    The Nile, flowing in a more narrowly-defined trench, allowed cultivation
of the flood-deposited silts in a series of basins formed by old levees, in
which the autumn floods provided natural irrigation for cereals sown as the
waters receded by November (Butzer 1976). Simple techniques for retaining
the water and increasing the watered area were in use by the third
millennium BC, involving the breaching of levees and the canalisation of
floodwater by digging overflow channels and constructing dikes. The proto-
dynastic 'King Scorpion' macehead shows a ritual scene of this kind (p. 67).
More labour-intensive methods of actually raising water from its lower,
summer levels began by the mid-second millennium with the use of the
shaduf (pole and bucket lever), and larger-scale operations were only
initiated in the later first millennium BC. In consequence, summer-grown
crops were not cultivated before the second or first millennium.
    The growth of irrigation systems in the Mesopotamian lowlands has been
extensively investigated in recent years (Adams 1974; Gibson 1974; Oates
and Oates 1976). The Tigris and Euphrates differ from the Nile and Indus
in that their floods, related to snow-melt in the mountains, occur towards
the end of the winter growing-season, in April and May. It was thus the
perennial flow which was most useful, with floodwater often presenting a
problem of dispersal: what started as irrigation had to continue as drainage
and crop-protection. Because the rivers deposit large quantities of silt and
build up high levees, they actually run above the level of the surrounding
plain. It is a relatively simple matter to spread water through breaches in
these levees; though this water had then to be dispersed through a system of
anastomosing channels. Early settlement 'followed the numerous small,
meandering stream distributaries found on any unmodified alluvial plain.
Lengthy, branching canal networks are not in evidence, and cultivation
seemingly was confined to narrow bands along natural levee backslopes and
to favourably situated margins of seasonally filled depressions' (Adams
 1974, 2). Mesopotamian irrigation was an extensive system in the sense
that it required an alternate fallow to restore the water-table and prevent
salination, and that there was more potentially irrigable land than could
 easily be managed without major investment in flood-control. Indeed, the


                                             98




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       IN   EARLY     CEREAL        CULTIVATION


onset of local salination forced periodic shifts. The fallow and intervening
areas allowed a symbiotic pastoralism which was essential to a full ex-
ploitation of the region.
    These observations apply to lower Mesopotamia - the 'River Plain' of
Buringh (1957). The development of irrigation on the Assyrian Steppe was
a later feature, because the entrenched character of the rivers necessitated
the use of lifting-devices rather than a simple use of gravity-flow. The shaduf
(used in lower Mesopotamia for watering the levees) was one answer to this
problem, and it was in use by the early-second millennium BC (Drower
1954), though only in a limited area adjacent to the major rivers.
    In each of these major alluvial basins, the Nile, Indus and Tigris/
Euphrates, there is evidence for the use of the plough (technically the ard
or scratch-plough) from an early stage in the development of lowland
irrigation: in Mesopotamia at least by the fourth millennium and in the
others by the third millennium (Chapter 6). It seems that this instrument
was an integral part of these extensive lowland cultivation systems, and
perhaps a precondition for their development.
    The construction of major artificial watercourses in Mesopotamia dates
to the Sassanian period (Adams 1965), when long branching canals argue
a significant degree of central control and investment, and are part of the
general pattern of intensified inputs of capital and labour and the more
elaborate construction typical of all forms of irrigation from the first
millennium BC onwards. This was the period in which summer-grown crops
such as rice and sesame were introduced from further east. Intensive irri-
gation led in many areas to substantially higher population densities and an
extension of the areas under state control. Many of the features stressed by
Wittfogel (1957) as associated with irrigation agriculture may thus be more
characteristic of these Iron Age developments than of preceding systems,
which were often village-based and local in management.
    The growth of irrigation thus followed a natural progression from the
earliest surface- and groundwater-based systems through an increasing
management of sources of surface-water and its distribution to suitable
locations. The earlier forms required only a small input of effort in pro-
pitious circumstances, and involved little co-operation beyond individual
communities. As with south-east Asian systems, even quite complex arrange-
ments could grow by quite small increments of household investment
in each generation (cf. Leach 1959). Small-scale hydroagriculture (in
Wittfogel's term) was a widespread though sporadic feature of cultivation in
the semi-arid and arid zones from the Mediterranean to central Asia in the
third and second millennia BC. Larger-scale projects involving higher invest-
ment and wider co-operation were needed to increase the area served by
these limited systems, and these did not emerge until the growth of imperial
power and investment in rural development by landlords and urban
capitalists, especially from the first millennium BC onwards.

                                             99




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       WATER,      SOIL    AND      SEASONALITY


COMPARISON
Starting from similar initial conditions, therefore, cultivation systems in the
Near East and Europe became increasingly differentiated as they exploited
more fully the particular characteristics of the two regions. In the sub-
tropical zone, where lack of water was the main constraint, large areas of
alluvium could be brought into cultivation by irrigation, to support sub-
stantial local populations from an early date. In the temperate zone, the
most significant agricultural resource was the reservoir of nutrients stored
as soil-colloids which could be released by forest-clearance and ploughing.
The wide areas of productive forest soils postponed the need for intensive
methods of cultivation; though, once introduced, these could support higher
overall densities of settlement. In northern Europe the scratch-plough
evolved into a heavier and more deeply-penetrating instrument for use on
heavy soils whose thick sod required turning to aerate and drain. What had
originally developed as a response to the lack of water had become a method
of dealing with its over-abundance.
   By contrast to the ecosystems of the subtropical and temperate areas,
those of the humid tropics are characterised by rapid oxidation and strong
leaching: nutrients are stored in standing vegetation rather than in the soil.
While significant areas of alluvial and volcanic soils can support permanent
cropping, the much greater areas of interfluvial terrain necessitate short
periods of cultivation and long fallows. Nutrients can be released from
standing vegetation by combustion, used up by crops in a few years, and the
plot returned to forest. More permanent cultivation can only be imposed on
such soils by large-scale investment of capital and labour. South-east Asian
terracing systems with padi-farming are a specialised development of this
kind, using flowing water to carry nutrients not available in the soil (Geertz
1963).
   The kinds of transition to more intensive systems studied by development
economists such as Boserup, therefore, are only partly analogous to the
kinds of change inferred in subtropical and temperate regions, and in any
case represent a relatively late phase of land-use even in the tropics. Recent
research has increasingly emphasised that the earlier stages of tropical
cultivation were characterised by systems of fixed-plot horticulture (Harris
1973, 399-402); while ecological arguments and archaeological evidence
from several parts of the world have emphasised the importance of low-
lying, alluvial areas in early cultivation.
   In south-east Asia, rice began as a palustrian species, adapted to semi-
aquatic habitats, as did taro. Dry rice, suitable for interfluvial cultivation,
was a secondary development. Gorman (1977) has postulated an initial
stage of inundation-cultivation in piedmont regions, lasting down to c.2000
BC, followed by an extension of irrigation-systems in the open alluvial
plains, with iron and plough-cultivation (using the water-buffalo) spreading


                                            100




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         IN   EARLY      CEREAL       CULTIVATION


in this context in the first millennium BC. Extensive swiddening could be
a relatively recent development, as drought-resistant strains of rice allowed
a spread to the hills in the first millennium AD.
   In Africa, where agriculture developed at a later date than the other areas
considered here, the situation is less well understood. Nevertheless, Harlan
(1975, 197) has pointed out the importance of fluctuating shallow lakes
in the Sahel region of West Africa where many of the indigenous cultigens
emerged, which would have been suitable for decrue cultivation on moist
soil as the floodwaters subsided.
   In Mesoamerica (Price 1971) the present importance of swidden con-
trasts with the types of cultivation inferred for prehistoric and early historic
times. Early crops in the dry tropical zone of Mexico were cultivated by
floodwater along barrancas (wadis). In the Valley of Oaxaca, one of the
most intensively-investigated areas, initial cultivation was confined to the
alluvial zone with a high water-table, and extended over a limited area by
pot-irrigation from wells. In the Late Formative period, settlement spread to
the piedmont zone where water from springs could be directed by canals to
terraced fields, as in the fossilised system at Hierve el Agua (Kirkby 1973).
In the Valley of Mexico, canal irrigation supported the growth of Classic
Teotihuacan, while intensive chinampa (wet-garden) cultivation sustained
Postclassic Tenochtitlan. In the Maya area of the humid tropical lowlands,
the supposition that swiddening formed the basis of sites like Tikal has
been replaced by a recognition of the importance of shallow lakes (bajos)
exploited by canals and raised fields as well as a variety of other water-
spreading devices (Harris 1978), and the situation is more complex than
was previously imagined. In coastal Peru, floodwater farming on the coast
was replaced by limited canal-irrigation in inland valleys, and in turn suc-
ceeded by larger-scale canal irrigation on the arid coastal plain (Moseley
1974). All these examples show a direct transition from floodwater-
cultivation to canal-based systems, with extensive cultivation as a later,
marginal development.
   Behind the regional variations, therefore, underlying similarities in the
development of agricultural systems are becoming evident. They emphasise
the importance of an often protracted initial phase of small-scale surface-
and groundwater-based horticulture, which ultimately differentiated into
hydraulic and rainfed systems of both extensive and intensive kinds.

NOTE

1. The term 'spring wheat' is used in a special sense by plant geneticists, to describe any
   wheat which lacks a vernalisation requirement, including winter-grown varieties in the
   Mediterranean and Near East. I am grateful to E G. H. Lupton of the Plant Breeding
   Institute, Cambridge, for this and other observations.




                                              101




                                 This content downloaded from
               128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
   Resources, Technology and Trade:
     An Essay on Early European
              Metallurgy
                                     (1976)

Early European metallurgy has been a topic of debate since the beginning
of the study of prehistory. As a fundamental division in the Three-age
framework and a crucial contribution to chronology through typological
sequences, it was a focus of interest from the mid-nineteenth century on-
wards. More recently, the application of rapid techniques of micro-analysis
has provided a massive body of quantitative data on the composition of
early metal objects and new opportunities for interpretation, while the large
body of surviving material continues to offer itself as a major source of in-
formation - not only about chronology but also about the way of life of
Copper and Bronze Age communities.
   The abundance of copper and bronze objects from these periods leaves
no doubt about their importance in the prehistoric economy, and the
reasons for growth in the use of metal are clearly essential in this case to our
understanding of economic change in primitive society. The process usually
invoked to explain the spread of metallurgy is one of discovery, followed by
diffusion of knowledge about the techniques involved, leading to a wide-
spread use of metal because of its superiority for manufacturing tools and
weapons. The change in technology would thus have led to a breakdown of
economic self-sufficiency, and a consequent reliance on trade as a funda-

This chapter was written as a tribute to J. G. D. Clark, Disney Professor of
Archaeology at Cambridge and subsequently Master of Peterhouse. (Sir Grahame
died in 1995.) It contrasts the metallurgy of the Early Bronze Age with that of the
preceding Copper Age, and suggests that the latter differed in no fundamental way
from the sophisticated uses and trade in stone achieved in the Neolithic. Grahame
Clark had himself illuminated the European stone axe trade by comparison with
Australian ethnography, and this paper followed Colin Renfrew's example in
applying the anthropological economics of M. D. Sahlins to early metalworking.
(See also Chapter 12 for flint exchange-networks in Neolithic and Copper Age
Hungary.) The illustrations are notable as experiments in graphical presentation.

                                         102




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY


mental mechanism. At the same time, increasing productivity of agriculture
would have begun to produce a surplus that served both to finance this
increased scale of trading activity and to support the specialists concerned.
   In its original conception (Childe 1958), this model sought to connect the
appearance of metallurgy in Europe with the activities of prospectors from
urban societies (in the Near East) whose concentration of capital had
fostered the growth of the industry. More recently the reappraisal of Euro-
pean chronologies has suggested a more active role for south-east Europe,
and attention has turned to the background of technological skills in high-
temperature firing available to Neolithic bakers and potters (Renfrew
1969). But, whatever the circumstances of discovery, emphasis still rests on
metallurgical knowledge as the key factor in the explanation with the
assumption that, once discovered, metal became common because of its self-
evident usefulness or inherent attractiveness. Both in Childe's account of this
process (1956,115-20) and in Renfrew's discussion (1972, 308,483) of the
growth of metallurgy in the Aegean, economic change is seen as the result
of technological change, both through increased efficiency and through its
stimulation of 'new needs'.
   It may be doubted, however, whether the advantages conferred by a
knowledge of the technical processes of metalworking could by themselves
have had such far-reaching effects. Early metal tools were not, in practice,
more efficient than stone ones, nor are early metal weapons likely to have
been decisive in battle. Are there, then, less obvious reasons why a relatively
rare raw material such as copper should have achieved so wide a circulation in
the third and second millennia? And was this circulation different, in scale
or character, from existing networks distributing materials such as fine stone?
   The inevitable bias given by a material subject-matter often leads the
archaeologist to a view of prehistory in which technology appears as the
main element of progress. On the other hand, Professor Clark (1965) has
stressed the need to come to terms with the social role of material objects,
and to treat prehistoric societies in a total ecological context. From this
standpoint, it may be possible to reach a view of the artefactual evidence
that relates it to long-term processes of economic and social change, rather
than treating technology as an independent sector producing revolutionary
repercussions throughout society.

' S T O N E A G E ECONOMICS'
A key issue in this discussion is the contrast often drawn between the relative
self-sufficiency of Neolithic life and the variety of raw materials required
for the more complex technical processes of the Bronze Age. If there is a
difference in trading activity between the two periods, however, it cannot be
summarised as simply as this. Even in the Neolithic there were inherent
limitations on self-sufficiency.

                                         103




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                RESOURCES,        TECHNOLOGY         AND    TRADE:


   This point soon becomes evident from a consideration of site locations.
The distribution of a population dependent on agriculture is determined
largely by the soils on which its crops are grown, the most suitable zones for
cultivation being naturally those with deep soil and an abundant water-
supply. In order to make use of these locations, however, another set of
resources is required - hard stone for tools, for example, or supplies of salt
to offset dietary deficiency. By and large, such resources occur in different
environments, and only a limited number of agricultural settlements have
direct access to them. For instance, a distribution such as that of the early
Neolithic Bandkeramik in central Europe (Clark 1952, fig. 45), with its
concentration on open loess-covered plains, implies a constant import of
materials from sources peripheral to the main concentration of population.
   In any case, there are good reasons why, in small-scale societies, indi-
vidual settlements and clusters of villages should not be isolated from wider
contacts. Single units of settlement are naturally vulnerable to the possibility
of local disaster, whether due to poor harvest or disease. A continuous ex-
change of population from village to village creates a network of relation-
ships that can distribute inequalities in local production and provide a wider
pool of assistance. As a background to the distribution of rarer materials,
a continuous movement of personnel and subsistence products between
villages must be envisaged. It is this network which provides the basic
carrier for the kinds of material that survive archaeologically in Neolithic
contexts.
   An important effect of this is the pattern of 'random walk' followed by
individual objects in the course of such exchanges. Although there may be a
general direction of drift in one class of material as it moves towards an area
of scarcity, there is a large number of jumps between the source and the
ultimate area of consumption. This lack of a direct link between producers
and consumers at some distance from the source implies a strong spatial
limit on effective demand with this kind of system. A distribution channel
for a particular material is thus likely to have the following structure:
1. Source: not necessarily in an area of agricultural production, though
   accessible from it. Activities: unearthing of material, preliminary re-
   duction of bulk.
2. Production zone: settlements concerned in the active exploitation of the
   material. Activities: working up into an exchangeable form.
3. Direct contact zone: area of settlements linked directly to production
   zone by face-to-face contact. Effective supply as result of close kinship
   links.
4. Indirect supply zone: area of settlements without direct access to the
   production zone, receiving supplies through intermediaries.
Anthropologists have stressed the basic contrast between the mechanisms
connecting zones (3) and (4) with their supplies. Sahlins (1965) has noted

                                         104




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY


the way in which exchanges with close kinsmen, who may be expected to
provide assistance, are less concerned with material equivalence than those
that take place across tribal boundaries, where a more direct return is
sought. Brookfield and Hart (1971, 315), discussing Melanesian evidence,
have drawn the contrast between transfer, where goods are easily balanced
by services, and trade, where goods are rarely exchanged for non-material
favours. Rappaport (1968,106) has suggested that production will be sensi-
tive to demand from within the area of direct contact, but not outside it. In
a situation where each village is producing a similar range of subsistence
goods, there will be an especially sharp division between those able to
supply food and services direct to the producers and those beyond this
range. Only in the case of particularly important materials is this friction
overcome, by the exchange of high-value objects between certain individuals
in different local groups (Sherratt 1972, 506).
    This lack of direct articulation between supply and demand must have
been a characteristic limitation on Neolithic economies, as Rappaport
points out for the primitive farming groups of the New Guinea highlands.
The problem is to avoid a situation in which an extensively needed com-
modity is under-exploited because of the lack of items to exchange for it.
In overcoming this, the circulation of non-utilitarian goods plays a vital role
in mobilising demand. Items of adornment or display that are exchangeable
for essential commodities, and can themselves be accumulated, encourage
continuity in the production of basic materials even when local needs are
filled. They thus act as a kind of 'fly-wheel' for the whole system.
    Not only do items not directly concerned with subsistence activities
contribute to the maintenance of the system, but essential commodities,
such as fine stone, also have non-material functions. Speaking again of the
New Guinea highlands, Strathern notes that 'in their area of production
axes circulate as items of exchange value, in ceremonial exchange, death
compensation, bride-wealth, payments in the settlement of disputes, and
they had a similar role in the Enga area' where they were distributed. While
ordinary working axes may be given in these contexts, particularly large and
fine specimens are considered appropriate for ceremonial and bride-wealth
presentations, and in the case quoted by Chappell (1966, 98) these may be
up to five times the size of working axes. (Such an axe 30cm in length would
require about three weeks' work in grinding.)
    The goods in circulation thus carry important symbolic values in a way
that is often explicitly organised. Commodities may be accumulated and
exchanged in specified quantities for particular situations such as marriage
alliances. Such artefacts are not generally exchangeable, as with a true
currency, but act as 'standardised entitlements to a series of social pre-
rogatives' (Douglas 1967, 135).
    The wider effects of this social aspect of material goods are twofold. In
the first place, the system is continuously generating demand both for the

                                         105




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                RESOURCES,       TECHNOLOGY         AND    TRADE:


commodities with direct symbolic value and for those exchangeable with
them, thus helping to overcome the limitations on supplies of useful
materials that arise from the lack of direct articulation between producers
and consumers. The use of necessary items, such as axes, in ceremonial
contexts also ensures a reservoir of raw material in case of shortage. In the
second place, by linking the movement of goods with the distribution of
marriage partners, the system contributes to demographic equilibrium by
adjusting the spatial distribution of women and goods (Rappaport 1968,
108-9).
    This tentative sketch of the working of a simple economic system is
a starting point for the analysis of the prehistoric European situation. In
opposition to the idea that 'a Stone Age community was, at least potentially,
self-sufficing' and that 'the objects of Stone Age trade were always luxuries
... at least things that men could have done without' (Childe 1951, 35), it
suggests that continuous circulation was a basic pre-condition of such
societies, extending even beyond simple material needs.
    To be fully satisfactory, however, something beyond a static model is
necessary if it is to cope with the evident changes within the prehistoric
economy. In the first place, changes occur as new sources of raw materials
are discovered and old ones are exhausted. Such changes are especially likely
as the area under exploitation itself expands and peripheral groups come
into contact with a wider environment. Secondly, any growth in population
will also increase effective demand, making worthwhile intensification in the
effort involved in unearthing raw materials and the development of larger-
scale operations. Perhaps even more important are changes in the sphere
of subsistence economy underlying the patterns of distribution in rarer
materials. Once again, ethnography provides a clue to the processes in-
volved.
    Coastal Melanesia, in particular, shows a high development of long-
distance trading links, some of them of extraordinary complexity. For some
of the groups involved, participation in these networks is essential, not only
at the level of raw materials but also in terms of basic subsistence products.
Hogbin (1951) quotes examples from the Huon Gulf of New Guinea where
groups survived only by producing pottery and importing food-stuffs, and
Malinowski noted the division, within the Trobriand Islands, between the
richer agricultural part and the poorer areas of the interior that manufacture
wooden dishes, baskets and pots to exchange with it for food. In these cases,
the occupation of such poorer areas is possibly only because of a continuing
output of non-subsistence products. One consequence of the extension of
settlement to marginal environments is the need for a class of products that
stimulate the mobility of subsistence goods. Brookfield and Hart (1971,
320-32), in a stimulating discussion of the problem, interpret the complex
cycles of inter-island exchange in Melanesia       part of a 'flywheel' mech-
anism to keep products on the move and s:           articulate several kinds of


                                        106




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
              AN   ESSAY       ON   EARLY        EUROPEAN             METALLURGY


                                                  trob    rianos




               SOUTH PAPUAN COAST

         1   CONUSARMSHELLS         7 ARMBANDS ANO PAINT           - A N T I CLOCKWISE KULA
         2
             SPONPYLUS NECKLACES    B BOWLS ANO BASKETS, - • C L O C K W I S E     KULA
         3   RAW GREENSTONE           CARVED WARE        «—»NON-KULA

         *   GREENSTONE AXES        9   CANOES                 •    PLACE OF ORIGIN

         5   QUARTZ SAND            10 SAGO                    O     DESTINATION
         6   POTTERY                11 TUBERS, COCONUTS        (    ENTRY TO KULA
                                    12 POTTERY CLAY            X    EXIT FROM KULA

4.1 A reconstruction of the flow of products around the kula ring: from Brookfield
and Hart (1971).

specialisation within the chain (see Figure 4.1). Such regional differentiation
allows areas of lower subsistence potential to survive alongside better-
endowed ones. Indeed, the fact that transactions still occur in a series of
individual jumps means that opportunities open up for middleman trading,
and some areas well connected in the network can survive even without
specialist products of their own (e.g. Siassi).
   In contrast to the relatively simple situation postulated above for the
Bandkeramiky with its concentration on a single productive zone and
occasional expeditions for raw materials outside this, the colonisation of a
wide range of landscapes leads to a situation in which various groups are
actively pumping rarer materials and products into the system. The contrast

                                                 107




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                RESOURCES,       TECHNOLOGY         AND    TRADE:


stems, not from a disparity in technology and raw material requirements but
from the difference in settlement ecology between the two cases.
   One further feature of the Melanesian case may be mentioned - the social
mechanisms involved. The actual operation of the trading process is in the
hands of individuals: participation in the network depends on the ability to
create stocks of trade articles and to manipulate social and ceremonial
relationships:
  Leadership and the political structure of groups are not set apart from the
  sphere of commerce; the rewards of the successful entrepreneur are the
  highest rewards of power and prestige which the society has to offer;
  he cannot dominate the political situation without first dominating the
  market ... This kind of fluidity is not a matter of individuals moving up
  and down rapidly from one recognized position to another. It is much
  more an instability in the relationship of actual positions, since each
  outstanding leader creates his own leadership. (Douglas 1967,125)
   In such systems, which have come to be known as 'big man' systems
(Sahlins 1963), richer individuals provide nodes of concentration for
circulating goods, without a rigidly hierarchical social structure divided on
class lines. The accumulation of subsistence products is a temporary matter,
and the climb to prestige is expressed in possession of the items of display,
such as valued ornaments, which act as indicators or 'counters' of success.
Although the majority of transactions is concerned with subsistence
products, the system runs on the movement of symbolic items and these
provide a material reading of varying status positions. This situation, one of
regional economic differentiation articulated by individuals in small com-
munities, must have been the condition of much of later prehistoric Europe
before the emergence of urban centres. How far are such processes reflected
in the artefactual record?


T H E MOVEMENT OF MATERIALS IN NEOLITHIC EUROPE
The patterns of movement, even in inorganic raw materials, are a field of
research hardly yet systematically explored, but some idea of the scale
involved can be gained from the major commodities often recognised and
from the few areas where detailed studies have been made.
   The Neolithic economy required both the cutting and scraping tools for
fine work that had been essential to previous hunting economies, and a
range of more massive implements for forest clearance and the manufacture
of wooden tools. Higher population densities, moreover, demanded a much
greater bulk of raw materials. For heavy axes and chisels, either large blocks
of flint were necessary or else crystalline massive rocks, mostly of highland
occurrence. These included ancient sedimentary rocks such as greywackes;
igneous rocks either formed at great depth, such as diorite, or nearer the

                                        108




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY


surface, such as dolerite; and direct volcanic products, such as lavas (e.g.
andesite and trachyte); or consolidated fall-out products (tuffs), and meta-
morphosed forms of these and other rocks such as amphibolite or schist.
The more deeply formed varieties have larger crystals and are hard to flake,
while those more rapidly cooled are more likely to approach flint in their
flaking properties. Apart from flints and cherts, almost all of the rocks used
for heavy tools occur in regions of low agricultural potential, either in
ancient massifs or more recently up-thrust blocks.
    In different areas, the distribution of agricultural land might be adjacent
to such regions or far removed. In the Balkans, with tectonic basins sur-
rounded by highland areas, there were many local sources of such rocks in
the crystalline massif and volcanic deposits in the Tertiary fold-chains
(Sherratt 1972, 518). In addition, siltstones and cherts were used from later
sedimentary deposits, while the extensive Cretaceous deposits of north-west
Bulgaria provided large quantities of the characteristic brown flint that had
been exploited since the Palaeolithic.
    The same pattern, on a larger scale, is represented in the Carpathian
Basin. Surrounded on all sides by young fold-mountains with local volcanic
activity, the basin itself consists of two parts: in the western area of Trans-
danubia, flint and chert, along with hard intrusive rocks, occur in the
Mesozoic formations of the Bakony mountains; but to the east of the
Danube neither these nor massive rocks are locally available, and an area of
around 50,000 sq. km provides only river-pebbles. This deficiency is com-
pensated for by the richness of the surrounding mountains in raw materials
and their direct river links with the Danube Basin. To the north, the volcanic
range of the Matra-Biikk-Zemplen mountains could provide not only
trachyte and related rocks for heavier tools but also, in the parts near Tokaj,
bombs of obsidian: to the east, Transylvania offered a variety of eruptive
rocks within easy access of the plains. Obsidian, as in the Near East, was
particularly widely traded.
    In the loess plains sought by early agriculturalists further north, inorganic
raw materials again came mostly from areas peripheral to the main con-
centrations of population. Around the clusters of Bandkeramik settlement,
sources of hard rocks were plentiful, for instance, in the ancient massif of
Bohemia, at various points along the Rhine rift and the Middle Rhine high-
lands, and in the central German highlands. There was no useful obsidian in
these areas, but cherts from pre-Cretaceous rocks were available, and on the
edge of the North European Plain the Bandkeramik spread as far as the
flint sources in the Low Countries and Little Poland. Local exchange cycles
brought these different sources into relationship: for instance, hard volcanic
rocks, such as trachyte, tephrite and basalt from the Koblenz region, moved
in the reverse direction to the flint of the Belgian Hesbaye; while the occur-
rence of import sherds shows how important were the major rivers in
articulating such systems (Clark 1952, 251). The recently investigated site

                                         109




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                 RESOURCES,      TECHNOLOGY         AND    TRADE:




(selection).

at Miiddersheim indicated a supply distance for stone of up to 10km for
bulky sandstone objects, 30-40km for basalt, and up to 70km for flint.
   As new regions were explored, fresh sources were discovered, and par-
ticularly desirable raw materials achieved a circulation over hundreds of
kilometres. The results of petrographic studies in the British Isles show how
a primary use of local sources was supplemented by the products of distant
factories as the network of inter-regional relations grew. Thus, in south-
western Britain, early sites show a dominance of Cornish products, with
Welsh and north-west British materials appearing in this area in large
numbers in the Middle Neolithic. Less attractive products continued to be
worked on a small scale and locally distributed: the Mynydd Rhiw quarry
site (Houlder 1961) with an associated flint assemblage implies no more
than small-scale seasonal exploitation in times of slack agricultural work, in
which the winning of raw materials could be combined with hunting forays.
On the other hand, it is clear that more highly organised production was
becoming profitable for the commodities widely in demand.
   The later-fourth and third millennia in many parts of Europe saw this
rationalisation and intensification of production on a large scale (see Figure
4.2). The honey-coloured flint of Bulgaria achieved a wide distribution
within the Balkans, up to the north of the Black Sea, and into the southern
half of the Carpathian Basin. Obsidian continued to be traded in large
quantities, and is found on a very high proportion of the sites of this period,
both within the Carpathians and beyond, especially in southern Poland.


                                        110




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
AN   ESSAY   ON   EARLY     EUROPEAN        METALLURGY




                            111




     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                RESOURCES,       TECHNOLOGY         AND     TRADE:




           DISTANCE     FROM      SOURCE
4.4 The distance from source of finds made from two varieties of flint: Krzemionki
banded flint and Grand Pressigny honey-coloured flint.

This last area seems to have had - at least in certain phases such as Early
Lengyel - a particularly intense exchange with the area of north Hungary
and Slovakia just across the mountains, reflecting the complementary
character of resources on either side. Going south to balance the obsidian
were flint and, probably, salt as well: there are salt-pans from mid-fourth-
millennium Lengyel contexts near Krakow in Little Poland (Jodlowski
1971). Supplies of flint became particularly important as settlement in-
creased in the North European Plain from TRB times onwards, for although
flint was widely scattered in glacial deposits, it was mostly of poor quality,
due to frost cracking. As in north-west Bulgaria, large-scale working and
trading took place in response to demand from neighbouring areas lacking,
or with inferior, raw materials.
   To the west, areas of good flint potential occurred widely in France and
the Low Countries within the Cretaceous deposits between the Seine and the
Maas; but to the north and east, such sources were more scattered, occur-
ring in north Jutland, Scania, the island of Riigen, south Poland and further
east in Wolhynia. Among the south Polish sources, various characteristic
types can be distinguished (Sulimirski 1960), mainly from the Upper Vistula
region. These include the chocolate-coloured Upper Astartian flint from
the Swi^tokrzyskie (Holy Cross) mountains; Lower Astartian banded
flint from Krzemionki, used for axes; greyish, white-speckled Turonian
flint from Swieciechow, used for blades; and a banded Jurassic chert from
near Krakow. (Krema, incidentally, is a common Slav place-name element
meaning 'flint'; e.g. Kremikovci, Bulgaria.) Attempts have been made to


                                        112




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY




4.5 The differential dispersal of three types of product from the same source: data
from Sulimirski (1960) [corrected].


map the distribution of these types of flint from visual identifications. The
Swieciechow variety shows a restricted local circulation but the banded
Krzemionki variety was exported in bulk, especially to the Middle Vistula/
Notec/Middle Warta area, and examples are known from beyond the
Carpathians in Slovakia (see Figure 4.3).
   Such distributions can be summarised as curves showing the percentages
of objects at given distances from the source (see Figure 4.4). Half of the
known finds of Swieciechow flint lie within 100km of the source, while for
the banded flint 50 per cent are within 300km, and 75 per cent within
350km. Finds of both types are mainly of third-millennium date, though
both start in the later-fourth millennium. Something of the same order of
magnitude would hold for the other wide-traded commodities shown in
Figure 4.2. An interesting feature of the Riigen flint distribution (see Figure
4.5) is the way different products have a characteristic range of distri-
butions.
   Of the western sources, the most easily recognisable and widely-traded
variety is the well-known iron-rich flint of Grand Pressigny, used in the later-
third millennium for large blades hafted as daggers (see below). This shows
a distribution on a similar scale to that of the banded flint, with 50 per cent
within 250km and 75 per cent within 350km, despite the fact that stray
finds occasionally occur up to 800km away. An analysis of the direction of

                                         113




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         RESOURCES,        TECHNOLOGY            AND   TRADE:

            %
           1 oo
                     N W                                                        SE
           9 0   -

           80 -
                                                        hr
           70    -

           60    -                   <S>
           50    -

           40    -

           3 0   -                            £                         1 ^
           20 -

           10 -                              1
                                                             I
           0                     i           i-              i          i
                     R                                       B                   W
4.6 Approximate percentages of finds of three types of flint in a SE-NW transect
across Poland. Each division represents a 100 km2 sample cell: R, B and w mark
the positions of the sources. Calculated from maps in Sulimirski (I960).

movement (Figure 4.7) indicates three major components: up-river, down-
river, and across-country north-eastward. The distribution map shows that
the down-river component splits at the coast to go either to Brittany or to
the Gironde - in neither case more than 200-300km by sea. The largest
component is the overland route to centres of population on the Loire and
the Seine, and beyond into the Low Countries. Finds become noticeably
more scattered on this axis beyond the 350km limit. It is an indication of the
special desirability of this material that its main axis of movement should be
into areas with local supplies of good flint.
   Although there are several sources of bias and inaccuracy in the maps
used above, they do give some idea of the scale of later Neolithic trade.
While many products were of merely local significance, demand was
sufficient to move large volumes of particularly desirable goods over several
hundred kilometres. While the banded flint went mainly to a single cultural
area, the Grand Pressigny distribution is significantly inter-cultural. Both
show the 'pull' of nearby population clusters, but spread beyond these to
remoter areas. (Compare, for instance, the banded-flint distribution map
with the one of Globular Amphora culture settlements in Wislanski 1970,
fig. 56.)
   Trading systems on this scale clearly required a considerable quantity of
raw material, and a particular expression of the expansion in demand, by
the later-fourth millennium and after, is the development of large-scale
mining for various materials. Small operations had been undertaken even in
Upper Palaeolithic times, as is shown by the two-metre deep pits for colour-
ing material at Lovas in western Hungary. Such workings must have become
very common in the Neolithic and, undoubtedly, many more sites remain to
be discovered. Typical, for instance, are the two- to three-metre horizontal
'drifts' for jasper in the hard Jura limestone of the Isteiner Klotz, north
of Basle (Schmid 1952), the mass of small shafts for limnoquartzite near
Miskolc, in north-west Hungary, and the network of three-metre deep


                                                  114




                         This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                          All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY




4.7 The distribution of products of Grand Pressigny flint, analysed by direction
of movement. The black inner zone of the orientation diagram (top right) includes
finds within 200km, the hatched outer zone coversfindsbeyond this (cf. Figure 4.4).

channels following vertical flint boundaries at Siimeg, in western Hungary
(Vertes 1964). All these are probably of third-millennium date, and the last
one certainly so. Somewhat larger are the series of shafts for Jurassic chert
(radiolarite) at Mauern, near Vienna, some of which reach eight metres in
depth and have lateral galleries (Kirnbauer 1958). With the widespread
shallow workings alongside, these would have yielded around 1000 tonnes
of usable stone, perhaps at the rate of a few tonnes per year. The workings
seem to belong to a Lengyel culture local group, and this material was
widely used between the Alps and the Danube. That such efforts were not
restricted to mining stone is shown by the extensive system of underground
galleries at Suplja Stena, near Belgrade, for the extraction of cinnabarite (red
mercuric sulphide), used as a paint. The galleries are definitely dated by finds
of Baden pottery to the mid-third millennium, but finds of cinnabarite at the
nearby tell of Vinca suggest an earlier beginning (Milojcic 1943).
   None of these, however, compares with the scale of flint-mining in
northern Europe, where shafts were sunk through the relatively soft chalk
to up to fifteen metres in depth, with lateral galleries following the hori-
zontal seams. These are found in all the areas where flint could be won direct
from the chalk, and range in date from early third-millennium examples,
such as the Hov mine in Jutland producing thin-butted axes, to early

                                         115




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                RESOURCES,       TECHNOLOGY         AND    TRADE:


second-millennium ones like the Aalborg mine 80km away, producing
especially daggers and sickles (Becker 1959). Where flint was widely avail-
able within a region, activity was not concentrated in one place: where
opportunities were rarer, very large operations took place. The extensive use
and limited natural occurrence of banded flint is reflected in the scale of
mines at Krzemionki Opatowskie, where between 700 and 1000 shafts,
some as much as 11m deep, are known in a rather barren area some 10km
away from the nearest centres of settlement, where the working-up took
place. Such an industrial scale of production (in the Krzemionki case
perhaps twice that of Grimes Graves in East Anglia), as much as the
wide distribution of the products, indicates the organisation that underlies
such a pattern, in which at least groups of villages were gaining special
advantages from their nearness to raw materials.
    The large volume of material required in northern Europe is partly re-
lated to the size of woodworking tools. There is a general decrease in the size
of axes further south, where small quadrangular or shoe-last forms were
most usually mounted in antler sleeves. In addition, the very large size of
some northern examples suggests that the contrast may be exaggerated by
non-utilitarian factors. In the New Guinea case mentioned in an earlier sec-
tion, the ceremonial axes are clearly distinguished by their size, being over
25cm in length as opposed to the working axes, which are generally less
than 15cm. Thin-butted axes in Scandinavia and north Germany occasion-
ally occur up to over 40cm in length, weighing around 4kg, clearly in excess
of ergonomic requirements. In northern Europe, the large axe had a sym-
bolic role beyond its immediate technical function, and is notable as one of
the few representational elements in Megalithic art. Large ceremonial forms,
if that is what they are, certainly travelled over long distances; the far-flung
Langdale axe from Langwood Fen, in Cambridgeshire, is 28cm long (Fell
1964) and it would be interesting to discover whether the larger forms gen-
erally moved further than the smaller 'working' forms. The existence of a
complete spectrum from simple working tools to purely symbolic forms is
impressively demonstrated by the larger and finer jadeite examples, where
use in ceremonial presentations was a sufficiently powerful motive to
necessitate the exploitation of a specific raw material - though this explicit
differentiation between tool and symbol may be a fairly late feature. The
aesthetic qualities of Langdale tuff and banded flint may, in a similar way,
have contributed to their major distributions, and the cross-cutting charac-
ter of the British stone axe distributions (Clark 1965, fig. 1) indicates how
one rock was traded against another.
    Besides axes that are simply a variation of working forms in a different
size or material, other forms appeared in the Late Neolithic that are linked
to status through their use as weapons. This is most clearly seen south of the
Carpathians, as early as the mid-fourth millennium, where working axes are
rather small and axes over 10-15cm in length are almost entirely shaft-hole


                                        116




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             AN   ESSAY ON E A R L Y E U R O P E A N       METALLURGY




                  HI
                  in                                             ft
Bach square represents
one burial: not all
                                           20
grave-goods shown.
                                           15

                                           10

                                           5




                    children           AGE AT                   children
                   (unsexed)           DEATH                   (unsexed)

          N I T R A CEMETERY                         TISZAPOLGAR- BASATANYA
                  dandkeramik                          Period ][ (Bodrogkenesztur)


              KEY TO SYMBOLS :                  £      Copper bracelet
              |   Schuhleistenkeil              II     Copper awl
             ® Spondy/us ornament                    I Copper pin
              f   ShaFthole axe                 i     Bone awl
              |   Copper dagger                 ~~    Limestone beads

4.8 The association of grave-goods by age and sex; a comparison of sixth- and later
fifth-millennium examples. Data from Pavuk (1972) and Bognar-Kutzian (1963).

forms and best described as 'battle-axes', since they are clearly intended for
fighting or display rather than more mundane tasks. Such stone battle-axes
occur in the north from TRB times onwards, becoming increasingly elaborate
and distinctive. These axes seem to belong to a stage in the development of
a more explicit symbolism of social status, the extension of a phenomenon
traceable from the Early Neolithic. The occurrence of various items as
common grave-goods allows some observations to be made on this process.
An interesting feature of certain classes of artefact is their association with
a specific sex and age-range (see Figure 4.8), suggesting that their possession
was limited to individuals of a particular status - even if items such as axes
could, no doubt, be borrowed by younger men for specific tasks. Such a
social dimension of utilitarian objects is well known in anthropological
literature, and it is likely that the exchanges that distributed objects such as
axes took place only between men of comparable rank.
    In the Nitra cemetery example, Spondylus ornaments reinforce the
pattern of axe distribution: in other contemporary cases further north, how-
ever, they occupy a converse position, associated with female and juvenile
burials (Pavuk 1972; Kahlke 1954). A particularly elaborate Bandkeramik


                                         117




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                RESOURCES,        TECHNOLOGY         AND     TRADE:


female inhumation grave at Erfurt (Inventaria Archaeologica D 85), for
example, had eighteen beads and eleven pendants of this shell at the neck,
two discs on the breast, and a ring on each upper arm.
   Besides the shaft-hole axe, another personal weapon that began to
achieve a widespread symbolic significance was the dagger. As early as the
fourth millennium in Bodrogkeresztur contexts (Bognar-Kutzian 1963, 318
'Group 1'), large dagger-blades of up to 18cm in length often accompany
male burials. This is another feature that was greatly emphasised in the third
millennium of northern Europe. It is significant that one of the most ex-
tensively traded materials of the time should be the Grand Pressigny flint,
whose characteristic cores were carefully prepared to produce especially
long blades, at great cost in flint. Some of the most extensively developed
systems of distribution in these stone-using communities were, thus, those
connected with status items.
   The development of a range of 'socio-technic5 items, such as the battle-
axe, was a characteristic feature of the artefactual history of the later fourth
and third millennia, both north and south of the Carpathians and,
as Tabaczynski has said (1972, 59), should be considered 'nicht nur
als Ausdruck der Verbreitung neuer Ideen ... sondern auch als eine
archaeologischer Hinweis auf die fortschreitende gesellschaftliche
Aufgliederung'. The evidence of stonework thus shows a growing scale of
trade during the Neolithic, not only in essential products but also in in-
creasing flows of symbolic artefacts. The rise in demand for essentials relates
directly to the growth of population, but the indirect results of this are also
of importance for the movement of materials in general. From the cultural
and environmental uniformity of the earliest Neolithic, expansion and
differentiation produced a mosaic of regional groupings and economic
zones of great complexity, ranging from farmers on the rich loess-lands or
more pastoral groups in sandy areas, to the specialised fishing villages of the
Rzucewo culture on the sandspits of the Vistula estuary. The opportunity for
fruitful exchange between these groups was thus much greater than in the
situation of initial colonisation. The basic exchange channels could usefully
carry a much greater volume of subsistence products and, with them, other
material items to balance and regulate the flow. The significance of material
counters in such situations has been emphasised by Vayda (1966) in dis-
cussing the Pomo Indians of central California, where shell beads were ex-
changed for food between communities concentrating on different staple
foods that were in surplus at different seasons. Beads accumulated from
a fish surplus, for instance, could be exchanged later with the donor com-
munity for inland products, when these in turn were in surplus.
   The actual distribution of population on the ground also encouraged
and necessitated contact. While Early Neolithic groups in central Europe
showed a strong orientation towards the river network and flood-plain
edge, the spread of settlement to drier interfluvial regions implied more

                                         118




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY


frequent face-to-face contact between clusters of villages, and a more richly
networked overall pattern (Krtik 1973). With more extensive grazing, the
maintenance of a wide set of relationships with surrounding communities
was not merely possible but essential to a smooth running of the system.
Indeed, the widespread distribution of certain ceramic styles, such as the
bell-beaker complex, indicates the growing intensity of inter-regional con-
tacts. All these factors promoted an increased turnover in goods, a general
quickening in local transactions that increased the power of such networks
to carry rarer materials. Such traded items served to emphasise the rank and
authority of those who could obtain them.


T H E ROLE OF COPPER
To understand the part that copper played in these developments, the
distribution and character of its sources must first be appreciated. In the first
place, copper ores are - like many of the types of harder stone used for axes
- basically of highland occurrence, being 'concentrated in areas of structural
complexity and igneous activity' (Park and Macdiarmid 1970). Such de-
posits are commonly formed by hydrothermal injection in periods of
tectonic movement, when hot solutions from deep-lying magma chambers
penetrate upwards into favourable structural and lithological environments.
Many such deposits were formed, for instance, during the Alpine mountain-
building phase, and such ores are widespread in the Tertiary fold-chains of
southern Europe (Sherratt 1972, 518). Somewhat different ore-complexes,
formed at deeper levels, are found in the ancient crystalline massifs such as
Bohemia or the Rhodope block: these may also contain copper, often lead,
and occasionally tin.
   A further factor of importance is the degree to which secondary changes
have occurred as a result of weathering. Where an ore vein reaches the
surface, a characteristic sequence of 'weathering horizons' develops, as a
result of the leaching downwards of impurities. At the top is a zone of pure
(native) copper, stable because of a thin surface coating of oxide. Below this
develop successively zones of oxide and carbonate ores (see Table 4.1 for
common minerals) and, below this, a zone of enrichment where impurities
accumulate at the water-table. While the higher ore minerals are mostly
bright^ coloured, those of the enrichment zone are characteristically grey
and are collectively referred to by the German miners' term of Fahlerz-
These are sulphide ores, containing also appreciable quantities of arsenic,
antimony, often silver and sometimes lead. (Depending on whether arsenic
or antimony dominates, these form crystals of the minerals tennantite and
tetrahedrite respectively - though owing to chemical replacement within the
same crystal structure, tetrahedrite-type crystals may represent either com-
pound: this is important in linking ores with analysed objects.) Finally,
below these secondary products, lies the zone of original unaltered sulphide

                                         119




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 RESOURCES,                       TECHNOLOGY                 AND     TRADE:


                                   Age of ore deposits



                                                                                            IT ?
                                                                                         51iSSliiS
                                                                                              U?.
                                                                                              fsl w
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                      fi
                                                                                                     -c t
                                                                                                            C

                                                                                                         m \MjiU
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                 • i l l ? ! 1 = 142sm l i i l i . i J l i l i l i
                                                                                        1
      Ore Type            Chemical Formula                        A pproximate
                                                                  Cu Content
                                                                                 Ssal i            Si
Pure Copper
   Native Copper
Copper  Oxides
   Tenorite                                        black
   Cuprite
Copper   Carbonates

   Malachite
Capper Silicate
   Crysocola
    (Kupferpeckerx)
'h'akleri'
   Tennantite             Cu) As S).«              grey              55%
   Tetrahcdrite           Cuj Sb Sj^               rey               55%
   Enargite               Cuj As S4                «rey              50%
   Buurnonite             Pb Cu Sb Sj              grey
Copper   Sulphides
    Covelina (Kupferindig) CuS                                       65%
    Chalcocite (Kupferglam) C C S                                    50%
    Bornite (Buntkupferz) uUJ Fe S«                       k*         65%
                                                                     35%
    Chalcopyrile (Kupferkiet) Cu Fe S,
Copper/Arsenic
   'Whitneyile'               Cu As               reddish-white
    lomeykite                 Cuj As              grey-white
    Alfodonite                                    grey-white
    Pseudo malachite          2Cu As 0«.2Cu (Oil)}green
Pure Arsenic
    Native Arsenic            As
Arsenic Oxide
    Arse oolite
Arsenic Sulphides
    Orpiroent                 As, S}
    Realgar                   As, S,              red
                              FeS As

Table 4.1 Selected occurrences of various copper ores in Romania: data from
Radulescu and Dumitrescu (1966). [The age of the metallogenesis will be reflected
in lead-isotope values.]

ore, usually chalcopyrite. Secondary sulphides not containing iron may also
occur higher up in the series. All sulphide ores require an additional roasting
process before smelting, to get rid of the sulphur; and, in addition, the iron-
containing pyrite ores present problems with slag. The common secondary ores
all have a much higher copper content than the unaltered primary deposits.
    The formation of secondary minerals is not inevitable, and ores in
different areas show this to varying degrees. In the Alps, for example,
unaltered sulphide ores are usual; while in the Carpathians and the Balkans
large deposits of secondary minerals were formed, including native copper.
Various factors (Pittioni 1957, 8-9) affected this and, in particular,
the effects of glaciation in the Alps, in contrast with the more continuous
conditions of development further south. As Pittioni (1957, 10) re-
marks, 'die kulturgeschichtliche Bedeutung dieser lagerstattenkundlich-
klimageschichtlichen Feststellungen kann nicht eindringlich genug betont
werden'. The most important factor in the early development of copper
metallurgy was the availability of a well-developed series of ores from the
pure native form, through the easily smelted oxide and carbonate forms,
down to enriched and, finally, unaltered sulphides; and, above all, the
occurrence of such deposits in locations not too distantly removed from the

                                                                            120




                                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
            AN   ESSAY    O N EARLY           EUROPEAN               METALLURGY




                         native   oxide and    nat., ox. a c a r s
                                  carbonate     witvi pahlerz.
 SEC
   O NDAR
        Y
 ORES OF COPPER
 IN ROMANIA -
                            i         b I

4.9 Relative accessibility of copper ores in Romania as indicated by the heights
above sea level of different sources. Data from Radulescu and Dumitrescu (1966).
early centres of population. In the Balkans and the fringes of the Carpathian
Basin especially - as indeed in other centres of early development such as
Anatolia and Spain - the exploration of nearby upland regions brought agri-
cultural populations, familiar with the controlled use of heat in firing pot-
tery, into early contact with the brightly-coloured secondary ores of copper.
   Some idea of the overall distribution of copper ores within the Carpatho-
Balkan and Dinaric chains is given in Figure 4.15. Within this, however,
there are important differences in accessibility, and these seem to have been
major controlling factors in the development of local metallurgy. An attempt
has been made in Figure 4.9 to give a visual impression of the variety within
Romania. Two major groupings suggest themselves - a north-east group
to the east of Baia Mare, and a south-west group from the Iron Gates to the
Munjii Metalici where the densest concentrations occur. The altitudes of
these two groups indicate that the latter are much more accessible, and the
distribution of copper artefacts (see Figure 4.10) strengthens the impression
that these were, in fact, important sources in the fourth and third millennia
(see below). The less accessible sources of the north-east group sustained the
second florescence of Carpathian copper metallurgy, in the early Bronze Age
(Otomani culture).
   A similar situation obtained in parts of Bulgaria. Figure 4.11 shows the
position of sources exploited in the later fourth millennium (Chernykh

                                              121




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               RESOURCES,       TECHNOLOGY         AND    TRADE:




                                                            \   • SECONDARY ORES
                                                                       OF COPPER
                                                                « COPPER AXES & AOZES




 ROMANIA :
 COPPER ORES
 & PR ODUC
         TS

4.10 The distribution of copper axes of the fifth and fourth millennia in Romania,
compared with potential ore-sources. Data from Vulpe (1973), Maczek et al. (1953).




4.11 Settlement and resources in part of central Bulgaria during the Copper Age:
Karanovo and adjacent copper mines in use at the time.

                                       122




                This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
            AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY




4.12 The spread of settlement in thefifthmillennium in the region around Sabac,
Serbia. (Sites marked 'Vinca* include also ones with Lengyel affinities.)

1972; also below), in relation to the area of dense prehistoric settlement
around Stara Zagora, where a series of important sites, including Azmak
and Karanovo, occur along the spring-line at the edge of the basin. In this
region, occupied from Early Neolithic times in the later sixth millennium,
metal ores as well as hard stone sources occur within 5-1 Okm of long-lived
tell settlements.
   In addition to areas that had this intimate association from such an early
date, expansion of settlement brought about similar conditions over a wider
area. One example will suffice to illustrate what must have been a wide-
spread process. The Tertiary limestones of Serbia were extensively colonised
in the Vinca period (Sherratt 1972, 531). In the area around Sabac shown
in Figure 4.12, Starcevo occupation of the sixth millennium concentrates

                                        123




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                RESOURCES,       TECHNOLOGY          AND    TRADE:




4.13 A schematic attempt to illustrate the extension of upland settlement in the
Alps as indicated by archaeological finds; compiled from various sources. [Dates
corrected; the location of Copper Age €Iceman' from the Hauslabjoch has been
added as a square symbol.]
along the Sava; but, in the course of the fifth millennium, settlement pushed
into the fringes of the uplands. Copper ores are known, not from the lime-
stone area itself, but from the older rocks behind it, for instance at Tekeris
(Maczek et al. 1953). Such deposits would again have been within a
5-1 Okm range from the nearest settlements.
   These three situations may be contrasted with the spread of settlement
into those regions of the Alps where metal ores occur. In the Miihlbach-
Bischofshofen area near Salzburg, for instance, which was the scene of ex-
tensive mining and smelting activity in the second millennium, the ores lie
between 1000 and 1500 metres above sea level. This is comparable with the
group in north-east Romania, and such areas would have seen little human
activity before the Bronze Age. Initial Neolithic settlement concentrated on
the loess lowlands (see Figure 4.13), spreading in the fourth and early third
millennia into the lake districts of the Alpine foreland, and only in the
second millennium, with the development of transhumance, were the high
pastures systematically used (Pittioni 1973). As the copper deposits in this
area were, in any case, mainly sulphide ores requiring a longer roasting pro-
cess, it is not surprising that Alpine ores did not figure largely in the Copper
Age.
   In the case of Bulgaria, therefore, with ores that must have been known
as curiosities for a millennium before copper-working began, a limiting
factor in terms of technology can, indeed, be inferred. The transition from

                                         124




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY


                                                                                       (hundreds)




4.14 The succession of Copper Age shafthole-axe types in Balkan-Carpathian
Europe, roughly from SE to NW as new sources were opened up (for selected spatial
distributions, see following figure); [from Sherratt 1976a].

light-coloured painted pottery fired in an oxidising atmosphere to the dark-
coloured reduced wares that became fashionable in south-east Europe and
Anatolia in the later fifth millennium probably indicates the critical change
involved. The Macedno-Bulgarian region, therefore, where settlement be-
gan as early as the sixth millennium in a landscape in which fertile alluvial
basins lay scattered among mountains rich in stone and metal, was an area
where resources waited for an appropriate technology; but outside this,
factors of location and, ultimately, of ore-type were more critical. For re-
sources requiring considerable labour to extract and process them at source,
it is unlikely that extensive exploitation could take place within a primitive
farming context unless these activities could be integrated within a yearly
subsistence cycle. Only where settlement was nearby, or when seasonal
movements of stock took men as a matter of routine into the area of
occurrence, could such a process begin.
    The earliest use of copper is, in fact, very hard to determine, as the kinds
of small object made in the experimental stages are rarely found except by
careful sieving of excavated deposits. For this reason, the date of the earliest
metallurgy is likely, in many areas, to be pushed further back than current
evidence allows. In south-east Europe, well-associated finds of beads, prob-
ably made from native copper, from the Boian culture cemetery of Cernica
(Cantacuzino and Morinz 1963) give a terminus ante quern in the earlier
fourth millennium, while a find of a copper awl has been claimed in a fifth-
millennium Cri§ context, though this is disputed. The earliest well-dated
heavy objects probably made from smelted copper occur early in the second
half of the fourth millennium, when the simpler forms of flat and shaft-hole
axes make their appearance, along with arm-rings and bracelets.
    The typological sequence of copper shaft-hole axes, beginning with

                                         125




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                 RESOURCES,       TECHNOLOGY         AND    TRADE:


simple axe-hammers that were a direct translation of contemporary stone
forms, is now well known (Bognar-Kutzian 1963; schubert 1965 inter alia).
See Figure 4.14. Some of the earliest associated finds are the three examples
from different houses in the early Gumelnija settlement at Hotnica in
Bulgaria, of the so-called Vidra type (Bognar-Kutzian 1972,144). The Vidra
form is typical of the area covered by the Gumelnija culture in Bulgaria and
south Romania. A local form of flat axe has a complementary distribution
(see Figure 4.15). Only slightly later are the finds from the Tibava cemetery
(Siska 1964), not far from the copper sources of east Slovakia. Here, from
a sample of forty-one excavated graves, come seven examples of the Coka
and Plocnik types (Figure 4.15). Although these forms are known from a
wider area at this time, it is significant that they occur in graves only in this
immediate region, which would correspond to zone (2) of the distribution
model set out earlier. The metalliferous area of eastern Slovakia was, in any
case, already an important supply-area for andesite and obsidian (lumps of
which occur in contemporary graves at Lucky in this region), and an
intermediary in the transmission of brown translucent chert and Wolhynian
flint (also in graves, at Tibava: Andel 1961). The copper industry at this
stage was thus ancillary to the distribution of a wide range of raw materials,
some of which were economically much more important.
   With the widespread occurrence of mining for various rocks in mind, it
is no surprise that the exploitation of copper should also involve mining
activity as early as the fourth millennium. It can plausibly be related to the
larger volumes of material required for heavy objects such as axe-hammers,
and was probably an essential part of the process of collecting the raw
material for smelting, rather than simply hammering small amounts of
native copper. As with the stone-quarries, therefore, many more sites must
remain to be recognised. The earliest confirmed traces of mining are the six
shafts from Rudna Glava near Bor - an important copper-producing area
down to the present day - where the Carpathian/Balkan arc swings through
north-east Yugoslavia (Jovanovic 1971). These shafts are sloping funnels,
varying from two metres to half-a-metre in diameter, following the ore
veins. One shaft had an access platform partly revetted by a dry-stone wall,
and the shafts extend beyond the two to three metres to which they were
explored. Fragments of pottery and a 'cult-vessel' (lamp?) datable to the
beginning of the Vinca-Plocnik phase of the early or mid-fourth millennium,
were found in association with this site (Figure 16.1).
    The Bulgarian sites near Stara Zagora, noted above and shown on Figure
4.11, have also yielded traces of mining (Chernykh and Radunceva 1972).
Pottery of Copper Age and Early Bronze Age types has been found in associ-
ation at the site of Aibunar, though the mine at Hristene, which has a
wide funnel entrance and a shaft nearly 25m in depth, may belong to a later
period. Other traces of prehistoric mining activity have been discovered at
Spania Dolina, near Banska Bistrica in western Slovakia (Tocik and ladar

                                         126




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
            AN   ESSAY   ON   EARLY     EUROPEAN       METALLURGY




4.1 S The distribution of various types of copper axe in Romania during the fifth
and fourth millennia. Heavy lines enclose SO per cent of the finds of a given type
in the country. Data from Vulpe (1973).

1971), identified by large stone hammers grooved for withy hafts of a kind
known elsewhere in Bronze Age contexts. (See map for these sites: Figure
4.16.)
   The scale of copper-working and trading grew appreciably, towards the
end of the fourth millennium and at the beginning of the third. Typo-
logically, this is indicated by the appearance of larger and more elaborate
forms of axe-hammers, usually formed by flattening and fanning out the

                                        127




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
shown by spatial proximity linkage [joining findspots at successive distance-
thresholds - more accurate than a grid isopleth]; dark masses indicate dense
clusters. Data from Schubert (1965). Below: the distribution of copper ores (dots)
and known prehistoric mines (circles); large circles indicate a 200km radius around
the most important sources. Source data from Maczek et al. (1954).

                                        128




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN       METALLURGY


'hammer' end: Figure 4.14. In some cases this method was used to produce
an actual working edge, and thus an axe-adze (e.g. Jaszladany type); in
others, it simply produced a more elaborate terminal (e.g. Mezokeresztes
type). Some examples of the latter - a local development in the upper Tisza
area - are up to 32cm in length, indicating the abundance of copper supplies
available. These developments took place in the Carpathian Basin rather
than in the Balkans, where supplies seem to have been less plentiful and
simpler forms continued. The Jaszladany type is by far the commonest and
most widespread of the stray finds (Figure 4 . 1 5 ) , as well as being put into
graves in the consuming area (zone 3) in the eastern Carpathian Basin.
It was probably produced at a number of centres. Despite the large amounts
of metal in circulation, however, there is no reason to believe that the trading
mechanisms that distributed them were any more sophisticated than those
involved in carrying stone supplies further north. The distribution map
(Figure 4.16) for copper axes shows a concentration largely within the
Carpathian Basin, and this pattern can be accounted for as the output of
a number of sources on its edge whose scale of production was well below
that documented for banded flint, for instance. While the use of copper
added another new and desirable raw material, it caused no revolution in
the sphere of trade.
   The development of copper-working in the later fourth and third mil-
lennia was the result of the availability of easily-smelted ores in locations
already well known. The numerous analyses of hammer-axes, adze-axes and
flat copper axes from this period (Patay et al. 1963; Junghans et al. 1968)
show a consistent pattern almost without impurities, except for traces of
silver. This would be compatible with the use either of native, oxide or
carbonate ores, but it is likely that the bulk of copper came from the widely
distributed (Table 4.1) ores, malachite and azurite, pieces of which have
been found on a number of sites in Yugoslavia (e.g. Fafos: Jovanovic 1 9 7 1 ) .
Over a wide area, from Macedonia and Bulgaria in the south to Slovakia in
the north, the extensive deposits of ores of this kind allowed a simple metal-
lurgy to flourish on an impressive scale. Although smelting was probably
confined to areas immediately adjacent to the sources, re-melting probably
took place over a wider area, and large objects traded outwards from the
sources would, no doubt, at some stage have been broken down, as occasion
demanded, into a multitude of smaller forms. No specialised ingots of
comparable size are known. The processes involved in the manufacture of
finished products are of a simple kind, involving only a one-piece open
mould and a good deal of hammering (Coghlan 1 9 6 1 ; Charles 1 9 6 9 ) .
   There is some evidence, even from the fourth millennium, of the pro-
duction of arsenical alloys. One of the Tibava hammer-axes (SAM N O . 3 3 5 4 )
contains 1.15 per cent of arsenic, and sporadic values of up to 4 per cent
occur in objects from the later Copper Age. Such occurrences in no way
imply the kind of regular trade in additives suggested by consistently high

                                         129




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                 RESOURCES,       TECHNOLOGY         AND    TRADE:


tin values in the Bronze Age. As can be seen from Table 4.1, native arsenic
and its oxides and sulphides occur commonly in association with the kinds
of copper deposit under discussion. Indeed, the green pseudo-malachite
mineral with a high arsenic content, similar in appearance to the pure
copper carbonate, is occasionally found, and could well have been added
quite accidentally. It is also, of course, likely that the effects of adding associ-
ated arsenic minerals came to be appreciated and, with the development of
closed-mould casting in the later third millennium (see below), the use of
this additive became standard practice in south-east Europe (Chernykh
1971) and the Aegean (Charles 1967), where tin supplies were sporadic.
   The ores that sustained the output of massive copper axes were naturally
limited in extent, and there are indications that by the later third millennium
they were in short supply. Copper axes were no longer put in graves, and
settlement finds are few. Some continuity was maintained in the north-west
part of the basin where axes are found occasionally in Baden contexts in
Austria and in Slovakia, and pieces of sheet metal were put in graves.
Significantly, one or two pieces from this period are of Fahlerz, and while
small amounts of purer copper ore remained (probably in relatively in-
accessible areas) to be used sporadically for the next half-millennium, its
main phase of use was over. The final stages of the third millennium marked
a time of scarcity and experiment.
   A curious situation then came about: at a time when raw-material sup-
plies in the Carpathian Basin were short, contacts across the Pontic steppes
with the Caucasian school of metallurgy (Chernykh 1966) introduced a new
range of forms, such as the single-bladed axe (Mozsolics 1967), associated
with the technique of closed casting in a two-piece mould. At the same time,
local copper-working began over a much wider area of central and north-
west Europe. This occurred in areas metallurgically entirely distinct: lacking
extensive deposits of purer secondary ores, their industries developed on the
basis of a supply of Fahlerz copper.
   By the beginning of the second millennium, therefore, especially in
Bohemia and central Germany but also further west, a second florescence of
copper-using was under way. It is this 'Fahlerz boom' which has marked the
Early Bronze Age of central Europe in general, and the Aunjetitz culture in
particular, as a phenomenon of special interest to the prehistorian (Childe
1957). Based initially on open-mould casting, this central European school
later followed the Carpathian Basin in adopting the two-piece mould, at
the same time taking local tin as a standard additive to improve closed
castings in the same way that arsenic was adopted in the Balkans.
   Spectographic analysis, of little use in identifying specific sources for the
purer metals of the Copper Age, has proved of great value in distinguishing
several varieties of Fahlerz (Otto and Witter 1952; Junghans et al. 1960;
1968). The assemblages of the central European Early Bronze Age are
dominated by a limited number of groups, chiefly CA' or Singen metal and

                                         130




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             AN   ESSAY   ON   EARLY     EUROPEAN        METALLURGY


the so-called Qsenhalsring metal (Waterbolk and Butler 1965). Neither can
be definitely attributed to a specific source: 'A' metal probably covers several
sources including, possibly, some in the Harz mountains; but Osenhalsring
metal shows a significant geographical patterning. Its concentration on the
Upper Danube and in Moravia has been related both to a Slovakian and
to an Alpine origin (Neuninger and Pittioni 1963; Bath-Bilkova 1973) but,
whichever is correct, two features stand out - the large quantities that occur
as ingots in hoards, and the contrast between the frequency of these in
Moravia and the trickle of this metal that reached the Carpathian Basin.
Only appreciably later did a local Fahlerz (FA/B or 'Otomani metal') become
widespread in the Basin and allow a full expression of the forms that had
developed there in the period of intervening scarcity (Schubert and Schubert
1967).
   What, then, was the social and historical significance of these changes in
the availability of metal, and how do these relate to the questions set out in
the opening section? In the first place, the development of a technology of
copper-smelting from the purer secondary ores had few wider effects upon
contemporary society. It was a local expression of processes widespread in
Later Neolithic Europe - the exploration of the landscape, an intensified
exploitation of raw materials, and a limited widening of trade networks. It
added a new prestige material that was used in much the same way as stone
and shell elsewhere. The earliest hammer-axes are a direct translation of the
stone forms elsewhere called 'battle-axes', and are clearly the equivalents
of these as deposits in graves. It was used for daggers - in phase II of the
Tiszapolgar cemetery associated with somewhat younger adult males than
the shaft-hole axes (Figure 4.8) - in place of stone blades, and it was used
for armbands and beads in place of shell. Its importance was largely
symbolic: the medium was the message.
   The spread of metal-using further north in the second millennium was
equally associated primarily with prestige uses. Again, the axe - in this case,
the local flat form rather than a shaft-hole type - and the dagger were among
the first applications, along with ornaments and the pins that were at this
time becoming fashionable in place of buttons. There are, however, new
features that are of significance for the social structure of the Bronze Age
proper. The rich grave of Thun-Renzenbiihl in Switzerland (Figure 4.17;
Strahm 1972) epitomises both old and new features. Axe and dagger retain
their symbolic role, reinforced by a headband and belt-terminal which them-
selves have antecedents in the later Copper Age. Cloak-pins of specific
regional types no doubt proclaim local loyalties, but the six neck-rings intro-
duce a new element of special importance. Such neck-rings (Qsenhalsringe)
were evidently both traded as ingots and worn as ornaments. They occur in
hoards of up to 600 (Schubert 1966) and are clearly counters as much as
symbols of individual authority. In the Copper Age, groups of more than
two or three axes found together are rare, and the 'hoard' of thirteen flat


                                         131




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                RESOURCES,      TECHNOLOGY         AND     TRADE:




axes from the Plocnik settlement is unique. This is consistent with their
inferred use as indicators of ascribed status. With the Osenhalsringe we
have for the first time an element of accumulation, the achieved position of
a 'big man' superadded to other inequalities. Contemporary with the
Osenhalsringe are the massive axe-hoards of the Saale region, such as that
of Grobers-Bennewitz, with 300 flanged axes, or the Dieskau II hoard in-
cluding also daggers and halberds (Brunn 1959). Such collections are typical
of the mixture of ingot-counters and display equipment that dominates
European Bronze Age hoards down to the occurrence of industrial collec-
tions ('smiths' hoards') which mark the system of rapid recycling necessary
when bronze was used as a workaday material (Rowlands 1971).
   It is unlikely that the goods that survive archaeologically moved in
isolation: the greater concentration of metal in the Early Bronze Age, which
for the first time saw the extensive import of metal objects to large areas,
such as Denmark and north Germany, without local resources, must indi-
cate also a greater mobility in other commodities, probably including sub-

                                       132




                This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
            AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY


sistence products and textiles. The greater mobility offered by extensive
transhumance and seafaring, the widespread use of the horse, all helped to
make possible a wider network of exchange and trade. In the Aegean, the
sudden flowering of inter-regional contacts in the later third millennium
(Renfrew 1967) surely indicates the beginning of the type of complex
maritime exchange-cycles so familiar to ethnographers (Figure 4.1).
   The division of prehistory into Stone, Bronze and Iron Ages has had a
remarkably long life since the scheme was first put forward in 1832. Seen as
symptomatic of underlying ecological and social changes, rather than simply
as a technological advance, the beginning of the Bronze Age retains its
significance as a critical point in European development.




                                       133




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                          5
     Social Evolution: Europe in the
    Later Neolithic and Copper Ages
                                     (1984)

Although archaeological information about the later Neolithic and Copper
Ages1 has increased enormously since the later part of the last century, its
interpretation in social terms has remained at a relatively primitive level.
While the need to deal with underlying social processes has been in-
creasingly stressed in recent years, many of the concepts employed have
been no more than revivals of nineteenth-century schemes. Technological
change and the unilinear development of increasingly hierarchical forms of
society still lie at the base of many current interpretations.
   One symptom of this is the frequent appearance of the term 'chiefdom',
covering a wide range of social forms from the groups encountered by the
Romans in the later Iron Age to the Copper Age inhabitants of Bulgaria or
the megalith-building Neolithic farmers of western Europe. Looking for 'the
indian behind the artefact' (in Robert Braidwood's phrase) has become in-
creasingly difficult when there is nothing to be seen but chiefs.
   This uncertainty as to when social ranking actually arose is symptomatic
of the problems of describing European prehistory by comparison, say,
with that of the Near East. While we have a fairly refined vocabulary for
dealing with the various stages in the emergence of complex urban societies,
Europe's stubborn failure to organise itself until just before the arrival of the

This paper was prepared for a conference on social evolution organised by John
Bintliff. It was thefirstsketch of a pan-European picture, with attention to social
process; and it was stimulated especially by the work of Richard Bradley, Ian
Hodder, Kristian Kristiansen, Michael Rowlands and Stephen Shennan - an
astonishing concentration of talent on a set of related problems. (The article by
Mike Rowlands in the same conference volume is now a classic, and has pro-
foundly influenced my own perceptions ever since.) It tried to go beyond the
ecological and functionalist views which had dominated my earlier work, and
pointed the way to some of the themes which would emerge in the following
decade.

                                         134




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER   NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER      AGES


Romans leaves us with some 6000 years of social development for which
a simple division into 'tribal' or 'chiefly' seems hopelessly inadequate. It is
especially primitive by comparison with the sophistication of our typo-
logical and chronological analyses, which allow us to divide this same
period into nearly twenty major cultural divisions, many themselves sub-
divided into three or four phases.
   The temptation in interpreting the archaeological record of the later
Neolithic and Copper Ages is thus to see some sort of cumulative growth of
social complexity, with evidence such as monument-building or minority
burial reflecting emerging hierarchies. Terms such as 'chiefdom' have
become stretched to include earlier and earlier examples of prehistoric
societies. The account presented here takes a different point of view: it tries
to explore the variety in early agricultural societies in terms of non-
hierarchical forms of social organisation. Although social change did not
benefit all sections of the population equally, it is misleading to see pre-
history simply in terms of the increasing domination of an elite. We need to
look more closely at the problems faced by communities in different circum-
stances and the sorts of power relations that emerged in each case.2 While
such societies may demonstrate a considerable degree of cultural com-
plexity, this does not necessarily take the form of centralisation, ranking and
stratification.

STAGES AND ZONES
A problem common to many discussions of 'social evolution' is the use of
categories derived from contemporary ethnography and their application to
long-term archaeological sequences. From Lewis Henry Morgan (1877)
onwards evolutionary writers have put forward schemes defining successive
'stages of culture': savagery-barbarism-civilisation (Clark 1946); band-
tribe-chiefdom-state (Service 1962); egalitarian-ranked-state (Fried 1967);
and so forth. While differing in detail, they share the same logic: they
attempt to convert static snapshots into a dynamic sequence. Such schemes
are now increasingly under attack. The band to state sequence - that most
used by archaeologists - has now been trenchantly criticised by its own
author (Service 1968,169). Recent bands, he noted, were often the smashed
remnants of more complex systems dislocated by western colonial impact.
Tribes, in the sense of discrete political units, were often created by inter-
action with more organised units (Fried 1978); chiefdoms and simple states
frequently arose in reaction to slave-raiding and the trading opportunities
offered by contact with the west (Stevenson 1968). Even if we do not treat
the whole band-tribe-chiefdom-state continuum simply as a reflection of the
differential impact of colonial contact, these arguments at least point to
differing degrees of social complexity in the ethnographic record as being
largely related to positions within the 'macro von Thiinen rings' of a recent

                                        135




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                             SOCIAL      EVOLUTION:


world system - a geographical zonation as a result of historical interaction
around a few major centres.
   The difficulty of interpreting archaeological sequences in social terms
is thus that of mapping an observed spatial variability onto an inferred
chronological sequence of social forms reconstructed from artefactual
remains. Not only do the two bodies of evidence - ethnographic and archae-
ological observations - differ in their raw material, but they also reflect
different parts of the process of global development. Many of the 'chief-
doms' of the ethnographic record reflect secondary consequences of the
existence of states that cannot be projected back into periods before the
emergence of the state. The time has now come to reassert the independent
validity of archaeological data, which offer too multivariate a pattern to be
constrained within arbitrary partitions of a homogenised universal suc-
cession. For this reason the following discussion takes a more inductive view
of the archaeological evidence, in searching for internal contrasts before
seeking external comparisons in world ethnography.
   Many apparently stadial phenomena need to be considered from a spatial
point of view, as they result from the rapid imposition of systems developed
in nuclear areas on less fast-moving peripheries. For instance, the contrast
between 'Mesolithic' and 'Neolithic' ways of life is in fact as much geo-
graphical as chronological, as economies based on cereals increasingly
intruded into neighbouring areas whose subsistence was based on the
increasingly intensive cropping of local resources. In other parts of the
world, this process was less abrupt and indigenous sequences were able to
develop further before being radically restructured by outside contact.
Temperate North America offers a relevant example, where the florescence
of monument-building and trading in exotica that characterises phenomena
such as Hopewell, for instance, preceded rather than resulted from the
spread of cereal cultivation from further south. Indeed, it is now suggested
that the apparent 'cultural decline' of the later Woodland period in fact
represents a period of increased stability and security in food supplies, with
cereal cultivation requiring a less complex and certainly less spectacular
socio-cultural system.
   There are two points to note here. One is the way in which a 'Mesolithic'
system, if preserved from outside interference, may manifest far more com-
plex properties than would be inferred from the truncated sequence of early
postglacial Europe. The other is the way in which new subsistence elements
that may actually raise population levels and energyflowscan at the same time
cause a simplification or decentralisation of social structures. It is this kind of
variability which characterises semi-isolated regions such as the woodlands
of Europe and North America. Structural principles which were rapidly super-
seded in nuclear areas may have continued to be important in the more drawn-
out sequences of social change where urbanisation was a relatively late feature.
Rather than trying to see in the European prehistoric sequence an increasingly


                                        136




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER    NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER      AGES


ranked series of societies in which successively more powerful chiefdoms suc-
ceeded one another at each opportunity, it may be more profitable to explore
alternative descriptions of social organisation.
    One of the striking features of the west European archaeological record
is the abundant evidence of ritual monuments which are not accompanied
by elaborate individual burials or residences. Instead of always looking for
hierarchisation, it may become appropriate in such contexts to look for a
different principle, that of ritual formalisation as the basis of social order.
To equate certain artefacts - monumental tombs, rare or craft-made items
(Renfrew 1973) in the later Neolithic of western Europe - with 'chieftain-
ship' may be to miss the essential character of such societies, and to obscure
both their essential similarity to earlier Neolithic societies and their contrast
with contemporary groups further east.
    It is clear that this approach requires European prehistory to be treated
as a whole, and that it is necessary to go beyond the artefactual mani-
festations to postulate underlying similarities in social organisation which
may cross-cut conventional divisions. Such social forms may have no direct
correspondence to that of any particular group within the ethnographic
record; but while this makes the task of such reconstruction more difficult,
it also makes the attempt more worthwhile as a contribution to the general
study of pre-literate societies.


EVOLUTIONARY PATHWAYS
The basic regional structure of Neolithic and Copper Age societies was
established by the arrival of agricultural groups and their interaction with
native communities.3 Along the main axis of agricultural spread, in the
Balkans and the central European loesslands, the dominant process was
one of colonisation. By 5000 BC the unity of 'Danubian' cultures across
the loess, from western Hungary in the south to the Low Countries and the
western Ukraine in the north, was already established. Cultures of the
Balkan group with a core area of tell settlements in Bulgaria and southern
Jugoslavia extended northwards into Romania and eastern Hungary. In the
central and west Mediterranean (Lewthwaite 1982), the successive adoption
of sheep and pottery by native littoral groups was increasingly sup-
plemented by cultivation as the complex expanded from its coastal base.
The main surviving zone of hunting and collecting groups lay in a broad arc
from the British Isles, across Scandinavia and the North European Plain,
to the marshes of eastern Europe which drain into the Black Sea. As the
Atlantic forests thickened and the climax trees of the mixed oak forest
shaded out pioneer species such as hazel, the nuts and game resources of
forest areas declined in productivity and concentrated the attention of native
groups on coasts, lakes and rivers where fish and molluscs provided a
substantial part of the diet.

                                         137




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                            SOCIAL      EVOLUTION:




5.1 The chronological dine between SE and NW Europe in the spread of farming,
metal use and features of the secondary products complex [from Sherratt 1995,
fig-4]-
   Two processes, therefore, dominated the development of European
societies in the period following this initial establishment of agriculture: one
was the differentiation and linkage of the increasingly copper-using groups
of south-east and south-central Europe; the other was the expansion of
agricultural groups and their interaction with native populations in the
outer arc. As a result of these processes, the relative regional homogeneity
of the first agricultural communities gave way to a diversity both within and
between regions that reached its climax during the fourth millennium BC
before giving way to a degree of uniformity within the new corridors of con-
tact which were opened up - the Mediterranean, the North European Plain,
the Steppes and the Atlantic Seaboard.


                                        138




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER      AGES


South-east Europe, 5500-4500 BC
The first question, therefore, is the nature of the changes that were taking
place in south-east Europe during the fifth millennium BC. This period
encompasses the climax of the pattern established in the Balkans during the
seventh and sixth millennia, and illustrates a relatively pure 'successionaP
change in that these societies then underwent an important transformation
without interference from adjacent zones. The climax of the tell cultures is
represented by a variety of groups whose ceramic distinctiveness is a hall-
mark of the period. There is a profusion of substantial settlement sites, rich
in the imported materials of everyday life: obsidian, greenstone axes, shell
beads. Female figurines, often in elaborate settings of painted clay altars and
shrines, are a characteristic feature; though burials (often still in household
clusters within settlements rather than in formal cemeteries) are not marked
by large accumulations of grave goods. I have tried elsewhere (Chapter 10)
to sketch how these systems may have operated. There is no reason to sup-
pose that these groups were composed of anything other than autonomous
communities and lineages. What is evident is an elaboration of material
culture, particularly the decorative elements, at the same time as an increase
in regional trade: an intensive production of locally specific pottery types,
the production of local specialities like salt and perhaps linen textiles, and
a massive transfer of materials like obsidian and flint between adjacent
highland and lowland zones. There is also a special emphasis on ritual
elements - figurines and house decoration, in south-east Europe, and also
some of the first ritual monuments like Kyjovice Tesetice (Moravia),
Schalkenburg (central Germany) or Kothingeichendorf (Bavaria) in the
related area of the central European loess belt (Hockmann 1972).
    These two elements, regional trade and ritual, give a clue to the social
mechanisms that organised and linked such communities. The wealth of
everyday objects, manufactured to high standards of craftsmanship, repre-
sent more than satisfaction of material needs. The flow of such items was
clearly vital to social reproduction as much as material survival. This would
explain the large quantities of items at the top end of the range of utilitarian
goods - well-finished axes, fine pottery, good flint or obsidian tools - that
occur in such profusion. Such quantities of valuables were generated by
social rather than economic needs (cf. Douglas and Isherwood 1978).
Anyone who has a small child is familiar with this principle: every visitor
or relative sends another toy digger, fire engine or teddy bear on social
occasions, quite beyond the propensity of the child to consume such wealth
(he has boxes full upstairs). Similarly with these Neolithic settlements: every
site is a bonanza to the archaeologist, who finds great quantities of museum-
worthy objects (stored in boxes downstairs) that originally circulated to
cement alliances, to purchase wives, or to compensate for offences.
   If relations between communities rested on alliances and the flow of


                                        139




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                             SOCIAL     EVOLUTION:


material valuables, the proliferation of items with ritual associations suggests
that this was important in regulating social life within the community. The
common forms of figurines suggest that these ritual codes were widely shared
between groups. Indeed, the contrasts between archaeological cultures in this
context (e.g. Vine a and Tisza, to take two classic Childean examples), which are
evident in their figurine designs and decorative styles but not in their more
mundane objects, are likely to reflect not breaks in social interaction (Hodder
1982a) but the limits of particular, consciously held, ideological systems. The
general form of these ideologies was probably very similar in the different
areas in which they were expressed, since the typical female figurines are all
variations on a theme. The basic features of this cult may even be reproduced
in very different cultural contexts, though similar social circumstances, in
other parts of Europe for which the shadowy presence of a mother goddess
has been inferred. We shall return later to the megalithic temples of Malta, but
it is perhaps worth noting the association of such Neolithic societies with
the worship of female deities or earth spirits. It is this kind of association that
lies behind older views - going back to Lewis Henry Morgan and surviving in
the canon of Marxist orthodoxy - which describe Neolithic society as 'matri-
archal' (e.g. Neustupny and Neustupny 1961). In settlement terms, this phase
was characterised by big sites - large communities of several lineage groups
with their own burial areas - aggregating for co-operation and defence. In such
acephalous groups, intensification of warfare is the other side of the coin from
the intensification of trading and ritual activity, and competition between com-
munities for the acquisition of material goods involved both alliance and
hostility (Chapter 10).
    This, then, is what I mean by ritual formalisation in an east European
context. The actual structures that underlay these archaeological mani-
festations remain to be defined, but we may bear in mind the elaboration of
cross-cutting ties - clans and sub-clans, moieties and ceremonial associ-
ations - that ethnography suggests may be relevant, and that do not involve
hierarchy. Their material evidence, in the form of ceremonial houses,
dancing grounds, symbolic oppositions or totemic signs, should not be
beyond the perception of archaeology. The hallmark of this type of system
- which archaeologically we may term the 'mature' Neolithic, to respect its
time-transgressive character and avoid regional terminologies - is the
presence of an abundance of material items, mostly of an unspectacular
kind, that are imported but not rare, moved by active regional trading
networks and circulating as small valuables. Allied to this is the pervasive
ritual and symbolic character of material culture in general, which never-
theless lacks the marks of individual rank and achievement.

4500-3500 BC
Some time around the middle of the fifth millennium BC this system was
radically changed, marking the beginning of what is locally termed the

                                         140




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER   NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER      AGES


'Copper Age' (Chapter 10). The tight regional groupings disappeared; settle-
ments dispersed or became less continuously occupied; burials received
greater emphasis (often being easier to find than the settlements); the bulk
of regionally traded products was replaced by smaller quantities of exotic
items (notably copper and gold); objects symbolising individual status
appeared (shafthole axes); the figurines became more schematic and less
overtly female; and there are greater contrasts in these new forms of wealth
both within regions and in individual cemeteries. The use of ritual within
established and long-lived communities was thus replaced by an apparently
more fluid system in which more explicit statements about rank were neces-
sary, and a wider range of competition was possible. Even so, there is little
indication of hierarchy: the rich burials are the end of a continuum, and
occur within the same cemeteries as the others - there was no mobilisation
of labour for a Fiirstengrab like Helmsdorf or L^ki Male. Nor are there
hoards in the same way as in the Bronze Age.
   This pattern continued into the fourth millennium when agricultural
settlement was expanding onto the Steppes and the North European Plain.
These movements of expansion on the periphery did not take place in
isolation: for the increasing scale of inter-regional trade from the Carpathian
Basin and the Balkans reached even the outer margins, in Denmark and the
Ukraine. These long-distance links were associated with shifts in the centres
of prosperity within south-east Europe. Instead of the central agricultural
areas, in Thrace or the Koros depression for instance, the areas which rose
to prominence were on the edges, at nodal positions between regional
systems: in east Slovakia, at Tibava by the critical passes through to the
Ukraine (modern frontier crossing-point at Uzgorod); on the Black Sea
coast at Varna, with its spectacular, gold-filled graves perhaps indicating
access to the Anatolian gold; in Kujavia (Brzesc Kujawski) on the interface
with the North European Plain. Access to metal sources and control of the
trade routes was the key to economic and social success, as the rich graves
in these areas testify, and the products which crossed regional boundaries
included Wolhynian flint in eastern Hungary (Kaczanowska 1980) -
especially the long flint dagger blades - and also the first horses (Bokonyi
1978), in return for the Balkan/Carpathian copper objects which appeared
at this time as far afield as Ukraine and in Early Neolithic contexts in
Denmark.

3500-3000 BC
Although this theme is clearly relevant to the developing picture in northern
Europe, we will follow through the sequence in south-east Europe down to
the end of the fourth millennium BC; for there follows a classic example of
a discontinuity caused by the incorporation of new features from a neigh-
bouring region. That region was the Steppes, where major developments
were now occurring. The expansion of population into the dry interfluves

                                        141




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                             SOCIAL      EVOLUTION:


altered the economic role of this region in a fundamental way. It now came
to act as a bridge between the peripheral Near Eastern cultures of the
Caucasus and those of south-east Europe: and many of the features involved
in adaptation to the steppe landscape were also relevant to the increasingly
open parts of temperate Europe. The early transfer of horses has already
been mentioned, though these early specimens - doubtless objects of wonder
and curiosity - did not survive as a local breeding stock. Equally important
(though contacts with Anatolia may have been equally relevant here) were
new breeds of sheep that are evident from the increased size of European
stocks at this time (Bokonyi 1974).
   In any case, a radical change in the settlement structure of south-east
Europe took place at this time, which accelerated the divergence of truly
Mediterranean areas (where tree crops now became important) from inland
areas. In the Carpathian Basin, the change is manifested in a major shift of
population to previously marginal areas both on the edges of the Basin and
the surrounding valleys penetrating into the uplands, and on the sandy inter-
fluves within it like the area between the Danube and Tisza (Chapter 10).
Within the interstices created by this shift, some actual penetration of Steppe
tribes seems to have occurred (Ecsedy 1979), for example on the Tisza and
lower Danube. As with the Late Woodland phenomenon mentioned above,
the effect of a more secure subsistence base was to render some of the
spectacular efforts of the previous period largely unnecessary: there is no
later-fourth-millennium equivalent to the Varna cemetery, and indeed
a relative recession in the copper industry. Social differences were now
perhaps evident in more basic ways - between village headmen buried with
their draught oxen and their local followers in the Alsonemedi cemetery
(Figure 8.1) for instance - than between generally wealthy communities in
nodal regions and poorer populations in the hinterlands. Such a foundation
had the potential for a taller edifice of social structure, in which hierarchical
divisions could cut deeper than ever before - the beginning of the Bronze
Age pattern - though it was another millennium before these divisions were
to become evident in the rich, fortified centres of Early Bronze Age Hungary,
Romania and Slovakia.

Central and northern Europe, 5 0 0 0 - 3 0 0 0 BC
While the south-east had a protracted early agrarian sequence unaffected by
neighbouring developments, north-west Europe was from the beginning in
contact with a wider network. It was also an area of greater diversity, from
the relatively dense coastal native populations to the pioneer farmers of the
loess bridgehead. Inevitably, therefore, it did not simply replicate the stages
defined for Balkan and Carpathian Europe; though at a deeper level there
are some significant resemblances. The sequence on the loess corridor of
central Europe has something of a transitional character: it reflected some
of the developments of the south-east, but its limited area rather reduced its

                                         142




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER    NEOLITHIC       AND   COPPER      AGES


importance in the fourth and third millennia when the surrounding regions
were opened up. This change in role makes it difficult to treat as an inde-
pendent entity and it will therefore be considered in conjunction with its
northern and western hinterlands. The increasing aggregation of settlement
that was characteristic of the early fifth millennium in the Carpathian Basin
(Chapter 10) was repeated during the later fifth and early fourth millennia
in the central European zone. The clusters of hamlets that were character-
istic of the pioneer phase, for example in the Rhineland, were replaced by
nucleated, enclosed villages of long-houses. Already, however, small groups
were penetrating northwards into the interstices of established Mesolithic
groups around the lakes of the North European Plain, and a complex
pattern of interaction was beginning.
    The origins of the northern Neolithic cultures (TRB) have conventionally
been sought either in continuity from local Mesolithic groups or in some
fresh wave of agricultural population from further south (e.g. Troels-Smith
1952; contra, Becker 1954). The present picture suggests that the new
pattern of farming cultures that united both the North European Plain and
the northern loesslands, actually originated from interaction on the interface
between the two. In some areas, such as Scandinavia, the expansion of farm-
ing seems to have followed a relative collapse of local resources (Rowley-
Conway 1984); in others, such as Brittany, some kind of fusion seems to
have occurred; in the south-east of the British Isles, some colonisation into
empty niches seems more likely. Despite these diverse origins, a strongly
convergent pattern came about, in which scattered hamlets were focused on
small burial-monuments and enclosures that provided continuing points of
integration between a diversity of exploited zones. Already, however, there
were significant regional exchange systems, which at certain points articu-
lated with long-distance chains reaching back to central and south-east
Europe; though these imported objects did not serve to mark an elite in the
same way as in Hungary or Bulgaria (Randsborg 1979).
    These relatively small-scale systems, limited in territorial extent, were
greatly enlarged at the same time as the radical shift which transformed
Balkan and Carpathian Copper Age groups. The appearance of plough-
marks in northern Europe suggests that these phenomena had a common
cause, and that in both areas the use of plough cultivation greatly enlarged
the area which could be exploited for agriculture. The effect of this techno-
logical innovation, on two contrasting socio-economic systems, was very
different: rather than changing the direction of development, as in the south-
east, this more extensive form of agriculture actually intensified propensities
already present in north-western Europe.
    One effect was greatly to extend the area under cultivation, absorbing in
the process many of the remnant communities of hunters and fishers. This
was accomplished, however, within the existing framework: the megalithic
tombs became larger and more elaborate, taking the form of passage-graves

                                        143




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                            SOCIAL      EVOLUTION:


rather than simple burial-chambers; the enclosures which seem to represent
a level of local integration above that of the monumental tombs reached
a peak and then declined; and existing methods of exploiting raw materials
either for tools (e.g. flint) or ornaments (e.g. amber) were greatly enlarged.
In the loess area this progress was manifested in a shift from the riverine
strip to the edge of the interfluvial zone (Kruk 1973; 1980); though since
this area lacked the local diversity of the north-western landscape, the foci
of this process were nucleated (and now often defended) villages (Bronocice,
Dolauer Heide) rather than burial monuments. The common basis of all
these societies, however, was an attachment to place and the rituals which
were performed there, rather than to individuals of a particular rank.
   How were these societies integrated, and in particular how do they
compare in this respect with the various stages defined for south-east
Europe? My impression is that despite their contemporaneity with the
Copper Age and Early Bronze Age groups of that area, they were funda-
mentally more similar to those of the late Neolithic tell climax, in which
ritual (manifested both in the monuments and the artefacts), rather than
rank, was the organising principle. As with these earlier 'mature' Neolithic
communities, the artefactual repertoire does not distinguish symbols of
individual rank, but rather offers a broad range of often finely-made
domestic items - such as decorated pottery, stone axes and amber beads -
which did not themselves act as sumptuary markers of a particular rank, but
served to structure social relations through their use as valuables. Burials
were not accompanied by impressive quantities of wealth objects associated
with particular individuals, although burial itself was a focus of ritual which
involved both monumental construction and the disposal of wealth. The
tombs are usually communal, and convey meaning by the arrangement of
the bones, rather than by varying quantities of personal grave-goods, which
often take the form of offerings at the monument as a whole. Emphasis was
on the community rather than the individual, and effort was expended not
to commemorate powerful leaders but to enhance corporate prestige and
territorial integrity. Moreover, burials in monumental tombs probably
represent only a part of the total population; though this in itself does not
imply a system of social stratification. The tombs should not be considered
as a means of disposing of the dead, but rather of giving significance to
selected people whose death was of importance to the groups involved.
There was often a considerable interval between death (and exposure of the
corpse, which was perhaps the usual means of disposal) and interment in a
tomb. The remains selected for such treatment were probably not those of
people who occupied a particular rank in their own lifetime, but venerated
ancestors who stood in critical genealogical positions in relation to group
fissioning.
  The main contrast between 'mature Neolithic' groups in south-east and
north-west Europe, then, is the elaboration of mortuary ritual which charac-

                                       144




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER    NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER      AGES


terises the latter. It can be argued that this is more an expression of local
ecology than of fundamental differences in social organisation. Funerary
monuments are typical of areas of early agricultural settlement beyond the
loess, and are associated with the particular conditions of the North Euro-
pean Plain and the Atlantic coastlands - unlike the defended centres, which
also occur on the loess. Monumental tombs are characteristic of areas where
settlement was still constrained - note their occurrence in clusters and linear
arrangements in relation to river-valleys - but where large aggregated
communities were not possible. They represent foci and territorial markers
for an expanded (though not dispersed) pattern of settlement, particularly
in core areas like the Danish islands where settlement was relatively dense.
Other types of non-monumental 'earth-graves' occur in less densely settled
zones like western Jutland (Randsborg 1975), where a seasonally mobile
way of life may have persisted, that was perhaps also characteristic of the
earliest phase of settlement in the core area. The monuments thus mark
a phase of saturation and the crystallisation of defined territorial units.
    Such monumental tombs served not only to legitimate rights to particular
territories, but were also agents of social control within the groups. One
striking feature, both of long barrows and 'causewayed' enclosures, is the
composite nature of their construction - reflected in discontinuous quarry
ditches as well as constructional compartments 4 that seem to relate to
corporate work-groups involved in their construction. Rather than simply
representing the tombs of different lineages, therefore, the tombs may be the
products of cross-cutting local associations which provided a focus of
political allegiance. This would be particularly important if surviving
Mesolithic groups retained a corporate existence within the agrarian terri-
torial structure, and such monuments would thus be particularly developed
in areas where native populations were integrated into Neolithic societies
at a local level.
   This interpretation of the social basis of the megalith-building groups
of north-west Europe does not imply that such groups were essentially
egalitarian - in the sense that there was no conflict of interests between
different status- and kinship-groups - for it is basic to the idea of such ritual-
centred organisations that competition took place between (probably ex-
ogamous) local units, and that certain sections of the population (notably
senior men) exercise dominance within them. But authority was localised,
and there was no hierarchy in the sense of successive tiers of authority:
rather, dominant groups promoted a common ideology which supported
their own interests within the unit, and left them free to engage in
competition for prestige between units. This probably took the form of
competitive feasting - 'fighting with wealth' - involving both consumption
of subsistence goods and the ritual destruction of material items, e.g. pot-
smashing. Differences in wealth between units (whether communities or
lineages) are therefore to be expected and are indeed manifested in the

                                         145




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                             SOCIAL      EVOLUTION:


different quantities of offerings associated with communal tombs, just as
there are notably 'wealthy' settlements among the Neolithic villages of
south-east Europe. Such differences in wealth, however, do not add up to
a conical pattern of ranking between communities and these must still be
considered as largely autonomous.

3000-2500 BC
This parallelism with the 'mature Neolithic' phase of the south-eastern
sequence is even more striking in its transition to a pattern which reversed
many of these elements - the disappearance of large, central sites and the
dispersal of population; the decline in ritual elements and the appearance of
status-symbolic artefacts; the development of long-distance trade (especially
in metal) rather than in common regional items. These new features charac-
terise the Corded Ware cultures that succeeded the variety of megalith-
building groups throughout the North European Plain and initiated the
pattern that was to characterise the second millennium BC; and in this
sense, it may still be useful to describe the Corded Ware and Beaker periods
as 'Copper Age'.
   One evident feature of this period was a major phase of internal
colonisation penetrating more deeply into the interfluvial areas of the loess
and cover sands, and extending agrarian occupation to the outwash sands
of the North European Plain. Settlement had a greater fluidity, with less
substantial and long-lived sites, and a shorter-term investment in burial
monuments: single graves under round barrows5 rather than long megalithic
or earth-built structures. Material culture had a more segmentary character;
a consistently replicated series of status-kits comprising a personal drinking
vessel and weapon (battle-axe) which accompanied a large number of males
to the grave. These symbols became internationalised to a much larger ex-
tent, even integrating neighbouring hunting and fishing groups within a single
framework of status codes, as in central Scandinavia and the Baltic regions.
   This pattern did not emerge in a uniform way over the whole of the
North European Plain. It seems to have crystallised earlier in the east,
perhaps in central Germany and eastern Poland, and to have spread like a
domino effect westwards into the megalithic heartlands, as far as the North
Sea. This complex seems to have penetrated within and around the estab-
lished TRB communities of the Low Countries and Scandinavia, before
absorbing them into the new pattern. It opened up a new east-west corridor
that articulated at its eastern end with the expanding Steppe groups, trans-
mitting horses and woolly sheep (as well as artefacts such as hammer-
headed bone pins) directly across the open landscape of northern Europe,
and restructuring the communities of the adjacent loess belt. It did not, how-
ever, penetrate westwards as far as the British Isles or large parts of northern
France (Seine-Oise-Marne culture), where the earlier pattern of territorially
focused communities persisted (Howell 1982).

                                         146




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER      AGES


   This linkage, from the forest Steppe to the Atlantic sea-board, was a
manifestation of the speed of forest clearance on the lighter soils of the
North European Plain. The increased size of cultivated area followed a
greater development of the pastoral sector of a mixed farming economy
based on light plough agriculture, with an emphasis on the male role
in warfare and protection of an acquired territory. It produced a similar,
segmentary social structure over a large interconnected area, with the ability
to penetrate and corrode the more static structures of surrounding groups.
In the following centuries, this pattern was to spread, and be further en-
riched, by contact along the Atlantic coast, the Rhone, and across the
western Alps: the Bell Beaker network.

The central and west Mediterranean, 5000-3000 BC
It is now time to consider the third major geographical division, the central
and western Mediterranean. During the earlier fourth millennium there was
no major opening-up of new areas for settlement as in northern Europe, and
a relatively stable pattern of large villages with stone or rock-cut tombs
occupied the more fertile zones within it, at a relatively low overall density.
Exchange networks carrying material such as obsidian linked islands such
as Sardinia with the adjacent mainland, but these had a limited, regional
scope. Some signs of the elaboration of territorial foci were in evidence, in
the beginning of megalithic construction in Iberia and in the prototypes of
the trefoil-shaped temples in Malta.
    As in north-west Europe, the mid-fourth millennium saw an increase
in the scale of these activities, without a discontinuity of developmental
trajectory. Tomb and temple construction became more elaborate, with a
concomitant appearance of small cult objects such as female figurines. Craft
production developed, with copper axes supplementing stone ones and
pottery bearing a profusion of ornamental and symbolic signs including the
'oculus' motif.
    These features bear a general resemblance to those of the megalithic
cultures of north-west Europe and they probably shared a similar form of
social organisation. Increasingly, however, a further process of spatial
expansion and inter-regional linkage introduced new elements, both from
northern Europe and from the east Mediterranean. This expansion can
plausibly be attributed to the use of the light plough, which assisted in the
opening-up of the interfluves in the same way as in other areas of Europe at
this time, and to specific features of the drier Mediterranean environment:
the cultivation of tree crops along with an expansion of sheep rearing, and
also fishing. An important outcome was the colonisation of new areas,
particularly highlands like the limestone plateaux of Languedoc and islands
like Lipari, which acted as nodal points in inter-regional contacts. Forti-
fication was a notable feature of Mediterranean settlement patterns, both
at large villages such as Los Millares (Almeria)6 and smaller fortified

                                        147




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                             SOCIAL     EVOLUTION:


enclosures like Zambujal (Portugal) and Lebous (southern France). The new
external links promoted the rapid spread of particular features such as
bastion fortification which can be traced throughout the length of the
Mediterranean. These contacts can also be seen in portable artefacts, like
the distribution of Castelluccio bone plaques.
   This growing network of regional links within the Mediterranean began
to be articulated with the long-distance routes reaching down from northern
Europe. The characteristic combination of drinking vessel (sometimes a
beaker but often a local form of handled cup) and personal weapons (now
a dagger and arrows rather than a battle-axe) began to appear in male
graves, though normally these were rock-cut tombs more appropriate to a
Mediterranean environment than the earthen barrows of the north. This
emphasis on the male warrior began to replace that on the female figure in
representations, stelae and rock engraving.7 The transition was most rapid
in Italy and southern France, with their more direct northward connections,
but also penetrated to the islands (e.g. Corsica). In Iberia the change was less
clear-cut, and was only fully complete in the second millennium with the
appearance of the Argaric culture with its male warrior burials. The pattern
of settlement in the Mediterranean, however, continued to be based on
defended centres now often positioned on spectacular heights.
   As with the British Isles in relation to the North European Plain, there
were spatial limits to this penetration, and in peripheral areas an older
stratum survived and continued to develop along its own lines. In Malta the
temples serving a female divinity reached a peak of elaboration in the earlier
third millennium, culminating in the massive structures of Tarxien and the
nearby Hypogeum. The stability of these temple-centres, of which over a
dozen are known, is indicated by their cumulative rebuilding and ex-
tension, and this territorial stability must be related to the finite size and
relative isolation of the island; these laboratory conditions allowed the
undisturbed growth of perhaps the most complex of these ritual-centred
organisations.

The British Isles
Britain itself must also be considered as part of the archaic fringe to which
continental innovations were introduced at a relatively late stage, and which
continued to develop along its existing trajectory to take an older pattern to
new heights of elaboration. While large enclosures and other monuments to
territorial stability largely disappeared in adjacent areas of the continent
during the third millennium BC, many parts of the British Isles saw a re-
newed phase of monumental construction, either of large passage graves like
Maes Howe or Newgrange in northern and western Britain in the later
fourth millennium, or of henges like Avebury or Durrington Walls - the
latter being significantly close to earlier territorial foci - in the south in the
third millennium BC. The scale of such construction, however, was entirely

                                         148




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER    NEOLITHIC       AND   COPPER      AGES


new; and the ritual landscapes of the British chalklands - for instance the
triangle of Avebury and its avenues, the 'Sanctuary' and Silbury Hill -
represent a concentration of effort unparalleled before. In this case, the
relative isolation from the Corded Ware 'domino effect' was reinforced by
the local setting of continued territorial expansion, which was internally
focused within the chalklands and adjacent gravel terraces, rather than
externally directed to the large areas of outwash sands as it was in the North
European Plain. This elaboration of ritual and territorial foci seems to have
been an alternative to the segmentary organisation reflected in Beaker
'status-kits', which began to be represented in parts of Britain, outside the
main henge areas. This 'Beaker' pattern led to the formation of rich indi-
vidual burials in Wessex itself shortly before 2000 BC, associated with the
erection of stone settings in the earlier earth and timber henges, e.g. at
Avebury and Stonehenge. The 'Beaker' pottery lost its role as a status item
and merged with the rest of the domestic pottery assemblage to form the
basis of the Bronze Age wares of the second millennium. These were associ-
ated with a major spatial expansion into more marginal areas outside the
earlier chalkland foci, in the manner of Corded Ware and Early Bronze Age
expansion on the Continent.
    This third-millennium phase of ritual monuments represented by henges,
like the Maltese temples discussed above, clearly went beyond the simple,
relatively autonomous character of earlier ritual-centred forms of social
organisation. They may well have been associated with a specialised ritual
caste with access to esoteric (e.g. astronomical) knowledge, rather than
simply being run by lineage heads or village elders in the way that may be
imagined for earlier Neolithic ritual monuments. But although they were
able to mobilise impressive quantities of labour, this apparently did not ex-
tend to the accumulation of surplus produce or the extensive patronage of
manufacturing operations based upon it. These properties, and the 'conical'
patterns of ranking that underlay them, only emerged from the more ex-
plicitly individualising warrior-centred form of organisation associated with
Corded Ware and Beakers.

CONCLUSION: SPACE, TIME AND SOCIAL STRUCTURE
This brief review of the contrasts between successive and contemporary
groups in different parts of Europe demonstrates the difficulty of applying
any simple scheme of social evolution to this phase of maximum diversi-
fication. Nevertheless, some common elements have been identified, as well
as trends which were to result in a much greater degree of convergence
during the Bronze Age.
   A basic theme of discussion has been the contrast between east and west.
Many of the most conspicuous artefacts of this phase - the megalithic and
earthen monuments of western Europe - have no direct parallels in the east.

                                        149




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                             SOCIAL      EVOLUTION:


Yet the types of society which they represent may, at a deeper level, have
a fundamental resemblance to already superseded stages of social develop-
ment in those parts of Europe which had been settled by agricultural
communities at an earlier date (Figure 5.1). The evident contrasts stem from
the historical and environmental setting of their respective developments,
and the relative isolation of the western periphery which allowed a further
elaboration of social forms which in other areas had been rapidly
extinguished.
   These contrasting trajectories determined the different reactions of the
various areas to the major technological and economic innovations of the
period, the secondary products complex (Chapter 6). The rapid spread of
features like the plough and woolly sheep cross-cut local successions of
social development, and they were integrated into local systems in different
ways. In the east, they caused something of a recession in the production
of spectacular elite items such as the goldwork of Varna; in the west they
accelerated and increased the scale of monument construction and terri-
torial demarcation, giving a further twist to the elaboration of ritual inte-
gration. In this way the effect of these innovations was to increase regional
contrasts, even though in the longer term it was to provide a more uniform
basis for convergent development.
   Although elites of different kinds were produced by the various processes
which have been defined, with a measure of ranking both within and be-
tween communities, there are no signs of substantial contrasts between
different levels of society that would deserve the term 'stratification'; nor of
the cumulative addition of levels of executive authority that could be
described as a hierarchy. The basic building block of Neolithic and Copper
Age societies was the community or lineage, and the bonds between them
were the fragile ones of exogamy and alliance.
   Within this framework, however, there was a variety of ways in which
social relations might be organised. An important variable was the layout of
settlement on the ground. Although Europe went through a protracted pro-
cess of 'filling up', this did not produce a simple linear increase in population
pressure and stress on land: instead, we can observe small cycles of infilling
within particular zones, followed by the unlocking of further zones either
within or beyond the region. The plough in particular opened up extensive
areas for cultivation (incidentally increasing the pastoral component of
agricultural economies) which allowed a more rapid process of spatial ex-
pansion than was characteristic of the often river-based patterns of initial
land-taking. Paradoxically, therefore, analogies with slash-and-burn
farmers in the tropics may be more relevant to the later Neolithic than to
the early Neolithic, whose constrained commitment to zones of primary
productivity is perhaps more analogous to that of the lowland rice farmers.
    The implication of these patterns of expansion can be taken further. In an
illuminating article on stateless societies in West Africa, Horton (1976) has

                                         150




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER    NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER      AGES


discussed the circumstances under which lineages and corporations based
on principles other than descent become important media of social organ-
isation. He contrasts the conditions of unconstrained expansion, in which
dispersed settlement is the norm and spatial and genealogical distance main-
tain an approximate equivalence, with constrained expansion where 'leap-
frogging' and disjunctive migration become necessary. In the former case,
segmentary lineages can occur in which a single genealogical scheme can
embrace many thousands of people; in the latter, aggregates composed of
several lineages are formed, which must be integrated by cross-cutting ties
and a genealogical definition of landholding rights is replaced by a territorial
one. Co-residence, rather than common descent, becomes the focus of
political allegiance.
   Such territorially-based societies may be of two kinds: those where the
political community coincides with a large, nucleated village, and those
where its members are scattered in a number of smaller settlements. In the
former case, the role of lineages is subordinated to cross-cutting institutions
based on age grades, secret societies, and especially ritual groupings - 'a
cluster of adaptations to the problem posed by the presence in the com-
munity of strong and rivalrous lineages' (ibid., 96). In the latter, the lineages
maintain their importance as social groupings within the territorial unit,
whose role in this potentially fissiparous situation is stressed by the cult of
an earth spirit that unites the constituent descent groups. In this case, the
head of the leading lineage usually acts as cult priest and presides over
internal affairs.
   Now these distinctions correspond in a rough way to some of the
contrasts which have emerged in discussing the societies of later Neolithic
and Copper Age Europe. While there are no equivalents here to the pioneer
societies of the earlier Neolithic, there are striking resemblances between the
institutions that have been inferred for the large Neolithic villages of south-
east Europe and the loess area, for instance, and those of stateless groups in
West Africa such as the Kalahari. The problems of scattered, but territorially
defined, groups like the Lodagaa are paralleled by the megalith-building
communities of north-west Europe, and were apparently solved in a similar
way, through a focus in territorial ritual.
   Can the properties inferred for 'Copper Age' societies (both the fourth-
millennium examples from south-east Europe and third-millennium
examples from the North European Plain) be related to a pattern of seg-
mentary lineages (Kristiansen 1982)? Settlement was both dispersed and
expanding in space, producing the (temporary) conditions under which
genealogical reckoning was an effective way of maintaining an expanding
series of relationships, and reducing the emphasis on territorial definition.
In such a system there is no permanent political community, but rather
adventitious combinations for particular threats, drawing on as large a
kinship range as necessary. This equivalence of segments and relativity of


                                         151




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                            SOCIAL      EVOLUTION:


political grouping - overlapping egocentred units - leads to a predominance
of leadership over authority: political position is a matter of external
negotiation rather than internal control. In such circumstances, the role of
individual lineage heads becomes crucial, both as a widespread status
position (marked by an appropriate set of sumptuary artefacts?) and as a
potential focus for wider allegiances in a shifting configuration of political
structures (with the possibility of achieving individual prominence in the
process). In this context, we can understand the emergence both of inter-
regional symbols of rank, such as stone or copper battleaxes or decorated
drinking vessels. The deposition of these items in graves (as Shennan, 1982,
remarks) was important in the process of defining succession to these ranks
and their acquired prestige. Moreover, this type of organisation has the
property of being able to spread at the expense of surrounding groups -
Marshall Sahlins (1961) has called it an 'organisation of predatory ex-
pansion'. This seems a particularly appropriate description of the spread of
Corded Ware and its impact on the ritually focused megalith-builders.
   The main contrast in the European succession is thus between two
sorts of societies. The first was characterised by stable flows of regionally-
acquired goods, and was organised on an established territorial basis, with
public rituals and symbolic analogies based on female images. The societies
which superseded them were characterised by a greater emphasis on exotic
goods and longer-distance trading contacts often of a less stable and more
adventitious kind, in which information-carrying items took precedence
over more basic commodities. Their territorial basis was less stable, their
ethos was a competitive and self-aggrandising one, with sumptuary codes of
artefact use and symbolic analogies based on the image of the warrior male.
More generally, we can perhaps discern in these European sequences an
underlying shift from societies organised primarily on the basis of com-
munity (whether a single settlement or several sites with a common focus)
to an increased emphasis on the potential of kinship for forming wider
networks of alliance than had hitherto been realised.8 This is perhaps the
clue to the new properties which emerged in Copper Age systems in tem-
perate Europe.
   This latter type of social structure provided the basis for Bronze Age
development, in which the scale of inter-regional exchange was expanded
from a primary concern with symbolic items to include a greater volume of
'consumer durables' like textiles and bronze tools. This involved a greater
organisation of local production for inter-regional exchange, with regional
specialisation in commodities and manufactured products which were more
widely available but still supplied through an elite. With the gradual filling-
up of the continent during the second millennium, differential access to
productive land became more significant and provided preconditions for the
emergence of true stratification. At the same time the expansion of urban
trading networks from the east Mediterranean started a process of inter-


                                        152




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
          EUROPE       IN   THE   LATER      NEOLITHIC        AND    COPPER       AGES


action with indigenous European communities, to produce the core-
periphery pattern of the first-millennium Iron Age (Frankenstein and
Rowlands 1978).
   The societies of later prehistoric Europe thus provide an extended series
of examples of the processes operating in the early stages of social differ-
entiation. Such societies are arguably poorly represented both in the ethno-
graphic record, and in the archaeological evidence from nuclear regions
where these types of society were rapidly superseded. European Neolithic
and Bronze Age archaeology thus represents a prime source for the study of
such phenomena. It may be complemented by the study of other areas - for
instance Polynesia - whose relative remoteness from expanding core areas
of states and empires allowed indigenous sequences to achieve a measure of
social complexity. An understanding of social change requires a continuing
dialogue between the evidence of ethnography and archaeology. By a better
definition of their own material, archaeologists will be in a better position
to understand the relevance of other branches of anthropology to it.

NOTES

1. The terminology of period divisions in European prehistory has been elaborated over more
   than a century and is still inconsistent. 'Neolithic' was first defined as the later part of the
   Stone Age in opposition to 'Palaeolithic'; the idea of a 'Copper Age' before the beginning
   of the Bronze Age grew up as a local concept both in Ireland and Hungary in the 1870s.
   National terminologies have incorporated this usage (often in the form 'Chalcolithic' or
   'Eneolithic'), but these usages are often mutually inconsistent and in any case do not
   precisely conform to the beginning of copper use in any particular area. This article uses
   calibrated radiocarbon dates to give absolute ages. The terms 'mature Neolithic' and
   'Copper Age' are used in a descriptive sense to denote particular types of social systems
   that are defined in the text. 'Copper Age' thus denotes a system in which copper objects
   are used in a particular way, rather than a period defined by the first use of metal.
2. Recent social theories (Giddens, A. 1979, Central Problems in Social Theory, London,
   Macmillan; Harre, R. 1979, Social Being, Oxford, Blackwell) have attempted to overcome
   the essentially static nature of conceptions of social structure based on fixed roles and
   functions, determined by efficient adaptation to external (usually economic) circumstances.
   Instead they have proposed a more dynamic view in which individuals and groups manipu-
   late their shifting advantages in a continuous process of negotiation (called 'structuration'
   by Giddens) which itself creates and defines the patterns of social life. While this over-
   comes some of the problems associated with the endless search for a 'prime mover' of
   social change, it has yet to be formulated in a way which is relevant to changes on an
   archaeological ('evolutionary') timescale.
3. For a more systematic general account of European prehistory and that of adjacent areas
   (with references), see Sherratt (1980).
4. Such compartments are seen both in earthen long barrows, where they are defined by
   hurdling, and cairns like the Severn-Cotswold barrows, where the mound was constructed
   of dry-stone cells filled with material from the quarry-ditches, themselves dug in a series of
   intersecting pits. This suggests an organisation of several co-operating groups, perhaps on
   the scale postulated by W. Startin (PPS 1978, vol. 44, pp. 143-59), for construction of a
   Bandkeramik longhouse. Such a co-operating unit, itself segmentary in character, would
   represent a political community but not necessarily a co-resident group. This may be the
   logic behind the settlement clusters definable in Neolithic settlement patterns in several
   areas.


                                               153




                      This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 SOCIAL      EVOLUTION:

5. Such tombs still had a 'monumental' aspect in that they were covered with earth mounds,
   which might form small cemeteries through the accumulation of satellite and secondary
   burials. A role as territorial markers is evident from their occurrence on interfluves and on
   sight-lines, but not all such burials were marked by mounds. In some areas where spatial
   expansion was not occurring, flat graves are found - sometimes in large cemeteries - e.g.
   Vikletice, Bohemia.
6. The Almerian collective burials in tholoi (nearly ninety at Los Millares) differ from other
   European megalithic tombs in their direct associations with a large adjacent settlement: in
   this case the tombs may directly reflect lineages within the community. These appear to be
   ranked in wealth and this pattern is probably associated with the continuing importance
   of limited areas of wet bottomlands in this arid environment.
7. This occurs on menhirs in the west Mediterranean, and also on Cycladic figurines.
8. This is not to deny the existence of extensive kinship networks in earlier times, especially
   among Upper Palaeolithic hunters in open environments; but it suggests that an initial
   effect of the introduction of agriculture (or other forms of existence involving large,
   sedentary communities) was to place the emphasis of social organisation foremost on
   community. This would be the case both in the large settlements of the Neolithic of central
   and south-east Europe, and in the Neolithic of western Europe where 'big monuments'
   replaced 'big sites'. The formation of more extensive kinship networks would then repre-
   sent a shift to forms of social organisation that were less tied to patterns of residence and
   the existence of large, stable settlements.




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                           Section           III

  D I S C O V E R I N G THE
SECONDARY PRODUCTS
          COMPLEX




Impression of a cylinder-seal of the Uruk period, c.3500 BC, showing two men
       harnessing an ox (British Museum: drawing by Ann Searight).



 Als man Milch trank, und den Ochsen an den Pflug spannte, waren
    wesentlich alle Bedingungen fur unsere asiatisch-europaische
                         Kultur vorhanden.
        (When milk was drunk, and the ox yoked to the plough,
  all the conditions for our Asiatic-European culture were present.)
                                                          EDUARD HAHN (1896)




              This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:26:25 UTC
                               All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
         DISCOVERING      THE    SECONDARY       PRODUCTS        COMPLEX


 u ur understanding of Old World animal management after the initial
provision of a captive meat supply was put on a new footing by Andrew
Sherratt's now classic study of 1981', wrote Stuart Piggott (1992, 13),
having earlier (1983, 34) called it 'important and stimulating' but the
phenomenon in question 'unhappily named'. Alas, quite true - but de-
liberately so. I have tendentiously titled this section 'Discovering ...', but
it would be more in tune with contemporary terminology if I had written
'Inventing the Secondary Products Complex' - or Secondary Products Revo-
lution, as I even more tendentiously termed it at the time. The rhetorical
flourish of an admittedly ugly title was a necessary strategy to ensure the
visibility of the concept.
   That strategy apparently succeeded; for not only is the concept enshrined
in the new Oxford Companion to Archaeology (with which I have no
editorial links), but the term is used in several British universities to struc-
ture their teaching of later European prehistory. There is obviously a need
to find punctuation points within the long sequence of agrarian communi-
ties before the arrival of bronze - a period which has successively increased
in length with every advance in absolute dating since the invention (or
discovery?) of radiocarbon dating. It clearly, therefore, fulfils a need in
current expository schemes: but did it ever really happen?
   That depends, of course, on how it is conceived. 'This was a time of
considerable intensification of farming production, using a whole range
of devices and inventions in agriculture and in animal husbandry. Some of
these are well encapsulated in Sherratt's term the "secondary products
revolution"', writes Colin Renfrew (1994,159-60), presenting a minimalist
interpretation - for he goes on to qualify his acceptance of the idea: 'but
unfortunately his exposition involves the diffusionist assumption that the
innovations in question had an eastern origin, a point that has been
effectively countered (Chapman 1982; see Bogucki 1988). As noted above,
these diffusionist arguments rest as much on faith as on material evidence,
and the positive features of his model are just as well described under the
rubric of the intensification of farming systems.'
    In this minimalist form, it still fulfils one of the intentions which I had
in (well, yes, frankly) inventing the concept: to emphasise the otherness of
early farming. Terms such as 'hunting' or 'farming' carry a heavy baggage
of contemporary images and assumptions, which it is anachronistic to retro-
ject deep into the past. On the one hand, it is necessary to choose some term
from contemporary language; on the other, any term cannot quite fit earlier
circumstances - for instance the combination of cereal cultivation and
gazelle-hunting practised by the early inhabitants of Jericho. Bundling
together all the features now characteristic of Old World farming - but not
present at the beginning, nor represented, for instance, in native North
American farming - was a convenient way of summarising the very different
character of early Old World cultivation systems. Use of the term 'revo-


                                        156




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:26:25 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
         DISCOVERING       THE   SECONDARY        PRODUCTS       COMPLEX


lution', however, suggested a stadial, evolutionary model underlying it,
which it was not part of my intention to convey; and this would be the core
of my disagreement with Colin Renfrew, for I do not believe that these
changes could have happened if Europe had remained in complete isolation.
   Fundamental to my conception of why the SPR did happen, and why its
successive impacts in mid- and late-fourth-millennium BC Europe were so
concentrated, was its intimate connection to Gordon Childe's Urban
Revolution in Mesopotamia. This, as I suggest in the final chapter in this
volume, is the 'revolution' to which its European impact is due - just as the
fundamental impact which farming itself had on Europe some three
millennia earlier was due to the Neolithic Revolution in the same area. It
was the unique characteristics of that intimate intermixture of the desert, the
steppe and the sown which made the area between the Mediterranean and
the Persian Gulf into such a power-house of innovations (Sherratt 1996).




                                        157




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:26:25 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
  Plough and Pastoralism: Aspects of
  the Secondary Products Revolution
                                        (1981)

 1 he contrast between the development of agriculture in the Old and New
Worlds is an instructive one. In both, the domestication of a cereal crop
allowed a massive increase in population, first in village communities and
later in towns and cities. The major difference lay in the role of animal
domesticates. In the New World there were few counterparts to the range
of domesticated animals which were an integral part of Old World systems;
in North America only the turkey, and in South America the guinea-pig
and the Andean camelids, played a comparable role to the sheep, cattle and
equids of Eurasia.
    The first implication of this contrast is the primary role in the 'Neolithic
Revolution' which was played in both hemispheres by the domestication of
plants, and especially cereals. Cultivation alone, without the extensive use
of domestic animals, was able to sustain even complex urban societies. But
it is not without significance that the next threshold, that of industrial-
isation, was attained only in the Old World; for the employment of animal-
power as the first stage in the successive harnessing of increasingly powerful
sources of energy beyond that of human muscle was only possible where
these animals were domestic, not wild. The critical differences between the

David Clarke's death in 1976, at the age of 38, was a devastating blow. Ian
Hodder and I discussed compiling a volume of papers. I wanted to write the best
paper of which I was capable, and this was it. (Even Glyn Daniel - no admirer
of New Archaeology - liked it, as I discovered from an unfinished review tucked
inside his copy, sold after his death.) It builds on comments that David made on
my Ph.D. thesis, about the fundamental nature of the transition from the Balkan
Copper Age to the Early Bronze Age, and continued in the comparative (and
interactionist) way which he encouraged. The paper would not have been possible
without the pervasive influence of David Clarke. Many of its ideas had their roots
in his suggestions and remarks. His enthusiasm and criticism were sadly missed in
writing it.

                                            158




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        ASPECTS     OF   THE     SECONDARY         PRODUCTS          REVOLUTION


utilisation of animals in the Old and New World lay less in their uses as a
source of meat than in their emergent properties when other applications
were explored - their 'secondary products'.
    The distinguishing feature of agrarian development in the Old World,
therefore, is the interaction between plant and animal domesticates. Of
major importance in this process is the plough - the first application of
animal-power to the mechanisation of agriculture. Closely connected with
this is the use of the cart, with its contribution not only to more intensive
farming but to the transportation of its products. These two innovations
resulted from a new application of domesticated cattle. Comparable
advances in transport resulted from the domestication of the equids and
their use as draught- and pack-animals. Also, secondary features of domesti-
cated ovicaprids - notably the development of wool in sheep - allowed a
new range of uses for these animals in providing fibres suitable for textiles.
Finally, the regular milking of domesticated animals provided a variety of
storable products and made possible a continuous flow of food without
slaughtering the stock.
    These features were not part of the original complex of plant and animal
domestication in the Old World. Archaeological evidence for this range of
secondary uses and products of domesticated animals is naturally very
varied and of uneven value. Nevertheless, where these features can be dated,
it is apparent that they only appear five millennia or so after the beginnings
of agriculture in the Near East, and some three or four millennia after its
introduction to Europe. There was thus a long primary phase of agricultural
development before the secondary uses of domesticated animals were dis-
covered and applied. Moreover, many of these features appeared within a
similar span of time, some four to five thousand years ago. While they are
by no means exactly contemporary, their appearance together at approxi-
mately the halfway point in the development of agriculture in the Old
World, marking the beginnings of a phase of interaction between the plant
and animal components and the earliest non-human sources of energy,
perhaps deserves some explicit recognition: and it is in this spirit that I
venture to burden an already over-taxed archaeological vocabulary with yet
another revolution - the Secondary Products Revolution of the Old World.
    These secondary products had important applications both in the intensi-
fication of agricultural production and in the sphere of transport, trade and
personal mobility. The plough increased production and made economic the
cultivation of a range of poorer-quality soils; it thus resulted in the colon-
isation of a wider area than had been possible under previous systems of
cultivation. Both the ox-cart and the horse, as well as the pack-donkey,
opened up new possibilities for bulk transport and reduced the friction of
distance. They made economic a range of locations and settlement types,
including systems with cities, which would otherwise have involved huge
amounts of effort. The development of textiles made from animal fibres


                                            159




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:




6.1 Clay tablets from Uruk with symbols in pictographic script, including the sign
for 'cart\ Uruk period, late fourth millennium BC (after Falkenstein 1936).

gave for the first time a commodity which could be produced for exchange
in areas where arable production was not the optimal form of land use. The
use of milk made much larger herds economical, making use of exhausted
and otherwise marginal land and encouraging the development of the
pastoral sector with transhumance or even nomadism.
   This bundle of innovations produced two types of society and subsistence
systems which were unknown in pre-contact aboriginal America: plough-
using agriculturalists, and pastoralists. The two were frequently in geo-
graphical proximity and interaction and their relations, both of conflict and
symbiosis, are a recurring theme in the history of the Old World. Anthro-
pologists have long recognised (and are increasingly emphasising; Goody
1976) the importance of plough agriculture as a predictor of social systems
involving new mechanisms of inheritance as a result of the importance
which the transmission of land acquires in such economies. Groups with
a major pastoral component, too, have characteristic social features, such
as strongly patrilineal descent groups, which are unlikely to have been
associated with earlier hoe cultivators. The revolution was thus not simply
a matter of subsistence and economics: it was a threshold of social develop-
ment as well.
   It would be surprising if so radical a set of changes were without evident
traces in the archaeological record. While the secondary utilisation of
animals can be shown from representations, or occasionally glimpsed
directly where the evidence is favourably preserved, the striking changes in
the distribution and character of settlement in Europe in the third millen-
nium BC are eloquent testimony to a major alteration in the condition of life.
Coming at a time when settlement in many of the older-settled areas had
expanded to its limits, and long-term soil deterioration had begun to set in,
these changes define a 'second generation' of agrarian economies in Europe,
and the beginnings of a new cycle of expansion in the Bronze Age.
   The 'secondary products revolution' thus separates two stages in the
development of Old World agriculture: an initial stage of hoe cultivation,
whose technology and transportation systems were based upon human
muscle-power, and in which animals were kept purely for meat; and a


                                             160




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        ASPECTS     OF   THE     SECONDARY          PRODUCTS         REVOLUTION


second stage in which both plough agriculture and pastoralism can be recog-
nised, with a technology using animal sources of energy. The former mode
of life is now extinct in the temperate and sub-tropical parts of the Old
World, though it may have important analogies with agriculture or semi-
agriculture as practised in aboriginal temperate North America. The
secondary products revolution marked the birth of the kinds of society
characteristic of modern Eurasia.


DATING EVIDENCE
The use of animal traction
Although cattle were fully domesticated at least by the sixth millennium BC,
they were not systematically used as traction animals until the later fourth
millennium, when a specific technology was developed to make use of this.
The most important applications were to the plough and the cart. The
evidence will be reviewed separately here, but it is clear that the two spread
as a closely related complex.

The cart. Earliest unambiguous indications of the use of the cart (Figure 6.1)
come from archaic Sumerian pictograms from Uruk in southern Meso-
potamia (Falkenstein 1936, signs 742-5). These date to the first half of the
fourth millennium BC. From the succeeding Early Dynastic period there
is a wealth of evidence from representations and actual cart burials. Clay
models of vehicles with two or four solid wheels occur at this time over a
wide area including northern Syria, northern Iraq, eastern Turkey, northern
Iran and Transcaucasia. Mesopotamian examples are mostly vehicles for use
in war, but the ones from further north include 'covered wagon' forms well
suited for use in regions at the junction of steppe and forest (Piggott 1968
[and now 1983 for the early history of wheeled vehicles in general]).
   Comparable vehicles are known to have been used at least during the
third millennium BC on the steppe-lands north of the Caucasus and the
Black Sea. Several groups of barrows near Elista on the Kalmuk steppe
between the Caucasus and the Volga have produced evidence of carts. The
most famous example, Tri Brata, contained both wooden wheels and a
model of a two-wheeled cart. A somewhat later example from Kudinov on
the lower Don contained a complete four-wheeled wagon. Similar finds
occur on the lower Dnepr.
   In Eastern Europe the most striking evidence is the handled drinking-cup
in the form of a four-wheeled wagon from Budakalasz near Budapest in
Hungary, now with another example (Figure 6.2a) from Szigetszentmarton
(Kalicz 1976). These belong to the Baden culture, as does the cemetery of
Alsonemedi with its double bovid burial [cow and calf in Alsonemedi graves
3 and 28, two calves in the comparable grave 3 at Budakalasz - presumably


                                            161




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                          PLOUGH       AND     PASTORALISM:




(a)                                                (b)




 (c)   ^ ^   ^       ^ ^ ^                         (d)

6.2 Early evidence of ox-traction in Europe: (a) cup in the form of a wagon from
a Baden culture grave at Szigetszentmarton, Hungary; (b) handle in the form of
two yoked oxen, TRB culture Krgznica Jara, Poland; (c) pottery *cart' with two
protomes, Baden culture, Radosina, Slovakia; (d) pecked scene of oxen drawing a
cart, from a megalithic cist at Zuschen, Germany; after Kalicz (1976), Nbnejcova-
Pavukovd (1973) and Uenze (1958).
to avoid killing valuable draught-oxen] indicative of paired draught (see
below Korek, Behrens 1964). [It is notable that there are several pedestalled
cups whose bowl is a wheel-less wagon body (Banner 1956, plate 114 nos
1-7); and also that the Budakalasz wagon-cup had its own grave (no. 177) -
a cenotaph without a body.] A somewhat larger vessel in the form of a
wagon, without wheels but with two animal (ox?) protomes protruding
from the front, comes from Radosina in Slovakia (Figure 6.2c), from an
early Baden (Boleraz) context (Nemejcova-Pavukova 1973, fig. 3). Radio-
carbon dates for this culture indicate a date of 3400-3100 BC. Double ox
burials appear at the same time in over a dozen examples in the Globular
Amphora culture in Poland and central Germany (and may be present in
Middle Neolithic Denmark, though bone is less well preserved). Evidence
from representations is also available in the form of a pottery handle show-
ing a pair of yoked oxen from Kr^znica Jara, Lublin (Figure 6.2b), in the
context of the south-east TRB group, datable to the later fourth millennium
BC, and also from a stone with a pecked schematic scene (Figure 6.2d) in

                                             162




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        ASPECTS     OF   THE    SECONDARY          PRODUCTS         REVOLUTION




                    KAA -

                                                         OlQ




6.3 Above: representation of a four-wheeled wagon on a TRB pot from Bronocice
(Phase III, 3500-3100), Little Poland: Milisauskas and Kruk 1982; middle: motif
in schematic form on contemporary Polish TRB pots from Inowroclaw-Mqtwy
and Ostrowiec Swiqtokrzyski (Midgley 1992, figs 13 and 108); below: wagon-
representation from below the belt of a statue-menhir from Lagunda, Alto Adige,
Italy (other examples have a plough in the same position): [new drawing].
a Hesse collective-burial cist at Lohne (Ziischen) with a similar dating
(Uenze 1958). The scene is a vertical view of pairs of oxen yoked to what
are probably carts. A similar view of a four-wheeled vehicle has recently
been found in a TRB context at Bronocice in south-east Poland (Milisauskas
and Kruk 1978: see Figure 6.3).
   Finds of actual cart components have been made in Europe only in water-
logged contexts. Wheels from the Netherlands and Denmark have been
dated by pollen analysis and radiocarbon dating to the third-millennium BC

                                            163




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         PLOUGH        AND       PASTORALISM:




                     _mnk            —       ^               -^k




                     ^                                       ^
6.4 Clay tablets of the fourth millennium BC with symbols in pictographic script,
including the sign for 'plough3: above, from Uruk, Mesopotamia (Uruk period);
below, from Susa, Khuzestan (proto-Elamite period). After Falkenstein (1936)
andScheil (1923).
Corded-ware period (van der Waals 1964; Rostholm 1977). Two yokes, one
from Switzerland (Vinelz) and one from Lower Saxony (Petersfehn), may
also be of third-millennium date (Gandert 1964).
   Turning east, there are many examples of models showing solid-wheeled
carts from the Harappan culture of the mid-third millennium BC in north-
east India. In China, however (as also apparently in Egypt), the wheel only
arrived in its spoked form in the second millennium. This spread across cen-
tral Asia was associated with the use of the horse, and is considered below.
   The evidence thus suggests that wheeled vehicles were first produced in
the Near East in the fourth millennium BC, and that they rapidly spread
from there both to Europe and India during the course of the third millen-
nium, and across the central Asian steppes in the second. The occurrence of

                                             164




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        ASPECTS     OF   THE    SECONDARY          PRODUCTS          REVOLUTION




6.5 Third- and second-millennium ploughs: left, impression of a cylinder-seal
showing two-handled plough (ard) with sowing-funnel, Akkadian period, late
third millennium BC (Ashmolean Museum); right, sole-ards in Cretan hieroglyphic
script, early second millennium (after Evans).
model wheels in New World contexts, indicating that the principle was
known even though wheeled vehicles were not used in transport, shows that
the availability of draught animals was the critical factor in this technology.
The plough. Again, earliest indications are in pictograms (Figure 6.4)
(Falkenstein 1936, sign 214; Scheil 1923, signs 668-77). The basic model
seems to be the same in both cases, with two stilts (handles) and a composite
draught-pole. Representations of such ploughs (or, more accurately, ards)
are plentiful as ritual scenes on cylinder-seals in the Akkadian period around
2300 BC, both in Mesopotamia and Assyria. These sometimes show a de-
veloped form with a sowing funnel (Figure 6.5), a device for sowing
in regular lines which was especially useful with irrigation and generally
in semi-arid conditions because of the deep implantation of the seed
(Christiansen-Weniger 1967).
   The plough, also in a two-handled version, is first evidenced in Egypt in
the mid-third millennium, in a third-dynasty representation (Hartmann
1923). The construction of the Egyptian plough owed features of design like
the rope binding to earlier hoe types.
   In contrast to these Near Eastern forms, the earliest European ones are
simpler and have only a single handle (Figures 6.6, 6.7). In the Mediter-
ranean region it consisted of a flat sole into which were inserted both the stilt
and the draught-pole. Further north, the even simpler design of the crook-
shaft was used - a branch with a recurving projection, carved from the trunk
itself, into which was set the stilt. As in Egypt, this resembled local hoe
types, and was indeed the basic form of hafting in use at the time.
   Ploughs of the sole-ard type are demonstrated from Early Bronze Age
Cyprus from small terracotta models [e.g. Vounous: Karageorghis 1982, fig.
29], and the signs of the Cretan pictographic and Linear A scripts (Figure
6.5; Evans 1909) make it clear that this design was also in use there in the
Bronze Age. It is not known what form was in use in Anatolia, but it was
probably also a one-handled type. The crook-ard is known to have been in

                                            165




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         PLOUGH       AND     PASTORALISM:




6.6 Finds of ards of crook-ard type from northern Europe and the Ukraine:
(a) Walle, Germany; (b) Wieu/ioki, Poland; (c) Polessje, Ukraine; (d) Tokari,
Ukraine; (e) Hvorslev; Denmark; ( f ) Sergeiev, Ukraine; (g) Vebbestrup, Denmark.
After Glob (1951) and Sramko (1971).
use in the second millennium north of the Black Sea in the area around Kiev,
as shown by finds from Polessje, Tokari and Sergeiev, the first radiocarbon
dated to the early second millennium BC (Sramko 1971). There is no reason
to suppose that it was not in contemporary use in the better-watered parts
of the true steppes further south.
   The use of the plough in the later third millennium in Harappan India has
recently been demonstrated by finds of plough-marks at Kalibangan in the
Punjab (Steensberg 1971). Its arrival in China, however, seems even later

                                            166




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                 ASPECTS              OF        THE    SECONDARY       PRODUCTS     REVOLUTION




                                                                             £ vnmnce ft he pimjgh
                                                                             and
                                                                              s 4
                                                                                  yoked tract**?*
                                                                             <*l               H''*.**^




             v-

                     '                     it

                   i; • n           --
                             0 " Oiw *
                      Ililll
                                                                   , - \\v
                    • P IIS
                    MBl \\ *
                              /
                            trill!!
                                                      •J.'-::-
                                           ""'v..       '   £-"7
                                                                                        111!

6.7 Nlap of plough-marks and of ard finds and representations, showing the
division between two-handled Near Eastern forms and European sole- and crook-
ards [cf. Fig. 0.5].
than that of wheeled vehicles, and occurred only in the first millennium BC.
   In southern Europe, finds of ploughs and plough-like objects are known
from second- and third-millennia circum-Alpine lakeside-village sites such
Early p l o u g h - m a r k s
l^frt Furrows
r 1 Megalithic blocks
      Disturbance
 0   Scalefor(a),(b),(c)   5 metres




6.8 Plough-marks preserved under north European long-barrows: (a) Avebury;
England; (b) Fuglebaeksbanken, Denmark; (c) Sarnowo, Poland; (d) Lundehoj,
Denmark. After Evans (1967), Ebbesen and Brinch-Peterson (1973), 0rsnes
(1956) and Dqbrowski (1971).

                                                                 167




                                             This content downloaded from
                           128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                                     All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         PLOUGH       AND      PASTORALISM:




6.9 Summary of evidence on the date of early ox-traction in Europe (scale in
hundreds of dendro-calibrated C14 years).
as the Lago di Ledro near Trento and Seeberg-Burgaschisee Sud near Berne.
The former yielded a crook-ard, the latter a rather similar 'hand-ard' or
Furchenstock (Battaglia 1943; Miiller-Beck 1965). The most extensive series
of early plough finds, however, comes from the North European Plain (Glob
1951). Four crook-ards are known from Jutland, of which two are dated
to the second millennium. Another, three metres in length, came from Walle
in East Friesland, Germany. Two more examples are known from the bend
of the Vistula in Poland.
   These finds of actual ploughs do not date the introduction of the im-
plement. It has long been known that traces of criss-cross plough-marks are
preserved under third-millennium round-barrows in north-west Europe; but

                                           168




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        ASPECTS     OF   THE    SECONDARY          PRODUCTS          REVOLUTION


               North-central       Carpathian          Western
B.C.             Europe              Basin             steppes

4OOO           Roessen             Tiszapolgar         Tripole BII



                Early TRB           Bodrogkeresztur Tripole CI
35OO


                Middle              Baden              Tripole CI I      <= Plough
                Neolithic                               (Usatovo)          Cart
                                                                           (Milk?)
3OOO

                Corded-ware/        Vucedol             Pit-graves       <= Wool
                 Beaker                                                    Horse
                                                                           Tumuli
                                                                           Alloying
2500            Early               Nagyrev             Catacomb-
                 Unetice                                 graves



2000            Late Unetice        Otomani            Timber-graves     <=• Chariot


Table 6.1 The earliest cultural contexts of features of the secondary products
complex in Europe.
now six examples preserved under late fourth-millennium long-barrows
are known, from Britain to Poland (Figure 6.8). At Sarnowo in Kujavia
a trapezoid barrow of the Wiorek phase of TRB overlay parallel plough-
furrows. A radiocarbon date for a pit beneath the barrow gave a terminus
post quern in the fifth millennium BC (Bakker et al. 1969, 7; Wislanski 1970)
and a more direct date is suggested from a nearby Wiorek site at Zar^bowo
dated to 3400 BC (2674 ± 40 b.c.). In Denmark four examples are known,
dating to the Middle Neolithic, around 3400-3200 BC. They are Lundehoj
on Mon (MN II-IV: 0rsnes 1956), Fuglebaeksbanken on Stevns in west
Zealand (MN lb: Ebbesen and Petersen 1973), Himmelev 53 in central
Zealand (MN lb) and Steneng in south Jutland (Skaarup 1975, note 239).
Finally, in southern England a long-barrow at Avebury, Wiltshire covered an
area of plough-marks some fifteen metres square. It was radiocarbon dated
by material from underneath and within it to 3500-3200 BC (Fowler and
Evans 1967). The coincidence of these dates is remarkable.
   There is also a striking similarity between the dates for the appearance of
the plough and the cart, and when the evidence is plotted in conjunction
(Figure 6.9) it forms a consistent pattern. The plough and cart seem to have
been developed somewhere in northern Mesopotamia by the early fourth
millennium BC, and to have spread in not much more than 500 years as
far as north-west Europe (Table 6.1), where it arrived around 3500 BC.

                                            169




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


Assuming a similar rate of spread to other parts of Europe, it would have
reached the Aegean by around 3400 BC, and Iberia by 3200 BC.
   This horizon has long been recognised as marking a major change in
culture and settlement patterns. It marks the beginning of the Early Bronze
Age in Transcaucasia, Anatolia, the Aegean and the Balkans; the Tripole-
Usatovo transition in the Ukraine; the Baden culture in central Europe;
the Middle Neolithic (Passage-grave) period in north-west Europe, and the
Chalcolithic of south-west Europe. There is thus reason to believe that the
introduction of this traction complex, and perhaps other features, was of
major importance in European culture-history; and that its spread to other
areas may have been equally significant.

Animals for riding and transport
The fourth millennium also saw the domestication of four or five species of
animals which, although hunted in earlier periods, had not been economical
to domesticate. These, however, were animals which could be ridden, or
used as pack- or draught-animals, and included equids and camels. Their
suitability as transport animals helps to explain their independent but near-
contemporary domestication from Egypt and Arabia to the Ukraine and
Turkmenia.

The equids. The genus Equus entered the Old World in the Late Pliocene,
and the modern distribution of species is the result of geographical
speciation during the Pleistocene. This produced four main groups within
the desert-steppe belt: zebras in sub-Saharan Africa, asses in north Africa,
half asses (hemiones) or onagers in the Near East, and true horses in
Eurasia.
   The horse (Equus caballus) was widespread in the steppe-tundras of the
last glaciation, and survived in small numbers in forested areas in the
Holocene; but its main habitat was the steppe belt from the Ukraine to
Mongolia. The contexts of the earliest horse domestication were the
sedentary cattle-keeping but non-agricultural communities of the middle
Dnepr, neighbours of agricultural Tripole groups in the parallel river valleys
further west in the late fifth and fourth millennia BC. These sites of the
Sredni Stog group of the Dnepr-Donets culture contain Tripole B imports.
At one of these, Dereivka, south of Kiev, a large number of bones of a small
variety of horse have been recovered, and dated by radiocarbon to around
4400 BC (Telegin 1971). These have been widely accepted as indicative of an
early stage of domestication, and features of material culture interpreted as
riding equipment. The keeping of horses spread from this area only in the
mid-fourth millennium, at around the time when the traction complex was
becoming widespread. The percentage of horses in Tripole C assemblages
shows a leap from 5 per cent to 15 per cent over the previous period (Figure
6.10), at the same time that sheep became more common than cattle both

                                            170




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        ASPECTS     OF    THE    SECONDARY          PRODUCTS         REVOLUTION


             Tripole




             0                      10                     20                  30
                                                                 % min. ind.

6.10 Percentages of horse (minimum numbers of individuals) in faunal assem-
blages of the three phases of the Tripole culture (data from Murray 1970). [In fact,
the increase probably reflects Tripole expansion into the steppes, and thus mostly
hunted animals - not the spread of domesticated horses.]
among Tripole groups and the successors of the Sredni Stog group. This
coincided with a widespread colonisation of the true steppe area in the
interfluves between the major river valleys, and formed part of the radical
economic changes behind the emergence of the Pit-Grave culture in this
area.
   Horses spread more slowly into forested Europe than did the traction
complex, but became widespread in the later third millennium. They are
evidenced in large numbers on the Island of Csepel below Budapest in the
Beaker period, when they also seem to have reached Ireland (Nobis 1971;
van Wijngaarden-Bakker 1975). At the same time they spread down into the
Near East through the Caucasus and eastern Anatolia, down to the Levant
and Mesopotamia. Riders on horseback are shown on terracotta plaques of
the Old Babylonian period, and though difficult to distinguish from the
native onagers, horses are well documented by the later third millennium,
though the expense of keeping them in a sub-tropical environment restricted
their ownership.
   The onager (Equus hemionus) was a widely hunted species in the Near
East during the early Neolithic. Lightly built and fast-moving, it is not easy
to domesticate and is often shown muzzled in Mesopotamian represen-
tations. It was probably first used in the steppes of Assyria or Khuzestan in
the later fourth millennium BC, before the spread of the horse, and is most
probably the equid shown on proto-Elamite tablets (Scheil 1923). In Early
Dynastic times during the third millennium they (or their hybrids) were
applied as draught animals to the solid-wheeled battle-cars with two or four
wheels of the kind shown in the Agrab model or on the Standard of Ur. They
were harnessed in the same way as cattle, and controlled by means of a nose
ring: but it took four animals to pull even the two-wheeled cars. Terracotta


                                             171




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:




6.11 Pottery model of donkey with panniers, broken from the rim of a vessel.
From Cyprus, EB III (late third millennium BC); (Ashmolean Museum).
plaques show that equids were ridden at least by the later third millennium.
   The southwards spread of the horse displaced the onager from most of its
uses, including that of traction animal. The vehicles with which it was used,
however, underwent a more rapid development to make them more suitable
for equids. This probably took place in northern Mesopotamia, Anatolia
and northern Iran: an early stage is shown by the use of the cross-bar wheel
with a central splat and two struts on a seal from Tepe Hissar, and true
spoked wheels are known from Cappadocia from the end of the third
millennium (Moorey 1968). In Mesopotamia in the early second millen-
nium, traction equids were still controlled by a nose ring: but on the
Eurasian steppes the new light vehicles were joined to more sophisticated
traditions of horsemanship using the bit. Horse bits and spoked wheels are
together evidenced in eastern Europe shortly after 2000 BC in sites of the
Mad'arovce and Otomani cultures, where bone cheek-pieces and clay
models of four-spoke wheels have been found in Hungary, Slovakia and
Moravia (Tihelka 1954; Bona 1960; Vizdal 1972). The spoke-wheeled cart
spread equally rapidly eastwards across the steppes, and it is represented in
a drawing on a pot of the Timber-Grave culture, and on rock engravings in
Kirgizia and Kazakhstan (Cherednichenko 1976). It was probably by this
route that spoke-wheeled vehicles reached China.
   The third equid to be domesticated at this time was the ass or donkey
(Equus asinus). Its natural distribution is from Algeria to Sinai and possibly

                                             172




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        ASPECTS     OF   THE SECONDALT Y PRODUCTS                    REVOLUTION


into the Levant. The advantage of the species is its docility and low dietary
needs, making it a most economical animal especially in the Near East and
Mediterranean. It thus provided a natural complement to the horse in this
region. It was known as a domesticated animal for pack use in the EBA of
Palestine around 3000 BC and in Egypt from the early third millennium BC
onwards. It was used in Cyprus in the later third millennium as a pack
animal, as shown in EB III figurines (Figure 6.11). Especially when crossed
with the horse to produce the mule, the vigorous but infertile inter-specific
hybrid, it was perhaps the most important form of bulk, long-distance
transport, and must have formed the basis for the expanding overland trade
networks of the later third and second millennia, such as the well-
documented route linking Assur with the karum of Kanis. In this role, it was
of even greater economic importance than the horse itself.

The camels. Like the equids, camels also spread through the Old World
in the Pleistocene, though they did not penetrate so far or split into geo-
graphical species to the same extent. While all belong to the species Camelus
dromedarius, they fall into two regional populations which were probably
independently domesticated. The more primitive woolly, two-humped or
'Bactrian' camel is adapted to the cooler steppe and mountain fringe of
Eurasia, and the more advanced, single-humped dromedary or 'Arabian'
camel to the more arid areas of Arabia and north Africa. The advantage of
the camel as a transport animal is that it can carry twice as much as a
donkey, faster, for less frequent feeding and watering (Bulliet 1975).
   The one-hump camel was probably domesticated from at least the early
third millennium, and is possibly shown loaded on a pot from the cemetery
of Abusir-el-Melek in lower Egypt; while the two-humped form is shown on
a contemporary bronze pick from Khurab in southern Iran (Zeuner 1963).
The two-hump form seems to have been part of the traction complex, being
controlled by a nose ring and shown pulling vehicles in central Asia, for
instance on third-millennium cart models with solid wheels and a camel's
head from Turkmenia, or on rock drawings showing camels pulling spoke-
wheeled carts from the region of Minusinsk (Bulliet 1975, 153,185; Figure
7.6). Camel bones are known from the Andronovo and Timber-Grave
cultures, and camel-hair was claimed at Maikop. The one-hump form,
traditionally controlled by a noseband, became more common in the first
millennium as Arab groups opened up the desert trade routes.
   With the equids and the camels, five independent but parallel episodes of
domestication took place during the fourth millennium, partly in direct
association with the traction complex, and partly in adjoining parts of the
semi-arid zone. Asses and camels in north Africa, onagers in the Near East
itself, and horses and camels in the Eurasian steppe and semi-desert zone, all
contributed to a more general transportation complex able to deal with a
wide range of conditions. Within this area, individual animals spread and

                                            173




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


replaced or complemented the others, as well as expanding beyond this
nuclear area into many parts of the Old World. Together they produced a
revolutionary increase in transport potential.

Milk and wool
Milk. Basic to the economics of keeping animals for exploitation in the ways
discussed earlier in this article is the use of milk. If animals are being used
for purposes other than meat, they are too valuable a resource to slaughter
simply when required for food. While surplus males may be eaten, larger
numbers of females are needed for breeding stock. To carry the numbers of
beasts required for a working population and a breeding population, some
continuously usable food-product is really necessary - milk or in some cases
blood.
   Milk has several advantages. From a dietary point of view, it supplies the
amino-acid lysine which is missing in cereal-based food. It contains fat,
protein and sugar in a balanced form, and is a useful source of calcium.
Being liquid, it is easily handled, and can be converted into a variety of
storable products. These qualities, together with its almost universal associ-
ation with domesticated livestock at the present time, have led many writers
to assume that milking was practised from the earliest Neolithic onwards.
   But the matter is not so simple. In the first place, animals which are not
specially bred for the purpose do not produce large quantities of surplus
milk; and moreover may not readily surrender it to the herdsman. Nor are
human populations physiologically well adapted to use, as adults, the
specific form of sugar which milk contains. Indeed, most adults suffer an
unpleasant, even dangerous, reaction to drinking milk - 'a bloated feeling,
flatulence, belching, cramps and a watery, explosive diarrhoea' (Kretchmer
1972, 72). Realisation that Euroamerican populations are unusual in their
tolerance to milk as adults has come only recently. Tests with American
negroes first showed that the adult ability to digest milk is not present in
mankind as a whole (Bayless and Rosenzweig 1966), and tests of popu-
lations around the world showed how restricted that ability is (McCracken
1971). This realisation made sense of the evidence being assembled on the
distribution of the milking habit itself (Simoons 1969; 1970). It was so long
in being recognised because of the concentration of research and medical
skills among the populations most tolerant of milk - European and
American whites. In the present context, it is of fundamental importance.
    Milk has three components: fat, protein, and milk-sugar, known as
lactose. This last is a disaccharide, composed of glucose and galactose, and
is synthesised only in the mammary gland. It is broken down in the small
intestine by the enzyme lactase, which splits the disaccharide into glucose -
which is used directly - and galactose, which is metabolised by the liver.
In the absence of lactase, the lactose remains undigested and is fermented
by the bacteria of the colon. It is this which causes the explosive diarrhoea.

                                             174




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        ASPECTS     OF   THE SECONDALT Y PRODUCTS                    REVOLUTION


The cause of lactose intolerance is thus lactase deficiency (Kretchmer 1972).
   In all mammals except human lactose-tolerant populations, the pro-
duction of lactase is at a maximum shortly after birth and ceases after
infancy - in man, from two to four years of age. This represents the normal
situation, and fits the pattern of other temporarily produced enzymes.
Lactase production is not stimulated to any extent by the continued in-
gestion of lactose. Lactose-tolerance is transmitted genetically, and indeed is
a dominant trait, although incompletely so. American black populations are
approximately 70 per cent intolerant in comparison with ancestral West
African populations, who at the present time are 98 per cent intolerant.
Lactose-intolerance is particularly high among Chinese, Thais, agricultural
West Africans (though not nomadic groups like the Fulani), South Ameri-
cans and New Guineans, of those tested. In short, lactose-tolerance is the
result of a relatively recent evolutionary episode, and adult milk-drinking a
late and restricted feature of human diet (Kretchmer 1972; Simoons 1969).
   The elaborate preparation of milk products may have been necessary
because of a limited tolerance of lactose. Fermented products such as yogurt
and cheese have a lower lactose content than fresh milk (McCracken 1971),
and it is a general pattern in the Mediterranean that most of the milk is pro-
cessed in this way. Low levels of tolerance are common today in Greece and
south Italy, and such processing is analogous to the preparation of bitter
manioc for consumption in South America.
   The well-known Chinese aversion to milk, often cited as an example of
an irrational food preference, is part of a more widespread phenomenon
with a basic biological explanation. The geographical distribution of the
practice of milking (Simoons 1970, 702) shows a continuous area from
Morocco to eastern India (with non-milking enclaves there suggesting a
recent expansion of the practice), extending southwards in east Africa but
not penetrating into south-east Asia and Oceania. It comprises those areas
connected via the steppe corridor and the Sahara, the arid belt across Africa
and Eurasia. In the centre of this area are the mountains of the Near East
and surrounding steppes. The distribution suggests a mid-Holocene origin
for the practice, somewhere in this central area, and it seems likely that
milking and milk-consumption form another aspect of the complex of
secondary uses and products which has been outlined above; indeed, it was
probably a precondition for these developments.
   The limited tolerance of human populations to milk is only one side of
the problem: the reluctance or inability of the cow to provide it is the other.
For a modern perspective on this we may turn to the pastoral groups studied
by ethnographers (Cranstone 1969). These illustrate the difficulties faced
by people who do not have the highly bred milch animals of north-west
Europe. The problem is to allow the animals to accumulate their milk, and
to persuade them to let it down to a human milker. Cows are often separated
from their calves during the day, to prevent their taking milk. However, they

                                            175




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:




6.12 Cylinder-seal and drawing of its impression, showing reed-built byres with
calves and milk-jugs, with a frieze of adult animals above. The seal itself is
surmounted by a silver ram. From Iraq, Uruk period (late fourth millennium BC);
(Ashmolean Museum).

                                            176




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        ASPECTS     OF   THE    SECONDALT Y P R O D U C T S          REVOLUTION




6.13 Inlaid scene of milking, forming part of the frieze of the temple to Nin-
Hursag built by A-an-ni-pa-da at El 'Ubeid, Iraq. Early Dynastic (mid-third
millennium BC); (by permission of the Trustees of the British Museum).

or some surrogate need to be present at the milking, to stimulate lactation
and to activate the milk ejection reflex (Amoroso and Jewell 1963). The
action of letting down the milk is a true reflex, involving the release by the
pituitary gland of the hormone oxytocin which stimulates contraction of the
muscles which press on the milk storage sacs. This reflex may be activated
by stimulation either of the teat and mammary gland, or (because of the role
of oxytocin in initiating uterine contractions) the vagina and cervix. It is
thus a common custom among present and ancient pastoralists to blow,
often using a special tube, into the rectum or vagina of the animal during
milking. The milker is thus positioned behind the animal, rather than at the
side as is otherwise more convenient. Instruments for this purpose have been
identified archaeologically, for instance in the Baden culture (Banner 1956)
and in south Russia (Galkin 1975).
   These features were once widespread, not only among specialised
pastoralists but in all the groups which practised milking. Uruk period seals
show the adult cattle returning to huts where the young have been stalled
during the day (Figure 6.12). From the Early Dynastic III period comes the
famous relief from the temple of Nin-Hursag at El Ubeid, built by A-an-ni-
pad-da, second king of the first dynasty of Ur. This shows in great detail the
actual milking - from the back, with the aid of an insufflator - and the
processing of the milk (Figure 6.13). The small udders on these early cows
suggest that they were not highly bred for milk, and such stimulation would
be essential. The milking position behind the animal is also shown in an
Early Dynastic inlay from Kish; and it was still in use in Minoan times,
as shown by a sealing (Figure 6.14) from the Archives Deposit at Knossos
(Evans 1935). Goats are also shown being milked on Early Dynastic
cylinder-seals. In Egypt a hobbled cow is shown being milked in the presence
of a calf in the tomb of Ti in the Old Kingdom (Klebs 1915, 63). Milking is
apparently shown on some central Saharan rock drawings from Tassili and
the Fezzan, but their date is difficult to determine and there is no evidence that
they are earlier than the third millennium BC (Simoons 1971; Clark 1976).
   The biochemical and iconographic evidence thus suggests that although
milking was known by the time of the first representations in early urban

                                            177




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                          PLOUGH       AND       PASTORALISM:




                                        \
                                            \




                                                                    i^MMlHlfl
                                            /
                                        /



                                                        ill

6.14 Early milking: left, sealing from Knossos, Crete, Late Bronze Age (later
second millennium), showing milking from behind (Evans 1935(4), fig. 534);
right, shell inlay from Kish, Iraq, ED III (mid-second millennium) (Ashmolean
Museum).

contexts in the Near East, it was not of much greater antiquity. Is there any
other evidence which would date the adoption and spread of the practice?
One suggestion comes from pottery. It has long been noted that the Bronze
Age sees a radical change in the kinds of vessels which constitute typical
assemblages. Specifically, the open bowls which dominated Neolithic assem-
blages were supplemented by a range of drinking and pouring vessels, and
a variety of pails (Figure 6.15). In the Mediterranean, the jugs and cups have
been attributed to the discovery of wine (Renfrew 1971, 282), and this may
be the case, but the changes affect a much wider area than that feature could
explain. They clearly reflect some dietary innovation occurring in southern,
central and northern Europe within a similar time range. Some types of
Bronze Age pottery, like the Appenine 'milk boilers' or the Cypriot 'milk
bowls' have already been characterised as being for such use. It seems likely
that the widespread adoption of shapes appropriate for the manipulation of
liquids is connected with the spread of the milking habit and the use of milk
products. This would explain the often uncanny resemblances between
distant areas, which have usually been used to argue for major migrations.
The massive array of parallels assembled by Kalicz between the Baden
culture and Anatolian Early Bronze Age cultures, for instance, finds an
acceptable explanation here [though see Chapters 8, 15 and 16]. Parallels
between EBA Bulgaria and Cyprus become comprehensible. The universal
appearance of strapwork-ornamented bucket-shaped pots, from one end of
Europe to the other, becomes less surprising; while the Fischbuttengefass
which appears in central Europe with the Baden culture has long been
explained in Ghassulian contexts in Palestine as a churn.
   Such lactic products, if such they were, probably had initially some ritual
and social significance, especially if they included the intoxicating products
of fermentation such as kumish. Precisely such an association is demon-
strated in the Baden culture cemeteries of Hungary, where the two cart


                                                178




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
       ASPECTS      OF THE SECONDALT Y PRODUCTS                     REVOLUTION

    CENTRAL EUROPE                        BALKANS                        CYPRUS




     N-W. EUROPE                         BALKANS                          T
                                                                          IAL
                                                                            Y




6.15 Pottery forms concerned with the manipulation of liquids and associated
with the spread of the secondary products complex. [The lower ones may be for
milk-processing, the upper ones - many with metal models - more probably for
alcoholic drinks.]



                                            179




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


burials at Alsonemedi were accompanied by identical assemblages consist-
ing of a finely made pottery jug, cup, dipper and bipartite bowl. From the
grave which produced the Szigetszentmarton cart model (Figure 6.2a) came
a precisely similar combination; and that model was itself a cup! The asso-
ciation of drinking and driving evidently began at an early stage in their
history. These coincidences strengthen the view that we are dealing with
an interdependent complex of features, which spread to a large extent in
association.

Wool. The textile-fibre which became most important in the Old World,
wool, was not present in the first four to five millennia after the initial
domestication of the sheep. Vegetable fibres formed the basis of the earliest
textiles, as in the New World, where cotton (Gossypium) fibre was de-
veloped by agricultural groups to supplement the older tradition of skin and
leather clothing. Flax (Linum usitatissimum) was the most common Old
World vegetable fibre, and already woven into elaborately patterned linen
textiles before the emergence of wool. This persisted in some hot countries
even after wool became common elsewhere: Egyptian Old Kingdom sheep
were commonly of non-woolly types. Wool sheep were not introduced into
Egypt until the Middle Kingdom.
   The date at which wool sheep developed is being made more precise by
microscopic examination of prehistoric fibres (Ryder 1969). These have
already suggested that claims of an early date for woollen fibres (as at Qatal
Hiiyiik) are mistaken. As with milking and paired-draught traction, the
earliest evidence comes with the beginning of a literary and pictorial record
during urbanisation in Mesopotamia. While such evidence gives only a
terminus ante quern, the replacement of linen by woollen textiles can be
traced in some detail from waterlogged contexts in Europe, and these show
that the transition had not occurred there before the mid-third millennium
BC. It seems most likely, therefore, that it had developed not long before the
first indications in the Near East. Examination of further samples will make
this more precise.
    The wild sheep has a brown, hairy coat with short, woolly underhair.
It was the development of underhair at the expense of the coarser outer hairs
or kemps which produced the wool sheep. This was probably deliberately
selected, in cold environments where the tendency was already present in
wild populations. Lighter colours of fleece were also sought, though early
sheep were probably more pigmented than today's breeds.
    By the time of the Uruk pictographs (Falkenstein 1936) there were over
thirty signs representing sheep. Pictorial evidence from the Proto-literate
period indicates that both hairy and woolly sheep were known, as well as
the fat-tailed breed. Sheep which are shown as being milked belong to the
spiral-horned variant of the wool sheep (Zeuner 1963, 173; Amoroso and
Jewell 1963). Early Dynastic sculptures and cylinder-seals not infrequently

                                             180




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        ASPECTS    OF   THE SECONDALT Y P R O D U C T S             REVOLUTION


show woolly sheep alongside hairy ones, while Old Babylonian shearing
lists indicate the organisation of wool collection (Kraus 1966, 47) and the
importance of the spring shearing in the agricultural calendar. The wool
would at this stage have been plucked, as it was naturally moulted, and
somewhat finer wool obtained as many of the coarser hairs were left behind.
    Marked changes in the exploitation of sheep appear in Europe in the
third millennium. In Hungary, sheep increase as a percentage of bones on
sites to 40 per cent or more, in comparison to figures of around 10 per cent
in the preceding period (Bokonyi 1974, figs 1 and 2). A similar change
occurs in the Early Bronze Age in the Alpine region and in Greece (Halstead
1981). In addition, the withers height increases dramatically, and there are
higher percentages of mature and old animals. Horns also increase in size,
though individuals without horns are common. These Bronze Age sheep
must have resembled the still-surviving Soay breed.
    These changes become comprehensible when attention is paid to the
textiles preserved in the Swiss lake villages (Vogt 1937). Of the fourth- and
early-third-millennium examples, all are linen, with leather being used for
garments requiring greater robustness. Wool appears in the late third
millennium. The proliferation of Early Bronze Age pin types represents the
adoption of fastenings suitable to the loose woollen weaves which were
introduced in this period, replacing the buttoned leather clothing of the
Neolithic. The extensively preserved Bronze Age costumes from Danish
coffin burials (Hald 1950) indicate the types of garment produced.
    One factor which favoured the expansion of textile production was the
change to a predominant male role in agriculture, leaving the women free to
spin and weave (see below). As medieval economic historians have long
been aware, woollen commodities are among the most basic items of inter-
regional trade, and are usually the first manufactured goods to be traded on
a large scale. Exports in developing areas shift from basic subsistence items
like grain to manufactured products. This process can be observed in Meso-
potamia during the course of the third millennium, and the development of
such trade may have had an important role in extending the urban network.
The role which wool and textiles played in the economies of the second
millennium is clear from the textual evidence, both in Mesopotamia,
Anatolia, and in Crete (Killen 1964).

The economics of secondary products            exploitation
When animals are raised purely for meat, it is economic to slaughter them
while they are relatively young. For instance, the same amount of fodder
(33,000kg of hay-equivalent) would raise seven calves to two years as would
be needed to take three of them to three and a half years; and the former
strategy yields 40 per cent more meat (Lotka 1956,120). The increase in live
weight for the first two years is roughly proportional to the amount of feed
consumed, but after that age the live weight increases more slowly while the

                                            181




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         PLOUGH        AND    PASTORALISM:


feed consumption stays consent (ibid., 133). It is th         ~e advantageous
to crop the population at this point (or even earlier, whe„ aiere are seasonal
fodder shortages), leaving only breeding stock, mostly females. Even the
breeding stock, however, would not be kept beyond the age of reproduction.
   Milking is a highly efficient mode of exploitation, giving four or five times
the amount of protein and energy from the same amount of feed as would
exploitation for meat. The use of cattle for beef recovers about 3.5 per cent
of the energy which they have consumed in feed: with modern breeds the use
for milk recovers 18 per cent (ibid., 136). Vitamins and salts (like calcium
compounds) which are present only in small quantities in muscular tissue
are abundant in milk. The kill-off strategy must be thus adjusted to
maximise the number of lactating animals, by increasing the proportion of
mature females. Male animals may either be mostly slaughtered very early
(even at birth in a documented example from medieval Ireland: Amoroso
and Jewell 1963, 135), or else kept for a longer period as an insured meat
supply in extreme environments. Thus the Karimojong of Uganda, although
dependent largely on milk (Dyson-Hudson and Dyson-Hudson 1969), may
have only 12 per cent of lactating animals in their herds because of the high
proportion of males (40 per cent), the long maturation period for cattle
(three and a half to four years), the long period between calves (fourteen
months), and the short lactation period (eight months or less). Female
animals kept for milk are usually retained for long periods: an Estonian herd
recorded in 1651 had half its cows over seven years and a third over ten
years old (Slicher van Bath 1963, 287).
   Animals used for traction are usually castrated males which at the age
of three to four years are almost fully-grown, and have been trained as
draught-animals since the age of two or three. The numbers of animals
which must be maintained depends on the total amount of work during the
year, and the extent to which it has to be done simultaneously. In India
(especially the Central region), a short wet-season makes it imperative that
each peasant should have a pair of bullocks to get his cultivation completed
in time, since it must be done at once when the rains come (Clark and
Haswell 1964, 55): this need underlies the maintenance of large numbers of
scavenging cows as breeding stock, even though their milk yields are poor
(Harris 1966). In medieval Europe there was increasing pressure on working
livestock because of the expanding arable, even though plough teams were
shared by the community (Warriner 1939).
   The interpretation of kill-off patterns in a prehistoric European cattle
population has been considered by Higham and Message for the TRB Middle
Neolithic settlement of Troldebjerg in Langeland, Denmark (1969). On the
basis of metacarpals, radii and mandibles, they reconstructed a pattern with
low mortality in animals of both sexes up to two or three years of age,
differential slaughter of castrated males from that age up to four years, with
about a sixth of all animals surviving beyond that point. This argues against


                                             182




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        ASPECTS     OF   THE SECONDALT Y PRODUCTS                   REVOLUTION


a pure meat economy, but does not suggest very highly developed ex-
ploitation of secondary products. It suggests small numbers of milch cows,
and the possibility of a few traction-animals. The pattern conforms to
Boessneck's observations (1956, 34) from Bavarian Neolithic settlements,
that half the animals slaughtered were young to subadult. The handful of
systematic investigations which have so far been made on this material,
however, needs to be multiplied many times before comparative patterns can
be defined. [Recent publications (Davis 1987; 1993; Benecke 1994a; 1994b)
have continued to refine the picture presented here.]
    For sheep, Payne (1973) has reported early results from his continuing
investigation into comparative patterns of mortality. He has suggested
model life-tables for different types of exploitation (ibid., figs 1-3). For
meat, similar considerations apply as to cattle: the optimum period for
cropping surplus stock is between one and a half and two and a half years,
with males preferentially slaughtered at this point. Milk production makes
it advantageous to keep at least half of the female animals beyond five years,
and some even up to ten. With wool production, males become equally
valuable at these ages also, so that there is a roughly symmetrical distri-
bution with a high proportion of both sexes being kept up to six years and
beyond. Historical samples studied by Payne show animals being carried up
to eight years, as does a Bronze Age sample from the west Anatolian site of
Beycesultan: by contrast, the sheep from the Early Neolithic site of Nea
Nikomedia in north Greece were all killed before four years of age, many
in their first year (Payne, pers. comm.). Ducos has suggested that kill-off
patterns characteristic of secondary product utilisation began in Palestine
with the Ghassulian (1973, 84). Halstead (1981) has investigated these
suggestions in Neolithic Greece and concludes that secondary products were
not a feature of early stock economies there. The evidence from osteological
studies thus supports the contention that domestic animals before the fourth
and third millennia BC were exploited only for their meat, and that the
spread of secondary products utilisation brought about major changes in
animal husbandry.



INTERACTIONS A N D EFFECTS
A general model
The evidence reviewed above suggests that a number of major innovations
occurred in the Near East and adjacent areas in the middle or later fourth
millennium BC; and that these innovations spread and interacted with each
other so as to cause major economic changes during the course of the third
millennium. This revolution in animal husbandry involved using old
domesticates in new ways, and in domesticating a new range of species. It
resembled the previous phase of Near Eastern domestication in the eighth

                                           183




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


and seventh millennia in that different parts of the area, evolving in parallel
with local resources, each contributed to a package of compatible elements
with widespread application. A general explanation may therefore be
suggested.
   These developments were not accidentally coincident. They represented
a variety of similar responses to a common problem, the pattern of popu-
lation growth and territorial expansion which had been initiated by the
beginnings of animal and plant domestication in that area some four
thousand years before. Such problems became especially acute with the need
to penetrate increasingly marginal environments in a landscape containing
sharp contrasts in climate and terrain within short distances. They were
partly dependent on biological changes both in man, in the case of tolerance
to lactose, and his stock, for instance with wool. They involved an increased
scale of investment in animal husbandry, and together they produced a new
phase of man-animal relationships (Figure 6.16).
   An increase in the scale of animal keeping was the basic feature. The
population of domestic animals had to contain both breeding stock and
working or production stock, as well as any beasts kept solely for meat. The
maintenance of such an increased population was greatly facilitated by the
practice of milking. It was this which made other uses possible, by allowing
the continuous cropping of a subsistence product from a standing herd.
   As agricultural communities expanded to the edges of the Fertile Cres-
cent, they encountered extensive semi-arid areas which supported large
mobile animal populations. Because of the uncertainty it involved, in areas
without alternative resources, hunting was not a viable economy. With a
product like milk which could be continuously obtained, and especially with
the added mobility given by draught- and riding-animals, such areas could
be exploited by pastoralism. Because of the easier alternative methods of
increasing subsistence, especially by small-scale irrigation, this pattern was
slow to evolve. The evolution of lactose-tolerant populations removed an
important brake on the development of such systems, which could them-
selves develop techniques of milk processing (initially for storage) which
rendered it usable by non-tolerant populations. The adaptation could thus
spread more rapidly than its genetic basis.
    Where did this process of adaptation take place? It is probably mis-
leading to look for any closely defined region of origin, but it would appear
that the process was occurring during the late Ubaid period in the second
half of the fifth millennium BC and first half of the fourth, in northern Iraq,
Syria and Palestine. The Ghassulian culture in Palestine shows a ceramic
inventory including vessels for pouring and manipulating liquids, including
the famous 'butter churn', and the suggestion of a mortality pattern among
its livestock of the kind indicating secondary products has already been
noted. Equally suggestive are the large numbers of sites which appear at this
period in the arid areas of south Palestine and Sinai (Rothenberg 1970),


                                             184




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
         ASPECTS         OF    THE SECONDALT Y PRODUCTS                  REVOLUTION




                                                                               New social
                                                                               structures
                                                                               wider networks,
                                                                               more centralisation
                                                                               of exchange,
                                                                               inter-regional roles

                                                                               New land use
                                                                               systems
                                                                               plough agriculture,
                                                                               transhumance,
                                                                               pastoralism


                                                                               New social
                                                                               structures
    Continuous                                                                 male dominated,
    deforestation and                                                          emphasis on property
    increasing pasture                                                         transmission



                              Milking                     Tree crops
                 {lactose tolerance)
                                            J   L
             Stage I (4th millennium B C)       Stage II (3rd millenium BC)



6.16 Interaction of the components of the secondary products complex in western
Eurasia through time. [This diagram has been much misunderstood, and is
perhaps misleading in trying to combine chronology and causality in a single
representation. Note, in any case, that it is not regionally specific: it offers a
general picture of western Eurasia as a whole.]

indicative of methods of coping with such dry environments, and important
also in the acquisition of raw materials like copper. Indeed, the formation of
populations in the dryer interstices would have had an important effect on
patterns of trade and contact (Sherratt 1976).
   The application of certain features of this system was not restricted,
however, to semi-arid areas. The use of draught-animals, especially, had
revolutionary implications for cultivation in better-watered areas. Not only
did the cart improve transport on the farm, but the innovation of a
'mechanical hoe', the plough, increased the farmer's ability to prepare his
land by a factor of up to four or more. (For the economics of this, see Clark
and Haswell 1964, 55.) This both increased the productivity of good land,
and made economical the preparation of land from which a poorer yield
might be expected. It seems likely that the plough played a critical role in the
cultivation of tree crops which began at this period (Zohary and Spiegel-
Roy 1975). An intensification of agricultural production was thus a parallel
development to the expansion of pastoral populations. Furthermore, the
large-scale production of wool, an animal product suitable for manu-
factures, provided a greatly increased potential for trade. It was the juxta-
position of contrasting environmental zones which produced in the Near
East such innovating co-action (Figure 6.17; cf. Clarke 1968, 355).

                                                    185




                                   This content downloaded from
                 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                           All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
6.17 Origins and interaction of the main elements of the secondary products
complex: (a) 4000 BC, primary developments; (b) 3000 BC, inter-regional exchange
and spread; (c) 2000 BC, continuing exchange and interaction. [In (b), I would
now take ox-traction through Anatolia as well as the Pontic steppes, as in Fig. 0.5;
and in (c) I would take the chariot through the Balkans rather than the Caucasus,
as described in Chapter 7.]

                                            186




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        ASPECTS     OF   THE SECONDALT Y PRODUCTS                    REVOLUTION


   This agricultural revolution was well under way by the later fourth
millennium in Mesopotamia and Khuzestan, where the massive increase in
population on the alluvium created an extensive demand for raw materials.
Ramifying trade links spread advanced techniques into the hinterlands,
while the increasingly urbanised populations of the lowlands began the
manufacture of woollen textiles. At the same time, semi-dependent pastoral
populations continued to grow in the areas where grain-growing was un-
profitable.
   The links between these differentiating subsistence specialisations, in-
tensive cultivation and mobile pastoralism, were probably deeper than
simple trading relationships. Such diversity opens up the possibility of poly-
ethnic and symbiotic social systems (Barth 1969), with a fluctuating balance
between sedentarisation and nomadisation, or long-term flows of popu-
lation between economies with different patterns of fertility and mortality -
notably across ethnic boundaries (Barth 1964, ch. 9). Such a complex
system, despite its inbuilt homeostatic features, has the potential for violent
change when there are rapid shifts in the balance of power: the relationship
between villager or town-dweller and nomad was always ambivalent. The
degree of interdependence involved in a closely adjusted timetable for
stubble grazing and use of winter pastures always contained the potential
for conflict.
   The dual economy of plough and pastoralism was characteristic of areas
of ecological diversity. Thus in mountain areas the pastoral sector was
occupied by transhumant groups which were directly analogous to the
nomads of the arid plains. This pattern became characteristic not only of the
Zagros and the Taurus but also of the Tertiary fold mountains of southern
Europe, where it was also a creation of the third millennium.
   In more arid areas, pastoralism spread without the plough. While plough
cultivation spread along with the rest of the secondary products complex
both to Europe and to India, it did not reach into Africa further than the
upper Nile. Pastoralism, involving milking, was common in the Sahara
probably by the later fourth and almost certainly by the third millennium
BC, and with the third-millennium desiccation some of these populations
were forced southwards (Clark 1976). The continuing penetration into east
Africa took a ploughless and cartless pastoralism down the tropical
grassland corridor, as cattle replaced the native wild ungulates. Cattle were
much less efficient than these animals, some of which (like the eland) were
potentially herdable; and indeed it was their plentiful provision of milk,
urine and dung - which in the native antelopes were sparse and con-
centrated - that made the introduced animals so valuable a resource (Kyle
1972).
   On the Eurasian steppes, pastoralism did not become divorced from
traction and the plough was used in oasis situations. On the other hand, the
well-known Chinese intolerance to lactose inhibited the development of a

                                            187




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


pastoral sector and thus a ready supply c draught-animals, which may
explain the occurrence of draw-spades and plough-like instruments pulled
by human traction (Leser 1931). In India, Harris (1966) has argued that the
very large numbers of animals needed for ploughing with the sharp onset of
the monsoon necessitates a large population of generally poorly nourished
cattle. He has also suggested that the prohibition on pork in large parts
of the Near East stems from the need to devote resources to animals giving
secondary benefits of milk or traction.
   The spread of the secondary products complex, then, offered new
opportunities to populations in many areas of the Old World. Many of the
characteristic features of the present-day ethnographic pattern can be traced
back to this dispersal.

Changes in agricultural systems and settlement               patterns
The changes which the secondary products revolution brought to pre-
historic Europe and the Near East are best demonstrated by the major
changes in settlement pattern which are characteristic of the fourth and
third millennia BC. Before looking at the archaeological evidence, however,
a brief comment on models of early agricultural economies is needed.
   It has often been assumed that the earliest agriculture was some form
of shifting cultivation, involving a 'slash and burn' system of temporary
clearings which were allowed to revert to woodland after a few years of
cropping. Such systems are widely known from agriculturally less developed
areas in the tropics and in peripheral parts of Europe. Ester Boserup (1965)
has suggested a general model of agricultural change in which the fallowing
cycle is progressively reduced as population pressure forces intensification
of production. Plough agriculture would thus be a threshold of development
separating temporary from permanent cultivation.
   The archaeological evidence from Europe and the Near East, however,
does not support such a scheme, and suggests that it may be misleading
to apply directly a model based largely on cultivation in the tropics to the
situation in temperate and sub-tropical regions. In these areas, cultivation
began by being concentrated in small areas of high-yielding land which did
not require a long fallowing cycle. Only later did cultivation spread to
poorer soils where longer fallows were required. In temperate Europe, slash
and burn systems are characteristic of the poor soils under coniferous forest
in Finland and the Carpathians (Balassa 1972) which were among the last to
be settled agriculturally. The introduction of the scratch-plough to Europe
made it economical to cultivate a wider range of soils than before, and thus
to extend the area of cultivation.
    In the Near East and Europe, present evidence suggests an early stage of
spatially restricted, fairly intensive cultivation of areas of high productivity
(Allan 1972), followed by an expansion of the cultivated area either through
irrigation or by tackling more extensive areas of less productive land. The

                                             188




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        ASPECTS      OF   THE SECONDALT Y P R O D U C T S            REVOLUTION


earliest cultivation systems in the Near East seem to have resembled the
floodwater-farming of the American south-west (Bryan 1929), and to have
concentrated on naturally watered mudflats by lakes, rivers and springs.
Expansion in the sixth millennium took place by small-scale irrigation by
water-spreading on alluvial fans, marking the beginning of the Early
Chalcolithic pattern (Oates and Oates 1976). Forms of settlement reflect
a continuing interest in localised resources, with substantial and long-lived
settlements like Jericho and Qatal Hiiyiik existing at an early stage and tell
sites continuing to be characteristic. Despite this stability, however, many
of these early agricultural sites continued to obtain their animal protein by
hunting or loose herding. Gazelle were still the animal staple at Jericho,
while frescoes of cattle at £atal Hiiyiik and onagers at Umm Dabagiyeh
show that there was little incentive to full domestication in open areas
supporting large herds.
    In central Europe, it has been usual to see the first Neolithic communities
as slash and burn agriculturalists with shifting cultivation and settlement
(Wanderbauerntum). This idea was supported by tropical and boreal-forest
analogies, by the existence of temporary clearance phases in pollen dia-
grams, and by inference from the fact that the settlements did not form tells.
This would conform with expectations on the Boserup (1965) model. How-
ever, close study of Early Neolithic settlement, especially in Poland and in
the Netherlands and adjacent parts of Germany (Kruk 1973; Modderman
1970), has demonstrated the stability and longevity of such sites. The
absence of tell formation relates more to differences in building material
than to the character of agriculture, and individual locations were con-
tinuously occupied for comparable spans of time, up to 1000 years in some
cases.
   Moreover, the locations chosen for such sites show a marked preference
for high-quality loessic soils, and within these for waterside positions. In
Little Poland, where the topography has sufficient relief to show locational
preferences with particular clarity, it is clear that these valley-bottom
locations offered access only to a relatively narrow area of land along the
rivers. The distribution of such sites is conspicuously linear throughout
central Europe, and the exploited zone was spatially very restricted although
of maximum productivity. Such limited clearances in the primary forest
would have offered very limited grazing. Cattle must have been kept only in
small numbers and probably partly stall-fed in the characteristic long-
houses.
   The economy would thus have resembled a garden system not unlike
the horticulture or semi-agriculture of the south-eastern parts of pre-contact
North America. While some comparison may be made with hoe cultivation
in the tropics, this temperate hoe cultivation has no true analogy in the Old
World, where it represents an extinct economic type which has everywhere
been replaced by plough cultivation.

                                            189




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


   These early agricultural systems were characterised by a highly selective
pattern of land use, in which population was concentrated in a few zones of
high productivity, and relatively small areas of land were intensively culti-
vated. The system allowed the maintenance of large herds only where there
were significant tracts of naturally open countryside accessible from the
'oases' of settlement. Grazing was increasingly problematic as such systems
penetrated into European forest environments. The lack of large-scale forest
clearance is reflected in a toolkit lacking large, wide-bladed axe forms.
   The effect of the spread of plough cultivation was to produce major
alterations in the structure and distribution of settlement. By contrast to the
limited areas along rivers which the earliest settlers opened up in the forest,
the wider areas opened up by third-millennium groups would have provided
the necessary grazing for the animals needed to till them, and the new system
operated on an extensive rather than a localised, intensive basis. The sites
chosen for settlement were less long-lived, and more rapid turnover of culti-
vated area would have left sufficient fallow for a more balanced form of
mixed agriculture in which the pastoral component was able to grow con-
tinuously with the progress of deforestation. The appearance [or, rather, in-
tensification of activity] at a similar date from England to Russia of mines
and quarries to produce material for effective flint and stone axes for forest
clearance is eloquent testimony to this new scale of attack on the woodland
(Sherratt 1976).
   An increase in the animal component of agriculture which was thus made
possible would have introduced for the first time problems of over-wintering
numbers of stock, but would also have provided manure in useful quanti-
ties. For the first time a balanced crop-livestock husbandry came into being,
with different requirements and patterns of land use. In central and northern
Europe, on the loess lands and the North European Plain, functionally un-
differentiated villages of longhouses were replaced by the variety of sites
which are characteristic of the TRB and related cultures. [This was initially
because of the integration of indigenous populations, as described in
Chapter 13, using more extensive methods of cultivation in which the
plough was increasingly advantageous; but the real shift in settlement
patterns did not occur until Corded Ware: see Chapter 16.]
   The main expansion of hoe agriculture had taken place on medium (silt-
grade) soils like loess. The main expansion of agriculture based on the
scratch-plough in the later third and second millennia took place on lighter
land, especially on sandy soils which were less able to withstand prolonged
cultivation. The vast numbers of round-barrows in areas like central Jut-
land, for instance, bear tribute to the speed with which Late Neolithic and
Early Bronze Age farmers effectively reduced large areas of precariously
wooded glacial outwash-sands to infertile heathland. The occurrence of
Bronze Age tumuli under forest in many parts of Europe show that, once
exhausted, such land was often never recolonised. This cycle of expansion


                                             190




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
              ASPECTS           OF        THE SECONDALT Y P R O D U C T S                    REVOLUTION

                                              Brown   Chernozem Glei     Rendsma
                                              Earth
                                            iO      500       500      500     50       V. '9P
                                                                                       ...m
                                                                                    fy valleys^
                                                                                      . Sites m ,

                                            ItllD                                   v



                                                                                                      A N
0   10
' km 1
                      LBK c 5 0 0 0 B C

           — Edge of survey
          H I Linked sites
              (< 5 km apart)
                                   Lengyel  llll                                                      A N
                                            EIED                                                      EH
                                                                                         Sues on


                            Corded Ware
           ^ Corded Ware c 2000 B C
                                            MOD I                                        elevations




                                                                                    Settlement
                                                                                                      Ml
                                                                                                      • Maiorsites
                                                                                                      C Minor sues
                                                                                                                      • Tumulus
                                                                                                                     //f Contours
Inter-site links                              Soil preference                       situation         Locational pattern
6.18 The development of settlement in the loess uplands of Little Poland, from
5000 to 2000 BC: locational preferences and contact networks. Note the simi-
larities between the first and last pairs, and the shift between Lengyel and TRB
(data from Kruk 1973). [This major shift in fact pre-dates my plough horizon,
and owes more to fusion with native groups, as discussed in Chapter 13.]
reached its limits in the later second millennium, when heavier types of ard
capable of turning a sod were developed as settlement spread to the still
little-used heavy clay and alluvial soils.
    The move from a pattern of concentrated and localised agricultural
exploitation to a wider use of the terrain for light plough cultivation and
extensive grazing had a marked effect on settlement patterns further south.
It is a notable feature of the later fourth millennium BC that the pattern of
tell sites established over the previous two millennia underwent substantial
modifications over a wide area, from Transcausasia to the Balkans. Instead
of long-lived tell sites in the valleys near to water, valley-edge or spur sites
appear and settlements are found in upland locations. The tell sites which
do continue are usually larger, frequently fortified, and with greater inter-
vening distances (Sherratt 1976). The disappearance of large, nucleated
Neolithic sites is also evidenced from the Tavoliere of Apulia, where the
large ditched settlements have been documented by aerial photography.
The shift of population to the plain edge and surrounding mountains in
the Bronze Age indicates the relative advantage of a milk-based pastoral
economy over intensive lowland cereal cultivation. The model has a wide
predictive value throughout the Mediterranean, especially where extensive
upland areas suitable for transhumance surround lowland plains.
    In the Near East, these processes lay behind the increasingly urbanised
character of settlement. Population expanded in the fourth millennium BC
in areas like the terraces of the Konya Plain or the alluvium of lowland
Mesopotamia. In the latter case, the use of the plough was part of the
irrigation-based system which made possible a fivefold increase in the

                                                                191




                                       This content downloaded from
                     128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                               All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


number of sites during the Uruk period. Subsequent development involved
an increasing concentration of population in a few defended centres.
Whether such defences were erected against potentially hostile pastoralist
populations in the drier areas between the irrigated farming areas, or against
the other cities of the region, such concentrations of agrarian population
were made possible by use of the ox-drawn cart for local transport.
   Longer-distance transport links were also made possible by the domesti-
cation of equids as transport-animals. The fertile but stoneless and metal-
less alluvial basin of the Euphrates and Tigris generated an enormous
demand for raw materials. The size of the hinterland over which effective
trade links existed has been demonstrated to extend for up to 1000km in
each direction. To the south-east, the discovery of Proto-Elamite tablets
at Tepe Yahya demonstrates links from Khuzestan to Kirman as early as the
later fourth millennium; while at the same time the site of Habuba el-
Kabireh in northern Syria indicates links along the Euphrates to southern
Iraq (Lamberg-Karlovsky and Lamberg-Karlovsky 1971; Strommenger
1976). In the third millennium the importance of east-central Anatolia to
Mesopotamia is shown both by the military expeditions of Sargon and the
Anatolian origin of gold from the royal graves at Ur (Maxwell-Hyslop
1977). By the second millennium the overland trade routes northwards from
Assur and westwards from Mari were major distribution lines for bulk
supplies both of raw materials like metals and manufactured products like
textiles. These would have been impossible without the use of transport-
animals.
   While the Mesoamerican evidence shows that animal-traction is not
a necessary precondition for the development of urban communities, the
rarity and much later appearance of towns in the New World suggests that
while a variety of settlement systems may eventually reach an urban form,
the higher energy of Old World systems greatly accelerated movement along
this trajectory.

Pastoralism and linguistic change [See also Chapter 19]
The secondary products revolution had large-scale effects in the semi-arid
areas of the Old World. The Eurasian steppes in particular saw important
changes in the distribution and density of population.
   Previously, in the fifth and early fourth millennia, population had been
largely concentrated in the valleys of the major rivers flowing into the Black
Sea. Agricultural settlements of the Tripole culture were confined to the
forest steppe parts, with cattle-keeping, fishing and collecting groups of the
Dnepr-Donets culture along the rivers in the true steppes.
   With the arrival of the cart and traction complex and the spread of the
horse, both groups began to make a greater use of the drier interfluves; and
sheep became the predominant domestic animal. The effect of new transport
possibilities, and probably also milking, was to create on the steppes an

                                             192




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        ASPECTS     OF   THE SECONDALT Y PRODUCTS                    REVOLUTION


economy with sufficient mobility to be able to exploit effectively the pre-
viously neglected zone stretching eastwards into central Asia; though at this
stage such pastoralism was probably 'transhumant' rather than 'nomadic'.
   This set of economic changes precipitated the formation of a new cultural
group on the basis of the previous riverine groups and under strong techno-
logical influence from the Caucasus. A characteristic of this group was the
erection of burial mounds covering graves in increasingly elaborate pits and
wood-lined chambers - the Pit-Grave, Catacomb-Grave and Timber-Grave
phases of expanding steppe culture. These herding and farming groups
penetrated eastwards along the Eurasian steppe belt as far as the Volga-Ural
interfluve in the early third millennium, and (using spoke-wheeled vehicles)
as far as the Altai in the early second.
   Some backwash of this expansion was also felt in Europe. Wool sheep
and the horse, along with tumuli and alloy metallurgy, spread westwards
from 3000 onwards and spoke-wheeled vehicles followed at the end of the
third millennium. The opening-up of the European forests, and especially
the creation of large areas of heathland on sandy soils, allowed a wider net-
work of contacts and facilitated the penetration of steppe elements into the
temperate forest area.
   It is instructive to compare the effects of horses and wheeled vehicles to
the spread of imported Spanish horses among the tribes in the Plains area
of north America (Roe 1955). As well as tempting a variety of formerly
settled riverine groups to colonise the prairies and create the classic Plains
Indian cultures of popular image, it also gave the opportunity for mounted
Athebascan sheep-herders - like the Navajo - to spread over a thousand
kilometres from the home area of their language group.
   The spread of settlement in the semi-arid corridors of the Old World had
important implications for linguistic distribution there. The expansion of
population in east Europe and central Asia provided the opportunity for the
spread and differentiation of a previously localised language group which
now occupies a major area of Eurasia. The dispersal of these Indo-European
languages was paralleled by the similar expansion and differentiation of the
Semito-Hamitic group in the Near East and north Africa.
   Philologists have long contended that the extensive resemblances in form
and vocabulary between geographically removed languages like Latin and
Sanskrit imply a common ancestral Ursprache which differentiated after
dispersal: and that, moreover, since such resemblances rapidly decay, it
must have taken place relatively recently. An often quoted estimate for such
a dispersal (Robins 1964) is 3000 BC - to some extent a circular argument
from the archaeology, but consistent with observed rates of change
(Swadesh 1968). The eastward movements of population onto the steppes
in the third millennium BC linked east Europe with the Pontic and Trans-
Caspian regions as far as the Tarim Basin and the Iranian Plateau, and there
seems no doubt that it was such relatively rapid movements in the semi-arid

                                            193




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


zone which gave Indo-European its geographical range. This is also con-
sistent with the first appearance of specifically Indo-Iranian names in
northern Syria and Mesopotamia in the second millennium BC.
   The extent to which Indo-European languages were already present
in the forested parts of Europe is uncertain. Nevertheless there are good
philological grounds for inferring some westwards spread of Indo-European
languages in the second millennium BC, and this could well have taken place
in the context of the changes in settlement and economy documented in a
previous section.

Social structure
Besides the large-scale effects of the secondary products revolution in
creating new forms of subsistence economy, its effects on the texture of
social relations was equally important. By its major alterations in the
allocation of subsistence roles between the sexes, it created new social
structures and patterns of organisation, and by giving a new importance to
the transmission of land it necessitated new mechanisms of inheritance.
   The arguments for associations of this kind are inevitably based on cross-
cultural surveys, and especially the Area Files of the Institute of Human
Relations and the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock 1967) abstracted from
them. Interpretations of such material in historical terms is especially
dangerous: but the archaeological perspective given above on the spread of
features such as the plough allows a time dimension to be fitted to the
recurrent patterns of association which have become clear from statistical
analysis of this data. Such considerations allow a sketch of the kinds of
society which may have been characteristic of temperate hoe-based horti-
culture.
   In common with some of the systems based on the intensive collecting of
localised subsistence products on a sedentary basis, agriculture involved the
transmission of property consisting of facilities such as fields and houses.
It is therefore usually associated with continuing kin-based corporations
such as lineages, often with a specifically unilineal mode of inheritance
(Harner 1970). The mode of inheritance is strongly influenced by patterns
of residence: in an uxorilocal system, where the husband joins the wife's
community on marriage, transmission is likely to follow the female line.
Residence systems, in turn, reflect the relative importance of the sexes in
subsistence pursuits. In simple hoe agriculture, the major subsistence contri-
bution comes from female labour in sowing, weeding and harvesting. There
have been some suggestions that a clear worldwide association occurs be-
tween simple hoe-based agricultural economies and matrilineal inheritance,
and that this association would be even stronger were it not for the effect of
recent influences (Keesing 1975). Societies based on matrilineal lineages are
thus likely to have been typical of early agricultural communities in the Old
World. This pattern is characteristic of aboriginal societies in the woodlands

                                             194




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        ASPECTS     OF    THE SECONDALT Y P R O D U C T S            REVOLUTION


of the American south-east which have been identified as the closest
parallels to pre-plough agriculturalists in Europe (Driver 1961).
    Both plough agriculture and pastoraliSfti, by contrast, show a strong
association with male dominance in subsistence activities, virilocal resi-
dence, and patrilineal descent. This pattern is often reinforced by the kinds
of warfare which are common when large quantities of livestock are present.
On a world sample, two-thirds of plough agriculturalists and two-thirds of
pastoralists have purely patrilineal inheritance. Moreover, such societies are
likely to evolve beyond the lineage mode of production to be composed of
larger non-localised clans or to become stratified as scarcity of land becomes
increasingly important.
    Changes in the sexual allocation of tasks affected non-agricultural pro-
duction. The decline of the female role in agriculture released labour from
the fields to the home, making possible an expansion in spinning, weaving
and textile production. This increase in scale made economical the use of
more elaborate forms of loom. Archaeologically, traces of weaving equip-
ment become much more prominent in the third millennium (e.g. Trump
1960).
    Besides reallocating productive roles between the sexes, plough agri-
culture introduced new principles to the transmission of property. Greater
flexibility of land use and the ability to use wider holdings gave a new
importance to the acquisition and devolution of land. The advantages of
'marrying out' came to be balanced by the advantages of keeping land
within the descent group, retaining resources within the productive unit.
Marriage would thus tend to become an important move in the de-
termination of patterns of land-holding, and a focus of interest to the
descent group as a whole (Goody 1969). Such a concern leads to arranged
marriages in which women, as carriers of property, have to be appropriately
matched to maintain the status of the family. These features are likely to be
more pronounced the greater the scarcity of land and the more intensive its
use.
    Goody (1976) has recently contrasted the kinds of property transmission
characteristic of plough-less Africa with those commonly found among the
plough-based agriculturalists of Eurasia. He characterises the contrast as the
difference between homogeneous devolution, where property is transmitted
between members of the same sex and there is no community of property on
marriage, and diverging devolution, where children of both sexes inherit
and marriage establishes a joint fund. In the former case, typical of African
hoe cultivators, property reverts to the lineage of a deceased person, and
is not passed to his or her offspring: in the latter, typical of Eurasian plough
cultivation, marriage produces successive recombinations of holdings in
each generation. Diverging devolution is characteristic of societies where
land forms a major heritable commodity, and is associated with a particular
emphasis on marriage and control over the choice of mate.


                                             195




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


   In examining a worldwide sample from the Ethnographic Atlas
(Murdock 1967), Goody found diverging devolution to be characteristic of
over half of the societies of Eurasia, including the most populous, but to
occur in only a twentieth of the African examples; and moreover that the
earliest Eurasian law codes show this contrast to reach back to the second
millennium BC. Features which showed a high correlation with diverging
devolution were advanced and plough agriculture, male farming, in-
marriage, monogamy, prohibited pre-marital sex, and kinship terminologies
separated siblings from cousins. Such features are often associated with
stratified and state societies. Goody (1976, 25) suggests that the increase in
production made possible by the plough had major implications for inter-
personal relations: Tor differentiation arose even at village level and the
scene was set for the development of relationships such as lord and serf,
landlord and tenant, which exist in Eurasia but not in Africa.'
   In so far as forms of society are determined by the organisation required
for work and the types of property which are passed between generations,
we may apply these insights to the historic situation in Eurasia. The
secondary products revolution produced an economy dominated by men,
who played a dominant role in handling large livestock either as herds or in
ploughing. Women became increasingly relegated to the domestic sphere.
Where the absolute amount of cultivable land was relatively restricted, as in
the Near East and the Mediterranean, ownership of land became increas-
ingly subject to competition. Differences in access to land became the basis
of growing inequalities, while the transmission and coalition of property
became a major preoccupation of the landed classes.
   In inland Europe, the archaeological evidence indicates that land was still
relatively plentiful as the Bronze Age farmers continued to clear primary
forest on somewhat less fertile soils. These features were probably not pre-
cipitated, therefore, until the end of the second millennium when organised
field systems were laid out, heavier forms of plough were developed, and
extensive indications of status differences appeared. Second-millennium
Europe may thus have exemplified a second extinct economy of the tem-
perate zone - an extensive light-plough cultivation with a predominantly
male role in agriculture, but without the highly differentiated social order
where groups struggled to maintain their status by the vertical transmission
of property. The 'rich' graves with prestige items at this time probably repre-
sent a 'big-man' system rather than true chiefdoms (Sahlins 1963). Essen-
tially a transient type, such societies have not survived to reach the pages of
the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock 1967); only the extreme contrast between
tropical matrilineal shifting hoe cultivators with homogeneous devolution,
and the more northerly patrilineal intensive plough cultivators with
stratified societies and diverging devolution, suggests the possibility of
structurally intermediate ancestral forms.



                                             196




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        ASPECTS    OF   THE SECONDALT Y P R O D U C T S             REVOLUTION


CONCLUSION
Eduard Hahn's perceptive remark quoted at the beginning of this section
still stands as a fundamental observation about the origins of western
society. The progress of archaeological research, however, has provided a
time-depth which allows a further definition of the processes involved. As
the beginnings of agriculture and domestication have been traced further
back into the post-glacial period, so the major developments of the fourth
and third millennia BC have emerged as a second burst of economic inno-
vation with far-reaching consequences.
    The spread of the plough was arguably the most important development
in Old World prehistory after the adoption of cereal cultivation itself.
It firmly tied together the arable and pastoral sectors of husbandry in an
interdependent system, and it fundamentally affected the character of settle-
ment and the structure of society. Use of the plough was only part of a wider
set of changes, however, which marked a new phase in man-animal relation-
ships, involving larger numbers of domestic animals, the domestication of
new species, and new uses for long-domesticated ones.
    The use of animals for traction purposes seems to have begun in Meso-
potamia, and involved first the familiar ox and then the onager, spreading
to include the Bactrian camel in the lands east of the Zagros. Riding was
developed on the steppe-plains north of the Caucasus and the Black Sea,
as the horse was domesticated. Pack-transport began in the lands around
the head of the Red Sea with the domestication of the ass, and then of the
dromedary. The production of wool was probably a development in the
sheep populations of the Taurus-Zagros arc. These innovations spread and
interacted, some animals changing role or adding new ones. Basic to all of
them was probably the beginning of milking, giving a continuously available
form of animal food and making economical the keeping of large numbers
of animals which could be put to a variety of uses.
    The focus of all these developments was the Near East, in different parts
of which the various elements emerged and spread. The key to this pro-
ductivity lay in large part in the diversity of adjacent environments which
this area offers. The arid belt of the Old World crosses north Africa and
swings north-east into central Asia: but it is interrupted in its course by
the great chain of Tertiary fold-mountains running from the Alps to the
Himalayas, which catch the rain-bearing winds of winter. This intersection
of desert, mountain and sea provides an intimate mixture of zones with
different stresses and opportunities, maximising the possibilities of inno-
vation and providing a theatre in which interaction and cross-fertilisation
can take place.
    The impact of the secondary products revolution was felt principally in
that part of the agricultural zone of the Old World characterised by cereal
crops, rather than the tropical part where root-crops were cultivated. Its


                                           197




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


innovations spread rapidly along the arid corridors and penetrated into
more temperate regions. The axis of Old World development from Europe
to India came into being as a result. These influences penetrated only slowly
and incompletely into east Asia. There an alternative system of protein
capture based on fish (especially in rice-paddies) and on the pig was already
supporting a relatively dense population, and the expanded pastoral sector
which the secondary products revolution required could not easily be
brought about. For this reason, the civilisation of China was in many re-
spects comparable to those civilisations of the New World where domestic
animals played a minor role.
    Beyond the zone of cultivation, the practice of milking allowed the in-
filling of arid areas by animal-based groups, and produced a secondary
impact on the hunting peoples of the northern forests. The milking of
reindeer by Lapp populations is a notable example. In Africa, milking may
have spread relatively early from its south-west Asian focus, but pastoralism
was imposed on existing systems of tropical hoe cultivation. It did not
achieve the organic linkage with cultivation that was characteristic of
Eurasia, and animals were not used as sources of energy.
    The effects of the secondary products revolution thus spread widely both
to north and south of the main axis, affecting much of the Old World. Many
of the cultures recorded ethnographically therefore were, like the historical
societies of Eurasia, products of the second half of the post-glacial period.
    As David Clarke showed in 'Mesolithic Europe: the economic basis'
(1976), archaeological data are most effectively used in the context of wider
ethnographic comparison; not by taking recent groups as direct analogies of
prehistoric ones, but by analysing both in the perspective of evolutionary
change. The societies which flourished in temperate and sub-tropical
Eurasia in the Early Holocene form an important extinct phylum of human
culture, which cannot be directly compared to any surviving groups. Their
character was completely altered by the secondary products revolution,
which created many of the basic features of the modern world.




                                             198




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
      The Secondary Exploitation of
        Animals in the Old World
                            (1983,            Revised)

In the historical and ethnographic record, western Eurasia appears as a
mosaic of pastoral and mixed-farming groups in which livestock has played
a major role. Specialised forms of animal husbandry have been adapted
to a wide range of geographical and economic conditions, from steppe
nomadism to large-scale commercial livestock rearing. In the perspective of
prehistory, however, this picture is a relatively recent one. Many of the
features which now appear basic to Old World farming only became wide-
spread three or four millennia after the beginning of farming. In Chapter 6,
I drew together archaeological and archaeo-zoological evidence for the early
use of secondary products and applications of domestic animals in the Old
World. The purpose of this chapter is to present some additional infor-
mation which confirms and modifies these conclusions, and also to sketch
the outlines of a general model of the development of animal husbandry
from c.6000 to 2000 BC. Many of the innovations considered here seem
to have emerged in restricted parts of the Near East, and to have been
exchanged and disseminated as part of the process leading to urbanisation.
Important interactions also occurred with the steppe belt, where new ways
of life appeared at this time, and the new features which were introduced to

This chapter was intended to update the information given in the previous chapter,
and I have taken the opportunity to allow it to continue this role by adding new
material up to 1995, and entirely rewriting the section on the horse. As well as
citing new information, this paper (originally written by invitation for a World
Archaeology volume on pastoralism) modifies it in two respects: in recognising
that milk-drinking, while secondary, may have emerged during the first spread
of farming (thus satisfying Bogucki 1984); and in emphasising the importance of
the Urban Revolution in Mesopotamia as the context in which the features of
secondary farming were integrated and dispersed. The new picture of horse
domestication fits very well with that point of view. As so often, Roger Moorey
provided invaluable guidance on Near Eastern matters.

                                        199




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     THE   SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION


7.1 Ard marks of the
Early Neolithic
c/Middle Neolithic I
period under a long
barrow at Snave, near
Dreslette, Denmark.
Drawn by Claus
Madsen (Fyns Stifts-
museum): published
in C. Madsen and
H. Thrane,
(
  Sydvestfynske dysser
og yngre stenalders
bebyggelse9 Fynske
Minder 1982, 17-42:
Odense 1983 [from
Sherratt 1987b],

temperate Europe caused a revolutionary change in the character of agri-
culture and social systems there. Despite the fragmentary nature of present
evidence, therefore, it is useful to consider this phenomenon as a whole,
since its elements are clearly inter-connected. The dating of these features
will first be discussed in a European context, and then considered as part
of the pattern of development in the Near East. [The sections on horse-
domestication, riding and chariotry have been amalgamated and sub-
stantially rewritten.]


U S E OF THE SCRATCH-PLOUGH (ARD)
The best evidence so far for the regular use of the plough in agriculture
comes from the discovery of actual plough-marks on old land surfaces, and
the recent multiplication of such discoveries offers the hope that this will
lead to a more precise definition of the date at which animal traction was
first applied to cultivation. The most impressive corpus of early plough-
marks comes from Denmark, where they have recently been comprehen-
sively reviewed by Henrik Thrane (1982; [1989: see Introduction]). Among
those dated to the end of the EN and the beginning of the MN (C.3500 BC)
is the splendid example from Snave near Dreslette, where 175 square metres
of criss-cross furrows have been exposed under a long dolmen-mound
(Figure 7.1). These examples can be dated by a series of radiocarbon de-
terminations on material of these phases to c.3700-3300 BC (see e.g. Bakker
1979, 141-5; [Midgley 1992, 205-20]). These fit well with the date of
c.3500 BC for furrows in the surface below the South Street longbarrow1
(Avebury) and the other evidence considered in the previous chapter.
    Further welcome evidence comes from the circum-Alpine region. In the
Valle d'Aosta, from phase II of the site of Saint-Martin-de-Corleans in the


                                        200




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD   WORLD




suburbs of Aosta in northern Italy, an area of plough-marks has been
exposed on a ritual site beneath Neolithic cist-graves (Mezzena 1981). The
furrows are bracketed by radiocarbon dates calibrating to 3600-3000 BC.
These show an impressive congruence with the Scandinavian dates. Slightly
later, with a calibrated radiocarbon date of c.3000 BC, is the site of
Castaneda at the mouth of the Calanca valley in Graubunden, Switzerland,
where another large area of criss-cross furrows has been exposed beneath
an Iron Age cemetery (Zindel and Deluns 1980). Another Swiss site, Chur-
Welschdorfli, yielded furrows sandwiched between Lutzengiietle (late Neo-
lithic) and Early Bronze Age layers, and so dating to the later fourth or third
millennium BC. Although the occurrence of such finds is naturally dependent
on the preservation of old land-surfaces, the existence of such conditions
under monuments dating to before 3500 BC (e.g. earthen longbarrows)
offers some control on this kind of evidence;2 and the emerging pattern
of dates both for plough-marks, stelai and figurines from several parts of
Europe seems to be a convincing one.
    As well as the contemporary iconographic evidence for paired draught in
the form of the pottery models discussed in the preceding chapter, the
copper models of yoked oxen from Bytyri near Poznan in Poland (Piggott
1968; Figure 7.2) also date to around 3500 BC on the evidence of the associ-
ated flat copper axes. Since the figures were made by a more sophisticated
method of casting (probably lost-wax) than was practised in Europe at that
time, it is possible that they were imports from a more advanced area such
as Anatolia [and recent evidence confirms this].3 The possibility of such
contacts is suggested by a series of remarkable pottery vessels from Olden-
burg, north-west Germany (Figure 7.3), which was clearly based on a metal
prototype (Bakker 1979, 123; [Korner and Laux 1980, Abb. 33-8]). This
evidence of long-distance contacts is important for the apparently rapid


                                          201




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    THE   SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION




7.2 Copper models of yoked oxen from Bytyn, central Poland, reportedly found
(in the 19th century) with flat copper axes of Copper Age type (Poznan
Archaeological Museum) [new photo, courtesy Lech Krzyzaniak].


spread of yoked traction at this time. [Two further finds have filled out the
pattern of evidence for traction in the later fourth millennium BC. The first
is a painted pottery figurine of a yoked ox (not dissimilar to the Bytyri
representation) found in a transitional EH I—II context (c.3000 BC) at
Tsoungiza near Nemea in the northern Peloponnese, Greece (Pullen 1992).
The second is from Bronocice, southern Poland, in the Baden-influenced
phase V (c.3000-2700 BC, some centuries after phase III with its pot bearing
the drawing of a wagon that was noted in the previous chapter: Figure 6.3).
It is a bovid horn-core with marks of rope-compression, suggesting that the
draught-pole of ploughs and wheeled vehicles was attached to a horn-yoke
(Milisauskas and Kruk 1991). It is contemporary with the assemblage
of cattle bones from a Bernburg context at Schalkenburg, central Germany,
half of which belonged to animals over five years old, and many of which
showed pathologies of the hip joints suggesting their use as traction animals
(Miiller 1985).] There is thus good agreement among the various lines of
evidence for paired draught (plough-marks, models, drawings of yoked
oxen, carts and ploughs, paired-bovid burials and osteological evidence) to
date its introduction to c.3500 BC, coinciding with a major horizon of
change in European settlement patterns.


                                       202




                This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD   WORLD




                                 OLDENDORFII
7.3 Handled pottery vessels copying metal original (note skeuomorphic rivet)
from rectangular dolmens near Oldenburg, Lower Saxony, Germany: Middle
Neolithic, c.3200 BC, after Korner and Laux 1980 [new drawing].


T H E SPREAD OF WOOL-SHEEP IN EUROPE 4
The basic problem in assessing the change from textiles based on plant fibres
(linen and bast) to those made of wool is one of differential preservation.
Vegetable fibres survive only in alkaline contexts such as the calcareous
muds of Neolithic Switzerland, while woollen fibres survive only in acid
contexts such as the oligotrophic peat-bogs of northern Europe (although
carbonisation may preserve exceptional examples of both). The great
abundance of textile finds from Switzerland in the period from 4000 to
3000 BC (Vogt 1937) shows that linen was widely used in the Neolithic.
After this time, in the Corded Ware and Early Bronze Age periods, the sharp
decline in textile remains suggests that linen had been largely replaced by
wool, which would not be preserved in such environments. On the other
hand, there is abundant evidence from northern Europe (especially in
Denmark and adjacent areas: Hald 1950) that woollen cloth was the major
textile in use during the Bronze Age, from c.2000 BC onwards. The problem
is thus to identify the point in the third millennium at which the change-over
occurred.
    An important find in this context is the 'Spitzes Hoch' tumulus at Latdorf
near Bernburg in central Germany, excavated by Klopfleisch in 1880. It

                                          203




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    THE    SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION




7.4 Drawing by the excavator; Klopfleisch, of a fragment of patterned (linen)
cloth - now destroyed - from the Spitzes Hoch tumulus, Latdorf (Kr. Bernburg),
central Germany. The accuracy of this drawing was doubted by Schlabow (1959),
who knew of no Neolithic analogy for the technique; but this seems no reason to
dismiss it.
contained a collective burial with Bernburg (later TRB, C.3000 BC) pots and
copper beads, within a circular stone setting covered by oak planks. The
burning of this wooden covering had carbonised nearly sixty textile
fragments, many decorated (Figure 7.4), which - though not all preserved -
have been examined by Schlabow (1959). These he described as being of
'erstaunlicher Feinheit', and consisting of 'feine, langhaarige Schafwolle' -
finer than wool from the Bronze Age. However, Dr M. L. Ryder (in litt.,
April 1981) informs me that he examined some of this supposedly Neolithic
'wool' in 1964, and is of the opinion that it is flax; and carbonised flax-seeds
occurred in the grave (Vogt 1937,43). It seems most likely, therefore, that this
late-fourth-millennium sample is linen, like contemporary Swiss textiles.
   The earliest European find of woollen fibres is the wrapping from the
handle of a flint dagger, found in its leather sheath in a peat-bog at
Wiepenkathen in northern Germany (Cassau 1935). This fabric is particu-
larly interesting, since it consisted of woollen threads that had originally
been interwoven with others, presumably linen, that had not survived the
acid conditions. This is neatly paralleled by a contemporary Swiss find
(Ruoff 1981), in which the converse obtained: linen fibres interwoven with
now vanished ones, presumably of wool. The Wiepenkathen dagger can
be dated typologically (Lomborg 1973) to the earliest phase of the Late
Neolithic 'Dagger Period', beginning around 2400 BC. Moreover, a find of


                                        204




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD   WORLD


carbonised wool from Clairvaux-les-lacs Station III, French Jura ('plusieurs
poils de laine de mouton': Hundt and Korber-Grohne in Petrequin 1986,
240f and fig. 7 no. 4) dates to c.2900 BC. [Winiger (1995, 172) notes that
the sudden paucity of linen remains in the Corded-Ware levels at Ziirich-
Mozartstrafie may indicate the introduction of wool.] It seems reasonable,
therefore, to suggest that wool was introduced [on a small scale] to north-
central Europe some time in the early to middle third millennium (probably
in a Corded-Ware context), and was used in conjunction with linen until it
became the dominant textile fibre in the second millennium [or even later, in
the far west of Europe]. [These conclusions are in agreement with recent
expert discussions of the subject (Barber 1991; Bender-Jorgensen 1986;
1992) which describe an extended transition from textiles based almost
entirely on plant-based fibres to wool-textiles during the third and early
second millennia. The recent find of the Alpine Iceman, dating to the final
centuries of the fourth millennium, shows that even an individual wealthy
enough to carry a copper axe was dressed at this time entirely in skin
clothing and a woven straw cape; indeed Winiger (1995) questions whether
linen was used for large items of clothing at all, and suggests that most
Bronze Age clothing was essentially a direct translation of skin garments
into textile. If so, then the introduction of wool marked a fundamental
transformation of this aspect of material culture.]


T H E ANTIQUITY OF DAIRYING
One of the most important questions about prehistoric economies is the
origins of milking. It cannot be assumed that this was practised from the
beginning of domestication; although it was probably considerably older
than the first iconological evidence for the practice, which appears only in
Uruk contexts in the fourth millennium BC. The answer can come only from
a large number of studies using age- and sex-specific mortality estimates
[and probably only unambiguously from residue-analysis: for comments on
faunal studies see Introduction, esp. Note 15]; and although many more
such studies are required, some initial results relevant to the early use of milk
in Europe will be noted here [see also Hesse 1982; 1984; Davis 1984 for the
Near East].
   Sakellaridis (1979) has provided detailed data on faunal assemblages
from Neolithic Switzerland, and although sample sizes are small, some
interesting patterns emerge. In the Pfyn and Cortaillod cultures (4000-3500
BC), 40 to 80 per cent of the cattle survived to maturity, of which the
majority were female. The lack of adult males confirms that they were not
kept as draught animals, but the high proportion of adult females implies
the possibility of milking as well as breeding stock. This pattern occurs as
early as the Roessen levels at Eschen-Lutzengiietle (fifth millennium), where
over 80 per cent of cattle were more than two to three years old. A similar

                                           205




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     THE   SECONDARY         EXPLOITATION


pattern was also noted for ovicaprids: Cortaillod populations also contain
20-60 per cent of adult animals, mostly female. This argues against their use
for wool, as predicted, but leaves open the possibility that goats in particular
were used for milking. (Incidentally, sheep were regularly used as milk
animals in northern Europe until the Industrial Revolution, as in southern
Europe today.) It is thus not impossible that milking was being practised
in Europe by 4000 BC, or even earlier^ though the use of milk in Neolithic
Europe seems to be a local rather than a general feature.
   [One piece of evidence that has been drawn into the discussion is the
occurrence of perforated pottery vessels or 'sieves', interpreted as cheese-
presses, which occur from Bandkeramik times onwards (Bogucki 1984;
1986). This is but one amongst many possible interpretations of their
function; and though it is not unthinkable that the cattle or sheep of the first
farming groups in central and northern Europe were being milked by this
time - some two or three thousand years after the initial domestication of
these species - the quantities produced must have been rather small, given
the essentially horticultural nature of the farming system and the very small
areas of forest which had been cleared. It would also be surprising in view
of the fact that Bandkeramik domestic animals were principally cattle rather
than sheep (see below), perhaps because of the necessity of reliance on leaf-
fodder. It must of course be admitted that milking, being neither a specific
technology (like the traction complex) nor dependent on highly specific
strains of livestock (like wool-bearing sheep), could well have emerged in-
dependently over large areas of Eurasia, and been practised already in
Neolithic Europe. Possible though this is, however, 'milking' is now too
easily attributed to early farming cultures in Europe, and care should be
taken not to retroject too far the large-scale image of 'temperate dairying'
as it has been practised in north-west Europe in historical times (e.g. Legge
1981). McCormick (1992) has pointed out that age-profiles for prehistoric
cattle indicating the slaughter of very young calves, often taken as diagnostic
for a concentration on milk production, are in fact the very reverse: for in
primitive breeds (in Ireland lasting down to recent times, and in England
down to the medieval period) the presence of the calf is essential for the
mother to let down her milk (Chapter 6), so that the high incidence of young
calves in bone assemblages would not imply dairying but meat production.
On this interpretation of the kill-off patterns from early Ireland, a true
'dairying' economy of the kind known historically only appeared in Early
Christian times, in the mid-first millennium AD. AS with many archae-
ological problems, recent images are misleading: prehistoric practices were
very different from modern ones and hard to imagine from recent models.
   Milk (and especially cow's milk) was not in prehistory the universal
commodity it has now become, and milk products - which were mostly
from sheep or goats - would always have had a special place in prehistoric
economies and diets - in many respects a (pre-monetary) 'cash-crop', like

                                       206




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD   WORLD




7.5 Upper row, Chalcolithic (early fourth millennium) figurines from sanctuaries
in the southern Levant: (a) ram or bull with churns (En-Gedi); (b) woman with
churn (Gilat); (c) ram with cornets (Gilat); lower row, Early Bronze Age (later
fourth millennium) figurines from the southern Levant; (d) donkey with vessels
(Bat-Yam); (e) donkey with vessels (Giv'atoyim); ( f ) donkey with large vessels
(Tel Azor tomb 10) [new drawing].

olive oil, wine and wool.5 This is certainly the impression given by the
Ghassulian and EB I figurines from the southern Levant, showing rams and
donkeys with pots (i.e. containers for liquid) and a woman with a churn (see
below, and Figure 7.5). The later fourth-millennium pictographic tablets
from Uruk (Green 1980) deal mainly with sheep and goats, and it is evident
that goats were the principal providers of milk, and that sheep were of
interest principally for their wool. Cattle seem to have been kept in very
small numbers.6 The search for the beginning of milk utilisation should
probably therefore concentrate on the ovicaprids, and the first extensive
milk production may indeed turn out to coincide with the introduction of
wool-sheep and the major shift to secondary products in the later fourth
millennium. The cattle-raising cultures of the Neolithic and Copper Age
were probably largely meat-oriented, though milking may have played a
more important part in temperate Europe than elsewhere.]
   How does this fit with other indications of the antiquity of dairying?
In Chapter 6, I discussed the relevance of the restricted adult tolerance of
lactose in human populations. The ability to digest milk, made possible by
persistence of the production of the enzyme lactase into adulthood, is very
low or absent in Mongoloid, New World, Melanesian, Australoid and
Khoisan populations. In the Near East it is generally low, with the exception

                                         207




                This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     THE   SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION


of the Bedouin of Saudi Arabia. Likewise in Africa, most Negroid popu-
lations except pastoralists like the Fulani, Hima and Tussi are intolerant to
lactose. Roughly half of the inhabitants of Mediterranean countries are
intolerant, and the only populations in which the majority of adults can
digest milk are those of north-west Europe. Although the practice of milking
has some correspondence with the distribution of lactose-tolerant indi-
viduals, it does not depend on the existence of high levels of lactose
tolerance in the population. The use of milk products such as yoghurt and
cheese (in which the lactose is broken down into simpler sugars) is thus
likely to have preceded the ability to drink milk directly.
   Two selective factors are thus likely to have been responsible for the
present distribution of lactose tolerance. One is the advantage, under ex-
treme conditions on desert margins with few alternative food sources, of
being able to consume large amounts of fresh milk. [Such niches may have
only been occupied fairly recently.] This does not explain the high levels of
tolerance in northern Europe, however, and an ingenious hypothesis to
account for this has been put forward by Flatz and Rotthauwe (1977). This
relates lactose to the promotion of calcium absorption where there is a
deficiency of vitamin D, when it is beneficial in preventing rickets. The
development of lactose tolerance would thus parallel the selective advantage
for de-pigmentation in areas of low sunlight (since vitamin D is produced in
the body by uv radiation). With a cereal-based diet, and little vitamin D
from fish and liver, agricultural populations in Europe would have been
prone to calcium deficiency and consequent bone deformations. If milk was
available, there would be a selective advantage for the prolongation of
lactase activity into adult life, which would allow milk to be consumed
directly, thus helping to prevent rickets.7
    We may therefore suggest that milking may have been practised in
Europe on a small scale by Neolithic populations, and that selective pressure
in favour of milk-drinking became increasingly important with the north-
wards spread of agriculture. The limited opportunities for grazing in the
primary forest would have inhibited the development of large herds, but the
ability to keep small quantities of domestic livestock for milk would have
been valuable in small scattered communities. Enlargement of the pastoral
sector, and the development of larger-scale dairying, would have depended
on the progress of forest clearance and in particular the change from small-
scale horticulture to a larger scale of agriculture (Figure 8.4). It is in this
context that the arrival of the plough and wool-sheep were important and
mutually reinforcing.

TRANSPORT AND TRADE IN THE FOURTH AND THIRD
MILLENNIA BC: THE N E A R EAST
Having surveyed the European evidence for secondary exploitation, we may
now turn to the Near East, and in particular to transport animals which

                                        208




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    OF   ANIMALS      IN   THE   OLD    WORLD


spread only marginally into prehistoric Europe. [We shall then look at
evidence for the horse, a transport animal which spread from the steppe belt
both into Temperate Europe arid to the Near East.]

Non-caballine      equids
As with the use of paired draught, the use of pack animals can be illumi-
nated from the evidence of figurines (Figure 7.5). A group of terracottas
from southern Palestine is the first known indication of the use of pack
animals, and particularly the ass or donkey, Equus asinus [Epstein 1985;
Ovadia 1992]. The earliest of them [which show rams rather than donkeys]
are from the Ghassulian (Late Chalcolithic) period, of the late fifth or earlier
fourth millennium BC, while others [including donkeys] come from EB I
contexts, equivalent to the Egyptian late Pre- and Protodynastic periods of
the later fourth millennium. From Ghassulian contexts, and especially ritual
centres, come a bovid carrying 'churns' from En-gedi (Ussishkin 1980, 35),
a ram with conical vessels on its back, and a woman with a 'churn' on her
head, from Gilat (Alon 1976). [A small donkey figure from Giv'atoyim, with
two globular containers (pots? leather bottles? baskets?) high on its back
(Kaplan 1969), originally thought to be Chalcolithic is now considered to
be EB I (Ovadia 1992,20).] The best representation of a pack donkey comes
from an EB I tomb at Tel Azor (not far from Tel Aviv), along with a copper
dagger and a predynastic Egyptian palette (Druks and Tsaferis 1970). It
carries two tall containers. A somewhat similar figure of a donkey, broken
from the rim of a vessel, comes from Cyprus and belongs to the EB III period
at the end of the third millennium (Figure 6.11).
   The context of these early figurines from Palestine is interesting: the Late
Chalcolithic Ghassulian culture saw a major expansion in the Negev and
Sinai, associated with an expansion of trade and metallurgical activity
(Rothenberg 1970), and the formation of links across the arid part of
southern Palestine with the cultures of Predynastic Egypt, where metal
objects appear in the Gerzean (Naqada II). These routes became increasingly
important during the period of formation of the Egyptian state. Loaded
donkeys appear on the rock drawings of Upper Egypt (Winckler 1939), and
in Protodynastic representations of trade or tribute scenes. Egyptian interest
in the Levant is indicated by the occurrence of traded objects (and even the
serekh of Narmer on a sherd from Tel 'Erany), and this sphere of influence
in southern Palestine parallels the interaction zone around the early
Mesopotamian states, indicated for example by the occurrence of proto-
Elamite tablets on the Iranian plateau. These Egyptian land routes based on
pack transport were superseded from the fifth dynasty onwards by the
development of effective maritime transport and bulk trade by sea (Marfoe
1987; [Esse 1991]). The scope of these earlier contacts was clearly depend-
ent on the existence of domestic donkeys used as pack animals.
   Faunal evidence shows that the donkey was present in both Palestine and

                                        209




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     THE   SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION


Upper Egypt from the four h millennium onwards, and the evidence of the
figurines suggests that it came to be important locally among transhumant
groups in southern Palestine, perhaps first in transporting milk and milk-
products, and in carrying rare materials from distant extraction sites. The
growing demand from expanding populations in the Nile valley, however,
gave it a broader significance within the expanding network of trade routes.
[Since the first real evidence for use of the donkey (Ovadia 1993), whether
in the form of figurines or an increase in the numbers of bones on sites, dates
to EB I (later fourth millennium), it seems that it was this larger geopolitical
context which was responsible for promoting it as a transport animal, and
for spreading it all around the Fertile Crescent - though the domestication
process could well have begun in the preceding Chalcolithic, and both rams
and bovids were perhaps then being used as pack animals (Figure 7.5). The
Chalcolithic way of life is hard to describe by ethnographic analogy: an
intensive floodwater horticulture (apparently not yet using the plough: Levy
1992, 74), and in places also arboriculture (olive) with extensive trans-
humance, keeping sheep both for milk and wool - fragments of woollen
textile, as well as the remains of a loom, accompanied the spectacular Nahal
Mishmar hoard of Chalcolithic metalwork, which also had olive, date and
pomegranate remains (Bar-Adon 1980). It is a good example of an 'extinct'
way of life with no recent analogies. Both ploughing and a more intensive
pastoralism seem to have accompanied the urbanisation of EB I, sparked off
by Egyptian intervention (Horwitz and Tchernov 1989; Smith and Horwitz
1984; Esse 1991), and it was in this context that the domestic donkey spread
rapidly all round the Fertile Crescent: primarily as a beast of burden but
soon, too, as a ridden animal - whose style of riding was transferred to the
horse when it arrived from further north. It must have been especially useful
on overland routes which articulated with the Euphrates supply routes from
the Uruk colonies. Perhaps crossed with other equids (horse or onager), it
was also an important traction animal in the warfare of third-millennium
Sumer.] This spread of innovations in transport (for example the use of the
sail, which also came into wider use during this time) took features formerly
important in local niches and gave them an international role in the
expanding relations between early complex societies and their peripheries.
    The donkey was introduced to the Aegean during the third millennium,
occurring both at Lerna V and in Troy IV (Gejvall 1969; 1946), and is thus
likely to have spread widely through the Near East during this period.
Tracing this spread is complicated, however, by the difficulty of distinguish-
ing donkey from the remains of other equids which were present in this
region. A further complicating element is the probability of hybridisation
between the various equids. These complexities have been comprehensively
assessed by Juris Zarins (1976) in a work which is a fundamental source of
information on this question. Central to his thesis is his contention that the
onager (Equus hemionus), although hunted, was unlikely to have been


                                        210




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD   WORLD




on a clay model from Altyn Depe, Namazga IV period (after Masson); [new
drawing].
domesticated in the same sense as the donkey (cf. Littauer and Crouwel
1979). However, onager-like equids such as those shown in teams of four
pulling battle-cars on the 'Standard of Ur' might well represent hybrids,
either with donkeys or perhaps with horses (see below). The use of the
onager, therefore, seems to be secondary to the use of other equids, and may
represent local attempts to extend the stock of a rare and valuable imported
species by the developing techniques of hybridisation with a locally
abundant equid.

Camels
Returning briefly to the early stages of urbanisation in the fourth
millennium, it is possible to suggest that the domestication of the camel
closely paralleled that of the donkey, but in a complementary area. Two
species are involved, the Bactrian (Camelus bactrianus) and the Arabian
camel or dromedary (C. dromedarius). Although there is no unambiguous
evidence for the domestic status of either animal before the second millen-
nium, indications of the presence of the camel on settlements, together with
the long overland routes which came into use in the later fourth and third
millennia on the Iranian plateau, suggest that it was already in use as a
transport animal. Tosi (1974) has suggested an early focus of use at sites like
Shar-i Sokhta in Seistan, where its bones, dung and hair have been identified;
and this area shows close cultural links with Turkmenia, where figurines
suggest that it may have been used initially as a traction animal (Figure 7.6;
Masson and Sarianidi 1972, plate 36; Bulliet 1975). Seistan is linked south-
wards to the area of Kerman and the Makran, where there are now further
indications of the Bactrian camel (Compagnoni and Tosi 1978) [and as far
as the Indus valley by the third millennium: Zarins 1979].
   On the other side of the Gulf, the Oman peninsula was part of the same
interaction-sphere (probably the historical Magan); and there are fourth-
millennium camel bones at Hili and Umm an-Nar, while representations
on grave-stones show that the species present was the dromedary (Ripinski
1975; Zarins 1978). The camel also occurs at Bahrein (Dilmun). It is thus

                                          211




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    THE    SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION


possible that domestication of the two species occurred in the developing
zone of long-distance trade contacts on opposite sides of the Gulf, linked to
the growing urban areas of Mesopotamia and the Indus. While the initial
focus of camel domestication may have been in some localised area of Iran,
it achieved a major significance within the expanding network of fourth-
and third-millennium trade-routes. These routes did not extend at this time
to western Arabia, and the relatively slow spread of the dromedary may
reflect the undeveloped nature of this hinterland until the end of the second
and first millennia BC, with the development of the Arabian incense trade
[Artzy 1994].
   The Bactrian camel, however, seems to have undergone a major dispersal
as a transport animal in the third millennium: camel bones occur on
Harappan sites (Ratnagar 1981, 173), and by the second millennium on
Andronovo sites in central Asia, where they may be linked to drawings of
camels pulling carts in the Minusinsk depression (Bulliet 1975; Figure 7.6).
They may even have penetrated by way of the steppes into eastern Europe
in the late fourth and third millennia: fabrics identified as camel-hair have
been noted at Maikop in the northern Caucasus (see Chapter 18), and camel
bones have been found in barrows on the Pontic steppes and at Gurbane§ti
east of Bucharest in Romania (Rosetti 1959, 802). It is clear that the steppes
acted as an important secondary axis of dispersal, as with other secondary
forms of animal exploitation. The fourth and third millennia thus saw the
emergence and dispersal of three major means of animal transport: wheeled
vehicles, pack transport and riding; and these techniques, and the domestic
species on which they were based, spread and interacted both within the
Near East and on its steppe hinterland.


T H E DOMESTICATION AND SPREAD OF THE HORSE [New]
[Information on the early history of the horse is now much more abundant
than when Chapter 6, or even the present chapter, was first written; and this
new account, replacing the original sections on the horse, may serve as
a guide to these subsequent developments - for although they modify the
detail, in many ways they relate horse domestication more closely to the
other elements of the secondary products complex.8

Domestication
Horses survived into the Holocene even in forested parts of Europe, and
were apparently hunted in Neolithic France (e.g. Carnac, Roucadour -
Chasseen) and Germany (e.g. Diimmersee - early TRB), though apparently
not in Britain after the Late Glacial, as recent radiocarbon dates have
shown.9 These local populations, which would have benefited to some ex-
tent from human opening of the woodlands by early farmers, seem to have
made a discernible contribution to European early domestic populations in

                                        212




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    OF   ANIMALS     IN   THE   OLD    WORLD


the third millennium, and the horse (like cattle and pigs, but unlike sheep)
seems to have undergone several geographically distinct domestication
episodes, within a finite period in the fourth and third millennia. These
cannot be considered 'independent', however, but are better seen within the
context of the large-scale cultural interactions at this time.
   It was on the steppes (Figure 7.7) that human populations had known
and made use of the horse for longest; while few sites in forested Europe
before 3000 BC have yielded more than a few per cent of horse bones, the
Copper Age cultures of the Ukraine include sites where they form the largest
proportion of animal bones. Of these, the site of Dereivka near Kiev (now
published in English: Telegin 1986) has tended to dominate discussion as
further techniques have been applied to its study, and their conclusions
are generalised to other contemporary sites. Dereivka is a small habitation
site dating to c.4000 BC, with the remains of two houses, overlooking a
tributary of the Dnepr. The pottery included vessels with cord-impressions,
typical of the later phase of the Sredni Stog culture. Three-quarters of the
faunal remains are horse, which would have provided a high proportion of
the food; the other domestic animals were cattle, sheep and pig. Horses from
this site had been claimed as domestic by Bibikova (e.g. 1975), and this view
was accepted by Nobis (1971) and by Bokonyi (1978), principally on
account of the contrast with earlier horses from the region - in fact mainly
Pleistocene ones, since Mesolithic examples were not available. A further
line of argument was cultural: on the eastern part of the site there were ritual
animal burials, including the skull and legbones of a horse (a seven to eight
year-old stallion) and foreparts of two dogs - all, perhaps, originally stuffed,
as the Iron Age Scythians are known to have done, in the manner of 'head
and hooves' burials (Piggott 1983, 91-2). A nearby pit contained a boar
figurine, long blade, and perforated antler fragments of a type thought to
represent bridle-bit cheek-pieces (Piggott 1983, fig. 44: but see below), of
which the site has yielded six single examples. It is, of course, crucial that
the stallion burial is contemporary with the rest of the site, and doubts have
been widely expressed about this possibility: direct radiocarbon measure-
ments on it would decide.10
   Two recent analyses of the faunal remains, by different methods, have
given what appear to be contradictory results. The first was a detailed study
of the mortality statistics, carried out by Marsha Levine (1990), and
compared with other assemblages which she has personally studied. Her
conclusion was that the age-profile of the Dereivka horses was characteristic
of a population exploited by hunting. An alternative approach was
attempted by David Anthony and Dorcas Brown: an SEM examination of the
wear surfaces on the second premolar teeth of the ritually buried horse has
demonstrated a pattern of attrition consistent with use of a bit - which did
not, however, occur on other specimens (Anthony and Brown 1991). If this
specimen is indeed contemporary with the site as a whole, rather than being


                                       213




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    THE    SECONDARY         EXPLOITATION




                                                                  c. 4000 BC




7.7 The principal cultural groups of the Pontic steppes and northern Kazakhstan
at millennial intervals, 4000-2000 BC [new drawing].




                                       214




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD    WORLD


a later intrusion, it would suggest that at least one horse at this time was a
domesticated (or at least tamed) animal used for riding. In this case it might
be hypothesised that ridden horses were used in hunting, on the principle 'it
takes one to catch one'. Alternatively, the stallion is intrusive and Sredni
Stog-period Dereivka is simply a horse-hunting site. Similar considerations
would apply to contemporary sites of the Khvalynsk culture on the Volga,
such as Sezzhee.
   Another candidate which has attracted recent attention as an early centre
of horse domestication has been the site of Botai near Petropavlovsk in
northern Kazakhstan (Zaibert 1993), for this large village of circular, semi-
subterranean huts also has a faunal assemblage consisting very largely of
horse, and would be a plausible candidate for the eastern origin favoured by
Marija Gimbutas. The relative chronology is now becoming clearer, how-
ever, thanks to a dating programme undertaken by the Oxford Radiocarbon
Accelerator Unit, and Botai now appears to post-date Sredni Stog, and to
be largely contemporary with the Pit-Grave culture in the later fourth
millennium. Although some horses have been claimed to show bit-wear, the
great majority are wild; so this might exemplify a mode of 'horse-catching'
which has no recent analogue in its combination of domestication and hunt-
ing of a single species. Where domestic animals are not used for secondary
products, the hunting of horses can make use of pasture which is beyond the
range of cattle, because of their water requirements, slow movement and
inability to graze under snow. In a wider context, however, this seems to be
a fairly marginal phenomenon, rather than an evolutionary step towards
horse-rearing and pastoralism.
   The long experience of steppe tribes with the hunting of horses, even if
it shows no inbuilt tendency to domestication, would have provided an
opportunity when new motives impinged on this area. This took place after
3500 BC, when the Maikop culture of the northern Caucasus was formed
under influence from the Uruk colonial expansion (Chapter 18), and in turn
created the conditions for the formation of the Pit-Grave culture.11 This
included the use of wheeled vehicles (apparently four-wheelers, rather than
a mixture of wagons and carts: Izbitzer 1993), and probably wool-bearing
breeds of sheep whose wool may have been used for felt.12 As well as the use
of cattle as draught animals, new species of transport animal such as the
camel (see above) and donkey may have been encountered. These would
have provided new models of animal utilisation, which may have been the
stimulus for the domestication of animals used for riding (see below). This
would have provided the mobility needed to make effective use of the
extensive interfluvial pastures. Domestication of the horse would initially
have been the outcome of culture-contact, but soon became integral to a
new way of life. The expansionist character of this cultural grouping, whose
tumuli dot the steppe interfluves eastward to the Urals and also penetrated
westwards in enclaves as far as the Hungarian Plain (Chapter 11), is well

                                          215




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     THE    SECONDARY         EXPLOITATION


known; but unfortunately its often insubstantial settlement sites have not
yielded large animal-bone assemblages which have attracted detailed
analysis. Only Mikhailovka has provided an assemblage, so far subjected
only to species identification, in which horses form 10 to 15 per cent of a
spectrum of predominantly domestic animals (mostly cattle and sheep).
There is thus no direct osteological evidence to demonstrate that the horse
was domesticated at this point, though it remains an outstanding prob-
ability that it was so, as is indicated by the spread of domestic horses to
adjacent areas, both within and beyond its natural distribution.

Spread of the horse in the Near East
The onager was widely distributed in western Asia and had long been
hunted, and the donkey spread rapidly in the late fourth millennium as
a pack animal. The potential presence of three different species of equid
(and six possible hybrids) thus makes osteological (and even iconological)
identification of horses difficult; but there is sufficient evidence to be reason-
ably confident of the presence of the horse in the third millennium, and
perhaps the late fourth (Littauer and Crouwel 1979, 23-30). Since the
survival of relict Pleistocene populations is not everywhere excluded (e.g. for
Anatolia), simple presence is insufficient to demonstrate domestication.
There is unambiguous evidence of the presence of horses and the use of
equids for riding from the later third millennium (Moorey 1970), and the
accumulation of indications suggests an earlier third-millennium spread of
domesticated stock, though in very small numbers. An equid humerus from
Late Chalcolithic Shiqmim (identified metrically as horse) with an associ-
ated date of 3240 BC has a claim to be the earliest (Grigson 1993), as would
contemporary horse bones claimed from Tal-i Iblis in south-central Iran.
Their cases are respectively strengthened by EB horse-bones from Arad
and Aphek, and by a bone inlay portraying a horse from Susa; but some
ambiguity remains because of the small numbers of specimens and
alternative species of equid. The clearest indications of the presence of
horses are in eastern Anatolia (Bokonyi 1991). It is possible that the con-
sistent representation of horse in late-fourth- and third-millennium sites
in the upper Euphrates valley in Turkey - like Arslantepe, fundamentally
affected by the Uruk expansion13 - is a reflection of the importance of a
route along which these animals were imported. The early Near Eastern
horses seem to have been ridden only incidentally (Moorey 1970), since this
activity is not the focus of elite iconography, which rather concentrates
on the military uses of equids as draught animals. Current opinion is that
the equids shown pulling battle-cars are not the notoriously untamable
onager, nor just an ass, but rather a hybrid - either mule/hinny or a donkey-
onager cross. (Such hybrids were occasionally used as draught animals in
ploughing, according to textual evidence.) If that is so, then the principal
reason for importing horses from a northern breeding pool (via the


                                        216




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    OF   ANIMALS      IN   THE   OLD    WORLD


Caucasus and eastern Anatolia?) may well have been to provide hybrid
pack-animals, and increasingly also draught-animals for military use, in the
context of the growing conflicts between early states (see below, in con-
nection with the chariot). In this perspective, the beginning of horse
domestication in the area immediately north of the Caucasus could have
been intimately connected with the northward penetration of the secondary
products complex, and the use of the donkey - initially as a pack animal but
used experimentally both for riding and draught. Horse-domestication and
riding may therefore be less independent of the main secondary products
complex than it is currently presented in archaeo-zoological discussions
(e.g. papers in Hansel and Zimmer 1994).

Riding and horse-control
Horses only became draught animals in their own right when a light,
wheeled vehicle had been invented (see below). The representational evi-
dence provides the answer to the old question as to whether early domestic
horses were ridden: yes, they were. With such small horses, however, the seat
may have been unusual to modern eyes - perhaps more like the 'back seat'
(over the pelvic girdle) that is appropriate on a donkey, or a very forward
seat like that of American Indians on their mustangs. The former method of
riding was used in the Near East in the third and second millennia, at first
using a nose-ring instead of a bit (Littauer and Crouwel 1979, fig. 37); the
latter may have been usual further north. These two styles would have been
the manner of riding until the first millennium BC, when horses were first
ridden for military purposes. In the meantime, however, over the course of
the second millennium, chariotry had been developed, and with it an array
of control techniques using bridle-bits and other harness attachments. The
combination of this developed type of bridle, together with larger breeds of
horse, made possible the military use of the ridden horse as it was employed
by the nomads of the steppes, and the use of cavalry as it developed amongst
the Iron Age civilisations of the east Mediterranean. Earlier riding styles
should not be confused with these more advanced forms of control.
   The question then arises as to how early ridden horses were controlled,
outside the Near East where the use of a nose-ring was transferred from
cattle. Here another shift in perception has taken place, in connection with
the interpretation of various pieces of perforated antler taken to represent
elements of harness. Antler objects interpreted as the cheek-pieces to bridle-
bits (and in some cases found in position in burials) are known from the
steppe area and eastern Europe in the early second millennium onwards;
bronze bits are known from the Near East after 1600, and in temperate
Europe after 1300 (Potratz 1966; Hiittel 1981). Both of these sets of bits
fall into two broad types: the vertical bar (Stangenknebel) or the disk
(Plattenknebel), the latter sometimes with spikes (and in Near Eastern metal
forms sometimes explicitly imitating a wheel). Temperate European

                                       217




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     THE   SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION


(Urnfield) ones are largely of the bar type, and were preceded during the
earlier second millennium by an often highly decorated series of antler
examples, known both from temperate Europe and the western steppes
(see below, Figure 7.8). It is these objects which have encouraged the in-
terpretation of the perforated antler pieces from Dereivka and elsewhere as
primitive bridle-bits. But the second-millennium examples were used in
connection with the chariot, i.e. most probably for driving, when the horse
must be controlled without other physical contact; so they are not really
necessary for controlling a ridden horse, except in the kind of disciplined
cavalry movement which took over from chariotry at the end of the second
millennium, and for which increasingly elaborate bits were designed. The
horse could thus have been initially controlled in a rather simple way by a
rope noseband; and decorative impressions on pottery indicate an extensive
knowledge of cordage and presumably ropes, probably made from hemp
(cf. also Chapters 15 and 16).

The spread of horse-riding in Europe
Horses seem to have come into use in Europe at approximately the same
time as they spread into the Near East: the first half of the third millennium.
Since horse populations survived in temperate Europe, including the
Carpathian Basin, the sporadic occurrence of horse bones in early Copper
Age (Tiszapolgar) contexts in Hungary need not be explained by the import
of exotic animals in exchange for copper. Instead, their first regular
occurrence in assemblages of the Baden culture may be taken as a token of
a new interest in horses of local origin. Since the latter part of this culture
coincides with the arrival of small enclaves of Pit-Grave burial within its east
Hungarian distribution at the end of the fourth millennium and the
beginning of the third (Chapter 11), these facts may well be related; and this
event can plausibly be seen as the stimulus for local domestication.
   In a recent survey of the European evidence, Norbert Benecke (1994) has
pointed to the appearance of horses in greater numbers, and with more
morphological variability, in the late TRB Bernburg culture in central
Germany, and in the contemporary Cham culture in Bavaria - both situated
on the main westward contact-routes from the Carpathian Basin, and dated
to c.3000 BC. In the Bernburg culture, this coincides with the introduction
of a larger (probably wool-bearing) breed of sheep, which also occurs in
Poland and Hungary (Miiller 1994). The central European horses show a
degree of continuity with earlier populations there, and are therefore
plausibly interpreted as a local intake from indigenous wild stock (either
here or in the Carpathian Basin), under the influence of new practices in
adjacent regions. Scandinavian horses seem to be of central European rather
than local type (Benecke 1994,135), and were apparently introduced from
there. The first plentiful occurrence in Denmark is in pits at the late TRB (MN
III-V, i.e. parallel to Corded Ware) site of Lindskov in central Jutland


                                        218




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    OF   ANIMALS     IN   THE   OLD    WORLD


(Davidsen 1978,142). The first burial with a horse-skull occurs in a Corded
Ware context at Borgstedt in north-west Germany (Bauch 1988).14 There is
also a similar Bell-Beaker burial from Moravia, while the well-known
Hungarian Bell-Beaker site of Csepel Haros (Bokonyi 1978) seems to have
been a specialised breeding centre, potentially supplying the adjacent Bell-
Beaker network with the central-European type of horses (see Chapter 15).
   These occurrences suggest successive westward extensions of the dom-
esticated horse, presumably as a riding-animal, reaching western Europe
(the British Isles, France, Iberia) in the Bell-Beaker period of the later third
millennium (van Wijngaarden-Bakker 1974, 345-7 for horses at New-
grange). Uerpmann (1990) has emphasised that Spanish populations were
derived from local wild stock; indeed, he views the domestication process as
having begun not in east Europe but in the far west of Europe in the third
millennium. Underlying this are the twin ideas of direct Near Eastern
influence in the Spanish Chalcolithic fortified sites ('colonies') like Los
Millares, in contact with the area where donkeys were already domesti-
cated, and of a Bell-Beaker expansion from the Iberian peninsula. Whilst the
model of a knock-on effect from donkey domestication is attractive, this
particular reconstruction does not seem to me to be tenable on archae-
ological grounds (cf. Renfrew 1967a); and he does, in any case, note as an
exception the striking increase in stature in Bavarian horses of the Cham
culture (later fourth millennium BC), which he attributes to eastern immi-
gration from the lower Danube (1990, 139-42), postulated as an alterna-
tive centre of local domestication. This multi-centric model of several
unrelated domestication-episodes of small relict populations seems to me
implausible; the reconstruction of a single, large-scale episode of horse
domestication on the Pontic steppes in the later fourth millennium, whose
effects were felt in eastern and central Europe in the later fourth millennium
and in western Europe in the third millennium, seems more persuasive than
any postulated alternative. (And my suggestion that Pontic horse domesti-
cation might indirectly reflect earlier experience with the donkey would
preserve the structural coherence of Uerpmann's proposal.) Whatever the
spatial logic, however, the chronological pattern is clear: domesticated
horses and local domestication only began to spread into forested temperate
Europe as the plough came into general use in these areas, and more
extensive patterns of cultivation began, making it possible to keep larger
quantities of livestock (cf. Fig. 8.4).15

The origin of the chariot
During the third millennium, solid-wheeled wooden wagons continued to
be placed in some elite graves under tumuli on the Pontic steppes. The more
elaborate design of these sunken chambers, with a side-chamber for the
burial, gives them the name 'Catacomb-Graves', and they are especially
numerous along the lower reaches of the Ingul and Dnepr.16 This focus of

                                       219




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      THE   SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION


elaboration suggests the possibility of coastal links with the Caucasus and
perhaps northern Anatolia. (Links from north-west Anatolia to the lower
and middle Danube, bringing amongst other things knowledge of faience
and tin-bronze, were established at this time: Sherratt 1993, 22-4.) On the
Anatolian plateau, ox-carts decorated with a variety of bronze openwork
mountings were in use by eminent personages at sites such as Alaca Hiiyiik.
Over the same period, Mesopotamian city-states came into conflict both
with each other and with the secondary states springing up in their
immediate periphery. (Some of the latter, like Ebla, may already have estab-
lished merchant colonies in central Anatolia.) As well as the four-wheeled
'battle-car' pulled by four equids (controlled by a nose-ring), several experi-
ments had been made in northern Mesopotamia and Syria with military
vehicles having two solid wheels - one type used as a moving platform, the
other straddled as if riding an animal (Littauer and Crouwel 1979, 37).
There was clearly a military incentive to develop a fast two-wheeler; but the
solutions involved solid, heavy carpentry. Attempts were made to lighten
them, by use of the cross-bar wheel (evolved from a tripartite disc-wheel
with lunate openings and strengthening-bars); and some solid two-wheeled
vehicles - with rather implausible reconstructions - have been claimed from
Catacomb-Grave contexts (e.g. Marievka mound 11, Zaporozhye region:
Pustovalov 1994, fig. 11). From this background a completely new, light,
horse-drawn vehicle emerged and set a new standard in fast personal
transport: the chariot (Moorey 1986).
    The first evidence of spoke-wheeled vehicles occurs in the early second
millennium. Establishing claims of priority is an unprofitable exercise since the
evidence takes such different forms: what is more striking is the simultaneity
(with current levels of resolution) of their appearance over a triangle from
central Anatolia to Hungary to the southern Urals. Two different interpreta-
tive emphases are possible. Looking at Anatolian seal-impressions from the
late third and early second millennia, with their images of deities or royal
personages on vehicles with cross-bar or spoked wheels, drawn by four and
then two equids, Littauer and Crouwel (1979,68-71) have seen an evolution-
ary sequence. Piggott (1983,103), following Childe, has stressed the funda-
mental contrast between the light, bentwood 'tension structure' of the chariot,
by comparison with the heavy 'compression structure' of the cart, and looks for
its origin in non-urban communities with experience of horses: the steppes.
Which origin is more plausible? It may be possible to compromise, and suggest
a relationship between the two; but first, chronology.
    In the Carpathian Basin the first part of the third millennium saw the
absorption of the enclaves of intrusive steppe population in the east, and
new links with the Adriatic through Bosnia and Slovenia; while the second
part saw the effects of a wider linkage along the Danube, and up into central
Germany. The radical change of pace, including the rapid development of
the Transylvanian bronze industry, nevertheless took place at the beginning

                                         220




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD   WORLD




                                                                    7.8 Evidence for
                                                                    the chariot in the
                                                                    Carpathian Basin,
                                                                    early second
                                                                    millennium BC:
                                                                    left, antler cheek-
                                                                    piece of bridle-bit
                                                                    (Szazhalombatta),
                                                                    length 9cm,
                                                                    diameter 1.3 (top)
                                                                    to 2cm (base);
                                                                    right, models of
                                                                    spoked wheels
                                                                    (various sites);
                                                                    (from Sherratt
                                                                    1987e, after
                                                                    Kovacs and
                                                                    Tihelka).




of the second millennium, with the appearance of fortified centres along the
key Carpathian passes, and plentiful evidence for horse-driving in the shape
of models of spoked wheels and items of antler horse-gear, pre-eminently
bar-shaped cheek-pieces, often elaborately decorated with a compass-drawn
ornament that was soon transferred to gold- and bronzework (Figure 7.8).
In Hungary this is principally associated with a group of cultures con-
veniently designated as Otomani; in Moldavia it is equally typical of
Monteoru: both of them, on a major trade route from the Black Sea, are
characterised by fortifications and chariotry (Sherratt 1993, fig. 7).
   It is now clear from new radiocarbon dates that the series of steppe

                                          221




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     THE   SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION


cultures which succeeded the Catacomb-Graves and their contempor-
aries also came into existence right at the beginning of the second
millennium: west to east, from the Pontic steppes to beyond the Urals, the
Mnogovalikovaya, Timber-Grave (Potapovo phase), and Andronovo
cultures (Figure 7.7). These bordered in the west on the Monteoru and
Otomani cultures of Romania and Hungary, and in the east were in process
of eastward expansion across the steppes - south of a line of forest cultures
(Seima-Turbino-Samussk) which had their own sophisticated socketed
bronze metallurgy, probably of east Asian origin. The originality of these
steppe communities has been emphasised by the recognition of a series of
circular ditched fortifications along the border of the steppe and forest (e.g.
Arkaim and Sintashta: Zdanovich 1988; Gening, Zdanovich and Gening
1992) between the upper Ural and Tobol rivers east of Magnitogorsk. These
amazing structures, with concentric rings of c.60 trapezoidal houses in a
(consciously?) wheel-like array, 150m in diameter, are now known from
some fifteen examples in this area, and may well be much more common in
the steppe zone than has hitherto been recognised. They are associated with
a flourishing metallurgy. This cultural florescence argues for new structures
of trade and contact at this time, and such sites recall contemporary fortified
sites in Slovakia like Barca. Associated with the Sintashta settlement is a
series of cemeteries, including a large 'temple-mound' and its associated
shafts with timber-lined chambers, five of which contained the remains of
two-wheeled vehicles, circular antler cheek-pieces of bridle-bits, and head-
and-hooves burials of horses. In one of these, the impression of the lower
part of the wheel was preserved where it had been sunk beneath the floor-
level, and indicated a ten- or twelve-spoked wheel. It should be emphasised
that little is known of the vehicle-type of steppe chariots apart from the
wheels (i.e. the impression of a multiple-spoke wheel at the eastern end of
the distribution, clay models of four-spoke wheels at the western end). Two
enigmatic representations on pots, of the early and mid-second millennium
respectively (Piggott 1983, 93-4), suggest light, minimal (and thus probably
bentwood) structures. It seems likely that the light vehicle we recognise as
the chariot had its critical development in the steppe zone, in association
with the development of the bridle and bit (and perhaps also a yoke
specifically adapted to equine needs by the development of yoke-saddles). It
is in this context that the distinctive style of compass-drawn ornament is
likely to have spread, over the area from the Pontic steppes to Alalakh (and
later to Mycenae). Did the typical compass-drawn Wellenbandmuster, so
often found on harness-related equipment (Figure 7.8), represent the
spinning, bouncing wheels of the light chariot?17
  This is not, however, to argue for an 'independent invention', carried
south by Aryan hordes. It can reasonably be argued that such a vehicle only
emerged under southern influence. The impetus to develop a fast two-
wheeler for personal transport was an urban rather than a rural necessity,

                                        222




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD   WORLD


and has no obvious precursors in the large four-wheel wagons of the Pit-
Grave tradition. The use of equids for traction, too, was a southern practice.
Its appearance on the northern shore of the Black Sea can only be under-
stood in terms of the growing links with Anatolia, which was itself in-
creasingly linked to Syria and northern Mesopotamia. The establishment of
merchant settlements at cities on the Anatolian plateau, as far north as the
Black Sea, has been established from documentary sources; and it is likely
that links established from north-west Anatolia to the Danube were now
supplemented by coastal connections around the whole of the western
perimeter of the Black Sea. One of the commodities in demand, as well as
metals, is likely to have been horses; and whereas earlier supplies may have
been obtained via the Caucasus, this western route now offered an
alternative. If later second-millennium evidence is anything to go by, this no
doubt also included experienced trainers.18 It was in this connection that
horse and fighting-vehicle might have come together, and a new means of
transport invented on the steppes: a combination of spoked wheels (perhaps
already developed in Anatolia), bentwood construction, and most especially
horse-training and new methods of control. Shortly after 2000 BC, in the
Old Assyrian karum towns of central Anatolia, representations of vehicles
with pairs of four-spoked wheels appear on cylinder-seals from Kiiltepe
(Kanis) near Kayseri; while from Acemhiiyiik (south of Tuzgolii, the great
Salt Lake) comes a set of bronze model wheels with four spokes (Littauer
and Crouwel 1979; 1986). In representations, the Anatolian early second-
millennium two-wheelers look cumbersome and rectangular, pulled by pairs
of badly-drawn equids with nose-rings and bearing heavy yokes probably
without yoke-saddles. More sophisticated machines only appeared a cen-
tury or so later. The earlier examples look like the first attempts to use horse
(rather than hybrid) traction, in a tradition not pre-adapted for such use, by
imitation of an outside model. It is significant, therefore, that these central
Anatolian developments are effectively contemporary with the first evidence
of spoke-wheel vehicles and antler bit-elements on the Pontic and trans-Ural
steppes, and in the Carpathian Basin.19 It seems best to regard this area as
a huge interaction-sphere, in which Anatolia provided the need, and the
western steppe zone the solution. Its genesis must go back to the closing
centuries of the third millennium.
    The creation of the chariot thus exemplifies a theme which has run
throughout this discussion of early uses of the horse - the intimate
relationship between the two sides of the Black Sea: Anatolia and the
Caucasus on the one hand (linked since the Uruk expansion to the Near
Eastern heartland), and on the other the broad belt of open country running
unhindered eastward to the Altai, where mastery of the horse is the key to
success. It also exemplifies a model which seems very widely applicable: an
interactionist interpretation, based on a particular conjunction of circum-
stances, rather than a gradualist one of local, evolutionary change.]


                                          223




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     THE    SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION



CONCLUSION: THE ORIGINS AND SPREAD OF
SECONDARY ANIMAL EXPLOITATION
Previous sections have reviewed evidence for the widespread appearance of
secondary uses and products in the fourth millennium BC. HOW far back
may these innovations be traced, and what were their areas of origin?
    The earliest forms of cereal cultivation in the Near East were closely tied
to restricted areas of seasonally moist soil (Chapter 3), requiring minimum
soil preparation. Neolithic sites first proliferated in the scattered environ-
ments where such cultivation could take place. Expansion beyond those
limits took place in the Early Chalcolithic (later seventh and sixth millennia
BC), particularly in two sorts of location. Samarran cultivators on the fans
of eastern Iraq (on or beyond the 200mm isohyet) pioneered the use of
water-spreading by constructing channels across braided streams (Oates
and Oates 1976). At the same time, Hassuna farmers expanded on the
brown steppe soils of northern Iraq (within the 200mm isohyet). The latter
area offered few opportunities for irrigation; and while precipitation at that
time may have been higher, it is likely that greater soil preparation would
have been necessary for cereal-growing. Since cattle were at that time
becoming widespread on lowland sites, the preconditions for traction
cultivation were present. Although the first representations of ploughs occur
in southern Mesopotamia only in the fourth millennium (Chapter 6), it is
likely that (as with irrigation) ploughs were first developed within Greater
Mesopotamia in the preceding millennia. These considerations would point
to an origin in northern Iraq in the period from the late seventh, sixth or fifth
millennia.
    Although this innovation was probably a basic element in the spread of
irrigation-cultivation on the alluvial plain of Mesopotamia, it may not
have been widely used outside the lowland area. At this stage it is likely
to have been a localised feature of cultivation systems where sufficient num-
bers of cattle were available; and there were still sharp contrasts in the type
of animal husbandry practised in different regions. For instance, faunal
assemblages from the Kermanshah region of western Iran show that down
to the fifth millennium BC the animal economy there was based on meat,
primarily juvenile goat and gazelle (Davis 1982). During the Late Chalco-
lithic (fifth millennium BC), at the same time as major agricultural expansion
was taking place in the Ubaid period, there was a further development of
animal economies on the fringes of Mesopotamia. In Kermanshah the
economy diversified, with the appearance of cattle and an increase in sheep,
which now became more important than goats (Davis 1982). Moreover, the
sheep were now kept to a greater age, and it is likely that wool was being
extensively used for the first time. Wool-sheep may have been present in this
area from an earlier date, since the Sarab figurine (Bokonyi 1974, fig. 44)
seems to indicate the V-shaped staples of hairy medium wool (M. L. Ryder,


                                         224




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD   WORLD


pers. comm.). Wool-bearing sheep probably spread from the Zagros to the
lowland steppe and semi-desert margins where significant changes were
taking place in the fifth millennium. In southern Palestine and Sinai the
colonisation of new areas in the Ghassulian was associated with a similar
increase in the importance of sheep, and the infilling of the area between
Palestine and Egypt was important in linking the Nile valley with develop-
ments in western Asia.
    The spread of new features within the Fertile Crescent created some of the
conditions for the urbanisation which took place in the fourth millennium.
The conjunction of expanding populations on the alluvium using irrigation
and plough agriculture, with the opportunities for long-distance trade,
resulted in attempts to secure direct supplies of metal, stone and wood. The
growing influence of Mesopotamia and Egypt affected a wide hinterland,
as trading partners and colonies were established in resource-rich areas of
Palestine, Syria, Anatolia and Iran, using both river-transport on the Nile
and Euphrates and land routes with donkeys (Palestine) and camels (Iran).
The sledge, probably used since the invention of the plough, was trans-
formed by the Sumerians into the wagon or cart by the addition of wheels,
as shown in the Uruk pictograms (Piggott 1968); and equids were used as
traction animals for the first time to pull battle-cars in the Early Dynastic
period. In the larger-scale economies of lowland Mesopotamia it became
possible to support a specialised pastoral sector in the interstices of the
irrigated land. Herds of dairy-cattle were kept in marshy areas (as shown by
dairying scenes in reed huts), while wool-flocks were maintained partly by
stubble-grazing. Animal-keeping thus began to move (like the cultivation of
tree-crops) from the sphere of subsistence to that of commodity production,
and manufacturing industry based on wool provided textiles for export.
Secondary products had become an essential part of the urban economy.
    The development of economies based on secondary animal exploitation
thus began as a mosaic of individual innovations, mostly in the semi-arid
areas of the Near East, initially as a response to the problem of adapting
early forms of farming to new types of environment, especially to the oppor-
tunities of open landscapes where it was possible to maintain larger
quantities of livestock. These innovations came together during the period
of rapid economic change leading to the rise of urban communities, and
were disseminated by the expansion of trade-routes linking the early states
with their resource-rich hinterlands. The process opened up a wider
hinterland, from Anatolia through the Caucasus to Iran, in which local
communities - Troy, Maikop, Altyn Depe - were developed by wider
contacts. The introduction of these new elements to the Pontic steppes
created a major area of secondary development and dispersal, carrying new
elements both into central Asia and into eastern Europe. In the forested
conditions of temperate Europe, livestock-keeping had been restricted in
scale by lack of grazing; but the introduction of the plough initiated a more

                                          225




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         THE    SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION


extensive type of agriculture that could support a larger pastoral com-
ponent. The Carpathian Basin acted as an important centre of dispersal
within Europe, and its links to the North European Plain had carried
advanced forms of stock-raising to the Atlantic seaboard by the third
millennium BC.

NOTES

 1. [Note that this type of 'short* longbarrow is a later fourth-millennium type, and not an
    example of the earliest unchambered longbarrows discussed in Chapters 13 and 14.]
 2. [Thrane (1989, 118) makes the same point: 'In view of the number of unchambered long-
    barrow excavations during the last decades it is worth noting that none of these have
    produced ard-marks.' It is noteworthy that the other set of ploughmarks from Poland
    besides those from Sarnowo, the set from fcupawa 15 in Pomerania (Jankowska 1980),
    belong to a group contemporary with Wiorek or Danish EN C/MN I.]
 3. [The two ox-figures and six flat axes were found last century, in 1873, and though the
    findspot is fairly precisely known there is no record of their archaeological context. The
    question of their association thus arises: could the ox-figures be much later, as Klavs
    Randsborg (pers. comm.) has suggested? As part of a recent study (Pieczynski 1985) the
    objects were analysed in Warsaw (and two of the axes also in Heidelberg). The axes show
    a number of impurities typical of the Fahlerz ores used in the northern Carpathians in the
    later fourth millennium (see Chapter 4): 0.5-1.0% of arsenic, 0.02-0.04% of antimony,
    smaller amounts (0.01-0.03%) of silver and nickel. The oxen show 4.0% and 2.3% of
    arsenic respectively (amongst other impurities, representing 0.3% and 0.7% respectively,
    not reported), which would suggest deliberate arsenical alloying. Since this composition
    was not used after the third millennium, this confirms the date of the oxen as pre-Bronze
    Age; and by comparison with the axes the higher arsenic values of the ox-figures suggest
    a different but broadly contemporary origin. (This is supported by their technology: lost-
    wax casting was not introduced to this area before the Bronze Age, or used for animal
    figures before the Hallstatt period.) Where did the ox-figures originate? The lost-wax
    casting method would suggest EBA Anatolia or the Levant at this date, and the examples
    illustrated by Littauer and Crouwel (1973), such as the one from Alaca Hiiyiik near
    Ankara (their No. 4, pi. xxxvii) now in the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, illustrate the
    genre to which the Bytyri figures might belong - specifically, paired cattle pulling wagons.
    The most likely interpretation still seems to me that they are imports from Anatolia (and
    perhaps specifically from the lower Kizil Irmak region, famous for its EBA metal figures),
    at the time of the introduction of ox-traction for wheeled vehicles and ploughs. Such a
    phenomenon would suggest something of the impact and scale of connections implied
    by the new traction usage and technology.]
 4. [The evidence for prehistoric textiles has now been magnificently summarised in a classic
    work by E. J. W. Barber (1991).]
 5. [All crops are cash crops, but some more so than others: the ones mentioned here are
    those in which value is added by secondary production (oil-pressing, cheese-making)
    before distribution and consumption, rather than in the home (cooking).]
 6. [The pictographs distinguish between the different containers used for goats', sheep's, and
    cows' milk (Green 1980, fig. 3).]
 7. [The most sophisticated discusssion of the inter-related processes of natural and cultural
    selection is by Durham (1991, chapter 5). He discusses (1991, 242 and 252) my original
    suggestion, following Simoons, and integrates it with the vitamin D hypothesis: 'the genes
    responsible for adult lactose absorption have evolved to high frequencies in populations
    that (1) have a long-standing tradition of dairying and fresh milk consumption, and (2)
    live in environments of low ultraviolet radiation where vitamin D and metabolic calcium
    are chronically deficient' (279); 'I submit that the memes of dairying and the genes of
    adult lactose absorption coevolved as a function of latitude' (282).]


                                             226




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         OF   ANIMALS      IN   THE   OLD     WORLD

 8. [Historians of the subject may wish to compare the two versions! The accounts differ
    in the following respects: (1) in being more sceptical about early-fourth-millennium
    domestication on the steppes, and preferring a mid-fourth-millennium date; (2) ceasing
    to rely on the evidence of antler 'cheek-pieces' before the undoubted second-millennium
    examples; (3) acknowledging the survival and contribution of local horse populations in
    forested Europe; (4) seeing the chariot as the outcome of steppe technology and Near
    Eastern military needs; and thus, in general, seeing horse-usage on the steppes as being
    more intimately related to Near Eastern developments. In revising this section, I greatly
    benefited from participating in the conference Die Indogermanen und das Pferd in Berlin
    in 1992, now published as Hansel and Zimmer (1994); and also from discussions with
    Viktor Trifonov and Marsha Levine.]
 9. [They are distinguished by size and robusticity: the eastern (open-country) populations
    were larger; and this distinction between 'eastern' and 'western' horses was still evident
    in European domestic populations into the early medieval period. Uerpmann (1990) has
    divided European wild horses into geographical subspecies: Equus ferns ferus for the
    steppe population, E. ferus sylvestris for the north-west European forest population,
    E. ferus lusitanicus for the Iberian population, and E. ferus scythicus for a postulated
    Balkan-Anatolian population. These would all represent 'tarpan' populations, rather than
    Przewalski horses (E. ferus przewalskii), typical for central Asia. (There is, of course, no
    justification for a separate species, E. caballus, for domestic populations.) It also appears
    that there was some geographical overlap between the distribution of wild horses and
    that of other equids, e.g. Equus hydruntinus (a now extinct ass, surviving into the
    Holocene in the Carpathian Basin), and also with Equus hemionus, the onager; further
    east.]
10. Date now released: (KI-5488) 2380 ±120 bc = 3300-2650 cal BC, i.e. post-Sredni Stog.
11. [On this model, the area of genesis of the Pit-Grave culture would be in the Pre-Kuban
    area, north of Krasnodar; in the late Maikop period (parallel to the formation of
    Novotitarovka); that would be my prediction for the area of initial horse domestication,
    too.]
12. [Traces of coloured cloths with geometrical patterns have been observed in a number of
    Pit-Grave burials, e.g. Tri Brata (see discussion in Ecsedy 1979, 38-9).]
13. [And also serving as way-stations to the Caucasus, whose metallurgical repertoire shows
    the influence of precisely the forms discovered at Arslantepe (see Chapter 18).]
14. [The interesting grave at Grofihoflein-Follik in the Austrian Burgenland (Pittioni 1954,
    247), within a stone setting, contained the burial of an adult woman and child, together
    with a 20-year-old mare and foal, cow and a calf, nanny-goat and a kid, ewe and a lamb,
    and also another 4-year-old mare and the skull of another 20-year-old. It was formerly
    thought to belong to the late-third-millennium Guntramsdorf-Drafiburg group (loosely
    described as 'Corded Ware' by Pittioni), but is now considered to belong to the early
    second-millennium Mad'arovce culture, chariot-using and closely related to its east-
    Hungarian neighbour Otomani.]
15. [The arguments set out in the preceding section now throw doubt on the interpretation of
    a set of antler objects which were interpreted by Lichardus (1980) as the cheek-pieces of
    bits. The whole subject of pre-Bronze Age bridle-bits has been recently reviewed by Dietz
    (1992), who comprehensively and critically reviews the evidence for perforated antler
    tines and concludes that all of them are better interpreted as toggles or in ways
    unconnected with horse harnessing, and not essentially different from the perforated
    antler tines common in Neolithic lake-villages. As described above, however, this does
    not invalidate the reconstruction of horse domestication; it merely removes a potentially
    convenient (but actually misleading) artefactual marker for its spread.]
16. [These tombs are especially interesting for the numbers of graves with specialist metal-
    casting equipment, probably making use of local ores. Some fortified sites are known
    (the upper levels of Mikhailovka, the Bayda fortress on an island in the Dnepr); and
    a remarkable circular temple-mound has been excavated at Molochansk on the Ingul
    (Pustovalov 1994).]


                                             227




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         THE    SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION

17. [Following this line of thought: may that also be the origin of that archetypal Aryan
    symbol, the swastika (four spokes, felloe omitted, with trailing lines suggesting move-
    ment)? The layout of the Arkaim settlement, with its outer circle of houses arranged in
    four circumcurrent 'wings', offers a plausible origin.]
18. [No doubt speaking Indo-Aryan (eastern Indo-European) languages: see Chapter 19.]
19. [Within the steppe region, the outlines of two regional schools of chariotry may perhaps
    be discerned: a western one (extending into the Carpathian Basin) using four-spoked
    wheels and bar-bits; and a more easterly one, represented for instance at Sintashta, with
    multiple-spoked wheels and circular bits. There was considerable mixing and hybrid-
    isation between them. Both contributed to the development of Near Eastern chariotry
    (Moorey 1986), via both the central Anatolian and Caucasian routes, with the latter
    tradition extending eastwards and eventually reaching China.]




                                             228




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                              8



   Wool, Wheels and Ploughmarks:
    Local Developments or Outside
  Introductions in Neolithic Europe?
             (Submitted             1985,         published               1987)

In the 1982 issue of the Bulletin of the Institute of Archaeology, Dr J. C.
Chapman devoted an article entitled The Secondary Products Revolution
and the Limitations of the Neolithic' (Chapman 1983) to a critical dis-
cussion of ideas which I had put forward in two papers, in 1980 and 1981.1
This short note is intended to remove some of the misconceptions in
Chapman's review. The following observations refer to points raised by
Chapman: page references are to his article.
   The cart (p. 111). The appearance of the wagon and cart in Europe is one
of the clearest examples of an introduced technology (Childe 1951; Piggott
1979). There is no evidence for wheeled vehicles in Europe before the mid-
fourth millennium BC2 (the beginning of the Baden and Ezero cultures).
Claims of an earlier origin in the Balkans are based solely on finds of clay
discs taken to represent model wheels. Since it is often hard to distinguish
the clay wheels of model vehicles from clay spindle whorls, perforated clay
discs can only be taken as evidence for use of the wheel when models of the
vehicles themselves are present. This is the case in the Early Dynastic period
in southern Mesopotamia, but such models are completely absent from the
Balkan Neolithic and Copper Age, though they do appear with the Baden

This was published in the Bulletin of the Institute of Archaeology (University of
London), and was a reply to a review-article there by John Chapman, in which
he offered an autonomist view of European development in the later Neolithic -
which dated the appearance of the light plough to what I have called (Chapter 5)
the mature Neolithic - and sought an origin for transhumance in continuity from
Palaeolithic hunting practices. (Publication of this reply was delayed by the
appearance of a special edition of the Bulletin, celebrating the opening of the
Institute in Regent's Park in 1937.) John and I still disagree on this, but usually
over a drink. Indeed, the principal interpretative change signalled in this paper is
to attribute the dietary change which is reflected in jugs, cups, etc. to the arrival
in Europe, not of milk, but alcohol (see Chapter 15).

                                            229




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   WOOL,       WHEELS       AND      PLOUGHMARKS:


culture. There is no reason         consider the 'model wheels' claimed for
Gumelnitsa as other than s p . d e whorls, and quite irrelevant to the prob-
lem of wheeled vehicles (Piggott 1983, 17).
    The plough (p. 112). The earliest representations of ploughs are those in
the Uruk IV pictographs. I speculated (Chapter 3) that the light plough may
have come into use some two millennia earlier in the Hassuna-Halaf period
in the moist steppe areas on the edges of the Mesopotamian Plain, in parallel
with the development of simple irrigation in Samarran contexts on valley-
edge fans. The recent find of ploughmarks in a Susa A context (c.5000 BC)
in Khuzestan (Wright et al. 1980) fits very happily with this suggestion.
This firm evidence from the Near East contrasts with the absence of com-
parable indications in Europe before the fourth millennium BC. The 'terri-
torial evidence supported by certain technological data' is hardly enough to
persuade one otherwise.
    The evidence from buried soil-surfaces preserved under settlement-
remains, earthworks or peat is, of course, crucial and is by no means con-
fined to the period after 3500 BC which is when plentiful traces of ploughing
appear. These contexts can provide evidence for a variety of soil-preparation
practices besides the use of the traction-plough, and need to be scrutinised
carefully for such traces. Convincing ploughmarks made with the light
plough (ard) in temperate Europe take the form of the criss-cross furrows
that result from cross-ploughing. The earliest and best example is the
175 square metres preserved under a long barrow with three megalithic
chambers of EN C/MN I date (c.3500 BC) at Snave near Dreslette on Fyn
(Figure 7.1; Thrane 1982). These criss-cross furrows are the earliest un-
ambiguous ard-marks in Europe. Other possible traces of cultivation may
be earlier, and one candidate for such an interpretation is the parallel traces
of cultivation beneath Barrow 8 of the longbarrow cemetery at Sarnowo
in Kujavia. The Sarnowo furrows are wide, unidirectional3 channels about
20cm apart (D^browski 1971). Their chronological position is bracketed by
an underlying pit with a radiocarbon date calibrating to c.4500 BC and the
overlying barrow, which dates to the mid-fourth millennium BC. It has
usually been assumed that these are ard-marks made by animal traction: but
it is also possible that Neolithic gardening techniques included features such
as 'lazy beds' (cultivation ridges) which would also leave parallel traces.
Such ridged cultivation is characteristic of intensive horticultural systems
without animal traction in many parts of the world, and it seems highly
likely that various intensive forms of cultivation would have appeared by
this stage in the European Neolithic. One might guess at the possibility of
hoe-based cultivation in the Mediterranean and central Europe, with a zone
of spade-based cultivation in the north. Some hint of this is present in the
design of European ards of the second millennium: the sole- and crook-ard
in the south and the bow- or spade-ard in the north, loosely based on the
design of the hoe and spade respectively.4 Spade-based cultivation may have


                                            230




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        LOCAL    DEVELOPMENTS             OR   OUTSIDE        INTRODUCTIONS?


continued in widespread use in parallel with traction cultivation, and may
have been prevalent in areas such as Ireland (Caulfield 1978).
   The example of 'ploughmarks' quoted by Chapman from a time before
my postulated introduction of the ard, however, raises problems as to
whether they have anything to do with agriculture at all. A rectangular
enclosure some 150m long by 5m wide at Brezno in north-west Bohemia is
dated to the Early Eneolithic (i.e. late TRB, C.3600 BC - and only briefly ante-
dating my ard horizon) and is distantly related to the Kujavian longbarrow
(Pleinerova 1980; 1981). It was probably originally covered by a low
mound. Within this, and parallel to its long axis, are short, discontinuous
shallow ditches or furrows. These are not the accidentally preserved remains
of an old land surface beneath the barrow, but - as their orientation shows
- part of its construction. Whether they are traces of internal divisions or
some more regular preparation of the surface is not clear, but they are in no
way comparable to the convincing series of Bronze Age and later Neolithic
criss-cross ploughmarks such as those from Denmark. They may have some
connection with the Sarnowo furrows, but they do not prove ploughing.
   Also quite irrelevant to this problem is the so-called 'rope-traction ard'
from Satrupholmer Moor, Angeln (Steensberg 1973), which is actually a
common form of Erteb0lle canoe-paddle, closely comparable to the recent
find of an elaborately decorated example from the underwater site of
Tybrind Vig off Zealand (Andersen 1983; conveniently illustrated in Jensen
1982, fig. 18). The two holes in the Satrup one are probably for repair
(S0ren Andersen, pers. comm.). The unlikely scenario of precocious plough-
ing around a lake in Schleswig Holstein can thus be replaced by the more
plausible idea of canoeing across it.s
   One more type of evidence should be noted, since it has sometimes been
used to argue for an earlier use of ox-traction for ploughing. This is the
morphology of cattle bones from the early fifth-millennium BC site of
Vadastra on the lower Danube in Romania (Ghejie and Mateesco 1973;
Mateesco 1975). On the basis of deformation in the epiphyses of the
humerus and femur, it was suggested that the forelimbs of subadult animals
had been subjected to vertical compression as the result of carrying loads.
While this phenomenon deserves further study, it cannot by itself be taken
as evidence of the use of bovines for traction.
   In short: all the evidence confirms the antiquity of ploughing in the Near
East, and its much later appearance in Europe - most probably in the mid-
fourth millennium BC.
   Milking and alcohol (pp. 112, 116). My views on this subject have
progressed considerably since 1981, and are summarised in Chapter 7. I
would no longer directly associate the emergence of lactose tolerance with
the horizon of drinking-vessels which characterises later-fourth- and early-
third-millennium pottery assemblages in Europe, on which more below.
Further data on lactose tolerance show that it is present only in relatively


                                            231




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   WOOL,       WHEELS       AND      PLOUGHMARKS:


low frequencies in Mediterranean and Near Eastern populations, though
much higher in northern Europe (Piazza et al. 1981). For this reason it
is very unlikely to have been associated with the initial spread of farming
populations (contra Chapman, p. 116). Flatz and Rotthauwe (1977), how-
ever, have provided a plausible evolutionary mechanism for its appearance
in temperate European populations some time after the spread of agriculture
to northern Europe. They point to a selective advantage given by the ability
to drink unprocessed milk in the prevention of rickets. This calcium-
deficiency disease is characteristic of areas of low sunlight and thus low
levels of vitamin D production. Although rickets must have been an endemic
problem in northern latitudes,6 a cereal-based diet, deficient in vitamin D,
would create a particular problem in this respect. Since milking was an
advantageous way of using the rich pasture grasses that would have colon-
ised abandoned fields in temperate Europe, lactose tolerance had a selective
advantage among north European farming populations and could indeed
have emerged during Neolithic times [cf. Bogucki 1984], although it prob-
ably reached present frequencies only much later. The implication of all this
is that milk was probably not drunk directly in early times in any case, but
only used in the form of yoghurt, koumish and cheese. This added com-
plication was no doubt one factor in the relatively late emergence of milk-
based pastoralism in the Near East (Davis 1984).
    The interpretation of European fourth- and third-millennium pottery
assemblages with an emphasis on drinking equipment is an interesting
question on which I have done further work (Sherratt 1987). These new
forms contrast with the wide, shallow vessels that dominate Balkan Neo-
lithic and Copper Age assemblages, and which in view of the above dis-
cussion may well have held milk products, as Chapman quite rightly notes.
The horizon of drinking vessels from Troy II via Baden and Globular
Amphorae to Corded Ware and Bell-beakers, however, continues to demand
explanation. Professor Renfrew (1972) originally asserted the importance of
the introduction of wine (see below on tree crops) in explaining the appear-
ance of this assemblage in the Aegean. This is most probably the case in that
area, but would not explain the very similar vessels in the Baden culture,
since the wild grape Vitis sylvestris - although present in temperate Europe
- does not contain enough sugar to ferment, and cultivated vines were not
grown in central Europe before the Roman period. Chapman is almost
certainly right, however, in pointing to the range of alcoholic beverages
potentially available by this time: mead, beer and (as I originally suggested)
koumish. This wider range of sugars and carbohydrates was itself partly due
to the complex of economic changes which I have described,7 while the male
ethos of social drinking was closely related to the social effects of an en-
larged pastoral sector. What thus seems to appear in common over large
areas of Europe is a social practice (itself arguably Anatolian and Near
Eastern in origin) rather than a particular beverage: though the sophisti-


                                            232




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
          LOCAL    DEVELOPMENTS            OR   OUTSIDE          INTRODUCTIONS?



                                                            <J         9
                                                                                  60
            bipartite bowl

     a      ju9                                                                   50
            cup
      D     copper tube                                                           40
      )     f l i n t blade
            copper awl                                                            30
            bone awl
            Dentalium beads                                                       20
     Cu     copper traces                                                         15
      A     f l i n t arrowhead                                                   10
            Cardium shell                                        II nil II 9 H
                                                          oo «»» hi""             5
            pierced -tooth
                                                                                  0
                                                           children
            double-ox burial                              (unsexcd)


                                                 ALS6N£MEDI
                                           Baden Culture
8.1 Grave goods with burials in the Baden culture cemetery of Alsonemedi,
Hungary, arranged according to age and sex. From Sherratt (1976); data from
J. Korek, 'Ein Griiberfeld der Badener Kultur bei AlsonemediActa Archaeologica
Acad. Sci. Hung. I, 35-91 (1951). [Note the association of drinking sets with
paired cattle burials (cow and calf): see also Figs 8.2 and 15.4.]

cated, sunshine-rich areas of the east Mediterranean, with their wine and
silver drinking-vessels, seem to have exercised a powerful stylistic influence
over neighbouring parts of Europe. Both drinking vessels and wheeled
vehicles rapidly became symbols of the elite. The combination of equipment
for drinking and driving in the rich Baden culture graves of the Alsonemedi
cemetery c.3500 BC is the precursor of a tradition of ostentatious burial that
was to last throughout prehistory (Figures 8.1 and 8.2; also 15.4).
    Wool (p. 113). It is hard to understand Chapman's comments on this
subject. Textile experts (Ryder 1983; Barber 1991) are agreed that wool was
a late introduction to Europe - as, incidentally, to Egypt: it first became
widespread in the Near East c.4000 BC8 and appeared in Europe c.3000 BC
(Chapter 7). Of course there were loom-made textiles before this time, but
these were of plant fibres - linen, nettle or lime bast. The absence of flax
seeds in botanical samples from particular sites is scarcely surprising, and
in no way contradicts this point. There is no reason to suppose that Balkan
Neolithic loom-weights, spindle whorls and textile-like designs on pottery
reflect anything other than the production of linen textiles, of the kind
plentifully preserved in Swiss lake-villages. [The absence, not only of wool

                                             233




                                This content downloaded from
              128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   WOOL,          WHEELS    AND     PLOUGHMARKS:

         ALS6N£MEDI



                                                                              4
                     r
                              ?


                                                                          %
                                                     o

                                                                                  /



8.2 Plan of the cemetery of Alsonemedi (schematic: after Banner 1956, redrawn).
The paired-cattle burials, accompanying graves 3&5 and 28, are represented
conventionally [new drawing].

but even of other textiles known at the time, was a striking feature of the
complete set of clothing preserved with the late fourth-millennium 'Iceman'
of the Hauslabjoch, who was dressed entirely in leather and fur, underneath
a grass cloak: Spindler 1994, 132-47.]
   Tree crops (p. 113). The economically important tree crops of southern
Europe and western Asia were dates, figs, grapes and olives. Their domesti-
cation is a feature of the fourth millennium BC, or perhaps a little earlier in
Mesopotamia (dates) and its surrounding hilly flanks (grapes). Vine and
olive were particularly significant as sources of liquid commodities that
could be grown as 'cash crops' and widely traded. The various members of
the Prunus family mentioned by Chapman, which flourish in the forest-
steppe margins and light woodland, are hardly comparable in importance.
   Transhumance (p. 114). Chapman's position is summed up in his sen-
tence: 'The importance of upland grazing had been recognised and exploited
since the Palaeolithic; there was no reason for this long-term adaptation to
cease before the Bronze Age.' This Higgsian view of the world can surely no
longer be maintained. Late Pleistocene hunting groups undoubtedly moved
between upland and lowland grazing areas; but postglacial afforestation
intervened between this and the transhumant grazing system linked to
Roman and later urban markets for animal products. These two phenomena
reflect different historical situations, not two ends of a continuous process.
Upland pastures had to be created from the woodland, and this was a slow
process. Some small-scale flock movements in marginal areas no doubt took
place in the Neolithic: but the rationale for large-scale sheep rearing only
became available with wool - and only assumed any importance in the late
Bronze and Iron Ages (cf. Figure 2.2). Lewthwaite (e.g. 1981) has con-

                                            234




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        LOCAL    DEVELOPMENTS             OR    OUTSIDE        INTRODUCTIONS?


vincingly demonstrated the subtleties of this process in the west Medi-
terranean.
   Mining and quarrying (p. 114). There is more justification here for
Chapman's strictures, in that the single sentence at issue (Chapter 6) con-
flated a number of points. Mining began, in an area from western Russia to
Britain and from Poland to the Balkans, around 4000 BC. The context in
which this took place was the shift from a Bandkeramik type of wedge
technology exemplified by stone 'shoelast adzes' to a true axe technology in
flint, classically represented by north European thin- and thick-butted forms
but also characteristic of later Gumelnitsa (e.g. Berciu 1961, 419, fig. 197;
Paunescu 1970,297, fig. 33). In the North European Plain this clearly reflects
the need to clear forests in newly-colonised areas, and this may be true on a
smaller scale even in Bulgaria (cf. the analysis of Detev's Plovdiv site maps
in Sherratt 1976, fig. S10). Its coincidence with the beginning of copper-
mining, however, reminds us that it may equally be related to the signifi-
cance of stone axes as a medium of exchange, and it occurred at the same
time as the movements of Wolhynian flint blades and early domestic horses
noted above. All this preceded my postulated arrival of the plough.
   This new axe technology, however, provided the means for the greatly
increased scale of forest clearance in the mid-fourth millennium which was
associated with the beginnings of plough cultivation and the expanded role
of livestock which went with it. This is most eloquently shown in pollen
diagrams from long-occupied areas such as the Aldenhovener Platte, where
a pollen diagram prepared by A. J. Kalis (Kalis 1988; Liming and Kalis
1988) shows a dramatic increase in open country during the fourth millen-
nium BC, by contrast with the tiny impact of earlier farming. The same effect
is apparent in Denmark in the so-called B-Landnam (Troels-Smith 1953) of
the Danish Middle Neolithic, with its permanent clearances and plentiful
occurrence of Plantago lanceolata. The massive increase in the scale of flint
mining which accompanied this major assault on the forests is well demon-
strated in the area supplied by the largest of the Polish flint-mining com-
plexes, Krzemionki (Lech and Leligdowicz 1980, fig. 23). In the TRB period,
the overwhelming preponderance of its distinctive axes occur within 100km
of the source (Figure 8.3, above). In Globular Amphora contexts, after 3400
BC, the volume of production had undergone a massive expansion, reflected
in a fivefold increase in its distribution radius, with large numbers occurring
up to 400km away, in Kujavia (Figure 8.3, below).
   Once again, it is the largely forested nature of Neolithic Europe which
has to be borne in mind when discussing changes in subsistence economy.
The first farming systems were very small in scale and occupied only a tiny
fraction of the landscape, as a glance at any of Sielmann's (1971) maps will
reveal. The importance of the plough in temperate Europe was that it first
made larger areas of cleared land an advantage, so creating the necessary
preconditions for any form of specialised animal husbandry [cf. Figure 2.1].


                                            235




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   WOOL,       WHEELS       AND      PLOUGHMARKS:




8.3 Distribution of axes of banded flint in Poland, around the mining centre
(starred) of Krzemionki Opatowskie: above, in the TRB period (4000-3400 BC);
below, in the Globular Amphora period (3400-2800 BC). Redrawn after Lech and
Leligdowicz (1980). A massive increase in the scale of forest clearance is indicated.
   This completes a review of the substantive points offered by Chapman,
and his other opinions are perhaps best discussed in a more general context.
A main aim of my 1981 article was to demonstrate that the European
evidence cannot be considered in isolation; the Near East and its temperate
European hinterland must be discussed from the fourth millennium on-
wards as a potentially interacting system in which innovations appeared

                                            236




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        LOCAL    DEVELOPMENTS             OR    OUTSIDE        INTRODUCTIONS?


in Europe in 'package' form, having had a longer developmental history
further east (Figure 0.4). This conception is not novel: indeed it precisely
characterises our present view of the origins and spread of farming itself.
What I am in effect postulating is a second generation of pastoral and agri-
cultural techniques, originating in the dry areas which make up a large part
of western Asia and the adjacent steppes, and appearing in different parts
of an area stretching from the Pontus to Arabia. Since these individual
innovations were widely applicable within this zone, they rapidly spread9
and interacted to produce a more differentiated pattern of agriculture than
the relatively archaic, small-scale systems which continued to characterise
forested Europe where pasture had to be won step by step from the forest.
    It is not surprising, therefore, that experiments in animal-keeping began
earlier in the east than in Europe, whose relative isolation ('the autonomy of
the south-east European Copper Age' in Colin Renfrew's expressive phrase)
meant that even in fairly open areas such as eastern Hungary, many of these
innovations remained unknown. For this reason, European horticulture -
like European metallurgy - pursued its own course, no doubt developing
more intensive hoe or spade cultivation in some areas, slash and burn
systems in others. Lacking a complementary package of new livestock and
pastoral techniques, however, Europe in the Copper Age did not undergo
the cumulative and sustained pattern of interactive growth that character-
ised this period in the Near East. The isolated elements that did spread to
the more open areas of Europe - like horses in Hungary - made no further
headway. Only when the full package was assembled could fundamental,
systemic changes occur. Basic to all the others in temperate Europe was the
use of the plough, with its logic of extending the area under cultivation, even
at the cost of lower yields per hectare, and sustaining a larger pastoral sector
on the fallow. This pastoral sector then provided the traction animals for
cultivation. It was this linkage that built in a cumulative advantage to forest
clearance, and made possible the expansion of livestock rearing and the in-
tegration of new practices.it is no accident, therefore, that both wool-sheep
and horses seem to have spread across Europe in the wake of the plough and
the accelerated rate of forest clearance.10 The complementary nature of the
various elements makes it a classic case of what Dr Joseph Needham (1970)
has called 'package transmission'.
   The incentive to adopt new techniques was no doubt building up in Euro-
pean farming communities, as a result of the filling-up of optimal zones for
simple cultivation, the deleterious effects on many of these landscapes of
two thousand years of previous cultivation, and the continuing growth of
population (Figure 8.4). But the historical process which brought about the
transfer of these innovations had no necessary relation to the long-term
ecological dynamic which made them desirable. Innovations do not always
magically appear when they are needed: there is an element of contingency
which is essential to a true understanding of any historical situation.


                                            237




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                   J
                    WOOL,              EELS   AND   PLOUGHMARKS:

  SMALL-SCALE       CULTI^             )N




 LARGE-SCALE       CULTIVATION




8.4 The contrasting logics of intensive and extensive farming with a pre-industrial
technology: above, small-area, intensive cultivation ('horticulture'); below,
extensive farming, which may be either swidden or plough-based (cf. Fig. 2.1).
A long-term trend from horticulture to a greater reliance on swidden may have
made the plough such an attractive innovation in fourth-millennium Europe
ISherratt, 1980, unpublished].




                                              238




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
       LOCAL    DEVELOPMENTS          OR   OUTSIDE       INTRODUCTIONS?




expansion of western technology C.AD 1600: adapted from maps in E. Werth,
Grabstock, Hacke und Pflug, Ludwigsburg 1954. This congruence suggests that
both should be considered as aspects of a 'traction complexwhich spread out
from a single nuclear area, rather than as parallel developments in several places,
like irrigation.




                                        239




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 2fff on Thu, 01 Jan 1976 12:34:56 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   WOOL,       WHEELS       AND     PLOUGHMARKS:


Whereas the basic options of labour intensification (irrigation, terracing,
land reclamation) are widely available, those involving a specific technology
or gene-pool (plough cultivation, woolly sheep) are not. How else to explain
the limited distribution of plough and cart in a narrow belt of the Old
World before AD 1500? (Werth 1954; Figure 8.5). These features can only
be modelled by a process of contagious spread, to explain the coherent
distribution area of plough cultivation on a global scale. [This spatial
association between plough and cart, echoing the chronological association
of their introduction to Europe, strengthens the idea of a traction complex,
with its own technology, ideology, and attitude to domestic livestock.]
   The factors which controlled the spread of these features in Europe were
no different in principle from those governing other innovations. In so far
as some of these leave less ambiguous traces than does prehistoric farming,
they may help us to reconstruct the processes at work. Copper metallurgy
provides an obvious example. The tradition of copper-working which de-
veloped in south-east Europe during the Copper Age was quite idiosyncratic
and unrelated to contemporary Near Eastern industries (Renfrew 1969): its
pure copper and simple casting techniques allied to an extensive use of forg-
ing distinguish it from the more efficient and sophisticated systems based on
alloying and the bivalve mould. These latter innovations appeared in Europe
in the third millennium BC, as a result of new contacts with the Caucasus
and Anatolia (Chernykh 1978; Chapter 4) - a set of events ultimately linked
to the expansion of long-distance trading networks around the rapidly
urbanising areas of Mesopotamia. An isolated and independent tradition of
copper-working, with an archaic technology, was brought into contact
with a wider pool of experience. If this model is acceptable for metallurgical
development, then why not for agriculture and pastoralism?
   The contrast between this conception and Chapman's view of plough
cultivation and woolly sheep appearing spontaneously among the in-
habitants of Neolithic Europe is one that is probably not resolvable by refer-
ence to the ambiguous evidence for these features which survives in the
archaeological record. It relates to more abstract expectations about the
way the world works, and how it has done in the past. Neolithic Europe was
an altogether more curious and interesting place than a homogenised image
of 'prehistoric farming' would suggest; and not to see the contrasts is to
blur the picture. What I have tried to show is that a piecemeal approach
is inadequate to understand the nature of the problem, and unhelpful in
making the most of the evidence available. Which conception prevails in the
light of future evidence and debate I am content to leave to the test of time.




                                            240




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
           LOCAL     DEVELOPMENTS            OR   OUTSIDE         INTRODUCTIONS?

NOTES

 1.1 have dealt only with the main points raised by Chapman, and have not attempted to
    correct errors of transcription or to question his somewhat curious phraseology. I hope
    that this brief statement will clarify some of the issues involved.
 2. Since I do not quote individual radiocarbon dates in this article, I have used calibrated
    dates and date-ranges throughout in order to avoid confusion. Terms such as 'Neolithic'
    and 'Copper Age' are used in a general sense, since local usages are inconsistent. My use
    of 'Copper Age' would not include Baden.
 3. Dr Magdalena Midgely points out to me that recent excavation of a further area of the
    old land surface has revealed criss-cross marks as well as unidirectional furrows
    (Gabalowna 1970; Wiklak 1980). They would thus seem to represent genuine plough-
    marks. By analogy with other areas, they would date to the later part of the possible
    time-bracket. [The often-quoted radiocarbon date of 3620 ± 60 bc (Bakker et al. 1969,
    7), it must be emphasised, is a single determination from a pit preceding the barrow (and
    most probably also the furrows).]
 4. Though hypothetical in Europe, this relationship between hoe and plough design can be
    documented for Egypt both from tomb-paintings and actual objects. Neolithic soil-
    preparation practices are illuminatingly discussed in Schultz-Klinken (1976), partly
    summarised in Liming (1980).
 5. The idea of a rope-traction ard as a precursor of the true plough but pulled by human
    muscle-power is a pervasive one. Recent ploughs drawn by human traction are confined
    to the rather special circumstances of south-east Asian paddy-farming or irrigation
    horticulture. The basic advantage of the plough is to apply a new source of energy; and
    students are no substitute for draught oxen (pace Liming and Meurers-Balke 1980, fig.
   22!).
 6. It is not without significance that this condition occurred already among Neanderthal
    populations, the first permanent occupants of the tundra zone; indeed, it was this con-
    dition, in one of the classic early finds of a Neanderthal skeleton, that gave rise to his
    persistent portrayal as a shambling idiot.
 7. Alcohol may not have been widely known in Neolithic Europe - though no doubt their
    knowledge of hallucinogenic mushrooms was considerable, as was that of their
    Mesolithic predecessors.
 8. Textile remains are more frequently preserved in the dry conditions of the Near East; a
    good example are the pieces of cloth from the Nahal Mishmar caves (Bar-Adon 1980),
    dated to the fourth millennium BC. Of the 45 samples tested, 37 were of linen, eight of
    wool. Remains of a loom were also found.
 9. The scale of long-distance connections which existed in the Near East at least from the
    beginning of the Holocene is well demonstrated by the length of the obsidian exchange
    networks in Neolithic times. Obsidian distribution in forested Europe never achieved
    such distances.
10. There were, of course, already great contrasts in the extent of deforestation, especially
    from east to west. While the plough seems to have been rapidly accepted in most areas,
    wool-sheep may be much later in areas such as the British Isles.




                                               241




                                  This content downloaded from
                128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                          All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                        10
  Two New Finds of Wooden Wheels
   from Later Neolithic and Early
        Bronze Age Europe
                                    (1986)

T h e purpose of this note is to draw attention to two recent finds of wooden
wheels, one of which extends the area of Pontic vehicle burials into Balkan
Europe and the other takes examples of Neolithic wheels in Europe back to
a still earlier period. While the former find suggests the importance of the
Pit-Grave culture in transmitting innovations from the Caucasus around
the northern shore of the Black Sea c.3000 BC, the latter suggests the possi-
bility of an earlier derivation for European wheeled vehicles, possibly via
Anatolia.1


PLACHIDOL, NEAR TOLBUKHIN, NORTH-EAST BULGARIA
(PANAYOTOV       AND   DERGACHOV          1984,         107-9)

The site is a cemetery of six tumuli belonging to the intrusive 'ochre grave'
group, and was excavated in 1979. Tumulus I was 7.30m high and 50-5m
in diameter. Seven metres south of the centre of the mound, at a depth of
4.90m, was a rectangular pit (Figure 9.1) orientated east-west; apparently
not the original central burial of the tumulus but dug into a subsequent
extension. The pit (Grave 1) contained the crouched inhumation burial of
an adult female (c.25 years) facing north. The skeleton lay on a mass of

Stuart Figgott's magisterial book on wheeled vehicles (1983) provided (as Gordon
Childe foresaw it would) the best demonstration of the transmission of advanced
technology from the Near East to Europe, which no one has seriously questioned.
Since the wheel appears in Europe at the same time as the first evidence for
ploughing, it strengthens the idea of a 'traction complex' as being an introduction
there. This brief note added two pieces of new material to Figgott's corpus; and
I have included some photographs which I took of a simple cart still in use in
Portugal in 1990. Figgott's book has been a lasting influence, not just as a source-
book but as a model for the way in which technology must be seen in a cultural
and social context.

                                       242




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:26:35 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
     FROM    LATER    NEOLITHIC       AND   EARLY     BRONZE      AGE    EUROPE



 PLACHIDOL Tumulus I Grave 1




 a Wooden wheels (actually found)   c Planks covering pit

 b Wooden wheels (conjectured)      d Remains of organic (felt?) covering under skeleton

9.1 The Plachidol wheel-burial, as excavated (drawn by Keith Bennett after the
plan and section by Panayotov and Dergachev).

plant material covering the bottom of the pit, and had red ochre sprinkled
on its head and feet. There were no grave goods.
    The pit was surrounded by a ledge, 50-90cm wide and 10-15cm deep,
on which wooden beams were placed lengthwise over the pit to roof it. The
eastern end of this ledge was partly destroyed, but in the two corners of
the western end of this ledge lay a pair of solid wooden disc-wheels. They
appear to be made of single pieces of wood, and have a diameter of 75cm.
Each wheel has an integral nave projecting on both sides with a circular hole
for the axle: no other details are given. The circular hole indicates that the
wheels rotated about a fixed axle and were held in place by a linchpin: the
normal type for this period (Figure 9.2, bottom).
    Tumulus I was the largest of the group, and had originally been crowned
by a stone anthropomorphic sculpture. Although the excavation report men-
tions no other burial in this tumulus, the anthropological report (Jordanov
and Michailova 1984) lists four more (two adult males and an adult female).
Tumulus II contained nine burials (four of children), all with red ochre,
but rare grave goods; two adults each had a copper ring and flint flake. It
had also originally been marked by an anthropomorphic sculpture. Tumuli
III, IV and V each contained only a single burial of an adult male with

                                        243




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:26:35 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                 Two     NEW   FINDS    OF    WOODEN      WHEELS


                     \     ^      X     \     \




                                                      Rotating axle




to a rotating axle; below, removable wheels held on a fixed axle by linchpins. The
cart shown at the top can be lifted bodily off its axle (cf. Fig. 9.3); the one below
can be jacked up for the removal of individual wheels. With a fixed axle, the
wheels can rotate independently of one another.
artificially deformed skull, with ochre but no grave-goods. Tumulus VI was
not excavated.
   The Plachidol ochre-grave Tumulus cemetery is one of ten known from
Bulgaria, preponderantly in the north-east. Approximately twice this num-
ber are known from Romania (mostly in Moldavia and the Dobrudja); and
many hundreds are known from eastern Hungary (Ecsedy 1979). While
excavations of some dozen tumuli in Hungary have repeatedly revealed
square, plank-roofed chambers with ochre burials and few grave goods,
none has so far revealed traces of a wheeled vehicle. All these tumuli are
outliers - in areas which are themselves steppe enclaves - of the great mass
of Pit-Grave tumuli on the Pontic steppes (Hausler 1971). They are most
reasonably interpreted as culturally autonomous groups penetrating from
the Pontic steppes into open areas within the territories of their western
neighbours. Intruders and indigenes maintained their own traditions of
burial side by side. The burials in the Plachidol tumuli closely resemble those
known from the Pontic steppes; the arrangement in Tumulus I Grave 1 is
precisely paralleled by burials such as that in the famous Tri Brata and

                                        244




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:26:35 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
     FROM   LATER    NEOLITHIC       AND   EARLY     BRONZE      AGE    EUROPE


neighbouring Arkhara tumuli near Elista on the Kalmyk Steppe (Piggott
1983, figs 23-5). This was the most elaborate form of interment in the Pit-
Grave culture, and no doubt indicates elite status. The fact that the
Plachidol I wheel-burial was that of a woman is thus particularly interesting.
   Some forty radiocarbon dates are available from Pit-Grave tumuli in the
southern Ukraine, covering the later fourth and earlier third millennia BC.
Dates for tumuli in Romania and Hungary all fall in the later part of this
period. These dates are parallel to those of the Baden and Ezero cultures, in
Hungary and Bulgaria respectively, confirming the contemporary existence
of these groups side by side. A date of c.3000 BC would thus be appropriate
for the Plachidol cemetery.


ZURICH, SWITZERLAND; 'AKAD.' SITE, NEAR TO
TRESSEHAUS' (RUOFF 1978; WOYTOWITSCH   1985)

Investigations by U. Ruoff on urban rescue sites at the edge of Lake Zurich
have revealed a series of waterlogged occupations belonging to the later
third millennium BC. At the 'Pressehaus' site (Ruoff 1978; Piggott 1983, 51)
excavated in 1976 a pair of wheels and their connecting axle were
discovered stuck in the mud with a third nearby, near to the palisaded
perimeter of a Corded Ware settlement. These wheels were of a more com-
plex construction, and on a different principle of attachment to the axle,
fromjthe other solid, tripartite or single-piece disc wheels known from third-
millennium contexts in Europe (van der Waals 1964). The two (or perhaps
three, since the upper parts were truncated) planks of which the wheel was
composed were held together by three battens with a trapezoid section let
into the outer face of the wheel. Moreover, the wheels, which lacked naves,
had a square hole which acted as a mortice for the axle to which they were
thus firmly fixed. The whole element of wheels plus axle thus turned as a
unit - the axle had a circular section (apart from its morticed ends) and the
body of the vehicle sat directly on top of it (Figure 9.2, top).
    After this find, fragments of a similar wheel (along with a wooden yoke)
were then noticed among old finds from Vinelz on the Bielersee, also prob-
ably of Corded Ware date. Radiocarbon estimates on Corded Ware contexts
in Switzerland fall into the range of 2800-2600 BC. (They are thus broadly
contemporary with, or slightly later than, the Plachidol find.) Wheels with
this square mortice-hole are characteristic of the circum-Alpine area in the
Bronze Age; a solid, single-piece example of Late Bronze Age date came
from Castione dei Merchesi in northern Italy, and it is also a feature of
contemporary crossbar wheels from this area (Woytowitsch 1985, figs 7,
36).
    The form, however, goes back earlier than the Corded Ware period.
Another small but identifiable fragment has been recognised from a Chalco-
lithic context at Egolzwyl 2 (Lucerne), and from the type-site of Auvernier

                                        245




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:26:35 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                 Two   NEW     FINDS    OF   WOODEN       WHEELS


(Ruy-Chatru) on Lake Neuchatel. Now another find from Zurich makes this
the oldest surviving example of a wooden wheel from Europe, contem-
porary with the classic Baden culture cart-models of Budakalasz and
Alsonemedi in western Hungary. Excavations by U. Ruoff on an early
Horgen site 'Akad.', near to the 'Pressehaus' site, brought to light a single-
piece solid disc wheel, which nevertheless still had the characteristics of
being naveless and having a square hole for an axle rotating with the wheel.
The wheel itself is 55cm in maximum diameter - it has suffered some lateral
compression - and just over 5cm thick at the centre. Like the others from
this area it is of Acer (probably field maple) wood. Radiocarbon estimates
for the Horgen culture range from 3400-3000 BC, while those for the earlier
part of the closely related SOM culture in northern France suggest a begin-
ning around 3500 BC (Howell 1983, 52).
    This date thus takes finds of wooden wheels back to the widespread
horizon of indications of the use of paired draught indicated in central
Europe by paired-ox burials, figures of yoked oxen and wagon-models, and
in northern Europe by plough-marks.2 Although no wooden wheels are yet
known from northern Europe before the Corded Ware period, this find
suggests that earlier examples may be found, taking the innovation back
into TRB (Middle Neolithic) times. This strengthens the suggestion that the
'traction complex' of plough and wheeled vehicle appeared as a unity in
fourth-millennium Europe (Sherratt 1981; 1983; 1986).
    Although the occurrence of wheel-finds at this date was thus predictable,
these examples (with their contrasting typology) raise afresh the question of
the route of their transmission to Europe. Links via the Pontic steppes to the
Caucasus are evident not only from the distribution of the burials of the Pit-
Grave culture but also from the introduction of Caucasian types of bronze
axes and chisels using arsenical copper and the two-piece mould (Chernykh
1978). But these appear in Central Europe and the Balkans only after 3000
BC; and while wheeled vehicles were clearly an integral part of the Pit-Grave
complex, they were apparently already in use in both Baden and Horgen
contexts at the time of its arrival. Since all the analogies for Baden pottery -
mostly skeuomorphic echoes of metal vessels - point to Anatolia (Kalicz
1963), this would provide a plausible source for wheeled vehicles of the
mid-fourth millennium.
    One point of typology remains: were the square-hole, naveless wheels, fixed
to a rotating axle, characteristic of the 'first wave' of possibly Anatolian-
derived wheeled vehicles, continuing to be used through into the Bronze Age
in the relative backwater of Switzerland; or were they a specific adaptation
to circum-Alpine conditions? Examples of fixed wheels in the Near East
are sporadic, and belong to the second millennium or later: all the third-
millennium finds have round-hole, freely rotating wheels with or without
naves (Littauer and Crouwel 1979,13-14). But we have no idea of the nature
of fourth-millennium Near Eastern wheels, since the only evidence is from


                                       246




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:26:35 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
     FROM   LATER   NEOLITHIC       AND    EARLY    BRONZE       AGE    EUROPE




93 below and right, simple cart with rotating axle and fixed wheels (in this
example made of iron, though traditionally of wood), on sale in a village market,
Minho, northern Portugal; top, similar cart drawn by two cows, with elaborately
carved wooden yoke, Minho, northern Portugal. (Photos: author, 1990, fieldwork
with F. Queiroga.)

Uruk pictographs rather than finds or detailed representations. It is thus
possible that the earliest wheels were generally fixed to the axle.
    However, functional differences between two types should not be for-
gotten. With a fixed axle and freely rotating wheels, a damaged wheel can
easily be removed. When the vehicle is stuck in mud, however, this pro-
cedure is difficult. With a rotating axle, the body of the cart can simply be
lifted off the bogged-down wheels and axle. Since this is arguably what
actually happened in the case of the Zurich Pressehaus example, it may be
the explanation for its preferred use in circum-Alpine lakeside settlements.
The alternative design would have been preferable on the steppes, and on
the dry plains of lowland Europe.3

                                        247




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:26:35 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    Two     NEW    FINDS     OF   WOODEN       WHEELS

NOTES

1. Both finds form interesting footnotes to the comprehensive survey of European wheeled
   vehicles published by Professor Stuart Piggott (1983). Since 1985 was Professor Piggott's
   75th year; this note is affectionately dedicated in celebration of it.
2. This horizon includes, of course, the wagon-models of Budakalasz, Szigetszentmarton
   (both in Hungary) and Radosina (Slovakia), as well as the drawing on a pot from
   Bronocice (Little Poland). Professor Piggott's dating of this horizon (1983, 44-5) needs to
   be corrected; or rather; returned to the date which he originally suggested fifteen years
   before (1968, 304). Since Lengyel and Tiszapolgar run parallel in western and eastern
   Hungary respectively, there is no need to compress Bodrogkeresztur (itself parallel to late
   Lengyel) into the third millennium bc. He was thus originally correct in dating the onset of
   Baden to c.2700 bc. Bronocice IV and V correspond to late Baden; Bronocice III with its
   cart-drawing parallels classic Baden (like Budakalasz), and has four associated radiocarbon
   dates of 2740-2570 (Kruk and Milisauskas 1981). The Radosina model, in a Boleraz
   (proto-Baden) context, is the earliest example and would just precede them at c.28/2700
   bc.
3. With characteristic perception, Mrs M. A. Littauer (in litt. Jan 1986) provides a further
   dimension to this argument. If wheeled vehicles developed from sledges with captive rollers
   (as the pictographs hint), then a fixed wheel/revolving axle would be a logical design for
   the earliest carts. It would require less sophisticated carpentry and would be less
   vulnerable to wear than a wheel whose nave was carefully cut to rotate on a fixed axle.
   The fixed axle, allowing the wheels to revolve differentially, was particularly advantageous
   for four-wheeled vehicles, especially where used in battle (as in Mesopotamia). The bias
   towards prestige vehicles (usually four-wheelers with fixed axles) in graves and artistic
   representations may mask the widespread contemporary use of a less sophisticated design,
   the two-wheeler with rotating axle. Such a primitive but robust design has survived down
   to recent times in areas less sophisticated technologically or with a more abrasive environ-
   ment (Portugal, Fig. 9.3, Anatolia, Mongolia). I am very grateful to Mrs Littauer for these
   and many other helpful observations. [For more recent surveys of early wheel finds, and
   technical discussion, see Hayen 1983; Schovsbo 1983; Hausler 1984; various articles in
   Treue 1986; Winiger 1987 (with a convenient illustration of the Vinelz yoke shortly after
   discovery, fig. 20 on p. 107); Honeisen 1989. What appear to be 15-20m of cart-rut occur
   under the extension to a long mound covering multiple cists of probable mid-fourth-
   millennium date at Flintbek in NW Germany (Zich 1992; information from J. Hoika); some
   mid-third-millennium trackways in the same region seem to be associated with the use of
   wheeled vehicles, to judge by the growing numbers of broken wheels and axles associated
   with them. Winiger (1987, 100), quoting a conversation with the excavator Ulrich Ruoff,
   notes that the chronological attribution of the Ziirich-'Akad.' wheel, stratified between
   early Horgen and Corded-Ware deposits, is uncertain; Winiger himself would prefer a
   Corded-Ware date for the introduction of the wheel to Switzerland. His interpretation
   of the rotating axle as a technological advance, however; is less compelling than Mrs
   Littauer's suggestion above.]




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:26:35 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         Section          IV

  PATTERNS ON THE
      GROUND




 The relationship between a central monument, occupation areas, and
 outlying standing stones, near to the Late Neolithic dolerite quarries
   at Plussulien, central Brittany, c3200 BC (after C.-T. Le Roux,
              based on fieldwork by M. F. Le Provost).




The wider area of archaeological theory ... treats processes with
 space- and time-scales for which there is no social terminology,
 or patterns which nowhere survive within the sample of recent
human behaviour. Archaeology in essence, then, is the discipline
  with the theory and practice for the recovery of unobservable
hominid behaviour patterns from indirect traces in bad samples.
                                                    D A V I D L. C L A R K E   (1973)




              This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:28:11 UTC
                               All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       PATTERNS       ON   THE    GROUND


 i h e ideas discussed above are only of use if they help to make sense of
patterns on the ground. For my doctoral thesis, I had travelled widely in
Turkey and south-east Europe, and in setting up a fieldwork programme I
wanted to create a trade-off between the robustness of the prehistoric record
in the south-east (Balkan tells) and the sophistication of data-recovery
(museum coverage, survey work) in the north-west. The optimum solution
was Hungary, which had the additional advantages of being axially placed
in relation both to the Danube route from Anatolia and the steppe zone
stretching eastwards beyond the Pontic region and the Caucasus to the Urals
and beyond.
    The Archaeological Topography of Hungary programme provided pre-
cisely the opportunity I sought: although conceived as a project to register
sites rather than to reconstruct settlement patterns, its collaborative team
combined vast experience with uniquely long periods of time engaged in
survey. In eastern Hungary, in particular, the combination of durable and
typologically distinctive ceramics, and a heavily-tilled landscape of open,
collectively farmed fields, provided an unparalleled opportunity to re-
construct prehistoric settlement patterns with a resolution never before
achieved. It was Nandor Kalicz who made this work possible, though sadly
his health prevented an active collaboration in the field (and also the late
Sandor Bokonyi who gave continuous support). Nevertheless, the experience
of working with Istvan Torma and Gyorgy and Julia Goldman, and getting
to know Istvan Ecsedy and Pal Raczky, remains a great pleasure; and among
the British team were Sue and Steve Shennan, John O'Shea, John Howell,
Nick Starling, Brendan Grimley, Basil and Mary Turton, Mark and Jenny
Robinson, and Sue Sherratt, following earlier visits with Paul Halstead,
Colin Ridler, Neil Roberts and Fred Hamond. The Archaeological
Topography, and the survey and sondage work undertaken to calibrate it,
permitted a detailed set of observations on the spatial and distributional
characteristics of settlement (pottery + house-building materials) within
something like 200-500 year intervals. These demonstrated gradual drift,
sharp shifts and a fluctuating pattern of concentration and dispersal, that
can be linked to changes in the internal organisation of settlements and their
cemeteries, as well as to changing patterns of supply and flow in materials
and artefacts. Equally importantly, they demonstrated both the validity of
the proposed model of early farming, and the magnitude of the shift which
coincided with the first evidence of animal traction. Such patterns stimu-
lated the construction of more detailed models of regional development and
environmental change, and confirmed suggestions of a co-existence between
two populations - one indigenous and one intrusive from the steppes - at
the beginning of the third millennium.
   My conditions of employment at Oxford do not permit fieldwork other
than in periods of annual leave. When my growing family began to demand
a holiday rather than forced labour, some compromise was required; and I

                                        250




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:28:11 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                        PATTERNS      ON   THE    GROUND


began instead to investigate spatial and morphological patterning within the
500 known megalithic monuments of the Morbihan, on the southern coast
of Brittany, of which nineteenth-century plans and drawings in Oxford and
elsewhere provide an invaluable record. The parallelism with Hungary was
remarkable: over a precisely comparable period of time (though beginning
somewhat later), an exceptionally well-preserved and recorded series of
Neolithic sites revealed a remarkable density of occupation, and permitted
a diachronic study. The only difference was that these were not settlements,
but tombs. Such a contrast, and the more general exclusiveness between
substantial sites and substantial burial-monuments in Neolithic Europe,
points to the arbitrariness of our ethnocentric distinction between rational,
secular domesticity and religious, ritualistic disposal of the dead. Both types
of site provide permanent inscriptions on the landscape - one emphasising
the presence of the living, the other of the departed. For their Neolithic con-
structors, houses were as 'ritual' as tombs - and tombs sometimes as dom-
estic as houses. This fundamental realisation, together with Ian Hodder's
illuminating writings on the subject, led to the reconsiderations of European
megalithism which complete this section.




                                        251




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:28:11 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                       10
             Mobile Resources:
          Settlement and Exchange
        in Early Agricultural Europe
                                    (1982)

Interpretations of the archaeological record in social terms have usually
been undertaken within an implicit evolutionary framework. The most
successful of these studies have been those concerned with the Near East and
Mesoamerica. In these areas the rapid onset of social inequality following
the adoption of agriculture has suggested that stages of increasing social
complexity are a normal succession in agricultural communities. In
Europe, however, this approach has been less fruitful. One of the notable
features of the European prehistoric sequence is the relatively late
appearance of complex societies associated with an urban base. Yet the
first farming communities appeared in Europe in the seventh millennium BC,
and the long intervening period cannot be adequately described by a simple
evolutionary succession of increasingly ranked societies. Archaeologists
have used technological criteria to divide this time into Neolithic,
Copper and Bronze Ages on the basis of surviving artefacts; but although
the use of metal is clearly relevant to the question of social change,
the dynamics of such a process cannot be inferred from the artefacts alone.
It is necessary to try and reconstruct the total flow of produce between
different areas, since it is this pattern that determines how particular

The objective of this article was to break down the artificial distinction between
'subsistence and settlement' and ftrade and exchangeby suggesting that the move-
ment of livestock was an important part of prehistoric economies, especially at
certain phases of development. To avoid constant recourse to external causes, it
took as its dominant metaphor the idea of (ecological) succession, in an attempt to
look at purely autonomous reasons for change: the evolving role of livestock in a
newly Neolithicised region. It was originally prepared for the 45th Annual Meeting
of the Society for American Archaeology in Philadelphia (1980), in a symposium
masterminded with characteristic flair by Colin Renfrew, and described by Shanks
and Tilley (1987, 37) as (in many respects the culmination of the programme of
functionalist social archaeology in Britain\

                                       252




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
  SETTLEMENT      AND   EXCHANGE        IN   EARLY   AGRICULTURAL          EUROPE


areas develop in terms of the opportunities open to them at different
times.
   Gordon Childe attributed the egalitarian nature of early farming com-
munities to the primitive character of agriculture and the lack of a surplus
for trade (1951). This view can be criticised on several grounds, not least the
clear evidence that Neolithic groups were capable of acquiring substantial
quantities of materials from considerable distances (Chapter 4). Because of
the importance of regional interaction in determining the course of econ-
omic and social development, it is worthwhile to examine the nature of such
Neolithic exchange networks and their social contexts. This chapter pro-
poses a fundamental reason for large-scale regional exchange in Early Old
World agricultural societies, and investigates the social structures in which
it was embedded. It uses detailed evidence from an area of central Europe to
explore the usefulness of this model in explaining a wide range of archae-
ological observations.


T H E POTENTIAL FOR EXCHANGE IN EARLY
AGRICULTURAL SOCIETIES
In discussions of exchange in simple agricultural societies, attention has
usually focused on the movement of hard stones for axes and cutting tools
(Chapter 4; cf. Hughes 1973). In a stimulating article in 1965, however,
Kent Flannery discussed the development of early agricultural communities
in the Zagros in terms of inter-zonal exchanges both of mineral resources
and of new domesticates. The movement of domesticated species was seen
as an aspect of social contact and trade rather than just a biogeographic
dispersal. That domestic livestock were an important item of trade among
early agriculturalists should not be surprising in view of their prominence in
New Guinea exchange cycles (Rappaport 1968, 105); but archaeologists
have usually considered them under the heading of 'subsistence' rather than
of 'exchange'. While the role of horses as trade items (by analogy with their
spread in North America) has recently been raised in unpublished work by
Stephen Shennan and John O'Shea in connection with Beaker and early
Bronze Age trade networks in Europe (cf. Schiile 1969), the significance of
livestock as an item of Neolithic trade has not been systematically explored.
   The role of cattle in this context is likely to have been particularly
important. The earliest Neolithic economies were based on sheep, which
spread as part of the primary agricultural complex from a restricted
mountain habitat. Cattle, on the other hand, were a widespread native
animal in the areas to which agriculture was introduced, and were probably
domesticated independently in a number of lowland foci (Herre and Rohrs
1977). These included northern Mesopotamia, central Anatolia and parts of
southern Europe. Domesticated cattle were supplied from these areas to
surrounding regions. The continuing significance of lowland cattle-breeding

                                       253




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                             MOBILE     R E SOURCES:


centres is well known from the historical period: Thessaly and Boeotia
exported animals in Homeric times, while classical Attica brought cattle by
ship from as far away as Macedonia, North Africa and Scythia (Semple
1932, 318). The movement of livestock is thus likely to be of major im-
portance in explaining regional exchange systems in prehistory.
    One site which may be illuminated by being considered in this light is
(Jatal Hiiyiik in central Anatolia (Mellaart 1967; Todd 1976). Large herds
of wild cattle (aurochsen) flourished in the seventh millennium in this well-
watered part of the alluvial Konya Plain, and their skulls are a prominent
feature of the numerous shrines found at the site. The capture or handling
of an aurochs bull is actually shown in wall paintings. Cattle formed over
ninety per cent of the faunal remains recovered from the site, and the stature
of the animals decreased in the upper levels. Since domestic cattle arguably
appeared in this region for the first time at Qatal Hiiyiik, it is likely that the
site had a major role in the domestication of these animals (Perkins 1969).
    The site also had a key role in relation to its surrounding region, since it
is notable for the extraordinary quantity and variety of imported materials:
some thirty-five different foreign minerals have been identified, including
rocks for axes, grinding stones, pigments and beads, as well as several
varieties of flint and very large quantities of obsidian (Todd 1976, 126; cf.
Jacobs 1969, 27-54). The last is particularly notable, as it was obtained
from the Acigol source, which is 200km away to the north-east. This trading
florescence was a temporary one, however, as the site had no immediate
successor of comparable size or importance - James Mellaart has called it
a 'supernova'. A possible explanation for this brief concentration of wealth
is the role of the site as a source of domestic cattle during the phase of
agricultural expansion, when it supplied sites proliferating in the nearby
upland basins and was thus able to acquire abundant supplies of highland
resources.
    Despite the flow of traded items at £atal Hiiyiik, it did not form part of
a site hierarchy in the same way as (for instance) the Protoliterate communi-
ties of the Mesopotamian Plain (Adams and Nissen 1972). Although only
a fraction of the site has been excavated, the buildings are remarkably uni-
form and there is no differentiation of large elite or public buildings: the
numerous shrines form part of domestic complexes. Whatever the precise
social organisation of the site or the character of the trade that supported it,
there is little indication of ranking of the kind discussed elsewhere in this
volume. The site thus raises in acute form the question of the nature of ex-
change in Neolithic communities and the social structures associated with
it. It suggests that early agricultural communities were on occasion capable
of operating large-scale exchanges in the absence of developed hierarchies,
and that such societies may have undergone cycles of increasing complexity
and devolution that defy characterisation as stages in an unilinear pro-
gression.


                                        254




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
  SETTLEMENT      AND   EXCHANGE       IN   EARLY    AGRICULTURAL          EUROPE




10.1 The Carpathian Basin and its regions, showing the Great Hungarian Plain
(Nagy Alfold); [from Sherratt 1983b].



   Another area where a phenomenon of this kind may have taken place is
the Great Hungarian Plain. Its marshy depressions and open, steppe charac-
ter provided a similar habitat for numerous herds of cattle in the postglacial
period. Early farming groups (as in Thessaly) concentrated chiefly on raising
sheep, though domestic cattle were known and aurochsen occasionally
hunted. During the fifth millennium BC, however, cattle became the prin-
cipal form of domestic livestock, and there is evidence in one area for inter-
breeding with wild herds and probably an intake of the latter for
domestication. What is particularly interesting is that this period saw a
notable increase in 'wealth' (in terms of both imported materials and local
craft products), an elaboration of ritual, and a significant change in the
character of settlements, with the emergence of large aggregated sites in
between phases of dispersed settlement.
   The rest of this chapter consists of an examination of the relationships
between these changes, at both a local and a regional level. It uses some of
the preliminary results of intensive survey work around Szeghalom in the
Koros depression1 to describe patterns of settlement and material culture in
the centre of the Plain. It then uses a colonisation model to examine changes
in the role of this area within the larger regional system of the Carpathian
Basin.

                                       255




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                                      MOBILE         R E SOURCES:


                                 Settlement            Subsistence          Material culture Exchange                       Cemeteries


  tiszapolgAr &                  Dispersed; small     Domestic cattle       Plain pottery,          Some obsidian,          Large formal
  bodrogkeresztur                coherent settlements predominate;          without local styles;   greenstone, etc.;       cemeteries (for
  (late 5th / early 4th mill.)   (not ditched);       cereals, etc.         no figurines; "battle   occasional extra-       whole community
                                 stable pattern                             axes"; (copper axes     Carpathian imports      or several sites)
                                                                            and daggers +           (esp. on edge of
                                                                            gold ornaments on       Plain)
                                                                            edge of Plain




  szakAlhat&                     Large aggregated      Domestic cattle      Elaborately             Large quantity          Small formal
  tisza                          settlements           predominate; wild    decorated pottery       and variety of          groups of graves
  (early 5th mill.)              (defence?); often     cattle locally       and cult objects        imported materials      (households or
                                 burnt; stable         important;           in local styles;        - obsidian, flint,      lineages)
                                 pattern               cereals etc.         textiles                greenstone, grinders,
                                                                                                    etc.; imported fine
                                                                                                    pottery




  koros                          Dispersed; linear     Domestic sheep       Basic craft skills;     Obsidian becoming       No formal
  & avk                          shoreline             predominate;         decoration not          important; some         cemeteries
  (6th mill.)                    settlements; fluid    fishing important;   regionally specific     greenstone and
                                 pattern               cereals etc.                                 grinders




                                                                                                                                                ®
10.2 Summary of evidence for settlement and exchange in the central part of
the Great Hungarian Plain, 6000-3500 BC, divided into three major phases:
(a) descriptive summary; (b) schematic settlement-forms, at the level of the
individual house, settlement, and settlement-cluster. Compare the detailed
survey results in Chapter 11 below. [Re-arranged.]


SETTLEMENT AND ECONOMY IN THE CENTRAL PART
OF THE GREAT HUNGARIAN PLAIN
The Great Hungarian Plain is an alluvial basin with extensive areas of fertile
land along its broad floodplains (Figure 10.1).2 Although it has a steppe
climate, irrigation was not necessary in preindustrial times, and there are
no sharp contrasts in productive potential as in the Mesopotamian Plain.
The landscape was undegraded at the time under discussion, and cultivation
systems based on the hoe or digging stick can be inferred for the whole of
the period before c.3000 BC. The contrasts discussed here thus emerged
from a relatively uniform environmental and technological base. The prin-
cipal changes are summarised in Figure 10.2.
   The earliest agrarian communities of the Koros culture,3 spreading into
the Carpathian Basin from the south along the major rivers, took the form
of linear settlements up to a kilometre or more in length, along the levees
of old watercourses. Such sites were composed of individual household
clusters - consisting of postbuilt rectangular houses with their associated
pits - arranged at intervals of 50 metres or so along the riverbank. They
yield evidence of cereal cultivation, the keeping of domestic livestock

                                                                     256




                                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
  SETTLEMENT      AND     EXCHANGE      IN    EARLY   AGRICULTURAL                EUROPE


                  House style        Site location    Settlement pattern
                                                                               4000 BC
                                                           •



                    o "7
                                                                   •
                                                       •

  TISZAPOLGAR                                                          •

                                                                  •



                                                                               5000 BC



                                                      %                    •
                                                                               AGGREGATED




                                                      (.                       6000 BC


  KftROS
                                -     m          .    \ •                      SHOREUNE
                                                                               SETTLEMENT

                                                                  \


                                                                                            ©
(mainly sheep), hunting of deer and wild cattle (Bokonyi 1974), and plenti-
ful indications of fishing in the form of fish remains and net-sinkers. Large
quantities of locally produced coarse pottery are present. The finer pottery
is undecorated, and there are no marked local stylistic groupings. There are
some clay figurines, but they are not elaborate. By the end of this period
obsidian was reaching the area from the edge of the Plain to the north
(Tokaj), though the chipped stone industry lacks the variety of materials
used in later periods, and stone axes are rare. Burials were placed within the
settlements, not unusually in rubbish pits with other animal bone, and no
formal cemetery areas have been recognised.
   The linear arrangement of settlement and the very large number of sites
probably indicate frequent minor shifts of individual household clusters
within the general area of exploitation over a relatively long span of time,
rather than a high density of large contemporary settlements. The absence
of cemeteries may imply that descent was not important in defining group
membership. This pattern suggests considerable fluidity of pioneer settle-
ment, freely growing and proliferating without constraint. Such ad-
ventitious colonisation at a low overall population density in a productive
environment would not have created competition and would have made
unnecessary the development of wider networks of alliance.
   This pattern persisted with only minor modifications throughout the
sixth millennium, during which the wave of population advance passed on
through the Carpathian Basin to the other parts of the central European
loess belt. Broad cultural affinities were maintained between these pro-

                                        257




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                             MOBILE     R E SOURCES:


liferating Bandkeramik populations further north and their contemporaries
in eastern Hungary, who are distinguished as the Alfold variant (AVK).
    A major change occurred in the Great Hungarian Plain around the
beginning of the fifth millennium BC, affecting both settlement patterns and
material culture. This corresponds to the beginning of the Szakalhat and
Tisza cultures.4 Although the same parts of the Plain continued to be occu-
pied, settlement became increasingly aggregated. Far fewer sites are known,
but on further investigation these turn out to be very large (of the order of
500m x 500m) and to consist of parallel lines of household-clusters, often
centred on a slight prominence with natural defences or suggestions of
artificial ditches.5 True tells first appeared at this time. All sites have sub-
stantial accumulations of settlement debris consisting of several layers of
mud-walled buildings, sometimes simultaneously burnt over large parts of
the site. The subsistence base of these settlements contained no new species,
but cattle now predominated heavily over sheep among the domestic
livestock, while the hunting of aurochsen made a substantial contribution in
the eastern part of the area. Fishing was now with harpoon rather than net,
perhaps indicating that animal protein came mainly from meat.
    The pottery includes a high proportion of elaborately decorated wares
with painted and incised ornament often imitating textile patterns. These
divide clearly into specific local styles in different parts of the Plain and
surrounding areas.6 Figurines and anthropomorphic vessels are similarly
elaborate, as are decorated household fittings. Equally striking are the
quantity and variety of imported materials. Many new types of flint make
their appearance, along with large quantities of obsidian (see Chapter 12).
Massive fragments of tabular flint up to 20cm long show the size of the raw
materials that were acquired. Saddle querns and grindstones are frequent
finds, while greenstone axes occur in very large numbers. All these materials
were imported from beyond the alluvial plain. Finely decorated pottery was
also widely traded. Although burials occur in small formal groups within
the settlement area, and male and female graves were differentiated by their
orientation, large quantities of objects were not deposited with the dead.
    The emergence of large, rich 'supersites' some 10km or so apart indicates
a greater stability and constraint on settlement coincident with the ex-
pansion of trading activity. The overall density of settlement was still
relatively low, since there are few smaller settlements between the 'super-
sites'. Such sites, therefore, do not appear to form the upper level of a
hierarchy, but rather a general tendency to aggregation of settlement. The
two factors most likely to have promoted aggregation are an enlargement of
the resident co-operative (e.g. animal-breeding) unit, or more likely the need
for defence - though the threat was not sufficiently severe to require en-
closing earthworks (as in the Bronze Age). The sites probably consisted of
an aggregation of compounds with livestock enclosures and kitchen gardens
in between (cf. Brookfield and Hart 1971, fig. 9.1. A4). The burials, which


                                        258




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
  SETTLEMENT      AND   EXCHANGE        IN   EARLY   AGRICULTURAL          EUROPE


seem to have taken place in the context of the domestic or lineage group
rather than of the whole community, also suggest a loose aggregation of
lineage groups rather than fusion into a single integrated unit. The evidence
of ritual activities in the form of figurines and cult fittings also has a
domestic context.
    The pattern which succeeded this one in the later fifth millennium
 (Tiszapolgar culture) reversed many aspects of the picture, at least in the
central area of the Plain. While the same parts of the area continued to be
occupied, settlement reverted to a dispersed pattern. The sites themselves
were more integrated than before, however, and consist of a concentration
of huts and other facilities within a more or less circular area having a modal
diameter of 50-100m. They do not appear to have been ditched. Many tells
continued to be occupied, though the layers are thinner and rarely burnt
 (Bognar-Kutzian 1972). The domesticates included no new species (with the
exception of occasional bones of horse, which appeared in appreciable
numbers only in the third millennium), and domestic cattle remained the
most common animal. By the beginning of the fourth millennium cattle
remains are almost entirely from domestic stock (Bokonyi 1974). The
pottery is predominantly plain, with decoration consisting for the most part
of knobs and perforations rather than elaborate patterns. Figurines are
absent. The pottery is remarkably uniform over the whole of the Plain and
does not divide into clear regional styles as in the preceding periods. Larger
formal cemetery areas outside the settlements appear for the first time in this
period, with graves arranged in rows and differentiated both by sex and
by relative quantities of grave goods. The larger and richer excavated
examples, however, come from outside the central area of the Plain. Stone
continued to be imported for tools, but not in the quantity and variety of the
preceding phase. New materials and products - long flint blades, and axes
and simple ornaments of copper - are known from this period, but few seem
to have reached the centre of the Plain.
    The large number of substantial sites indicates that this period was stable
and prosperous, and there is no evidence for declining fertility, even though
materials from outside the Plain were not imported in such quantity. Con-
ditions seem to have been more peaceful than in the preceding phase, since
settlement was able to disperse and there is less evidence of destruction.
Both the layout of Tiszapolgar sites and the existence of community
cemeteries indicate a more organised composition of local groups, probably
structured by descent.
    The early fourth millennium BC (Bodrogkeresztur culture) saw for the
first time a major shift in the area under occupation in the central part of the
Plain, with relative depopulation (or less visible settlement) in the parts
previously settled most intensively. A truly radical break occurred in the
later fourth millennium (Baden culture), with the settlement of new micro-
areas and the construction of large burial mounds in the previously

                                       259




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                         MOBILE        R ESOURCES:




             KOROS                     AVK               szakAlhAt&tisza        TISZAPOLGAR
             Early sixth               Late sixth        Early fifth            Late fifth
             millennium BC             millennium BC     millennium BC          millennium BC




POPULATION
                   &
                 POPULATION
                                     /
                                  EXCHANGE   CONCENTRATION
                  MOVEMENT                     OF WEALTH

10.3 A model of agrarian colonisation and changing patterns of exchange in
relation to new opportunities, as exemplified by the eastern part of the Carpathian
Basin, 6000-4000 BC. [The diagram does not show long-distance inter-regional
exchange, which becomes significant in thefinalperiod.]

inhabited ones. Faunal remains show a shift to sheep (now probably for
secondary products), while other parts of central Europe provide evidence
for the use of paired draught animals and the plough. This major trans-
formation is beyond the scope of the present discussion.


T H E CARPATHIAN BASIN AS A REGIONAL SYSTEM
These developments can only be understood in a regional setting (Figures
10.3, 10.4). The earliest settlers in the sixth millennium formed part of a
river-based network, spreading from the south and largely confined to the
Plain itself. Contemporary settlements in adjacent areas occupied similar
environments, and there was little penetration of surrounding uplands.
Small quantities of necessary materials were imported, but early populations
had a high degree of self-sufficiency.
   The changes of the early fifth millennium coincided with the first major
penetration of the uplands (Kalicz and Makkay 1977). Sites with clear
cultural affinities to those on the Hungarian Plain are known not only from
the valleys reaching up into the mountains but also up to 900m in the
limestone caves of the Biikk mountains themselves. The existence of groups
with direct access to highland materials and the resources on the edge of
the Plain7 opened new possibilities for the supply of desirable materials to
lowland areas. The appearance of large quantities of imported materials
there suggests that contemporary alterations in settlement and material
culture may be a part of a change in organisation to take advantage of these
opportunities. The new pattern of relationships was a relatively short-lived


                                                       260




                             This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                              All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
  SETTLEMENT       AND E X C H A N G E           IN E A R L Y       AGRICULTURAL        EUROPE

                   elaboration                  long-                         4000 BC
        06         of status                    distance
                   items (e.g.                  trade
                   metal)
      5 £3                                                                 rising wealth of
      -J *                                                                 communities on
      O UJ   large               dispersal of        regional              edge of Plain
      gS     community           settlement          devolution
      HQ     cemeteries          (peaceful           (local
        s                        conditions)         subsistence)




                                                                              6000 BC




10.4 Descriptive model of the inter-relationships between the succession of
settlement and exchange systems in the eastern part of the Carpathian Basin,
6000-3500 BC. (Similar models would apply, for instance, to the Konya Plain,
central Turkey 7000-5000 BC, or parts of northern Europe 4000-2000 BC.)

episode, however, for many of its elements disappeared in the succeeding
phase; though even so it lasted for several hundred years.
   The sources of imported materials on one Idwland site are considered in
Chapter 12, and can be seen to lie in a broad airborne 100 to 150km away
in the surrounding uplands to the north and east (cf. Com§a 1967). Such
resources could only have been mobilised if the intensification of lowland
production were articulated within a regional system of exchange. The first
requirement of such a system would have been the existence of an export-
able lowland resource (cf. Godelier 1977, 141-5). While the archaeological
record gives no direct evidence of what this was, it can be argued that cattle
were the most important lowland product. The movement of surplus grain
over such distances is unlikely in primitive conditions of transport, and
in any case would give the central area no advantage over the peripheries.
Textiles of plant fibres are a possibility, especially in view of the charac-
teristic geometrical designs on pottery, though as flax grows well in
surrounding areas (Illes and Halasz 1926) its production is unlikely to have


                                                 261




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                            MOBILE      R E SOURCES:


been a monopoly of the lowlands. Similar considerations apply to salt,
which is known to have played an important role in the acquisition of stone
resources by groups in alluvial lowlands in New Guinea (Godelier 1977).
Fine pottery was manufactured both in the lowlands and in the area of the
Biikk mountains, and traded in both directions.
    The most likely commodities for specialised production in the Plain,
therefore, are cattle and cattle products. The well-watered, open plains were
a natural breeding-ground for cattle, both wild and domestic. Faunal re-
mains from the Plain show a predominance (fifty to seventy-five per cent) of
cattle at this period, with very high proportions of wild forms especially in
the eastern part. In this area (around Berettyoujfalu) the intergradation of
sizes and mixture of morphological characteristics between domestic and
wild forms is taken by Bokonyi (1962) as evidence of local domestication.
The open character of the Plain environment (Kosse 1979) would have
provided a valuable reservoir of livestock as population moved into the
wooded areas on the fringes of the Carpathian Basin. The demand for cattle
among these expanding populations could have been met by breeding cattle
for export in much of the central Plain, and by actually domesticating new
stock in the eastern part, where wild herds were extensive. If the practice of
milking was a later introduction, as has been suggested (Chapter 6), then it
is the animals themselves rather than their secondary products that are likely
to have been of importance. Such an export could literally move itself over
the required distances. Since the initial clearings in forested areas would
have been small,8 herds in the wooded fringes and uplands would have taken
some time to become self-sustaining. As it would in any case have been
difficult to maintain large herds (which would only be able to expand after
several generations of forest clearances), there was probably a continuing
dependence on lowland supplies, both as breeding stock and as meat on the
hoof.
    If this interpretation is correct, then it suggests that the changes in
settlement pattern and material culture in the Great Hungarian Plain in the
early fifth millennium represented the intensification of one aspect of local
production and the consumption of a wider range of goods through partici-
pation in regional exchange. The use of livestock as a commodity moved
it from the subsistence sphere into that of negotiable wealth. The effect on
settlement patterns was to concentrate population into larger and more
permanent social units that could handle and protect a valuable and mobile
resource.
    The trade in livestock was the main means of acquiring necessary
materials from the surrounding highland zone. These complementary ex-
changes also provided the opportunity for the distribution of other goods
based on craft skills at a village level, such as fine pottery and textiles (cf.
Jacobs 1969). The increase in the volume of traded goods thus coincided
with the greatest diversity of local pottery styles and most elaborate types of

                                        262




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
  SETTLEMENT      AND   EXCHANGE        IN   EARLY   AGRICULTURAL          EUROPE


decoration: it was advantageous to make local products sufficiently distinc-
tive to break into the flourishing regional exchange system. (This is equally
true of highland areas: it is the limestone mountains of the Biikk - without
volcanic rocks for axes etc. - that are most notable for their fine pottery.)
Such local specialisation disappeared in the following period.
    One feature that was characteristic of the whole region during the early
fifth millennium, and disappeared in the following phase, was the pro-
duction of elaborate cult items, especially figurines. These include some of
the finest examples of Neolithic art (e.g. Gimbutas 1974, figs 102-9). Ritual
activity was clearly an important feature of the social system, and its sig-
nificance in this context is considered in the next section.
    In the later fifth millennium, a somewhat different pattern can be dis-
cerned. Some measure of local devolution (reflected in the dispersion of
settlement and decline in imports) seems to have taken place within the
central area of the Plain, but this was balanced by the rising wealth of areas
nearer to the edge of the Plain (Figure 10.3). Metal objects (copper shafthole
axes and daggers, gold ornaments) now supplemented those of stone as
status items (Bognar-Kutzian 1972), and their distribution in the late fifth
millennium is clearly restricted to sites immediately adjacent to the high-
lands or within 100km along the major rivers (Tisza and Maros).9 This most
probably reflects the decline in importance of the central region as a cattle-
breeding area and supplier of a major commodity. Groups on the Plain
margins, however, were able to acquire objects such as fine flint blades (and
perhaps also the first horses) from expanding populations on the other side
of the Carpathians; and some of these objects travelled over longer distances
than the commodities used in earlier intra-Carpathian exchanges (Chapter
4).


THE SOCIAL CONTEXT OF EXCHANGE
Discussion of the archaeological evidence for fifth-millennium exchange has
emphasised the lack of discernible hierarchies, the general conditions of
insecurity, and the increasing concern with ritual. A model of this exchange
must encompass these three interdependent elements. Dalton (1977) has
characterised exchange in acephalous (egalitarian)10 societies as one aspect
of alliance. Since the largest political unit was the local descent group,
relations were horizontal - fluctuating coalitions and enmities between a
multitude of similar small groups. Alliance allowed peace and therefore
social and economic relationships. Such alliances were both initiated and
maintained by exchanges of women, valuables and trade items; relations
outside this network took the form of raiding, abduction and capture.
Power within the group consisted in control over marriageable women, both
directly and through valuables used as bridewealth and exchange items, and
through access to ritual formulae for ceremonial.


                                       263




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                             MOBILE     R E SOURCES:


   Where relations between neighbouring groups were minimal, as in the
phase of early settlement in the sixth millennium, such networks of alliance
were little developed. The intensification of economic activity in the fifth
millennium, however, was accompanied by increased competition between
groups and a strengthening of control within them. Since alliances would
have taken the form of chains linking different resource areas, rather than
clusters in a coherent block of territory, individual settlements or groups are
likely to have had potentially hostile relations with at least some of their
neighbours. Defensive aggregation was the logical settlement pattern for
an open plain. Control within the community, however, was a problem
common to all. This control may have been accomplished by ritual and
ideological means rather than by more overt expressions of power. The
elaboration of cult objects at this period indicates the existence of ritual
codes shared by all the communities of the area. Relations within groups
could thus have been regulated by ritual; those between groups by selective
alliance.
    The pivotal points in both of these sets of relationships are likely to have
been the men, especially senior males and lineage heads. The evidence for
this comes from grave associations of goods which are likely to have played
the role of primitive valuables. The late Bandkeramik cemetery at Nitra in
Slovakia (Pavuk 1972) exhibits a striking pattern in which both stone axes
and ornaments of imported Spondylus shell occur in all but one case in the
graves of older males (Figure 4.8). Some forty per cent of men over twenty
years old were buried with such items, and they occur in increasing pro-
portion to age. Moreover, the greater longevity of males makes it likely that
the age of marriage for men was high, so that powerful seniors could
monopolise the women of marriageable age, probably by control of bride-
wealth valuables. Such valuables, which would have included the main
prestige items of intergroup exchange like axes, obsidian blades, ornaments,
fine pottery and cattle, are likely to have circulated in their own economic
sphere and to have been exchanged only between eligible males (cf. Godelier
 1977, 231 n. 29). The social system of these later Neolithic groups can thus
be reconstructed as one dominated by senior men, who controlled both the
movement of goods and the formation of alliances through the exchange of
marriage partners.
    This picture of autonomous communities linked only by alliance and the
attendant circulation of valuables, with ritual as an important medium of
internal control, does not fit the pattern of the following Tiszapolgar and
Bodrogkeresztur periods. The evidence of insecurity diminishes, the volume
of traded valuables declines, and the evidence of cult activity disappears.
The large number of distinctive pottery types gives way to uniformity,
suggesting that the pottery was no longer a competitive prestige item. At the
same time, specific status-linked items appear, like shafthole axes and
 daggers of stone and copper, and ornaments of gold.11 These are less com-


                                        264




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
  SETTLEMENT      AND    EXCHANGE       IN   EARLY   AGRICULTURAL          EUROPE


mon than the stone axes and shell ornaments at Nitra (occurring only in
fifteen per cent of adult male graves at Tiszapolgar II (Figure 4.8), and argu-
ably indicate a new level of status differentiation. These items may also
occur with younger adult men, especially the daggers. The cemeteries are
larger, representing whole communities rather than household or lineage
groups, and contain greater quantities of grave goods. (The cemeteries
themselves may now have served as foci for groups of scattered settlements.)
Family authority and ritual regulation seem to be giving way to wider
structures in which a greater element of relative ranking and hierarchisation
was possible. In regional terms, wealth was being spatially concentrated,
with communities on the edge of the Plain or on main waterways becoming
conspicuously richer than those in the centre. These communities had access
for the first time to items of extra-regional trade.
    The contrast with the preceding period should not be overdrawn: an
ethnographic equivalent might be the difference between highland New
Guinea and the more advanced parts of coastal and island Melanesia - both
within the ethos of the Big Man rather than the Polynesian chief (Sahlins
1963). Nevertheless, European societies had entered the era of inequality.


CONCLUSIONS
The model presented here has important implications for the interpretation
of early agricultural societies in many parts of the Old World. Although
£atal Hiiyiik is probably unique in that the whole region seems to have been
focused on a single site, the early spread of domestic cattle is likely to have
had a similar effect in promoting regional exchange systems linking nodal
lowland areas and their hinterlands, for instance during the Halaf period in
northern Mesopotamia, and somewhat later in highland Iran. Such nodes
may also have existed in south-east Europe, for instance in Thessaly, the
Marica Basin and the lower Danube.12
   A comparable, though attenuated, process may also have occurred even
where initial agricultural occupation took place in forested areas, as in much
of central and northern Europe. In these areas there is a clear distinction
between primary settlement, usually on loess, and secondary expansion,
which occurred up to 1000 years later. By this time there would have been
a marked contrast between the already cleared and partly exhausted land-
scapes of initial settlement (where animals could be reared in quantity), and
the small clearings round newly founded sites (cf. Kruk 1980). It is thus
significant that enclosures often interpreted as cattle-pounds should appear
by late Bandkeramik times, for example in the Rhineland; and that larger,
centrally placed enclosures of a more elaborate kind should be associated
with expanding settlement in the subsequent Michelsberg period (Boelicke
1976/7). [These enclosures may have a defensive purpose: for trade and
warfare are two sides of the same coin.] Such enclosures are increasingly


                                        265




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                            MOBILE     R E SOURCES:


being recognised as characteristic elements of the late foun and third-
millennium settlement patterns in north-west Europe, as forest cover was
being opened up, and have analogies in many parts of the continent, from
Les Matignons in the Charente to Dolauer Heide in central Germany.13 They
are likely to have served as centres for the concentration of surplus animals
from the surrounding area, and their dispersal to outlying communities.
These seasonal cattle fairs would have been occasions for general trade, as
well as the observance of ritual. Such sites are of particular significance in
northern Europe (including Britain), where expansion into forested environ-
ments was a large-scale process that continued into the period when animals
were used for traction and secondary products.
   The model is equally significant for understanding the social structure of
early agricultural groups. The idea of self-sufficient groups 'budding off'
and immediately achieving independence is probably true only in large
uniform areas. In many cases there was probably an initial phase of con-
tinuing dependence and linkage. Where colonisation linked zones with com-
plementary resources, regional exchange systems could develop that were
capable of handling impressive quantities of goods. Such exchanges could
be handled by transactions between acephalous groups linked only by
alliance in conditions of general insecurity. A characteristic of such systems
was the elaboration of many kinds of competing prestige items within the
range of utilitarian artefacts. Since objects such as stone axes were used as
social tokens (for example as bridewealth), they were probably produced in
quantities beyond practical necessity. Although the importation of stone
axes no doubt raised the productivity of the Hungarian Plain, demand was
stimulated by social rather than technological factors. These societies
appear 'wealthy' to the archaeologist in the sense that many sites produce
quantities of stone tools, decorated pottery, ritual items, etc.
    As regional differences in animal-raising potential became evened out
with continuing forest clearance, the former structure, based on com-
plementary exchanges in a regional system, began to break down. Contrasts
emerged between areas whose wealth was purely agricultural and those
which had both agricultural and mineral wealth. In the latter, competition
was increasingly focused on rarer and rarer prestige goods, especially metal
objects. These usually take the form of prestige symbols (for example battle
axes and sceptres) rather than commonly used items (for example work
axes). Exchanges between these richer nuclei brought exotic materials over
longer distances than before, and greater inequalities in access to imported
materials are evident within the richer areas. These are well exemplified in
the contemporary cemeteries of Tibava and Lucky (Bognar-Kutzian 1972)
in the north-east of the Carpathian Basin (with both local stone and metal
artefacts and imported materials from across the Carpathians) and at Varna
(Todorova 1978) on the Black Sea coast of Bulgaria (with local copper and
 PAnatolian gold).14 Both areas have relatively undeveloped hinterlands


                                        266




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
  SETTLEMENT      AND   EXCHANGE        IN   EARLY    AGRICULTURAL         EUROPE


where such prestige items are not found. These societies appear 'wealthy' to
the archaeologist in the sense that a few sites produce spectacular quantities
of specifically status items. Although many of these items are weapons,
conditions appear to have been more peaceful than in the previous phase of
acephalous communities linked by alliance.
    A very similar succession seems to be behind later Neolithic develop-
ments in north-west Europe. The communities of 'middle Neolithic'
megalith-builders, with their emphasis on ritual rather than rank, have
many of the attributes of central European acephalous communities in the
period of intensive regional trade. The main difference lay in the availability
of draught animals for tillage and construction. The significance of middle
Neolithic defended enclosures has already been noted. Ritual played a
prominent part in social control, and burial took place in communal lineage
ossuaries. Explicit symbols of rank are absent, but there was an elaboration
of everyday items - decorated pottery, stone axes, flint leaf-points - for use
as valuables. The succeeding 'late Neolithic' pattern of Corded Ware and
Bell Beakers was characterised by dispersed settlement without defensive
and ritual elements, at the same time as the emergence of status-linked
weaponry - battle axes, daggers and archery equipment, and rare orna-
ments. Long-distance trade (as opposed to the regional axe trade) brought
increasingly rare materials into circulation, especially metals. This fits the
pattern of rank competition. The last area to adopt the new pattern was the
British Isles, where archaic structures (with a strongly ritual aspect) con-
tinued to be elaborated, producing sites like Avebury and Stonehenge long
after comparable forms had disappeared from continental settlement
patterns.
    The element that transformed European economies in the early Bronze
Age was the arrival (along with the horse) of woolly sheep (Chapter 6), that
first provided a cash crop and the basis for a larger scale of textile pro-
duction.15 In this way, well-populated areas with extensive grazing were able
to enrich themselves despite the lack of local metal sources. The chalklands
and sands of Wessex and Jutland were able to develop a complementary
relationship with the Irish/Welsh and Harz metal sources respectively, and
to intensify regional differences in wealth. Bronze (and textiles?) became a
'fetishised commodity' (Godelier 1977, 152) that could now be accumu-
lated, with some of the characteristics of primitive money (cf. Douglas 1958;
Dalton 1977) as opposed to primitive valuables. Competition was still
largely for goods, and not linked to ownership of land. The rapid expansion
of this extensive, land-hungry economy reached its ecological limits in the
later second millennium, when land became a scarce good. Laid-out fields
mark the beginning of formal landholding systems in which true social
stratification could occur (Bradley 1980), creating the preconditions for
interaction with the expanding Mediterranean world.16
   The contrast between European and Near Eastern developmental

                                       267




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  MOBILE       R E SOURCES:


trajectories from the fifth millennium onwards thus lay in the way such
landholding inequalities were linked to the operation of regional exchange
systems from an early date in areas like the Mesopotamian Plain. The con-
junction of increasingly large-scale exchange with competition for access to
high-yielding irrigated land caused inequalities between descent groups to
build up into a truly stratified pattern from the fourth millennium onwards.
The greater uniformity of the temperate European landscape deferred the
emergence of such rigid forms of inequality for another 3000 years.


NOTES

 1. Systematic surveys have been carried out by the Archaeological Institute of the Hun-
    garian Academy of Sciences as part of the Archaeological Topography programme in
    Co. Bekes (Bekes Megye Regeszeti Topografiaja: A Szeghalmi Jaras, 1982). This was the
    basis for further fieldwork by a joint Hungarian-British team directed by Dr I. Torma
    and the author (see following chapters).
 2. For a less schematic view of the topography, see maps in the following chapter.
 3. For a general archaeological background see Kalicz (1970) and Tringham (1971).
 4. Szakalhat and Hsza are successive phases, closely related in both material culture and
    settlement pattern. For other contemporary groups in the Great Hungarian Plain see n. 6.
 5. Many examples are well known in the archaeological literature: Hodmezovasarhely-
    Kokenydomb, H.-Gorzsa, Szegvar-Tiizkoves, Battonya-Godrosok, Szeghalom-
    Kovacshalom, Devavanya-Sarto.
 6. E.g. Szilmeg, Esztar and Biikk in the Szakalhat phase; Herpaly and Csoszhalom in the
    Tisza phase.
 7. Well exemplified in the settlement of Boldogkovaralya-Tekeres Patak (Co. Abauj-Borsod-
    Zemplen), a site of the Biikk culture which included several workshops for flint and
    obsidian, including a cache of 567 blades as well as cores and lumps of raw material
    (Kalicz and Makkay, 1977, 68-9.
 8. It is likely that many animals were partly stall-fed on leaf-fodder in the early stages of
    settlement in forested areas, as suggested for Neolithic Denmark and Switzerland on the
    basis of pollen diagrams and finds of excrement and leaf-fodder in settlements (see Guyan
    1971,151-4). If early Neolithic animals were not kept for milk, this would involve the
    fattening of individuals for slaughter; like the 'family pig* of recent times.
 9. Access to rivers for canoe transport became an important element in determining settle-
    ment patterns from this time onwards, and is especially notable in the Bodrogkeresztur
    and EBA periods.
10. Dalton's term is 'stateless': but this is too inclusive since it is not intended to describe the
    various kinds of ranked society (best attested by archaeology) that preceded the state.
11. A similar contrast may be observed at this time further north, in Czechoslovakia and
    Poland, between the earlier and later phases of the 'Lengyel culture'. The early phase has
    many local styles of painted pottery, figurines, intensive use of local resources (salt pans),
    regional exchange (obsidian) and defended or enclosed sites (Kyjovice-Tesetice, Hluboke
    Masuvsky, Krepice); the later phase has plain pottery, no figurines, long-distance contacts
    (metal, flint, pottery types) and 'rich' graves (Jordanow, Brzesc Kujawski).
12. For the west Mediterranean, Jim Lewthwaite has discussed the importance of sheep as
    traded items in the Cardial interaction area. As in central Europe, cattle seem to have
    increased in importance in the fifth and fourth millennia, and the large enclosed site of
    Passo di Corvo in Apulia - contemporary with the Tisza sites discussed above - is likely
    to have had an important role in this respect. The expansion of sheep-herding (for
    secondary products) in the third millennium is again associated with large defended sites,
    especially on limestone plateaux.


                                               268




                      This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
   SETTLEMENT         AND    EXCHANGE        IN   EARLY     AGRICULTURAL           EUROPE

13. The existence of earthworks and earth or stone monuments is sometimes taken as
    evidence of the central direction of labour: but this is to underestimate the capacity of
    egalitarian societies to mobilise labour for communal projects (L. Groube, pers. comm.).
    The existence of settlement networks with enclosed, centrally placed sites is not evidence
    for social hierarchisation, but is often characteristic of developed egalitarian societies
    with a strongly ritual focus (cf. the fifth-millennium Moravian Painted Ware sites in n. 11).
14. The importance of Varna is closely linked to its potential for coastal trade. The com-
    position of the goldwork, with its high values for platinum, is almost unparalleled in
    Europe (Hartmann 1978). Although little is known of late Chalcolithic northern
    Anatolia, this source seems very likely. The objects were manufactured locally, however
    in the Balkan Copper Age tradition.
15. In the east Mediterranean this was combined with another cash crop, the olive, to
    produce high-quality manufactured commodities for the international maritime trade.
    This was the economic basis of the Aegean palace system.
16. In sub-Saharan Africa, complex societies developed in the absence of intensive agriculture
    and its attendant landholding systems: hence the critical role played by competition for
    prestige goods at the time of the early states (Goody 1969, 25ff.). Such systems are thus
    only partly analogous to those of first-millennium Europe.




                                             269




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                         10
  The Development of Neolithic and
    Copper Age Settlement in the
       Great Hungarian Plain
                               (1983,          1984)


                  I: T H E REGIONAL SETTING
The purpose of this chapter is to describe the succession of patterns which
characterise the first four millennia of agricultural settlement in the Great
Hungarian Plain. It consists of two parts: a regional description and analysis
of the distribution of known Neolithic and Copper Age sites in Eastern
Hungary, and a more detailed consideration of the patterns of site location
as they have been revealed by recent survey work in the Koros basin.1
The aim is to relate the evidence from a planned survey programme to the
development of prehistoric settlement in the region as a whole.
   The area chosen has particular advantages for a study of this kind. The
archaeological study of the region has a continuous history from the early
nineteenth century when finds were first systematically recorded. The
cultural sequence is well known from numerous excavations, including
deeply-stratified tell settlements. The Neolithic and Copper Age cultures
have been well described in a series of monographs which contain compre-
hensive lists of known sites. The environmental setting of these distri-
butions, consisting of an alluvial plain with surrounding terraces and
uplands, has been systematically mapped and described. The large areas of
relatively uniform landscape simplify the problem of analysis and general-
Fieldwork in Hungary was designed to track changes in object-distributions and
settlement-patterns over thousands of years, from c.6000 down to 2000 BC, in
order to see how long-term social processes worked out on the ground in a nodal
area of central Europe. This long chapter, originally published in two parts,
attempts a systematic presentation of these patterns, zooming in from a regional
to a local perspective. The contrasting patterns of site-distribution in the survey
area are a unique record of fluctuating (and slowly evolving) forms of spatial
organisation over long periods of time, with a comprehensiveness and degree
of resolution unequalled anywhere.

                                        270




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


isation. The sample of sites at a regional level is thus both large and well
dated, and its geographical context is well known.
    In addition, a central part of the region has been selected for planned
investigation in the programme of the Archaeological Topography of
Hungary.2 This county-by-county survey consists not only of the systematic
recording of known finds but also of active fieldwork directed to an
assessment of the density of archaeological sites in the area. For the first time
it has been possible to appreciate the numbers of prehistoric settlements and
the regularities of their distribution at a local level. This both revolutionises
the interpretation of distribution patterns on a regional scale, and must itself
be interpreted in the wider context of regional development. A major theme
of this article is thus the interplay between different types of sample of the
spatial patterning, and the way in which each contributes to a comprehen-
sive view.
    The information from the topographic survey of Co. Bekes was the basis
for a co-operative research programme between the Ashmolean Museum of
the University of Oxford and the Archaeological Institute of the Hungarian
Academy of Sciences. This was concerned with the closer definition of the
distribution and structure of Neolithic and Copper Age settlement by an
integrated programme of surface collecting, geophysical survey and
sampling by excavations.3 The present chapter provides a background to
this programme of fieldwork, which takes the analysis offered here down
to the level of individual communities and their components. The com-
plementary study of traded materials is discussed in Chapter 12.


EASTERN HUNGARY WITHIN THE CARPATHIAN BASIN 4
The Carpathian Basin (Figures 10.1, 11.1) occupies a critical position in
European prehistory. As a major lowland area on the middle course of the
Danube, it is connected by natural routes with the Mediterranean, the
Pontic steppes and the loess-lands of central Europe. It was important both
in the initial spread of agriculture from the east Mediterranean in the sixth
millennium BC,5 and also in the transmission of elements from the steppe
belt from the third millennium onwards. Its largely enclosed character,
ringed on all sides by mountains rising to over 1000m, nevertheless made it
the focus of a distinctive series of cultures which had a continuing influence
on surrounding areas.
   The Basin itself is a downfaulted median mass formed during the Tertiary
mountain-building phase that produced the Alps and the Carpathians.6 Its
sinking surface has been covered by the erosion products of the surrounding
uplands. During the Miocene and Pliocene it was occupied by the sea, and
marine limestones were deposited. These, mantled during the Pleistocene by
loess, form the predominant landscape in the area to the west of the Danube
- the historical Pannonia. The eastern part, affected by continuing tectonic

                                        271




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
THE   DEVELOPMENT        OF   NEOLITHIC       AND   COPPER      AGE    SETTLEMENT




11.1 The Carpathian Basin, showing the areas covered by detailed maps.
Hatched area: eastern Hungary (regional distribution maps, Figs 11.3-4, 11.8-9);
rectangular outlined area: the Koros-Berettyo region (Figs 11.10, 11.12-13, 11.16);
rectangular filled area: the Szeghalom survey (Figs 11.18-27) [from Sherratt 1984a].

depression, has been filled by alluvial deposits of various kinds to produce
a level plain with only minor changes in relief - the Great Hungarian Plain
(Nagy Alfold).
   This contrast is accentuated by a climatic difference, the eastern part
having the low rainfall and high evaporation characteristic of the Pontic
steppe belt further east. While the western part forms a southern projection
of the central European loess region, the eastern part has an individual
character resulting from the combination of a concentration of surface
water from the surrounding mountains with a yearly precipitation in the
Plain of less than 600mm. The slow drainage from its level surface has
created a mosaic of marshy floodplains and dry interfluves, in which minor
differences in relief have a marked effect in creating suitable conditions for
early settlement.
   The alluvial plain, covering an area of 100,000km2, is surrounded first
by a narrow terrace of marine limestones, and then by the ring of fold
mountains, rich in the hard stone and metal ores sought by early man.
The upland and lowland areas thus formed a complementary unity in their
respective mineral and agricultural resources.
   In cultural terms, the western part of the Carpathian Basin has always
had strong links via Moravia with the central European loess area, begin-

                                        272




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


TISZAPOLGAR                                   HATVAN




11.2 The contrasting distribution of settlement in north-east Hungary in the Early
Copper Age (Tiszapolgar culture) and Early Bronze Age (Hatvan culture).
Compiled from Bognar-Kutzian (1972) and Kalicz (1968).

ning with the formation there of the Neolithic Bandkeramik complex which
spread throughout central Europe. This pattern may also be discerned in the
later Neolithic and Copper Age Lengyel culture, and was still evident in
the Bronze Age. The eastern part of the Carpathian Basin, lacking an easy
northern outlet, followed a rather different course, with more evident
southern links. It formed the northern margin of early Neolithic cultures of
Balkan/Near Eastern character, and later in the Neolithic it again marked
the furthest extension of settlement types including tells. It was increasingly
integrated within the central European sphere, however, first by the
strengthening of links with the Ukraine and southern Poland across the
north-eastern Carpathians and secondly by the infilling of the sandy area
between the Tisza and the Danube which allowed the first cultural unifi-
cation of the Carpathian Basin in the Baden period.
   From this time onwards the eastern part of the Carpathian Basin began
to play a major innovating role in central European prehistory. The focus
of settlement shifted from the central areas of the Plain to the fringes of
surrounding uplands (Figure 11.2). This marks the beginning of a new
pattern characteristic of the Bronze Age, in which a powerful centre of
political and cultural development emerged in the north-eastern part of the
Carpathian Basin. The advanced social organisation and metallurgical skills
associated with the rise of the Otomani culture had a major impact on
surrounding regions.

                                        273




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 THE   DEVELOPMENT      OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER     AGE    SETTLEMENT


T H E EVOLUTION OF THE EAST HUNGARIAN LANDSCAPE
Geomorphology
The surface of the Great Hungarian Plain took its present shape within the
Quaternary epoch. Infilling by rivers during the Pleistocene period con-
tributed up to 300m of alluvial deposit. This accumulation created the basic
units of relief (Figure 11.3), which relate to the main bodies of water
entering the region (Pecsi 1970). The largest of these was the Danube, which
in the Pleistocene flowed south-westwards in a number of braided channels
to create a major fan now lying between the present courses of the Danube
and Tisza. From the north-east, the waters from the catchment now drained
by the Tisza, Szamos and their northern tributaries converged to form
another fan in the area now known as the Nyirseg.7 These fans lie at 150-
120m above sea-level, having been extensively mantled by blown sand
during the closing phases of the Pleistocene and the early Holocene. The
Maros, draining southern Transylvania and entering the Plain from the
south-east, also built up a large loess-covered fan at 110-90m. A row of
piedmont fans produced by smaller rivers along the edge of the Tertiary
terrace completes the picture. Together, all these fans enclose a central tri-
angular depression - the Koros region - forming a water and sediment basin
some 5-10m below the level of the surrounding Plain, within which loessic
sediments were redeposited.
   At the beginning of the Holocene, this area received water from all the
surrounding territories (Papp 1969), the greatest volume being supplied by
the palaeo-Szamos + Tisza, which flowed along the southern margin of the
Nyirseg in a valley now occupied by a small creek called the fir. This major
river, flowing across the area in a south-westerly direction, built up a sub-
stantial series of raised beds at about 85m, with backswamps on either side.
Its frequently changing course created a tangle of old channels outlined
by levees, coalescing to form a discontinuous flat-topped ridge or terrace
known as the Devavanya Plain.
   At the end of the pre-boreal phase, this situation was abruptly altered.
Sinkage of the northern margin of the Plain diverted the Tisza and Szamos
across the northern part of the Nyirseg through the chain of depressions
now marked by the Szatmar basin and the Retkoz. This water then found
its way southwards, at first through the Hortobagy and then along the
present valley of the upper Tisza, separating the outlier known as Great
Cumania (Nagykunsdg) from the main body of the north Alfold fans. At
about the same time the Maros also moved southwards to occupy its present
course. These two diversions reduced the hydrographic importance of the
Koros region and interrupted the process of infilling. The rivers draining
into it were now smaller, and the sediments which continued to accumulate
there became generally finer. The Devavanya Plain was left in a fossilised
form, as the Berettyo and Rapid Koros spread respectively into the back-


                                       274




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    IN   THE   GREAT   HUNGARIAN         PLAIN




11.3 The development of the landscape of eastern Hungary during the Quaternary
(after Pecsi and others).
swamps on either side, where their slow drainage created the bog-like
conditions of the Great (Nagy-) and the Little (Kis-) Sarret (literally 'bog-
meadow'). Water from the Tisza and Szamos still occasionally found its way
into this region as overspill in times of flood, following both the fir valley
and the Hortobagy.
   The floods of the Tisza and its tributaries occur in two peaks, one in early
spring and a larger one in early summer, the former caused by snowmelt and
the latter by rainfall. At these times the water occupied large parts of the
Koros area, depositing a black organic meadow-clay that contrasts with the
yellow loessic deposits of the ridges. The river-courses themselves were in
any case highly unstable, with extensive meanders and ox-bow lakes reflect-
ing frequent changes of course. Regulation of the Tisza during the nine-
teenth century reduced its length by approximately one third, and all the
rivers of the Plain are now constrained by massive dykes. This canalisation,
by restricting the flood areas and altering the water-table, had extensive
secondary effects on sedimentation and soil-formation.


                                       275




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 THE   DEVELOPMENT      OF   NEOLITHIC       AND   COPPER      AGE    SETTLEMENT



       EASTERN HUNGARY
        LANDSCAPE TYPES




11.4 The geomorphic landscape units of eastern Hungary and their associated soils.

Soils and     vegetation
The soils of eastern Hungary are closely related to the relief (Figure 11.4).
The whole of the lowland area is dominated by processes producing steppe
soils (Somogyi 1964); only where the hills on the edge of the Plain rise to
over 200m, and in the north-eastern area where there is an increase in rain-
fall and summer moisture, do forest soils occur. Skeletal sandy soils occur
on the Danube fan and the Nyirseg. Over the rest of the region, varieties of
chernozem are the rule except where modified by groundwater conditions.
There is a graduated sequence from true chernozem on the loess-covered
fans to the alluvial and marsh soils of the floodplains. In between lie
meadow chernozems, and the saline soils - solonetz and solonchak - that
occur under a steppe climate where salt-charged groundwater evaporates at
the surface. These soils are particularly important since they occupy a
position intermediate between the dry soils of the interfluves and those of
the low floodplain, where inundation inhibited cultivation and permanent
settlement.


                                       276




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN         PLAIN




11.5 Initial spread of farming into the Carpathian Basin in the Early Neolithic,
showing the fwestern stream' (Starcevo) and the 'eastern stream' (Kdrds-Cri§).
    Most of the Great Hungarian Plain is covered by vegetation classified as
forest steppe. Considerable areas, notably on the chernozem-covered inter-
fluves, are unlikely to have undergone extensive afforestation during the
Holocene. Riparian forests, however, are likely to have been characteristic
of the floodplain margins and wet depressions. The extent of forest cover on
the lower terrace now characterised by solonetz soils is problematic, but
a mosaic of light forest and more open areas is most likely.
    The landscape of the Great Hungarian Plain, therefore, as it presented
itself to early settlers, offered a range of environments each with its attend-
ant problems, from aridity to inundation. This fine balance of advantage
made the choice of settlement-location a critical one, and the distribution of
prehistoric sites is thus an important source of information on the ecological
requirements of early farmers.


T H E CULTURAL SUCCESSION AND THE STRUCTURE
OF REGIONAL CONTACTS
The well-investigated succession of Neolithic and Copper Age cultures and
the growing number of radiocarbon dates provide a firm framework for the
interpretation of the settlement-evidence. The classification of these groups
will be briefly reviewed in this section before presenting the details of their
distributions.

                                        277




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 T H E   D E V E L O P M E N T   OF   N E O L I T H I C   A N D   C O P P E R     A G E   S E T T L E M E N T


                                                                                 14 C         CONTEMPORARY
                                                                                DATES           GROUPS




                                                                                              KARANOVO I * H
                                                                                             CR\f




5300             PR0T0-
                 vin£A                                                                        VESELINOVO
                                                                                              DUDE^TL
                                                                                              kour1lo
5100
                                                                                              My LBK
                                                                            4 2 0 0 be
5000                       SZAKAL-        SZAMOS/         TISZADOB/
                            HAT            ESZTAR           BOKK                              KALOJANOVETS
                           ( • SZJLMEG)                                                       vXdastra

4800     -
                                                                                              UU LBK
                VINCA-                                                      4 0 0 0 bc
                PLODNIK
                   c        TISZA         HERPALY         C50SZ-
                                                                                              MARICA.50IAN
                                                                                              GBADESHNITSA
                                                           HALOM                              PRECUCUTENI
                                                                                              Stichband K.
                                                                                              HinkMlstein
4400                                                                                          Ekrlier Ungyel
                                                                            3 5 0 0 bc

                                      PROTOTISZAPOLGAR.
                                                                                              GUMELNITSA
                                      TISZAPOLGAK                                             SALCUTSA
                                                                                              CUCUTEN1
                                                                                              Roessen
                                                                                              Latmr UngyeL
4000     -




              THE NEOLITHIC AND EARLY COPPER AGE
                CHRONOLOGY OF EASTERN HUNGARY
11.6 The cultural succession in eastern Hungary; showing contemporary groups in
the Balkans and west-central Europe.


The Neolithic           period
The earliest agricultural communities in eastern Hungary (Figure 11.5)
belong to the Koros culture (= Romanian Cris culture), long recognised as
part of the Balkan early Neolithic complex (Kutzian 1944). Its sites occur in
the southern part of the Plain and are characterised by plentiful pinched and
rusticated pottery with chaff tempering. Radiocarbon dates take it back to
the early sixth millennium BC (Figure 11.6). The origins of this culture have

                                                   278




                        This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


usually been sought in the Starcevo culture of Jugoslavia, but since material
closely resembling the Koros assemblage occurs as far east as Moldavia, on
the border of the USSR, a primary dispersal centre in Transylvania seems
more probable. The recent discovery here of a pre-Kdrds phase of painted
pottery with strong analogies in northern Bulgaria (Comsa 1974) indicates
the possibility of an eastern stream of Neolithic population, parallel to that
of Starcevo further west, which would have provided the basis for such a
Koros dispersal. In this case, the eastern part of the Carpathian Basin would
have been the meeting point for two streams of incoming Neolithic popu-
lation as shown in Figure 11.5. True Starcevo sites occur in the southern part
of western Hungary, where they are represented by recent finds at Lanycsok-
and Becsehely (Kalicz 1980).
   A further element in this picture is the recently-defined Szatmar group in
the north-east part of the Carpathian Basin with a material culture basically
similar to that of Koros (Kalicz and Makkay 1977). It can plausibly be
interpreted as a further movement from Transylvania around the northern
margin of the Bihor Mountains. Far fewer sites are known than for Koros,
and it probably arrived somewhat later (Figure 11.5).
   Around 5300 BC major changes took place within the Carpathian Basin.
Eastern Hungary became the focus of a new group centred in the Great
Hungarian Plain, while western Hungary was occupied for the first time
by agricultural groups expanding from the former Starcevo area. These
changes must be seen as part of a wider reorganisation throughout south-
east Europe, reflected in new cultural groupings such as Vinca and
Veselinovo. The south part of the Carpathian Basin formed part of the zone
characterised by dark, burnished pottery ornamented by channelling; in the
south-east (from Serbia along the Maros to Transylvania) it is represented
by the Vinca culture, and in the south-west (along the Sava and Drava) by
the related Sopot group. To the north of this zone, incised, linear ornament
was characteristic - the so-called LBK or Linienbandkeramik - which divides
into two regional groups. Within the previously occupied area of the Great
Hungarian Plain, the group known as AVK (Alfoldi Vonaldiszes Keramia =
Alfold Linear Pottery) developed from local Koros and Szatmar populations
under strong Vinca influence (Kalicz and Makkay 1977). In the hitherto un-
occupied area west of the Danube a new group, the west Hungarian branch
of pan-European LBK, made its appearance as the first stage in a major
movement of agricultural expansion.
   These two groups in the east and west of the Carpathian Basin thus
emerged in parallel, with a common background in the earlier agricultural
communities of the Balkans. Although imports demonstrate a continuing
contact between them, they continued on independent lines of development.
In terms of European prehistory, the western group was the more significant:
for it was this group that carried agriculture into Moravia and northwards
beyond the Carpathians to the whole of the central European loess belt from

                                       279




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 THE   DEVELOPMENT        OF   NEOLITHIC       AND   COPPER      AGE    SETTLEMENT


France to the Ukraine. Expansion in eastern Hungary took place along the
valleys reaching up into the mountain foreland to produce important
peripheral groups in the karstic landscapes of north-east Hungary and
Slovakia, but major expansion was blocked. While western Hungary main-
tained an important role as intermediary between the Balkans and central
Europe, eastern Hungary continued an introverted development in which
Balkan elements became increasingly pronounced.
   The changes marked by the appearance of AVK and earliest western
Bandkeramik seem to have been relatively rapid (Figure 11.6), for by c.5200
BC the cultural uniformity of eastern Hungary had given way to a series
of regional pottery styles (Bognar-Kutzian 1966; Kalicz and Makkay 1977)
with further Vinca influence in the south and a lively focus of trade and
stylistic innovation in the north. This pattern was more stable, lasting for
some 300 to 400 years. On the lower and middle Tisza and along the Koros,
the Szakalhat group is distinguished by pottery ornamented with paint
outlined by incised decoration. To the north of this the Esztar group
occupied a wide territory on the Nyirseg, Szamos and upper Berettyo,
in which pottery with dark painted ornament was used. Various smaller
groups emerged on the fringes of the northern mountains: Szilmeg in the
Biikk foothills, Tiszadob in the Sajo valley, and Biikk in the mountains
themselves, with exceptionally fine incised and occasionally painted pottery.
All these groups are distinguished by their characteristic finewares, which
occur in smaller quantities as imports in each others' areas. This small-scale
cultural distinctiveness is probably related to a degree of economic differ-
entiation, and the trade between mountain and plain in obsidian and other
hard stones was greatly expanded. Biikk sherds and obsidian from the Tokaj
and neighbouring sources occur on Vinca sites in Serbia and southern
Transylvania, a distance of 400km.
   Around 4800 BC another horizon of stylistic cultural change can be
observed in many parts of the Balkans, for instance in the transition from
Vinca-Tordos to Vinca-Plocnik. At this time the Great Hungarian Plain saw
the emergence of Late Neolithic groups represented by the Tisza and
Herpaly-Csoszhalom groups (Bognar-Kutzian 1966). Decorated Tisza fine
pottery, with its intricate incised, textile-like patterns is characteristic of the
southern area and shows continuity from the Szakalhat group. The northern
part of the Plain - with the exception of the mountain fringes, where settle-
ment was abandoned - was occupied by the Herpaly-Csoszhalom group,
with painted finewares. This replaced the multitude of smaller groups on
the northern edge of the Plain, and is found in the former Esztar area.
Small differences in the colour-combinations distinguish Herpaly from
Csoszhalom, but together they differ from Tisza not only in their pottery
but also in their settlement-pattern and in the occurrence of small numbers
of simple copper objects, for instance at Herpaly. Since both these groups
shared a common set of domestic pottery, the sharp frontier between Tisza


                                         280




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


and Herpaly finewares may indicate a genuine social boundary that is
particularly interesting because of the differences in settlement-types, in
which true tells are confined to the north and east. These groups were long-
lived, persisting for perhaps a 300 to 400 year span. During this period the
elaborately-decorated finewares declined, with the final phase of Tisza being
distinguished as the Gorzsa group.

The Copper Age
A new pattern marks the beginning of the Copper Age8 around 4400 BC,
when a much more uniform culture developed over eastern Hungary and
neighbouring parts of Transylvania (Bognar-Kutzian 1972). This was the
Tiszapolgar culture, which has a new range of shapes (especially pedestalled
forms with decorative lugs), but lacks the element of painted decoration.
The larger cemeteries of this period provide evidence of the first heavy
copper objects and also goldwork. These indicate the rising wealth of areas
on the edge of the Plain, with access both to the highland metal sources and
to trade routes, which for the first time crossed the Carpathians to bring
commodities such as blades of Ukrainian flint into circulation. This new,
outward-looking pattern reduced the importance of the hitherto wealthy
central area.
   By 4000 BC this pattern may be perceived with even greater clarity in the
succeeding Bodrogkeresztur culture (Patay 1974). The scale of copper pro-
duction was greatly expanded, with copper axes occurring in graves up to
200km from the copper sources. This metalwork and even pottery occur
north of the Carpathians in Little Poland, while cultural mixing with late
Salcutsa groups on the Lower Danube testifies to the increased importance
of links in this direction also (Roman 1971).
   The most radical break in the prehistory of this region occurred around
3500 BC. The appearance of the Baden culture, with its roots in the Lengyel
tradition of western Hungary and Czechoslovakia, marks the integration
of eastern Hungary into a wider grouping including the whole of the
Carpathian Basin (Banner 1956). The pottery assemblage was transformed
by a new range of types including pails, jugs and cups that testify to funda-
mental changes in eating habits, with an increased importance of liquids.
This occurs over a wide area of south-east and central Europe. The first
evidence for the cart, and probably also the plough, appears at this time
(Chapter 6).
   Another important development of this period was the appearance of
large numbers of tumuli (some up to 70m in diameter and 10m high) con-
taining burials covered by planks and hides, with the body in a characteristic
supine position, with knees drawn up, and the skull painted with stripes of
red ochre. They have few grave-goods, but occasionally ear- [or hair-] rings
of silver. Such burials have close analogies on the Pontic steppes, and other
examples are known from the Lower Danube. They have plausibly been in

                                       281




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 THE   DEVELOPMENT            OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER     AGE     SETTLEMENT



 NEOLITHIC                   &     COPPER             AGE          POTTERY

                                                         BODROGKERESZTUR
                                                           C . 3 9 0 0 - 3 5 0 0 BC.



                                                              TISZAPOLGAR

                                                            C . 4 4 0 0 - 3 9 0 0 BC.



                                                                   TISZA
                                                S§|         c . 4 8 0 0 - 4 4 0 0 BC.

                                                              SZAKALHAT
                                                            c. 51OO - 4 8 0 0 BC.


                                                                    A.V.K
                                                            c. 5 3 0 0 - 5 1 0 0 BC.


           o                                                      KOROS
          - 0 o.
                                                            c. 6 0 0 0 - 53OO BC.
               0 -o/

11.7 Selected pottery types characteristic of the main phases of the Neolithic and
Copper Ages in eastern Hungary.
terpreted as evidence for an intrusive steppe population, maintaining a
cultural distinctiveness alongside native groups (Ecsedy 1979).

The Early Bronze Age
By 2800 BC these populations had fused to form the Early Bronze Age
groups of this area, broadly divided between a north-eastern (Nyirseg)
group and a central (Mako) group (Kalicz 1968). Innovations at this time
include improved techniques of copperworking such as the two-piece mould
and the new types it made possible, and also the advent of horse-breeding
on a large scale. Trade in metal items, and also warfare increased in signifi-
cance, reaching their full development in the Nagyrev, Hatvan, Otomani
and Perjamos cultures. These occupy discrete territories, the first on the


                                             282




                       This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


Danube and middle Tisza, the second and third in northern and north-
eastern Hungary, and the last on the Maros. These are more than simply
ceramic styles, and the burial evidence indicates that they may be con-
sciously distinguished cultural groups (O'Shea 1978). Sites of this period
show significant new features such as large cemeteries with several hundred
graves (especially in the south, on the major rivers at the Maros confluence)
and the reappearance of tell sites, which now had a fortified character. These
are especially common on the margins of the Basin (though flat sites fortified
with ring ditches are known from the Koros region). The Otomani culture
in particular shows a new level of centralisation, and its sites have produced
evidence of bronze- and gold-working, early ironwork, chariotry and stone-
built fortifications (Vladar 1973).


T H E REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF SETTLEMENT
The agricultural occupation of eastern Hungary in the periods described in
the preceding section may be followed in the series of distribution maps
presented in Sherratt (1983b).9 What is essential to such comparisons,
however, is an appreciation of how this archaeological record has been built
up and how it must be supplemented by future research. The characteristics
of this record will therefore be briefly reviewed before discussion of the
distributions.

History of research
Hungary has a long tradition of archaeological research, with the oldest
national museum in Europe, founded in 1802. As well as this national focus,
local museums and amateur societies have been active from the later nine-
teenth century onwards. By the time of the International Congress of Pre-
historic Anthropology and Archaeology in Budapest in 1876, organised by
Floris Romer (1878), commissions with local correspondents were investi-
gating the problems of obsidian distribution, tell settlements, tumuli and
hillforts. County archaeological maps were exhibited at the Congress. The
Tisza/Koros region was well represented, with reports on excavations at the
Bronze Age tell of Nagyrev and finds from the important Tisza culture sites
of Szegvar-Tiizkoves and Bekesszentandras (Romer 1878). Before the First
World War excavations had taken place at the eponymous sites of Lengyel
(1880s), Tiszapolgar (1900s) and the crucial Bronze Age tell at Toszeg
(1906-13).
   Investigations in the Interwar years clarified the Neolithic cultural
succession (Tompa 1929; 1937) and saw extensive regional fieldwork -
notably by Janos Banner (1942) in the Szeged-Hodmezovasarhely area and
by Jeno Hillebrand (1937) in the Biikk mountains. Kutzian summarised the
Koros culture, and since the Second World War further monographs in the
series Archaeologia Hungarica have described the assemblages and known

                                       283




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
T H E   D E V E L O P M E N T   OF   N E O L I T H I C   AND   C O P P E R   AGE       S E T T L E M E N T



        EASTERN HUNGARY
  INTENSITY OF RESEARCH




                                                                                   n* to ton- sfuere *ith one or
                                                                                   more Neolithic/Copper   Aft
                                                                                   findspots



                                                                                   Areas of intensive   research

                                                                                   Btse-mop outlines show
                                                                                   boundaries cflgndeope types,
                                                                                   modified from Pksi and others




11.8 The intensity of field research in eastern Hungary before the commencement
of the Archaeological Topography of Hungary, showing the distribution of
reported Neolithic and Copper Agefinds,and individual surveys or projects.
   Key: (1) Banner - Hodmezovasarhely; (2) Kalicz - Tiszazug; (3) Banner -
   Szarvas; (4) Bereczky - Devavanya; (5) Makkay - Derecske; (6) Korek,
   Gazdapusztai and Mesterhdzy - Hortobagy; (7) Kalicz - Tarnabod; (8) Bognar-
   Kutzian - Polgar; (9) Kalicz - Nyiregyhaza.

findspots of the Koros, AVK, Tiszapolgar, Baden and EBA cultures (Kalicz
and Makkay 1977; Bognar-Kutzian 1972; Banner 1956; Kalicz 1968), while
Bodrogkeresztur has been summarised in a major article (Patay 1974). Only
the Tisza-Herpaly-Csoszhalom complex remains without monographic
treatment. Excavations on tell settlements have taken place at Herpaly,
Tape-Lebo, Szegvar-Tiizkoves, Battonya-Parazstanya and Veszto Magor, as
well as the settlement and cemetery at Aszod and at many Koros sites.10
   At the same time regional surveys have been conducted, first by Kalicz
in the Tiszazug (1957), by Bognar-Kutzian in connection with the major
excavation of the Tiszapolgar cemetery (Bognar-Kutzian 1963), and by
Makkay near Derecske (Makkay 1957). These pioneer projects have led to

                                                  284




                       This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


a current interest in the discovery and registration of sites, fuelled by the
need to identify priorities in rescue work on the part of local institutions in
many areas. This work has been organised and given central direction by the
Hungarian Academy in the programme of the Archaeological Topography
of Hungary (Magyarorszdg Regeszeti Topografiaja), a county-by-county
survey of finds, sites, and monuments. Although the initial volumes have
been concerned with western Hungary (Co. Veszprem, Co. Komarom), a
major programme on the northern part of Co. Bekes (covering the Koros
area from the Romanian border to Szarvas) is nearing completion (e.g.
Ecsedy et al. 1982). This work is unique in its scale and sustained in-
tensity, and has multiplied the number of known prehistoric sites by a factor
of ten.
   These planned surveys represent a new threshold in the discovery of pre-
historic settlement-patterns which complements the overall picture built up
by chance finds and selective recording. They can be used to calibrate exist-
ing maps by demonstrating the arbitrary character of existing records and
indicating the real nature of changes in the number, character and location
of sites. But they must also be interpreted in the light of conclusions gained
from wider studies about the role and significance of the areas in question
within the region as a whole. Both levels of analysis are needed to make
sense of the information.
   On a practical point, it is difficult (and misleading) to mix the two kinds
of information on a single small-scale map. It is better to realise that
traditional distribution-maps indicate only the occurrence of sites in a given
area, but not their relative density: this can only be assessed from full survey
data.11 For this reason, findspots from the recent Topographic Survey have
not been plotted on the small-scale regional maps. Figure 11.8 shows a first
attempt to map the intensity of research which underlies the following
distributions. [Maps of Koros, AVK, Tiszapolgar, Bodrogkeresztur and
Baden distributions are not reproduced here.]

The Koros and Szatmdr cultures
The first Neolithic communities show a strongly constrained distribution
with a riverine emphasis and little or no expansion into the side valleys or
onto the fans. The Koros and Szatmar distributions are very similar in this
respect, and their complementary character, with a boundary on the middle
Tisza, is consistent with a convergence along the Tisza from south and north
respectively. Although the apparent clusters of settlement are largely related
to the intensity of fieldwork (e.g. around Hodmezovasarhely and in the
Tiszazug), there appears to be a real difference between the density of Koros
sites and those of Szatmar. The very high density of Koros sites is re-
markable, and contrasts in this respect also with Starcevo (Kalicz 1980).
Where the floodplain is narrow, the sites show a linear arrangement on
bluffs overlooking the valley; where the floodplain is broader they occur


                                       285 -




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 THE   DEVELOPMENT      OF   NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER      AGE    SETTLEMENT


on the small islands of higher ground within it. In places (as around
Hodmezovasarhely) the pattern of sites may relate to an earlier course of the
Tisza. The only exception to the general riverine distribution is the group of
sites on the Maros fan around Oroshaza, which may indicate more ex-
tensive penetration of this region. By comparison with the following period,
there is a notable absence of sites on the broad, flat floodplains of the
Hortobagy and the middle Tisza.
   Excavated evidence of the Koros economy demonstrates a substantial
seasonal contribution from fishing, shellfish-gathering and fowling, as well
as the cultivation of grain and the keeping of domestic livestock, mainly
sheep (Bokonyi 1974). Clay weights, probably net-sinkers, are common
finds.

The Alfold Linear Pottery (AVK) culture
This period was probably shorter than the others considered here, and
is contemporary with the earliest phases of the Vinca culture (sites not
known), which extended up to the Maros confluence. The basic pattern re-
sembles that of Koros, with some additional movement along the side-
valleys up into the Jaszsag and along the Sajo, with an initial penetration
into the foothills. (It is likely that some of the sites of the Tiszadob group
shown in the following map began before the end of this period.) A com-
plementary expansion occurred on the floodplain to the north of the middle
Tisza, and in the now highly saline lands of the Hortobagy. The distribution
was still predominantly riverine, with no settlement of the northern fan on
the Hajdusag and Nyirseg.
   The economy is less well known, but there are indications that there was
less reliance on wild resources and a greater emphasis on cattle and perhaps
cereals. Net-sinkers no longer occur.

Szakdlhat and its contemporaries (Figure 11.9)
This period saw a general expansion in the north, encompassing the Jaszsag,
the northern foothills and limestone mountains, and the Nyirseg with its
surrounding floodplains - the upper Tisza depressions and the upper
Berettyo. Some expansion is also observable in the south, on the east bank
of the Tisza (e.g. around Szentes) and lower Koros, and also around the
marshy depressions on the Maros fan around Battonya. Many tell sites were
founded in this period, e.g. Veszto Magor. There was no penetration of the
Danube-Tisza interfluve, and the sites in the Hortobagy appear to have been
abandoned.
   The emergence of the Nyirseg and its surrounding areas created a north-
eastern focus marked by Esztar pottery. The lower foothills of the Biikk
mountains are picked out by the curious small concentration of the Szilmeg
group, extending to the opposite bank of the Tisza. The mountains them-
selves, and the adjacent valleys of the Sajo and the Hernad, were the focus

                                        286




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN        PLAIN




11.9 Mapping at the scale of cultural distributions: Late Neolithic (late sixth/early
fifth millennia BC) findspots of Szakalhat, Szilmeg, Biikk and Esztdr material (data
from Kalicz and Makkay 1977); findspots of contemporary Zseliz and Vinca
material not shown. (For distributions of material from other periods plotted at
this scale, but not reproduced here, see Sherratt 1983b.)

of the distinctive Tiszadob and the Biikk groups, which are also represented
on the Retkoz and the northern Nyirseg.
   Biikk sites (both on terraces and in the plentiful caves) occur in the
greatest number in the limestone mountains of the Biikk itself and the North
Borsod Karst. The absence of sites in the acid Matra mountains is con-
spicuous. They are, however, frequent in the foothills of the Cserehat and
around the fringes of the volcanic mountains of the Zemplen range, where
raw materials are likely to have been the motive for settlement. The presence
of sites in the deep, well-watered upland valleys of the northern karstic
mountains indicates an emphasis other than cereal-growing. Animal
remains from the Domica cave across the border in Slovakia indicate a high
proportion of hunted species, with predominance of sheep among the
domestic stock. Within the cave, lines of postholes outline rectangular pens

                                        287




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 THE   DEVELOPMENT      OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER     AGE     SETTLEMENT


some three by four metres, while smaller camp-sites occur nearby next to
springs. These indicate the importance of animal-keeping, perhaps on a
transhumant basis, though carbonised cereals and grinders indicate the
consumption of grain. The village-like open sites at lower altitudes had an
economy similar to that of sites in the Plain, based on cattle-keeping
(Lichardus 1974).
   An important element in the economy of the region was trade, both in
raw materials and manufactured products.12 Although the limestone areas
themselves have no hard rocks, the andesites and rhyolites of the Biikk
foothills and the Zemplen mountains, along with the obsidian deposits of
the latter (especially around Erdohorvati) were both exploited and widely
traded. Hoards of blades in local siliceous rock are known from Barca and
Boldogkovaralja - the latter apparently an obsidian workshop also - and
there is a group of nine axes from Domica (Kalicz and Makkay 1977;
Lichardus 1974; see Figure 12.10). Biikk groups were active both in the
direct exploitation of these resources and as middlemen in their distribution
both northwards and southwards. Another traded commodity was pottery
- apparently manufactured from terra rossa in the caves themselves. This
was superbly decorated with fine parallel lines and was traded over a similar
area as obsidian, as far as Serbia, Transylvania and southern Poland.
The economy of these sites cannot be understood in terms of local self-
sufficiency.
   In the Plain to the south the prosperity of this period is emphasised both
by the number and size of sites and by their evident ability to acquire
highland products and materials. The emphasis on cattle has prompted
speculation that this formed an important traded commodity in its own
right (Chapter 10).

Tisza-Herpdly-Csoszhalom
The sites of this period have not been systematically mapped, but from the
known distribution a great similarity to that of the preceding groups may be
inferred, the main difference being the lack of sites in the northern mountain
fringe. Continuity in the main cultural boundary, from Szakalhat/Esztar to
Tisza/Herpaly-Csoszhalom is very striking, with a proliferation of sites in
the upper Berettyo region, which continued as a major focus of settlement.
Large numbers of tell sites (including Herpaly itself: Korek and Patay 1956)
are known from this area. The tell at Csoszhalom near Polgar (Bognar-
Kutzian 1958) can be seen as part of the northern wing of this group on the
other side of the Nyirseg.
   In the Tisza province further south two types of settlement are known
(Kalicz 1965): a zone of 'pit settlements' on the middle Tisza and a zone
on the Lower Tisza and Koros where very large aggregated sites up to a
kilometre across are common.13 Such sites are usually near to important
river links, and may reflect the advantages of congregation at nodal points

                                       288




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN        PLAIN


of trade. (This seems to be the case in the Vinca area, as at Vinca itself.) The
smaller size of Herpaly tells may thus reflect a different organisation of
trading activity in a zone with more immediate access to highland resources.
   The lowland economy continued to be dominated by cattle-raising,
with high proportions of large animals of aurochs size on sites of the
Herpaly-Csoszhalom group (Bokonyi 1974). Lowland sites continued
to import large quantities of highland materials. The lack of sites in the
mountains appears to indicate that control of these resources now lay with
adjacent lowland groups, and that the regional economy no longer sup-
ported a fringe of specialised middleman-trading combined with herding.
Examples of spectacular long-distance trading in pottery or obsidian are less
frequent.

The Tiszapolgar culture
The map of Tiszapolgar settlement shows a pattern (emphasised by the loss
of the mountain fringe) that was still essentially riverine. The territory on
and around the Nyirseg remained the main area of interest outside the river
valleys. Contemporary Lengyel groups again occupied the north-west of the
area (sites not shown) on the upper Galga and Zagyva, forming a link
westwards from the Jaszsag. One or two Tiszapolgar sites are known from
the eastern fringes of the Danube-Tisza Interfluve, but there was no real
penetration of this area. The Koros-Berettyo area was well populated, while
Makkay's survey of the Derecske region (1957) indicated a large number
of sites between the upper Berettyo and the Nyirseg. The Polgar area is
similarly highlighted by Bognar-Kutzian's work, while the Tiszazug again
shows the plentiful sites from Kalicz' survey. Two areas of settlement, indi-
cating the possibility of further sites, are picked out on the Maros fan,
around Oroshaza and Battonya.
    Although they have not been differentiated on the map, large cemetery
sites are known. The Tiszapolgar-Basatanya cemetery contained over sixty
graves of this period and was not directly associated with an adjacent
settlement (Bognar-Kutzian 1963). Such cemeteries seem to have had a dis-
tinctive role in the settlement pattern, perhaps serving as the common focus
for several small hamlets.
    Subsistence evidence shows a continuing emphasis on cattle, though now
without the large, aurochs-sized specimens that have been interpreted as
evidence of hunting and local domestication. A new traded commodity,
however, was the heavy copper axe, mostly in the form of simple axe-
hammers. The distribution of these finds (Schubert 1965) is notably
restricted to the edge of the Plain, mostly outside Hungary: one group
occurs in the north-east, for instance as grave-goods at Lucky and Tibava
in Slovakia, another group is at the foot of the Rezhegyseg (Copper
mountains) along the headwaters of the Berettyo in Romania, and a third
lies in the portion of the Plain in northern Jugoslavia (Bognar-Kutzian

                                        289




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER     AGE     SETTLEMENT


1972). The central area of the Plain, although well populated, was not rich
in metal goods.

Bodrogkeresztur
The map of this period is more complicated, since it attempts to differentiate
settlements and cemeteries, and also records stray finds of copper axes.
Characteristically, rather few settlements have been recognised, though
eight times as many cemeteries are known and an equal number of stray
axes - many themselves probably derived from destroyed graves. Cemeteries
clearly continued to be important in the settlement pattern, and the
Tiszapolgar-Basatanya cemetery contained nearly 100 graves of this period.
The small number of settlement-sites is partly related to the difficulty of
recognising Bodrogkeresztur pottery, only a small proportion of which is
decorated. The distribution of sites defined on the occurrence of pottery (less
than half the number of comparable Tiszapolgar sites) can usefully be sup-
plemented by findspots of types of copper axes known to belong to this
period. This information amplifies, but does not radically change, the basic
pattern shown by settlements and cemeteries.
   While the riverine axis continued to be important, a scatter of sites occurs
on the fans, notably on the Nyirseg and less obviously on the Maros fan
(though this may be due to the poorer representation of metal finds in the
central part of the Plain). Some increase in activity is evident on the Danube-
Tisza Interfluve, while the important linking area between the Jaszsag and
the Danube bend was absorbed from Lengyel into the Bodrogkeresztur
grouping, emphasising the increasing significance of east-west links. Small
numbers of finds reappear at this period in the northern mountains and the
intermontane valleys behind, and there is evidence for some occupation in
the Hortobagy again. The most striking contrast with the preceding
distribution is in the Koros-Berettyo area, previously well settled but now
apparently deserted, which contrasts with the evident continuity of the
Szeged-Hodmezovasarhely area.
   On a regional scale, there is a large measure of continuity from Tisza-
polgar to Bodrogkeresztur, both in terms of way of life (continuity in ceramic
forms, similar subsistence pattern) and in the continuity of particular sites
such as the Tiszapolgar cemetery. The distribution of copper objects, too,
shows a similar pattern but on an expanded scale (Schubert 1965). The
greatest densities are on the northern Nyirseg and the upper Tisza, probably
representing the east Slovakian centre exemplified in the previous period by
Tibava; the southern Nyirseg, upper Berettyo and north-east Maros fan,
again the western fringe of a Transylvanian group; and in the area of the
Danube bend, reflecting west Slovakian sources. A few strays from Serbian
sources complete the picture in the south. Relatively few copper objects
reached the central part of eastern Hungary, Tiszazug and the lower Koros.



                                        290




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


Baden and Early Bronze Age
Banner's map of sites belonging to the Baden complex was published in his
monograph of 1956, and has a serious gap in its coverage of lowland eastern
Hungary. A recently-published map of the adjacent area of Romania
(Roman and Nemeti 1978) gives a better impression of the numbers of sites
now known. Together, these two maps indicate the growing importance of
the areas on the edges of the Plain. In particular, intermontane valleys such
as those of the Hernad and Sajo now supported a substantial population,
both in their lower reaches and along their headwaters in Slovakia. This
substantial upland expansion brought to an end the dominance of the Plain.
There is some suggestion of an emphasis on cattle in the upland valleys and
on sheep in the lowlands (Bokonyi 1974). Sites (including the well-known
cemetery of Alsonemedi) appeared at this time on the Danube-Tisza Inter-
fluve in larger numbers, and opened further westward links.
    Bronze Age sites have been accurately mapped only for certain cultures
(e.g. Kalicz 1968), but the general pattern follows strongly from Baden and
shows the continuing importance of the basin-edge as opposed to the centre
of the Plain. The magnitude of this contrast is well summarised in Figure
11.2, which compares the Tiszapolgar distribution with that of Hatvan. The
main EBA concentration is along the northern margin of the Plain, and picks
out the line of the terrace between the Jaszsag and the Hernad-Sajo conflu-
ence. Many of these sites are tells, including the eponymous examples of
Hatvan and Fiizesabony. This line (now followed by the main Budapest-
Miskolc road) was an important route of contact and trade, especially as
horses were now bred in large numbers and bone harness-pieces are not
uncommon finds.
    The role of trade is also significant in explaining the continuing import-
ance of the major rivers within the Plain. Positions on the river itself, rather
than just with access to the soils of the floodplain margin, were especially
sought. The Tisza and the Maros, with their potential for long-distance
trade by dugout canoe, were more important than the Koros in this context.
It is significant that the name of the eponymous EBA site on the central Tisza,
Nagyrev, actually means 'Great port'. The concentration of large cemeteries
at the Maros confluence (Szoreg, Deszk, Cszentivan, etc.) is also notable,
and imported items such as copper ornaments and fossil shell beads are con-
spicuous items in the graves (O'Shea 1978).
    The large volumes of bronze goods in circulation are indicated by stray
finds and hoards, whose distributions form a special topic that will not be
considered here (though see maps in Bona 1975; Mozsolics 1967 and 1973;
Hansel 1968). The overall pattern of metal supply, however, was dominated
by two groups of sources: a north Transylvanian group (perhaps including
the Rezhegyseg) serving north-east Hungary and adjacent parts of Romania,
and a west Slovakian group serving western Hungary and penetrating as far


                                       291




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER     AGE     SETTLEMENT


as the lower Tisza and Maros, probably through the Nagyrev and succeed-
ing Vatya groups of the Danube-Tisza Interfluve.
   Fortification is a noteworthy aspect of EBA settlement, especially around
the fringes of the Carpathian Basin - though by the time of the Vatya culture
there was also a ring of 'hillforts' around the territory of this culture in the
strategic linking area between the Danube and Tisza. The most striking
examples of defensive works are the major fortified centres at Barca and
Spissky Stvrtok in the montane valleys of Slovakia, which have notable
concentrations of wealth (Vladar 1973); but many of the lower-order tell-
and flat-sites throughout the region were protected by concentric ditches.


CONCLUSIONS
Systematic comparison of the patterns of finds over the 4000 years from the
Neolithic to the Early Bronze Age demonstrates a considerable measure of
continuity in the areas chosen for settlement, but also important variations
both in the central area of the Plain and on the margins of the occupied area.
   The rivers played a primary role, first in the initial dispersal of popu-
lation, secondly through their association with well-watered environments,
and increasingly because of the role of the waterways in trade. Year-round
settlement in the floodplain itself was precluded by the spring and early
summer floods; yet the broad interfluvial areas with their low rainfall were
equally unsuitable for early agriculture. Early settlement was therefore con-
centrated on the lower terrace or intermediate zone, overlooking the flood-
plain, either beside the major rivers or on raised areas with the basins
defined by the larger fans. Along the active river-courses, this gave settle-
ment a linear character, as in the Tiszazug; elsewhere clusters of settlement
occurred where sites occupied the margins of small islands rising from the
floodplain, as in the area around Hodmezovasarhely or the Devavanya
Plain.
   Some settlement took place within the Maros fan and the Nyirseg,
but occupation here was less continuous and confined to favourable de-
pressions. Very little penetration of the Danube-Tisza Interfluve took place
until Baden times. The upland fringe experienced a brief, specialised
occupation in the Biikk period, after which settlement was again largely
confined to the plains. Permanent occupation was pushed up the river
valleys penetrating into the highlands during the Baden period, initiating a
general movement of population from the central part of the Carpathian
Basin to the edges, particularly along the northern and eastern terrace
margins where the main concentration of Bronze Age tell sites occurs.
   The area of the Koros-Berettyo depression, for which more detailed
evidence is available, was thus a core area of Neolithic settlement which
gradually lost its importance in the later periods. The marked local shift
in population at the time of Bodrogkeresztur raises the possibility that

                                         292




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


significant ecological change took place in this extensive lowland area at this
time; but the long-term decline of this area must also be related to its struc-
tural position in the context of the expanding margin of settlement in the
Carpathian Basin as a whole.
   The detailed settlement-patterns which can be reconstructed from
planned surveys such as that in the northern part of Co. Bekes make it
possible to examine the relative densities of settlement over this period and
to follow these changes in terms of the location of particular sites. The broad
geographical treatment of this section can thus be refined to deal with the
behaviour of individual communities.


      I I : S I T E SURVEY A N D S E T T L E M E N T D Y N A M I C S
SCALES OF STUDY
In the first half of this chapter, the distribution of settlement in the four
thousand years following the introduction of agriculture in eastern Hungary
was discussed at a regional level. From the maps presented, based on the
accumulated record of chance finds, excavations and small-scale surface
surveys, it was possible to define changes in the areas selected for occupation
by early farming groups and fluctuations in the margin of settlement at
different periods. A major shift in the emphasis of settlement, from the
centre of the Plain to its periphery, was noted in the mid-fourth millennium
BC.
    To complement this picture, a more detailed view is required of the
development of settlement at a local level. This is necessary both to calibrate
the accuracy of the relatively coarse-grain mapping attempted in Part I, and
to reveal the fine structure of settlement development. This might include
localised shifts in the areas occupied at different times, and changes in the
numbers and size of sites. The nature of such changes may be expected to
reveal some of the underlying reasons for alterations in settlement pattern:
environmental, social and historical factors.
    Fortunately, a unique combination of circumstances makes it possible to
provide such evidence. The level surface of the Great Hungarian Plain has
suffered minimal erosion by comparison with many parts of central and
western Europe, where much of the Neolithic landscape has been truncated
and partly removed. The low rainfall of the area minimises the destruction
of surface-scatters of pottery, which occur in profusion there on Neolithic
sites. Uniform patterns of land-use based on collective farms provide ex-
tensive areas of ploughed land for the recovery of such material, which can
be related to the succession of cultures summarised in Figure 11.6. These
opportunities have been seized by Hungarian archaeologists as part of the
programme of the Archaeological Topography of Hungary (Magyarorszag
Regeszeti Topografiaja) undertaken by the Institute of Archaeology of the


                                       293




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER     AGE     SETTLEMENT




11.10 The Koros-Berettyo region: an enlarged portion of the geomorphological
map (Fig. 11.4) with known sites of the Tiszapolgar (after Bognar-Kutzian 1972)
and Bodrogkeresztur cultures (including both settlements and cemeteries, after
Patay 1974, and stray finds of contemporary copper axe-adzes, after Schubert
1965). The positions offindspots at this scale are approximate.

Hungarian Academy of Sciences in conjunction with local museums. The
recent publication of volume 6 in this series (Ecsedy et al. 1982) is the first
of several volumes in preparation covering the northern part of Co. Bekes.
Because of the relative scarcity of standing monuments in Hungary, this
work has not simply taken the form of a description of finds and buildings,
but an active search over one of the largest areas of prehistoric landscape yet
surveyed. The parishes covered in volume 6, comprising the administrative
district (jaras) of Szeghalom, total some 1220 square kilometres; and within
these, approximately 500 Neolithic and Copper Age sites have been recog-
nised. This survey work thus provides information whose extent and fine-
ness of resolution are unparalleled elsewhere in Neolithic Europe. The
position of this unique sample in relation to the regional distribution maps
discussed is indicated in Figure 11.1.
   As a link with the type of evidence discussed in Part I, an enlarged portion
of the geomorphological map used as a base for the regional distributions
is presented in Figure 11.10. It shows the Koros/Berettyo region with sites
from two successive periods (Tiszapolgar and Bodrogkeresztur) taken from
monographs published before the results of the Topographic Survey were
available. As can be seen by comparison with the more detailed environ-
mental map of the same area presented later (Figure 11.13), the natural
units are indicated in a highly generalised form. Nevertheless, the broad
pattern of association between sites of the Tiszapolgar period and the
tongue of redeposited loess across the centre of the map - the Devavanya


                                        294




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


Plain - is clearly evident. What is also striking is the contrast between this
pattern and the following distribution of Bodrogkeresztur sites. Although
there is some continuity in the types of environment chosen for settlement,
it is notable that the later sites avoid the major parts of the area settled in
the previous period. What seems to be occurring is a small-scale displacement
of population to previously unoccupied parts of the area, mostly to rather
similar sorts of soil but also to new sorts of location within the floodplain.
    How does this evidence compare with that of the detailed surveys? The
area of the Szeghalom survey is confined to the central area of the map,
where there are large numbers of Tiszapolgar sites but little indication of
Bodrogkeresztur occupation. We shall see that this pattern is strikingly
confirmed by the survey evidence (see below, Figures 11.21,11.22): but it is
important to note that the significance of this localised abandonment can
only be appreciated within the context of its wider setting: the shift is a
limited one of the order of c.25km, and it is possible to predict that similar
detailed surveys, for instance in the area of Co. Hajdu-Bihar to the east,
would recover larger numbers of Bodrogkeresztur sites. The levels of
analysis represented by regional mapping and local survey are thus
complementary to one another, and neither is sufficient in isolation from the
other.


T H E GEOMORPHOLOGICAL SETTING OF
THE KOROS-BERETTY6 REGION
Before presenting the detailed site distribution maps it is necessary to refine
the generalised description of this region given in Part I. The triangular
depression drained by the Berettyo and Koros rivers is defined by the three
major Pleistocene loess-covered fans to north, west and south (Figures
11.10-13). The depression has a general slope from east to west (Figure
11.11): at the Romanian border the relatively steep gradient reflects the
outwash fans of small rivers like the Rapid Koros which descends from the




11.11 East-west section across the Koros-Berettyo basin, from the outwash fans
on the Romanian border to the east (Biharkeresztes)3 through the tongue of early
Holocene redeposited loess (Zsaka), to the northern backswamp (Nagy Sarret).
Vertical scale in metres above sea-level. Adapted from Sumeghy.

                                       295




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC       AND   COPPER      AGE    SETTLEMENT




11.12 (a) Landscape units of the Koros-Berettyo region. E and W mark the ends of
the section shown in Fig. 11.11; (b) changes in the drainage pattern of the Koros-
Berettyo basin during the Postglacial period.

Bihar massif, and also the somewhat larger fan built up by the palaeo-Tisza,
when (together with the waters of the Szamos and Berettyo) it flowed across
this area in the Pleistocene and early Holocene. The major element of relief
within the depression is the deltaic formation (the Devavanya Plain) built up
by this body of water as it crossed the area in a series of raised beds. With
the tectonic diversion of the Tisza and Szamos in the early Holocene, the
smaller volume of water entering the depression was diverted to either side
of the ridge, forming peaty backswamps to the north and south of it. These
landscape elements are shown in schematic form in Figure 11.12a.
    The frequently shifting courses of these lowland rivers, and their ex-
tensive flooding, led to a major programme of canalisation in the nineteenth
century: the course of the rapid Koros through the southern backswamp
(Kis-Sarret) was straightened, and a new channel was created for the
Berettyo. This took it across the Devavanya Plain instead of through the
northern backswamp (Nagy-Sarret), where it had previously joined
the Hortobagy to flow along the edge of the Cumanian fan segment. The
lower course of the Koros was also shortened, by cutting through meander-
loops (Figure 11.12b).
    The full complexity of the situation can be appreciated from the more
detailed map of surface geology shown in Figure 11.13. While the surround-
ing loess-covered fans form a relatively uniform environment, the Koros-
Berettyo basin has a mosaic character with islands of various sizes rising
from the floodplain. With the exception of limited areas of sand on the small
fans to the east, and isolated patches of true loess, these islands are essen-
tially the levees of the early Holocene river-system. They are composed of


                                        296




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN        PLAIN




11.13 Surface geology of the Koros-Berettyo region, after Magyarorszag Foldtani
Terkepe (1:300,000), showing the position of the Szeghalom region mapped in
Figs 11.18-27.

redeposited loess. In some parts these form an extensive, more or less level
terrace with well-defined palaeochannels; in others they are broken into a
multitude of small promontories and creeks. Beyond the chain of larger
islands, smaller and more isolated hillocks break through the alluvium.
   Before the regulation of the rivers, these islands of higher ground within
the depression were literally insulated by the spring and early summer
floods, as can be seen from historical maps.14 Besides the permanently wet
areas of the backswamps where peat accumulated, the floodplain can
be further subdivided into the larger basins where loessy silt continued to
be seasonally deposited in the later Holocene, and the shallower basins
and creeks where a finer deposit of black meadow-clay was laid down.
Occasional floods of exceptional strength sometimes reached the level of the
early Holocene terrace itself, so that settlements there sought the highest
elevations available - even where the advantage was no more than an
additional metre above the surrounding area. After the regulation, the rivers
were confined by dykes within which somewhat coarser silts have accumu-
lated.
   How far is the present pattern of surface geology a valid basis for

                                       297




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER     AGE     SETTLEMENT


interpreting prehistoric settlement distributions? Ir       far as the shift in
river-courses in the early Holocene reduced the flow of water and sediment
through the depression, leaving the chain of levees in 'fossil5 form, no major
changes have occurred within this early Holocene terrace. Floodplain
deposits, however, have continued to accumulate in the lower-lying areas.
Some idea of the extent of alluvial accumulation may be gained from the
distribution map of tumuli (Figure 11.16), mainly dating to the third
millennium BC, whose significance is discussed in a later section. Their
importance here is that - unlike sherd-scatters - they can be recognised on
the surface even where alluviation has occurred. While the major concen-
tration of tumuli occurs on islands (and inaccuracies of mapping have
undoubtedly caused minor displacements around their edges), there are
significant groups of these monuments within the area of meadow-clay - for
example on the northern margin of the Nagy Sarret. The implication of this
is that the accumulation of meadow-clay and peat in the later Holocene,
particularly around the backswamp areas, has mantled lower-lying areas of
the early Holocene land-surface which may have been settled in Neolithic
times. Geological slit-trenches dug as part of the excavation programme at
Sarto15 confirm that significant accumulation of meadow-clay has also
occurred in the palaeochannels between the islands. Since the data from the
Szeghalom survey are mainly concerned with the higher parts of the early
Holocene terrace, this problem does not seriously distort the picture of
prehistoric settlement there. As the permanent sites are often located on the
higher levees on the edges of the islands (e.g. Figure 11.15), however, some
evidence of seasonal activities within the adjacent floodplain may be in-
accessible to surface investigation. This factor has been considered in
designing the excavation programme, and has led to the discovery of
previously unsuspected pits at the edge of the floodplain by the Koros
settlement at Rehely-Diilo.
    The soils of this region at the present time correspond largely with the
surface geology. They range from chernozems on the loess-covered fans to
the meadow- and raw-soils of the floodplain. The characteristic soils of the
islands are varieties of solonetz, whose saline character results from the high
watertable and net upward movement of salt-charged water during the
summer months. These are especially developed on the broad, flat islands in
the centre of the Devavanya Plain. The acutely saline character of these soils
is a natural result of their position just above the floodplain and the high
temperatures and low rainfall of eastern Hungary (Szabolcs 1971; 1974).
It is likely that salination posed a problem for prehistoric agriculture.
    The position of the parishes represented in the survey data given in
Figures 11.17-25 is shown on Figure 11.13. As noted above, this area
coincides with the largest extent of early Holocene terrace in the central part
of the Devavanya Plain. It also includes some of the lower-lying land to the
north, on the southern margin of the Nagy Sarret, and extends south-


                                        298




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN          PLAIN


eastwards to the edge of the Kis Sarret. On its north-western part, therefore,
it includes an area of broad, flat islands separated by well-defined palaeo-
channels, south of which is an extensive area of loessy silt characteristic of
the Koros lowland. To the east the islands are smaller, and separated by
broader inlets filled with meadow-clay. As well as the marked contrast
between the early Holocene terrace and the floodplain, therefore, the
difference in character between the eastern and western ends of the area is
significant in terms of prehistoric settlement.


T H E SZEGHALOM SURVEY AND ITS RESULTS
In historic times large parts of the area, and especially the expanses of
solonetz soils, have been pastureland. In the postwar period, following the
collectivisation of agriculture and the mechanisation of farming, a major
campaign to extend the area of arable has been undertaken for the culti-
vation of maize and sunflowers. Since soil salinity was a major obstacle, this
necessarily included a programme of amelioration which took the form of
digging large quarries - the so-called 'digo-pits' - into the non-saline loess.
The saline topsoil was pushed to one side, and the (archaeologically sterile)
loess was spread over the surrounding area.
    During the 1950s these operations were watched by the village school-
master in Devavanya, Dr Imre Bereczki. He noted the very frequent remains
of prehistoric sites, and made an extensive collection of Neolithic and
Copper Age pottery and other artefacts. This first revealed the potential of
this area for systematic archaeological work. The finds came to the attention
of Professor Gyula Gazdapusztai of the University of Szeged, who organised
the first programme of recording and survey in 1968. The execution of this
work was then incorporated within the framework of the Archaeological
Topography of Hungary, centrally organised by the Archaeological Institute
of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences in Budapest, with the co-operation
of local museums. The intention was to make a complete inventory of
archaeological sites in Co. Bekes. A field-by-field survey has so far been
conducted in the administrative divisions of Szeghalom (published in 1982:
Ecsedy et al. 1982) and Szarvas (Denes et al. 1989; cf. also Bokonyi 1992).
Since 1979, under an agreement for scientific co-operation between the
Ashmolean Museum and the Institute, further work has taken place to use
this information for the reconstruction of prehistoric settlement patterns
and to carry out a programme of fieldwork based upon it.
   The sites are identifiable on the surface from the scatter of pottery, lithic
artefacts and lumps of burnt daub which occur in great profusion. The large
scale of arable farming makes it possible to define the sizes of these scatters
with some precision. These sites are listed and described in the published
volumes of the Topography (in Hungarian), and limits are assigned to each
site. Since many of these have multi-period occupations, however, it has


                                        299




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER     AGE    SETTLEMENT


been necessary in using this data for settlement-pattern studies to return to
the original field-reports and make use of observations on the extent of
occupation at particular periods within the life of a site.16 It is these re-
constructed limits which have been used in plotting Figures 11.17-25.
   Not all the area is under arable, although the long period over which the
survey was conducted made it possible to make repeated visits in relation to
changing patterns of land use. Where land was continuously under pasture
- usually the highly saline puszta areas - it is often possible to recover sherds
under the dry conditions of late summer and autumn, and identify the
positions of sites even though their extent cannot be precisely defined. Other
limiting factors include the fragmented pattern of land-use and built-up area
around the villages themselves. Since modern settlement is highly nucleated,
the proportion of such land is relatively small; there is one major village
or town for each of the parishes included. The effects of one of these
(Devavanya) will be noted below, where it coincides with an area of
preferred prehistoric settlement.
   The existence of numerous soil-improvement quarries (digo-pits) has
already been noted. These are easily recognisable as rounded rectangular
hollows some 100 by 50m. Finds from the area of the quarry occur in
the dumped topsoil on its perimeter: since archaeological levels occur in the
saline soil layer, finds have not been strewn across the fields with the non-
saline loess. Their effect on the size of sherd-scatters has thus been minimal.
   Bearing in mind the limitations noted in the previous section due to the
continuing alluviation of the floodplain, therefore, the extent and character
of settlement in the prehistoric period can be reconstructed with some
accuracy. The robust patterns and internal consistency evident in the period-
by-period distribution maps are themselves testimony to the amount of
information which can be recovered. While not every site can be considered
to have been accurately defined, the regularities in size, morphology and
distribution are a true reflection of the changing character of settlement in
this region.

An example: north-west         Devavanya
In the programme of joint British/Hungarian fieldwork, certain sites known
from the survey have been selected for more intensive investigation. Most of
these have so far been in the north-western part of the parish of Devavanya.
The initial aim has been to define the limits of sites more accurately, and
as an example a worksheet from the first season's work at the large late
Neolithic site at Sarto is presented in Figure 11.14. This shows a series of
transects with 4 by 4m collecting grids over an area of c.2000 by 500m.
Finds of diagnostic pottery types are plotted, indicating the growth and
reorganisation of this major settlement. (Further work has been conducted
in later seasons, including an extensive fluxgate survey and selective ex-
cavation: Sherratt 1984c.)


                                        300




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN          PLAIN




pottery from three periods. [See Sherratt 1984c for a full plan of Sarto and survey
results.]

                                       301




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
THE   DEVELOPMENT        OF   NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER     AGE    SETTLEMENT




11.15 The NW corner of the parish of Devavanya, showing the site of Sarto and
contemporary settlements in relation to the early Holocene terrace (open) and
floodplain (hatched). Sites where intensive survey and excavation have taken
place are named. After Magyarorszag Regeszeti Topografiaja vol. 6, and British/
Hungarian fieldwork.

    The context of this site in terms of the environmental setting and
settlement history of the area from 6000-4000 BC is shown in Figure 11.15.
Practically without exception, the sites are located on the edge of the early
Holocene terrace, overlooking the floodplain; there is little trace of Neo-
lithic occupation on the interfluves. Each period, however, has a character-
istic pattern of site density and morphology, from the linear shoreline
settlements of Koros to the aggregated pattern of Szakalhat and Tisza and
the small, dispersed sites of Tiszapolgar. While these patterns are repeated
elsewhere, the density of such early sites in this area is characteristic only
of the western part of the Szeghalom survey, and later sites are less well
represented here. These larger patterns will now be described in chrono-
logical order, following the sequence of cultures defined in Part I.

Koros (6000-5300       BC?): Figure       11.19
The maps in Figures 11.18-27 cover the four large parishes of Devavanya,
Szeghalom, Korosladany and Veszto, together amounting to 68,400
hectares. Within this area, 125 Koros sites have been defined. The actual
number of findspots is somewhat artificial, however, since some of the
smaller adjacent sites might be considered as parts of a single linear scatter,
and elongated shapes have been defined only where there is positive
evidence for a continuous spread of material. Nevertheless, the extent and

                                         302




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN         PLAIN




11.16 The Koros-Berettyo region: surface geology (as Fig. 11.13), and the
positions of early third-millennium tumuli (after Viragh 1979). Owing to
inaccuracies of re-scaling, the positions are approximate.

density of occupation evidence is striking, and represents a vast quantity of
sherd material and settlement debris.
   This material is found over a large part of the area represented in the
map. The major unoccupied areas are to the south-west, in the basin of
loessic silt to the south of Devavanya, and in the similar basin which lies in
the north-central area east of Atyaszeg (cf. Figure 11.13: both of these
floodplain areas contain small islands, however, which were subsequently
settled). The broad band of settlement from north-west to south-east
represents the main extent of the chain of larger islands. Within this, there
is a greater density of material in the north-western part. This not only
contains two-thirds of the findspots, but the sites themselves are more
substantial. True linear 'shoreline sites' (up to 2km in length) only occur in
this part.
   After the scattered dot-distributions of chance finds of this culture
mapped at a regional level, this density of sites strikes the observer with the
force of a revelation. It highlights the arbitrary nature of the sample which
is available from sources other than planned survey. For the first time it is
possible to appreciate what the archaeological record may hold in the way


                                        303




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             6000 BC                         5000 BC                           4000 BC                          3000 BC
        Eastern Hungary




         Szeghalom survey
                                              if"
                                     w
                                     fS         \
                                      rnikledah-st,                                                   W


         KOROS & Szatmar               SZAKALHAT et al. TISZAPOLGAR                                       BADEN & TUMULI
11.17 Summary diagram giving successive snapshots, at roughly millennial intervals, of the extent of settlement (defined by spatial
proximity linkage) at two scales: above, in eastern Hungary as a whole (see Fig. 11.9 and other maps in Sherratt 1983b: sites linked at
<20km) and below, in the Szeghalom survey area (see Figs 11.19-27: sites linked at <2 and <5km). Note the gradual south-eastward
                                      • lm
                                       <2 \/
shift in settlement, from the larger interfluvial areas in the NW to the more interrupted expanses of terrace in the SE, probably in re-
sponse to increasing salination of the earliest-settled areas. In the final snapshot, settlement is confined to the SE sector, and Fit-Grave
tumuli occupy the more saline areas. On a regional scale, settlement has expanded into the dry sandy area of the Danube-Tisza inter-
fluve, and the upland areas around the Basin.




                                        This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


of prehistoric sites. However, it would be wrong to infer from this evidence
that there was a particularly high density of population at any one time
during this phase of the Neolithic. The period in question may be a relatively
long one, since although its end is well defined, there are too few radio-
carbon dates to be sure of its beginning. It may last for more than 500
years.17 Although the sites contain substantial evidence of occupation in the
form of massive pits and large quantities of burnt daub, there is no certainty
that even the area defined as belonging to a single settlement site was in
simultaneous occupation. The linear scatters may represent a pattern of
settlement drift over several generations, with the smaller sites being similar
but less long-lived. Equally, however, the smaller sites may represent
seasonal stations subsidiary to the major scatters.
    These problems can only be resolved by intensive fieldwork and exca-
vation, and some relevant points from current work may be noted here. For
instance, it is clear that the scatters do not represent a continuous, built-up
area. Geophysical survey has demonstrated the existence of discrete clusters
of structures, some 50m or so apart, separated by areas with no structures
(and a low density of finds) that probably represent the areas where horti-
culture took place. While cereal-cultivation is demonstrated by plentiful
finds of carbonised seed-remains, the large numbers of fish-remains and
net-sinkers, as well as bones of wild mammals and birds, indicate that
seasonally-available wild resources were an important component of the
diet. The position of the settlements immediately on the low bluffs over-
looking the floodplain is consistent with this dual emphasis on cereals and
fish.
    Although the larger settlements (and perhaps the majority of finds)
probably represent permanent, sedentary occupation on a year-round basis,
it is likely that there was a considerable degree of long-term fluidity in settle-
ment location, and that the pattern shown here is a palimpsest of many
generations.

AVK (5300-5100 BC): Figure 11.20
The pattern shown by sites of the Alfold Linear Pottery culture (Alfoldi
Vonaldtszes Keramia = AVK) continues many aspects of its predecessor. Some
95 sites are represented, and although the same considerations of site
definition apply as in the Koros period, the conditions which produced a
proliferation of sites seem to have continued. The overall distribution of
sites is very similar, with a centre of gravity in the north-west and a con-
tinuing presence in the south-east, though with some abandonment of the
small sites on the far eastern edge. Some extension of settlement is evident,
however, on the small islands in the basins of Devavanya and Atyaszeg.
    The timespan covered by this period is shorter, of the order of two to
three hundred years, strengthening the argument for a relatively dispersed
character of contemporary settlement. While the absence of linear sites


                                        305




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER     AGE     SETTLEMENT


might be explained by the lack of time for settlement drift to occur, more
detailed observation of AVK sites suggests that their morphology was rather
different from that typical of Koros. Such sites are often set back somewhat
from the terrace edge, and the component units form small clusters rather
than lines. This may be linked with a decline in the importance of fish, since
net-sinkers are no longer such common finds, and perhaps a greater con-
centration on cereals. Seen in the context of the succeeding distribution
patterns, that of AVK clearly belongs to a primary phase of settlement, before
fundamentally new properties emerged in the settlement system.

Szakdlhdt (5100-4800 BC): Figure 11.21
After the widely-strewn evidence of settlement from the preceding periods,
a major change is evident with Szakalhat. Only 29 sites are known, but these
range from massive, 2km long, concentrations to small groups of sherds.
Although the central axis of the islands remained in occupation, the
peripheries were all abandoned. A process of settlement aggregation seems
to have been operating, in which previously dispersed populations came
together in larger units.
    The outstanding example is the case of Sarto discussed above, which
is the large site in the north-west corner. At this stage it was a relatively
elongated area, parallel to the shoreline and covering approximately
1800 by 400 metres. Fluxgate surveys carried out in recent field seasons
demonstrate that like earlier Neolithic sites, such aggregated sites also have
a compound character and are composed of individual concentrations of
structures, separated by 50m or so of postulated garden areas. Although this
is the only site of its kind in this area which has been investigated in detail,
the cluster of apparently separate sites in the east-central portion (including
Kovacshalom in the parish of Szeghalom) may turn out to represent a
similar aggregation in a somewhat less even topographic setting where the
clusters occupy separate hillocks. (Sarto itself is centred on a small eminence
which may have a special role in the site layout.) It is also just possible that
a third site, that of Simasziget near the town of Devavanya in the west centre
of the area, may be larger than it appears because of the character of land-
use on the edge of the town. In this case there might be some regularity in
the spacing of these 'supersites', which would occur some 10-15km apart:
though at the moment this can only be speculation. Not all sites were of this
character, however, and some formed small compact units that grew up into
minor tell-like mounds. A typical example is Rehelyi Gat, 4km from Sarto
(Figure 11.15). Two or three such sites occur in the vicinity of the major
aggregated settlements.
    A notable feature of the aggregated sites is their great wealth of imported
materials. As well as large quantities of obsidian and other stonework,
sherds of Biikk and Vadastra pottery testify to cultural contacts over a range
of 200km. This aspect is discussed more fully in Chapter 12.


                                         306




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN        PLAIN


Tisza (4800-4400 BC): Figure 11.22
The process of aggregation became more pronounced in this period,
with the number of sites falling to nineteen, mainly by loss of the
smaller peripheral stations. The three main nuclei established in the
previous period continued, and the limitations on site definitions con-
tinue to apply. At Sarto, intensive survey (Figure 11.14) has shown that
the site changed in shape to a more compact form, shortening and
extending backwards from the shoreline;18 Simasziget remains as a
possible further nucleus; while the Kovacshalom complex continued to
occupy several adjacent sites. The main subsidiary tell-like sites also
continued.
   The quantities of material items recovered from surface collection and
excavation at Sarto demonstrate the continuing wealth of the 'supersites',
which were able to pull in supplies of hard rocks and flakeable stone from
a 150km radius on the periphery of the Carpathian Basin. Such supplies
must have been moved by boat, and it is possible that the course of the
Hortobagy-Berettyo ran closer to the site than at present, perhaps even
along the Sarto channel.
   The process of aggregation characteristic of Szakalhat and Tisza seems
to have lasted for a period of the order of 700 years. The main sites were
probably occupied throughout that time, absorbing a successively greater
proportion of the population of the smaller settlements. It is not clear that
any decline in population occurred, since it has been argued that the more
abundant sites of earlier periods were a reflection of the fluidity of settle-
ment rather than the effect of a large contemporary population. The small
number of large, stable sites in the period of aggregation thus probably gives
a more accurate impression of the size of the Neolithic population at a single
moment in time.
   It may be inferred that large areas of land went out of use in this phase,
since it is unlikely that territories of the order of 10km in radius (the areas
in between major sites) were exploited even for grazing. Crops were prob-
ably grown only in the immediate vicinity of the sites (or even within them,
in the extensive 'empty' areas). Models involving nucleation within well-
defined territories are probably inappropriate for the low population
densities and small scale of agriculture of the Neolithic, which allowed great
variability in the disposition of settlement. Social factors are likely to have
been more important then ecological ones in determining these patterns:
people wished to live together in large groups and as far from their
neighbours as possible, and the large settlements may have been sited at
locations advantageous for external contacts. The conditions underlying
this pattern therefore probably included both insecurity and the importance
of exchange networks linking this area with the expanding periphery
(Chapter 10).



                                        307




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER     AGE     SETTLEMENT


Tiszapolgdr    (4400-3900      BC): Figure       11.23
The conditions which gave rise to settlement aggregation were abruptly
reversed in the Tiszapolgar period. Small sites became the rule, and these
were widely dispersed over the area available for settlement. Some 106 sites
are known, few larger than a few hundred metres in diameter and most
averaging around 100m.19 From the intensive survey investigations, these
sites seem to represent small hamlets of a few houses: unlike the settlements
of previous periods, they do not have a compound character with individual
clusters of structures and empty areas.
    Before this period there is no evidence for a differentiation of settlements
and cemeteries: burials occurred within the settlements in small groups
associated with the component units. Now, however, at a time of small,
dispersed settlements, formal cemeteries seem to have assumed a particular
importance. In the case of the best-known example, Tiszapolgar-Basatanya
(Bognar-Kutzian 1963), there seems to have been no nearby settlement, and
these fairly large cemeteries (c.50-100 graves) may have served more than
one settlement site. No cemeteries have been identified as such within the
survey area, but it is possible that some at least of the findspots may repre-
sent sites of this kind. The implications of this important shift in settlement-
pattern and contemporary burial practice must be considered as part of the
general problem of Neolithic and Copper Age social structures.
   The distribution of Tiszapolgar sites extends over the whole survey area
with the exception of the small peripheral islands. There is a roughly equal
emphasis on the eastern and western halves of the area, with a slight pre-
ponderance in the east. Many of the sites in the western part are small
stations with a few sherds, though there are also many more substantial
sites. Even the larger ones, however, do not produce the striking quantities
of imported materials noted for the preceding phase.

Bodrogkeresztur     (3900-3500        BC): Figure       11.24
In contrast to the plentiful remains of settlement in earlier periods, those of
Bodrogkeresztur are sparse in the extreme. Only a dozen findspots, each
represented by no more than a few sherds, have been identified. The period
in question is not notably shorter than the others (c.400 years), and though
the pottery assemblage is less diagnostic because of the relatively small
percentage of decorated sherds, it seems likely the small number of in-
substantial sites is a genuine reflection of a sharp fall in population in this
area.
   This result accords with earlier discussion (cf. Figure 11.10) of the
indications from stray finds: the survey area is located in the middle of a
zone of abandonment, from which population moved to a number of nearby
locations - mostly previously unoccupied. A large group of such sites occurs
at a somewhat higher elevation further east, and others appear on the edges

                                        308




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


of the Pleistocene fans or on the small islands in the floodplain. Displace-
ment of population thus seems to account for the lack of local finds. Since it
is noteworthy that the main focus of earlier settlement was on soils most
prone to salinity, this factor deserves to be considered as a major cause of
this change.

Bolerdz and Baden (3500-2900 BC): Figure 11.25;
Tumuli, Figure 11.26
The reappearance of more substantial settlement traces in the Boleraz and
Baden periods was restricted to one quarter of the total area. Some 24 sites
are known, all from the eastern part around Szeghalom. Their average size
is rather small (the majority being less than that for Tiszapolgar), with only
half a dozen extending for more than 100m. It is again possible that some
findspots represent cemeteries, though Baden cemeteries elsewhere were
generally quite small. Since the recolonisation of the area after its effective
abandonment in Bodrogkeresztur did not necessarily take place right at the
beginning of Boleraz (only a quarter of the sites belong to this phase), the
effective span of this period may be rather less than the five to six hundred
years suggested for Boleraz and Baden as a whole. Even so, the amount of
settlement material is not great by comparison with that which occurs in this
area from the Neolithic and earlier Copper Age.
    The restricted distribution of Boleraz and Baden sites (Figure 11.25)
should be compared with the occurrence of tumuli (Figure 11.26). Recent
work on these burial mounds (Ecsedy 1979), which has included the ex-
cavation of Barce-halom in the parish of Devavanya, has pointed to a date
contemporary with Baden. It is immediately apparent from the maps that
the two distributions are complementary, and should be considered to-
gether. The tumuli fall into two groups, separated by a gap representing the
intervening Boleraz and Baden settlements. The major group in the north-
west largely coincides with the area of particularly dense settlement in
Neolithic times, on the larger and flatter islands of the parish of Devavanya.
Unlike the earlier sites, however, their locations are not tied to the shore-
lines. Although they do occur along levees on the edge of the islands, they
are more commonly found on prominent spots further inland: it is the
advantage in height which is being sought. Partly as a consequence of this,
they tend to form chains along the more prominent ridges.
    Because such tumuli have often been used as landmarks on cadastral
maps, a more comprehensive record can be compiled of the distribution of
these monuments (Viragh 1979). Plotted on a base-map of surface geology
(Figure 11.16), they reveal a general pattern of which the Szeghalom survey
examples form a part. Dense concentrations occur in the Hortobagy, on
the Berettyo and Koros fans near the Romanian border, and along the
Devavanya Plain. They also occur as a general scatter on the loess-covered
Pleistocene fans.


                                        309




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC         AND   COPPER    AGE     SETTLEMENT


   The interpretation of these apparently contemporary tumuli and Baden
settlements has been a matter of controversy. The material culture and
burial rite of the tumuli differ from those of Baden and stand in stark con-
trast to them. Moreover, the Baden culture extends beyond the limit of the
tumuli in western Hungary, and the tumuli occur eastwards to the Pontic
steppe which is their centre of distribution. It thus seems likely that small
populations of eastern origin penetrated around and within established
groups in the eastern Carpathian Basin: and this interpretation is strength-
ened by the spatial exclusiveness of the two distributions. If this is so, then
the tumulus-building groups seem to have sought relatively open terrain
(presumably for stock-raising), either on the chernozems of the Pleistocene
fans or in those parts of the Koros Basin with a long history of settlement
and clearance of woodland but which were now perhaps unsuitable for agri-
culture. If the reasons for Bodrogkeresztur abandonment were connected
with the effects of salination, this penetration could be seen as the occu-
pation of empty niches around contemporary farming populations. Since
there is evidence in Baden contexts elsewhere for the use of animal traction
and thus probably of the plough, farmers may themselves have been able to
open new areas for cultivation, as was noted in Part I for the edges of the
Carpathian Basin.

Early Bronze Age (2900-2000 BC): Figure 11.27
Only forty-one sites are known from this long period, and many of these are
very small. The area of occupation corresponds closely to that of the pre-
ceding Baden and Boleraz period, although there is little continuity in the
location of individual sites. Only a few, small sites occur within the former
area of tumulus distribution, and the western part of the area was effectively
abandoned in favour of the east. The phase of land-use represented by the
tumuli was evidently a relatively short interlude in the settlement history of
the region.
   Seven of the EBA sites can be attributed to the earlier part of the period
(Mako-Nyirseg) and eleven to the later part (Otomani), of which four are
fortified. The latter take the form of circular ditched enclosures some
60-80m in diameter, and 10-15km apart. These densities are very low when
compared with the large numbers of such sites known, e.g. from Co. Hajdu-
Bihar (e.g. Bona 1975, Verbreitungskarten I and II), and the area continued
to be of relatively minor importance in the Middle Bronze Age.

Implications    of the survey      data
Besides demonstrating the very large number of Neolithic and Copper Age
sites in this area, the Szeghalom survey has also revealed marked contrasts
in the numbers, distribution, sizes, and shapes of settlements in different
periods. These provide raw material for the analysis of community size,
locational preferences and major demographic shifts. They do not, however,

                                          310




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


provide any easy answer about the detailed course of population change
during the prehistoric period. Archaeologists have often used counts of the
number of sites in successive periods as an indication of the changing density
of settlement and thus of population levels. The survey results demonstrate
the dangers of this approach. In many cases a change in the number of sites
is accompanied by changes in their size, so that what is being measured is
effectively the relative aggregation or dispersal of population rather than the
numbers of people involved. Only in those cases where a fall in the number
of sites coincides with a steady or declining average size of site can popu-
lation decline be suggested. In fact, the calculation of relative population
densities in different periods within a given area depends on a complex
equation, many of whose variables (such as the average length of site occu-
pation) remain unknown. Without a major programme of excavation and
site-dating, therefore, estimates of the actual course of population change
remain subject to wide margins of error. It is more useful at the moment to
discuss the phenomena of settlement aggregation and dispersal or settlement
displacement in their own terms, without attempting to translate this
information into relative sizes of population.


CONCLUSION
Settlement        dynamics
It is clear that there is no single trend over the long period of agrarian
settlement recorded in the site-distribution patterns of the Szeghalom area.
General similarities persisted through successive periods - Koros and AVK,
or Szakalhat and Tisza - but the trends were reversed by factors operating
on a local, regional or even a pan-European level (Figure 11.17).
   The first 1000 years were characterised by a profusion of settlement sites.
Although some of these sites cover extensive areas, they were occupied at a
low density and may not have persisted for more than a few years. Although
there were consistent changes in the internal layout and organisation of
sites, this initial phase of relatively fluid settlement lasted until c.5100 BC.
   There then followed a period of 700 years in which population tended to
aggregate into larger, more stable units. Some of these sites were spec-
tacularly large, although still occupied at a low density. The trend towards
a concentration of settlement is evident throughout the late Neolithic of
central Europe (cf. Starling 1984). This phase seems to represent a peak in
the material prosperity of this area.
   Around 4400 BC a fundamental change in the organisation of settlement
took place. Smaller unitary settlements were dispersed widely across the
landscape. Elsewhere, it is known that cemeteries came to play a prominent
role in the settlement pattern and social fabric (Chapter 5). By this period,
the area was probably less wealthy than the zone nearer to the edge of the
Plain where finds of copper objects occur. The pattern of dispersed sites and


                                        311




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 THE    DEVELOPMENT          OF   NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER      AGE     SETTLEMENT


cemeteries continued to be typical of many parts of eastern Hungary for the
next 300 years; but in this area it was interrupted by a phase of relative
abandonment. It would appear from this that local ecological factors were
responsible, and the correlation with areas of high salinity at the present day
suggests that this may be relevant.
   By some time around 3500 BC a new pattern had emerged, that was to be
characteristic of the next thousand years. The focus of settlement shifted
eastwards, at the same time as the Carpathian Basin as a whole saw a major
movement into the surrounding uplands. For part of this time, the zone
apparently abandoned for agricultural settlement was occupied by groups
coming from outside the area, who constructed large numbers of burial
mounds and apparently existed side by side with local groups. From the
general distribution of tumuli in the lowland area, it appears that these local
agricultural groups occupied only small enclaves within it (Figure 11.16).
By 2900 BC the phase of tumulus-building was apparently over, and the
agricultural areas were characterised by small defended villages occupying
an area that was now marginal to the main zone of Bronze Age occupation
further east.
   The factors responsible for these alterations of settlement pattern thus
represent a conjunction of widespread social changes, environmental pro-
cesses and historical opportunities, through which the area rose to prominence
and was then progressively reduced in importance (Chapter 10).

Implications
Few areas of Europe possess the combined advantages for surface survey of
the central part of the Great Hungarian Plain. Nevertheless, much progress
has been made in recent years through programmes of planned survey and
excavation (e.g. Kruk 1980), and the number of comparable bodies of data
may be expected to grow rapidly in the next few years. These need to be
combined with systematic mapping of all finds on a regional basis, so that
more intensive work can be planned to answer questions arising from what
is already known. Where systematic fieldwork has taken place, it has re-
vealed the often astonishing abundance of prehistoric sites and the magni-
tude of changes in the sizes and abundance of sites over long periods of time.
Work such as that described here is important because it demonstrates some
of the properties of this record, and its potential for reconstructing funda-
mental information about the nature of prehistoric communities.20


NOTES

 1. This was originally published in two parts, in vols 1 and 2 respectively, of the Oxford
    Journal of Archaeology. Some of the regional maps have been omitted in this present
    version.
 2. Magyarorszag Regeszeti Topografiaja: Vols 1-4, Co. Veszprem (1966-72); Vol. 5,
    Co. Komarom (1979); Vol. 6, Co. Bekes (Denes et al. 1989).


                                             312




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                        IN   THE   GREAT      HUNGARIAN          PLAIN

 3. The programme of Hungarian-British fieldwork was directed jointly by Dr Istvan Torma
    and the author.
 4. The natural physiographic unit is the Carpathian Basin, consisting of Pannonia in the
    west, the Great Hungarian Plain in the centre and Transylvania in the east. This was also
    a political entity until 1920, when it was divided between Hungary, Romania and Jugo-
    slavia. Since recent research has been organised within these national boundaries, the
    term 'eastern Hungary' is used here to describe the territory of the present Hungarian
    state east of the Danube.
 5. Calibrated radiocarbon dates are used throughout, using the table provided in Clark
    (1975). Uncorrected radiocarbon dates are indicated as bc.
 6. For a convenient introduction to Hungarian geography, see Pecsi and Sarfalvi (1964).
    The environmental background and its changes are usefully discussed from an
    archaeological standpoint in Kosse (1979).
 7. For the names of these physiographic units and their location, see Sherratt 1982b,
    Fig. 11.5.
 8. The Hungarian divisions of the later Neolithic and Copper Age do not directly cor-
    respond to other east European systems, where the term 'Chalcolithic' or 'Eneolithic' is
    used. Hungarian usage of the term 'Copper Age' rightly stresses the important changes
    that begin with Tiszapolgar, but by including Baden (as Late Copper Age) it fails to
    indicate the radically new aspects of the latter.
 9. A comparison of Koros and AVK distributions with various elements of the landscape
    (climate, vegetation, hydrology, geology, soils) is given in Kosse (1979), which includes
    a statistical analysis of the occurrence of sites in different zones. While this usefully
    complements the approach adopted here, it is limited to small-scale maps and uses the
    stylistic groups rather than a regional framework as the units of analysis. For further
    comments on the statistical methods, see the review in Proceedings of the Prehistoric
    Society, 46 (1980).
10. For references to recent work, see especially Kalicz (1970) and the yearly reports in
    Mitteilungen des Archaeologischen Instituts (Budapest). An unpublished study of the
    Tisza culture has been written by J. Korek, A Tiszai Kultura (Budapest 1973).
11. A more serious problem is the interpretation of negative evidence: the blank areas on
    distribution maps. Where sites are known for some periods and not others, it is reason-
    able to assume that this absence is significant. Where no prehistoric sites of any period
    are known, judgement must be suspended until the region has been actively investigated.
    The interpretation of distribution maps is therefore only one point in the cycle of
    archaeological research, reaching preliminary conclusions and posing questions for future
    fieldwork.
12. It is worth noting the presence in the uplands of a macrolithic industry ('Grobgeratiges
    Mesolithikum' or Eger-Avas culture) usually taken to be of Mesolithic date and some-
    times seen as a source of the Szatmar and AVK populations (e.g. Kalicz 1980). Its dating,
    however, is uncertain, and such tools have occasionally been found in association with
    pottery (Dobosi 1976). It is possible that these actually indicate Neolithic extraction sites,
    and are thus similar to the Lengfeld, Campignian, Montmorencian and Hackpen Hill
    industries in western Europe.
13. These include some of the most famous Late Neolithic sites in Hungary, many of
    which are on present or former courses of important rivers, e.g. Hodmezovasarhely-
    Kokenydomb (Tisza), Szegvar-Tiizkoves (Tisza), Szarvas-Pepikert = Bekesszentandras
    (Koros), Devavanya-Sarto (Hortobagy-Berettyo), Szeghalom-Kovacshalom (Sebes Koros)
    and Battonya-Parasztanya (Szaraz-£r).
14. E.g. Matyas Huszar (1822) Hydrographia depressae regionis fluviatilis Crisiorum Magni,
    Albi, Nigri, Velocis, Parvi, Fl. Berettyo cum ramificatiortibus ... horumque omnium
    illustrata inundationis topographia.
15. In 1981 a test-trench 50m from the terrace edge at Sarto demonstrated that a scatter of
    Neolithic artefacts from the settlement, directly overlying redeposited loess of the early
    Holocene, was covered by 75cm of meadow-clay.


                                              313




                      This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 THE    DEVELOPMENT          OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER      AGE    SETTLEMENT

16. The extent to which surface pottery is attributable to particular cultural groups depends
    on the proportions of diagnostic pieces such as decorated sherds or distinctive knobs,
    handles, etc. For some periods the fabric is immediately recognisable (e.g. Koros chaff-
    tempered ware). The following table offers a rough, order-of-magnitude guide to the
    proportion of diagnostic pieces:
       Koros: almost all
       AVK: more than a quarter
       Szakalhat: less than a quarter
       Tisza: less than a quarter
       Tiszapolgar: about half
        Bodrogkeresztur: perhaps a twentieth
        Boleraz, Baden and EBA: about half
    Changes of fabric, e.g. from chaff- to sand- and grog-tempering, allow a further
    proportion to be classified as 'Neolithic', 'Copper Age' or 'Bronze Age', and others as
    merely 'Prehistoric'. A relatively small proportion of the total number of sites can only
    be attributed to these gross periods: 85 Neolithic, 5 Copper Age, 23 Bronze Age,
    95 Prehistoric. Most of these are small finds in the vicinity of larger, attributed sites.
17. Many of the sites, however may belong to a relatively late phase within it, since exca-
    vations at Rehely Diilo in 1980 produced Koros material in association with proto-Vinca
    pottery.
18. In 1981 a fluxgate survey carried out by Mr Basil Turton covered an area of 40,000m2.
    This indicates a pattern of magnetic anomalies (shown by excavation to represent burnt
    houses) spaced about 50m apart.
19. The dimensions of these settlements may be slightly exaggerated, since comparison of the
    extent of the surface pottery scatter with the limits of features revealed by the fluxgate
    survey at Pohalom in 1980 showed that the pottery spread beyond the indications of
    structures.
20. It is a pleasure to acknowledge the advice and help of Hungarian colleagues: Nandor
    Kalicz, Janos Makkay, Istvan Torma and Gyorgy Goldman - none of whom should,
    however be held responsible for any errors or deficiencies of this article. The maps are
    the work of Nick Griffiths. Fieldwork in Hungary has been supported by the British
    Academy, University of Oxford, the Leverhulme Trust and the National Geographic
    Society.


The following 10 maps show the distribution of sites of successive periods in the
parishes of Devavanya, Szeghalom, Korosladany and Veszto (see Fig. 11.13 for
location), with limits of occupation reconstructed from MRT vol. 6 and field notes.




                                            314




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
11.19 The distribution ofKoros culture sites.


                                        315




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
THE    DEVELOPMENT          OF   NEOLITHIC       AND     COTTER   AGE    SETTLEMENT




11.20 The distribution of AVK (Alfold Linear Pottery) culture sites.




11.25 The distribution ofBolerazandBadenculture sites.


                                           316




                    This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                     All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN        PLAIN




11.22 The distribution of Tisza culture sites.




11.23 The distribution of Tiszapolgar culture sites.


                                        317




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
THE   DEVELOPMENT        OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COTTER     AGE     SETTLEMENT




11.24 The distribution of Bodrogkeresztur culture sites.




11.25 The distribution of Boleraz and Baden culture sites.


                                        318




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN         PLAIN




11.26 The distribution of third-millennium, tumuli.




11.27 The distribution of Early Bronze Age sites.


                                         319




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                        12
      Neolithic Exchange Systems in
      Central Europe, 6000-3500 BC
                                     (1987)

T h e results of identification programmes dealing with flint, hard rocks
and obsidian have long since exploded the idea that the Neolithic period
was characterised by self-sufficiency and an absence of trade (Chapter 4;
Willms 1982). Exploration of the range of items traded by Neolithic com-
munities has revealed a bewildering diversity of exchange systems covering
impressive distances and often involving large volumes of material. At the
same time, the application of radiocarbon chronologies and acceptance of
the implications of recalibration have emphasised just how large a span of
time we are dealing with - something like 4000 years between the intro-
duction of agriculture and the regular use of tin-bronze in central Europe.
It would thus be quite false to try and force the evidence for traded materials
into a single model of 'Neolithic trade': the diversity of evidence truly
reflects the major contrasts that must have existed in social and economic
organisation during these millennia.
   The large, relatively uniform alluvial plain of eastern Hungary provides
a natural laboratory for the study of lithic exchange systems, being prac-
tically devoid of stone resources but surrounded by mountain and piedmont
areas with a wealth of stones (including obsidian) and metal ores. The flint
and chert sources of Hungary are described elsewhere [Biro 1988; cf. also
Kaczanowska 1985]: in general they are of rather poor quality by com-

Tbe very different patterns of settlement and social organisation defined in
previous chapters for the three millennia following the introduction of farming
have correspondingly contrasting patterns in the circulation of material goods:
broadly; the frugality of a pioneer phase, the bulk circulation of materials in the
mature Neolithic, and the appearance of conspicuously exotic types of flint in the
Copper Age. This account of materials collected as part of the British-Hungarian
project was made possible by raw material identifications undertaken by Mrs C.
Takacs-Btro of the Hungarian Geological Institute, and first presented at the
Fourth International Flint Symposium in Brighton, 1983.


                                        320




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                  IN   CENTRAL     EUROPE,      6 0 0 0 - 3 5 0 0   BC


parison with siliceous materials from Jurassic and Cretaceous deposits
north of the Carpathians. The acquisition of cutting materials of any kind
thus required special procurement, while the acquisition of high-quality
materials for specific purposes involved particular effort. The sequence of
stone sources used in this area is thus an effective index of changing needs
and the scale of the sustaining area upon which local communities were able
to draw. That this area was able to acquire stone at all is significant; that it
did so in certain periods in enormous quantities or from great distances is
particularly interesting. However, these patterns only make sense when seen
in the context of complementary flows of other materials and the social
setting in which they took place. (For discussion see Chapter 10.)
    The proportions of various types of flaked stone materials at three
neighbouring sites of the period under consideration in Co. Bekes, eastern
Hungary is given in Figure 12.2. These assemblages are characteristic of
their respective periods, and similar observations (though not cast in quan-
titative form) have been made on other contemporary sites in this region.
The assemblages represent three distinctive systems: an early, pioneer phase
following the first introduction of agriculture; a phase of regional inter-
action in the Late Neolithic; and a phase of inter-regional exchange in the
Early Copper Age.


T H E PIONEER PHASE
The quantities of chipped stone material found on early Neolithic sites in the
centre of the Plain are not large, and the pieces themselves are generally
small. Partly worked cores were imported, but these and their debitage are
rare and good flint was carefully conserved - in one case the flakes and
debris from a knapping operation were carefully collected and stored in a
vessel (Kaczanowska, Kozlowski and Makkay 1981). At first, stone supplies
came mainly from the south; but as agricultural communities reached the
obsidian sources of the Zemplen mountains in the north, this material came
into widespread use. At Mehtelek, a site of the Szatmar group near Szatmar
(Satu Mare) on the Hungarian-Romanian border, it formed up to 80 per
cent of the chipped stone, the remainder being a great variety of other
stones. It was traded both to surrounding Mesolithic groups in Moravia
and Little Poland (Kalicz and Makkay 1977b, 17) and southwards to
the agricultural communities of the Plain. At one of these, the site of
Rehely-Diilo (Koros culture), some 170km from the sources, it was the
dominant material (Figure 12.2). The rest of the assemblage was made of
small quantities of less useful jasper, probably from river pebbles. Supplies
of obsidian were limited and perhaps sporadic. There was great variability
in the size of blades, and extensive reworking shows an intensive utilisation
of the material available.



                                        321




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    NEOLITHIC        EXCHANGE        SYSTEMS




REGIONAL INTERACTION
Within a few hundred years, however, this situation had been transformed:
by c.5000 BC large, prosperous lowland sites had established intensive
relations with an expanding periphery that was actively supplying quantities
of desirable rocks from the highland fringe. The amounts of material
recovered from settlements of this period are impressive: surface investi-
gations at the Late Neolithic site of Sarto (Szalkahat and Tisza cultures), a
settlement some 500m in diameter, have yielded over fifty greenstone axes
and more than 45kg of grinding stones, for instance (Figures 12.3,12.4). The


                                        322




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                  IN   CENTRAL      EUROPE,     6 0 0 0 - 3 5 0 0   BC




                                                                         <S

                                                                               .ov
                                                r
i„ KJO
                                                       1             1

                                                    POHALOM
                                                    Early Copper Age




% too-

                                                       SARTO
                                                      Late Neolithic




%   100

    50 -



                                               REHELY DULO
                                                      Early Neolithic
    60-

    50-

    40-




12.2 Changing proportions of imported materials on three sites in the centre of
the Great Hungarian Plain from 6000 to 4000 BC. The histograms give the
percentages by weight of different raw materials in the flaked stone assemblages
from three adjacent sites, representing the Koros, Tisza and Tiszapolgar periods
respectively. Note that this diagram shows only relative proportions: the absolute
quantity of obsidian, for instance, greatly expands in the Late Neolithic, and falls
away again in the Early Copper Age.




                                         323




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     NEOLITHIC       EXCHANGE        SYSTEMS




   mm
12.3 Types of imported materials at Sarto (Devavanya parish, Co. Bekes) in the
Late Neolithic (Szakalhat and Tisza periods): axes of volcanic and metamorphic
rocks, including trapezoid (left) and shoelast (right) forms.




12.4 As 12.3: saddle quern (length: 37.5cm; weight: 8.73kg).


flaked stone assemblage is dominated by large quantities of limnic hydro-
quartzite, imported in the form of tabular pre-cores weighing up to 1.35kg
(Figure 12.5). It is not a high-quality material, but its usage was prodigal -
large cores and quantities of debitage are found in abundance, as well as
tools such as knives, scrapers and sickles (Figure 12.6). Supplies were clearly
plentiful and reliable. Jasper was also used in small amounts, but more
significant is the sporadic appearance of small quantities of longer-distance
imports such as the type of flint found in the Mecsek mountains of south-
west Hungary, and of the radiolarite which occurs at a number of sources
on the southern fringes of the Carpathians and which was exploited by
Lengyel groups in western Hungary, Austria and Slovakia (see Chapter


                                        324




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                 IN   CENTRAL     EUROPE,      6 0 0 0 - 3 5 0 0   BC




12.6 As 12.3: hydroquartzite cores and core-trimming flakes (top), blades (middle)
and scrapers (below) - one blade with sickle-gloss.



                                       325




                This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     NEOLITHIC       EXCHANGE         SYSTEMS




12.7 As 12.3: obsidian cores and core-trimming flakes (top), blades (middle) and
scrapers (below).

4). Obsidian, although proportionally far less than the abundant hydro-
quartzite, was nevertheless available in large quantities: it occurs as large
cores, little smaller than the 'bombs' (ejecta) of the original raw material,
and as regular blades, implements and debitage (Figure 12.7). With the
obsidian at this site should also be mentioned a number of sherds of the fine,
decorated Biikk pottery which was made in the areas around the obsidian
sources to the north (Figure 12.8).
    Sites such as Sarto, which are conspicuous for their size and wealth,
probably represent the upper tier of a settlement hierarchy, being sur-
rounded by smaller settlements (Makkay 1982; Chapter 11). The major
sites occur at something like 30km intervals, and are located at points along
the major rivers (notably the Koros and lower Tisza), which must have
played a major role in the distribution of such items. However, within these
sites there is remarkably little evidence for social differentiation in the form
of rich households or well-equipped graves, or of material items distinctive
of an elite. Nevertheless, imported materials came in regular flows: their
movement was well organised and not just a sporadic windfall.
   Where were these materials coming from? Figure 12.9 represents a first
attempt to define the supply radii for some of them. Two areas in particular

                                        326




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   IN   CENTRAL     EUROPE,      6 0 0 0 - 3 5 0 0   BC




                                                                lll^ifi
            l«!i              31    41 ' Si            ' ?1     Si    9
                                                                     HO
12.8 As 12.3: sherds of imported fine pottery of the Biikk culture, incised and
incrusted with red paint.



stand out: first the edges of the Bihar Massif, to the east, along the upper
reaches of the various branches of the Koros River in Romania; and
secondly the north Hungarian mountains, linked either along the Tisza and
lower Koros or more directly along the flood-course of the Hortobagy. Both
areas are known as sources of cherts. Com§a (1967; 1976) has described
sources for cherts widely used in Neolithic times in the region of Crisana (fir
Valley), at Iozagel (on the White Koros) and in the Banat (Poiana Ruscai
mountains near Bega), while small shafts for limnic hydroquartzite are
known near Miskolc in north-east Hungary (Vertes 1964, 210). Axes of
volcanic and metamorphic rocks could have either a northern or an eastern
origin, but in the days before wheeled vehicles and pack animals the bulky
products like grinding-stones are likely to have been transported directly by
boat from the nearest eastern source. Direct access at certain seasons is a
possibility here, though the distances are impressive: 100km or more.
   Higher-value items - obsidian and decorated pottery - came from the
north over a slightly longer distance. Their bulk was smaller, but in the case
of pottery more fragile. The northern mountains form an interesting study
of the relationship between settlement and the exploitation of raw materials
(Figure 12.10). The mountains fall into three blocks: Matra, Biikk and

                                         327




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     NEOLITHIC       EXCHANGE         SYSTEMS




12.9 Supply distances for the major classes of lithic material at Sarto in the Late
Neolithic, c.SOOO BC.

Zemplen. The Biikk, in the middle, is the exception - it is limestone, and has
plentiful caves. Zemplen, on the other hand, is volcanic and metamorphic,
supplying a variety of rocks of which the most important was obsidian.
Other siliceous rocks also occur there. Two main sources of obsidian have
been distinguished analytically (Williams-Thorpe 1978; Williams-Thorpe et
al. 1984): one, which was the major supplier throughout prehistory, and the

                                         328




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                 IN   CENTRAL     EUROPE,      6 0 0 0 - 3 5 0 0   BC




sole Carpathian source for most of it, is just over the Czech border at
Seleska (Szolloske), in a fairly low-lying position. But just at the period
under discussion, smaller secondary sources within the Zemplen mountains
were opened up and specialised workshop settlements with hoards and
production-debris are known from the valleys leading down from them
(Figure 12.10, detail map). What is even more remarkable is the extent of


                                        329




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     NEOLITHIC       EXCHANGE        SYSTEMS


settlement in the Biikk mountains themselves. Occupation traces occur up
to 900m above sea level in the limestone caves that are famous for their
Palaeolithic assemblages. This upland occupation lasted only for a short
time from c.5000-4800 BC, and much of the area was then abandoned. The
sites seem to be tied in with the extensive trading opportunities of the
period. Remains from the caves show traces of hunting, sheep herding, and
evidence for pottery-making, as well as hoards both of axes and blades
(Lichardus 1974). It seems that, as well as being concerned with the direct
exploitation of sources in the Zemplen and nearby, these groups were also
acting as middlemen in the dispersal of this range of materials and were
also perhaps engaged in forms of secondary specialisation such as the manu-
facture of specially fine pottery or the transhumant movement of sheep. The
most easily recognisable product, obsidian, found its way 400km down
river to Transylvania and Jugoslavia, and also (along with some pottery)
across the Carpathians for 200km into Little Poland.
   The pattern of trade, then, was one of intensive localised movement of
highland products to adjacent lowlands, with one or two more special items
moving from one side of the Basin to the other, and occasionally just into
the area over the mountains from important sources. The asymmetry of this
reconstruction, in which durable items of many kinds were moving into the
Plain, strongly suggests the counter-movement of some balancing exportable
commodity, of which cattle is the most probable (Chapter 10). The cultural
pattern at this period is one of fragmentation, with a multitude of small
groupings defined by their fine pottery, suggesting a rather localised scale of
interaction in which middleman positions could be exploited, since there
was no elite participation in longer-distance trade by which intervening
areas could be bypassed. This, then, is what I have defined as a regional
network, and marks the first climax of trade activity within the Carpathian
Basin.


INTER-REGIONAL EXCHANGE
We now move to a very different situation. This is defined in the Hungarian
sequence as the beginning of the Copper Age (c.4500 BC), although
populations in surrounding areas were still stone-using and indeed in Poland
this period saw the development of open shaft-mining and specialist flint-
workshops. Technological labels - Neolithic, Eneolithic or Copper Age - are
less important than the recognition that a major change had occurred in
social organisation and the character of trade.
   In the examples presented here, this period is represented by the Early
Copper Age site of Pohalom (Tiszapolgar culture). The absolute quantities
are no longer as impressive as those of the preceding period, and the sites
have no obvious hierarchy; but the component of long-distance imports is
substantial. Hydroquartzite continues as an everyday material for small


                                        330




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                  IN   CENTRAL     EUROPE,      6 0 0 0 - 3 5 0 0   BC


cutting tools, and obsidian is also present; there are also significant numbers
of pieces of Mecsek flint and radiolarite. But almost half of the chipped
stone industry, including the larger and longer blades, is made of a Creta-
ceous flint which has been identified as coming from deposits in Wolhynia
(the region east of L'vov on the upper Dnestr: Kaczanowska 1981; 1985).
This was capable of being made into the longer blades which were thought
particularly desirable (see below). Such supplies were obtained on a regular
basis for some hundreds of years: Wolhynian flint makes up to 60 per cent
of assemblages of the succeeding Bodrogkeresztur period (c.3900 BC).


DISCUSSION
The three types of exchange systems characterised above form only a part
of the history of trade in lithic materials, which continued to circulate along-
side copper for a further 1000 years. This latter period saw the development
of the Sumeg flint mines in western Hungary and the major development
of bulk production and distribution in the flint-mining areas of the North
European Plain (Lech 1987; Schild 1987). The enlarged scale of flint pro-
duction must be related to the increasing population and accelerated rate of
forest clearance linked to the introduction of plough agriculture and more
extensive types of farming (Kruk 1980; Chapter 6).
    In northern Europe the need for stone axes in forest clearance was
marked by the development of effective upright axes with a long cutting
edge and rectangular cross-section (Montelius' 'thin-butted' and 'thick-
butted' types) that have no counterparts further south. These were produced
in very large quantities from mined flint. However, towards the end of the
third millennium there was a shift in north European flint production away
from axes and towards large cutting implements - especially daggers
but also knives and sickles. This is associated with the very widespread
distribution of specialised products such as the daggers of Grand Pressigny
flint, whose use as equipment for warrior males shows continuity with the
first copper daggers in north-west Europe, as demonstrated by Beaker grave-
goods in the Netherlands (Lanting, Mook and van der Waals 1973, 45). In
some respects, therefore, this change in northern Europe recapitulates the
type of transition described here for central Europe about 1000 years earlier.
The mass circulation of everyday items gave way to a concentration on
specific exotic materials and types with a more explicit symbolism of social
status. It is significant that the regular use of copper occurs in this context
in both areas. Materials such as obsidian seem to have been incapable of
carrying such a message: as with Spondylus shell, its main period of use
occurs in earlier Neolithic contexts at a lower level of social differentiation.
    The interpretation of studies of lithic material sources thus inevitably
leads not only to a consideration of the other items circulating in exchange
networks, but also to attempts at evaluating the social significance of the


                                        331




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    NEOLITHIC       EXCHANGE        SYSTEMS


materials in question and how they were manipulated by the individuals
concerned (Douglas and Isherwood 1980). The complementary evidence
from settlements and graves provides a starting-point for the analysis of
how such commodities were used by Neolithic populations. The study of
lithic artefacts thus remains a challenging area of archaeological research,
but one which cannot be isolated from more general consideration of the
archaeological record, and indeed of ethnography as well.




                                        332




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                         13
         The Genesis of Megaliths:
        Monumentality, Ethnicity and
            Social Complexity in
        Neolithic North-West Europe
                                     (1990)

                    Houses for the living,
                    Dolmens for the dead:
                    Are these distinctions 'on the ground'
                    Or only 'in the head'?
                    And whose head is it anyway:
                    The 'writer' of the 'text' -
                    Or just the archaeologist's
                    Who stumbled on it next?
                    I'll break my skull on megaliths
                    And join the pile of bones;
                    And then perhaps I'll empathise
                    With builders of the stones.
                                               (Old folk song)

MLonumental architecture was one of Gordon Childe's ten criteria of urban
civilisation; and monument building is still employed by evolutionary
archaeologists as an important index of social complexity. It is misleading,

On the western and northern edges of the central European loess corridor; lying
next to the sea, a very different pattern of Neolithic land-occupation occurred
from that in Hungary - inscribing the landscape not with settlements but tombs.
Chapter 5 suggested that the answer lay in a fusion between Mesolithic indigenes
and incoming Neolithic groups; this chapter; written for a World Archaeology
special issue on monumentally, describes the physical setting and chronology of
the process. The account was much influenced by the work of Richard Bradley
(who solicited it) and Ian Hodder. It demonstrates that local manifestations can
only be understood in the context of interactions over very large areas; and it
shows how a setting within such large physical and cultural structures influences
the 'personality3 of a region.


                                         333




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      THE    GENESIS     OF    MEGALITHS:


however, to approach all monumentality with the same model in mind.
Although megalithic monuments were constructed for two millennia in
Atlantic Europe, they belong to a relatively early phase of the development
of farming economies there. Unlike the architectural achievements of early
Mesopotamia or Mesoamerica, they were the products of societies able to
mobilise relatively unskilled labour rather than specialist craftsmanship;
and their experiments, while impressive, gave rise to no wider architectural
tradition. They thus belong more to the spread of farming than to the onset
of urbanism.
    In Childe's view, the whole European megalithic phenomenon was itself
an indirect reflection of contemporary oriental civilisation, carried as part of
a mortuary cult by seaborne missionaries along the Atlantic coastlands.
While radiocarbon chronologies have severed this diffusionist link, mega-
lithic monuments still retain some of the glamour of this earlier association;
they have thus been treated as indicative of new forms of social organis-
ation, or indications of territorial consciousness as the result of a shortage
of land (Renfrew 1976; Chapman 1981; Hodder 1984). In consequence
they have continued to be seen as something additional to the processes
leading to the appearance of farming in north-west Europe, marking out
their users as in some sense more 'advanced' than their neighbours. It would
be a mistake, however, to draw too sharp a line between early constructions
in earth and stone and the substantial timber buildings of contemporary
Neolithic groups in central Europe; or to see the effort devoted to 'religious'
structures as fundamentally different in character from that devoted to
'domestic' structures elsewhere. By considering the genesis of megalithic
monuments in this wider context, I hope to avoid the teleological overtones
of an evolutionary view which sees them simply as a stage in the rise of
social complexity, emerging as a local response to problems of population
pressure. Instead of examining their evolutionary credentials, therefore, this
paper explores the initial role of monuments in the spread of farming to the
outer parts of Europe.
    The areas under consideration here - western France, Britain, northern
Germany, northern Poland, and southern Scandinavia - form an arc around
the central European loess belt along which farming spread from 5500 BC
onwards, and to which it was initially confined. In each of these areas, dense
hunting and fishing (Mesolithic) populations existed for a long period after
the arrival of the first farming groups on the loess. It will be argued that this
relationship was critical in explaining the beginnings of monumentality in
each area; and the argument will be pursued in greater detail in relation to
western France and the North European Plain.
    It is useful to divide European earthen and megalithic burial monuments
into two major cycles: the first, which is that considered here, lasted from
c.4500 to 3500 BC; the second, which I prefer to distinguish by the term
'neo-megalithic', began c.3500 and lasted in some areas down to 2500 or


                                        334




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    NEOLITHIC       NORTH-WEST          EUROPE


even 2000 BC. These two cycles were different in character, those of the
second cycle being associated with use of plough agriculture and rather
different types of settlement pattern, as well as with the spread of mega-
lithism to new areas. In the following sketch I shall deal only with the first
cycle, and attempt to defend the view that the variety of early monumental
forms was an essential part of the interaction between natives and new-
comers, and was not due to more generalised factors such as a scarcity of
land.


EARLY FARMING AND THE CREATION OF COMMUNITY
The spread of farming to Europe took two forms. In the Balkans and central
Europe, the 'west Asiatic package' was imported wholesale, with cereal
farming (horticulture), livestock keeping, pottery, and villages of substantial
houses. This pattern spread, largely through migration, along the central
European loess corridor. In the central and west Mediterranean, a second
pattern prevailed: cereals were less important, and there was initially no
radical alteration of settlement patterns or replacement of population.
Individual elements of the farming technocomplex were selectively inte-
grated within an existing way of life. This latter pattern was also typical of
the later spread of farming among 'sub-Neolithic' groups in the far north
and east of Europe.
   Around the margins of the area occupied by immigrant farmers in central
Europe, a more complex set of interactions between incoming and native
groups took place, associated with the transfer not just of the more easily
transmissible features such as pottery and livestock, but of cereal cultivation
as well. In the circum-Alpine area, the nucleated village pattern was trans-
ferred to native groups around the margins of morainic lakes, to produce the
characteristic pattern of 'lake-villages'. Here the spread of horticulture to a
new ecological setting was directly associated with a pattern of village life
and its community structure. On the western and northern margins, how-
ever, this simple correlation did not occur. The spread of cereal cultivation
was associated, not with substantial timber villages, but with what can be
considered as their monumental surrogates: mounds and megaliths. This
pattern should thus be seen as the first stage in the transformation of
indigenous foragers into indigenous farmers; and monumental tombs
appear to have been an essential element in that transformation.
   This interpretation of the role of the first monuments in north-west
Europe rests on two arguments. The first is inductive: the mutually exclusive
occurrence of substantial villages and non-domestic ('funerary') structures
in the archaeological record of Neolithic Europe. The second is deductive:
the need for an organisational framework (involving both material culture
and social relations) appropriate to the new requirements of cereal
cultivation.


                                        335




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       THE    GENESIS     OF   MEGALITHS:


   The first point is very widely applicable to the study of Neolithic (and
earlier Bronze Age) settlement patterns: indeed, it is almost an axiom of
archaeological research that substantial settlement traces and funerary
monuments seem mutually exclusive (e.g. Kowalczyk 1970, 161 on TRB
Poland; Scarre 1983,330 on later Neolithic southern France). A comparison
of Neolithic north-west Europe with the central European loess zone is
especially instructive. The absence of burial monuments in central Europe is
not due simply to the lack of stone in this area. While both cemeteries and
earth-built structures such as enclosures are not uncommon features in
Neolithic central Europe, their combination in the form of monumental
burials scarcely exists. Instead, substantial settlements fill the archaeological
record. In western Europe, conversely, the burial monuments are often all
that we have in the absence of intensive survey or lucky accident; especially
in the earlier period, settlement traces are scattered and unimpressive. This
marked contrast is not accidental: it corresponds to a fundamental
difference in the structure of settlement. Whereas the village was the basic
settlement unit and primary community of Neolithic central Europe
(whether in the form of a Balkan tell or a looser aggregation of substantial
timber longhouses in the loess zone), early Neolithic settlement in western
Europe was insubstantial and dispersed. The element of permanence seems
to have been provided not by the settlements themselves, but by monu-
mental tombs and enclosures.
   The second point explains why such monumentality was necessary. The
requirements of cereal cultivation would have necessitated a more radical
social reorganisation of hunting and foraging communities than the
keeping of small quantities of domestic livestock. It required a continuing
commitment to particular places, and to a social and ecological trans-
formation of the landscape. Larger labour teams (of perhaps twenty to fifty
men) would be required for certain operations in the farming cycle, and
cultivation required constant hoeing and weeding. These placed a premium
on the recruitment of a labour force, and thus on control both of female
labour and female reproductive capacity. In place of the demographic flux
characteristic of foraging societies, it was necessary to create stable lineages
whose depth could provide a dependable pool of labour through the
widened cone of kinship. In the immigrant Neolithic societies of central
Europe, this continuity was assured through the existence of the village
community as a residential unit, cross-cut by family ties and made up of
individual households occupying substantial longhouses, whose con-
struction (like forest clearing and harvesting) involved the co-operation of
several households. To reproduce this social mechanism in the absence of
large, stable residential units required the invention of some equivalent
ritual mark of continuity and common descent. The monumental tomb was
the surrogate for the living village (Sherratt 1984, 129; Hodder 1984, 54):
a permanent house and household of the dead amongst the insubstantial


                                         336




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   NEOLITHIC       NORTH-WEST          EUROPE


huts scattered within its territory. Often reconstructed and enlarged, such
monuments served their communities for many generations: as the burial
places of founding ancestors, as communal ossuaries, and as a continuing
focus for ritual.
   The adoption of monumental tombs seems thus to be characteristic of
areas which were already fairly densely occupied by Mesolithic groups, who
adopted Neolithic horticulture on the central European model, but who
did not not take over the village-based settlement pattern with which it
had previously been associated. Instead, tombs formed the basis for their
symbolic construction of community (cf. Cohen 1985). It can thus be argued
that these tombs, like the architectural elaboration and permanence of
Bandkeramik and tell settlements, were as basic a feature of early cereal
cultivation as the hoe and the axe: the material infrastructure of the
organisation of labour was as crucial in the establishment of horticulture as
the more obvious elements of technology (Thomas 1988). Moreover, the
advantages of this form of organisation were not limited to the cultivation
of cereals; and once established, could be applied to other modes of sub-
sistence (such as marine fishing) where the recruitment of a more extensive
labour force gave a competitive advantage.


MEGALITHIC MORPHOLOGY AND ITS DEVELOPMENT IN
NORTH-WEST EUROPE
In many parts of northern and western Europe, a general sequence of
structural types may be observed (sometimes even within the same
monument); and since it occurs in widely separated areas at different times,
it seems to be a general trend rather than evidence of direct contact. The
earliest forms of burial monument are frequently long mounds of earth and
timber, often trapezoidal in shape. Stone then replaces timber for revetments
and internal structures, still often in long mounds; round forms then become
more frequent, and the chambers increase in size. These phases may overlap,
or occur in spatially discrete areas, and there is no simple succession: types
may continue to co-exist and be consciously elaborated in opposition to
each other, older forms may be revived or accommodated to new ones; so
that individual cases must therefore be explained in their context. Yet there
is an underlying regularity, which demands explanation.
    From the perspective indicated above, it is significant that the sequence
begins with monuments that have explicit similarities with contemporary
houses in the loess belt, and then progressively diverges from this pattern.
Following an idea of Gordon Childe (1949) and suggestions by Stuart
Piggott in relation to unchambered long-barrows (1966), this argument has
been persuasively developed by Ian Hodder (1984), who points out the
many analogies between the houses of the later Bandkeramik tradition and
the first monumental tombs of the western and northern Neolithic, from the


                                       337




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      THE    GENESIS     OF    MEGALITHS:


middle Vistula to the Charente. In the metaphor of the longhouse, therefore,
a diverse array of cultures in western and northern Europe would have
symbolised their adoption not only of a new mode of subsistence but the
organisation necessary to sustain it.
    The transformation of these timber surrogates into stone was a con-
sequence both of the local occurrence of stone in the new territories beyond
the loesslands, and of the need for more permanent monuments (just as
the church in a medieval village was often the only building of stone). More-
over, the use of extravagantly large stones ('megaliths' sensu stricto) in their
construction suggests a further element. In a society where labour was the
most important commodity, moving large stones symbolised the size of
the workforce which could be assembled at any one time - an epideictic
demonstration of demographic strength and co-ordinated effort. The
monuments developed a meaning in their own right, as well as an inherited
typological continuity from their skeuomorphic origins. These construc-
tional changes in early monuments were also accompanied by an
enlargement of their use. Early long-mounds often cover individuals (who
probably represent members of founding lineages rather than 'chiefs');
chambered megalithic tombs received greater numbers of individual
remains (and often operated as a 'bone bank' in the wider circulation of
human relics); and many of these 'tombs' continued to receive offerings and
act as foci for non-monumental burials long after they themselves ceased to
be used for interment.
    It would be wrong, however, to see these changes simply as a linear
sequence or as a prescriptive necessity. The longhouse model, already
monumentalised, was apparently the common stimulus to megalithism in
each of the areas concerned; but due weight must also be given to the role
of indigenous inhabitants in this process, for this is basic to the overall
distributional argument (which must also take into account areas such as
Iberia, remote from the central European loesslands), and to the strong local
continuity generally evident between Mesoliths and megaliths. Detailed
local distributional studies can here suggest an answer, for there is often a
spatial contrast between the first long, unchambered forms on the one hand,
and the round or chambered forms on the other. The former often avoid
Mesolithic concentrations, the latter often coincide with them (see detailed
examples below). It looks as if the early long forms, with a central European
background, provoked a conscious reaction from native groups, perhaps
associated with a different conceptual or cosmological framework. Some
elements of megalithic design, such as the round mounds and chambers,
may therefore be an indigenous contribution to the process - an idea that
goes back at least to Montelius (1899, 41-6). If the chambers and circular
forms reflect native house-types or concepts of space, the proliferation
of such types would mark the widespread adoption of monumentality and
 its associated social structures by indigenous communities; and various


                                         338




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    NEOLITHIC       NORTH-WEST          EUROPE


degrees of fusion or incorporation of one group by the other might then
occur.
    This reconstruction implies the participation of both incoming and native
elements in the process by which agriculture reached the outer parts of
northern and western Europe, and the monumentalism which accompanied
it. The model could apply equally to western France, the British Isles, and
the North European Plain and Scandinavia - all of which combined
substantial indigenous populations with potential contacts to adjacent parts
of the loesslands. Their similarities of sequence would in this view result
from a common background and similar influences, rather than from any
coastwise contacts as were envisaged in the traditional picture. That these
remarkably parallel developments took place independently in each area is
indicated by the fact that while monumentality in western France began
c.4600 BC, it only appeared in Denmark c.3800 BC. While the situation in
Britain is less clearly established (and will not be discussed here), a date of
c.4200-4000 BC is a plausible estimate. The process of expansion would
thus have occurred in a clockwise progression, successively but indepen-
dently, in three separate areas around the north-west margins of the loess.


THE GENESIS OF MEGALITHS: FRANCE
One recent revelation of French archaeology has been the extent of
Impressed Ware influence from the west Mediterranean (Joussaume 1986),
which by the later sixth millennium reached west-central France as far north
as the Vendee and along the northern margins of the Massif Central (Figure
13.1). Although this has led some (west!) French archaeologists to assert its
importance for subsequent developments, the early date of its appearance
(c.5300 BC) has rather served to emphasise that local monumentality in fact
only began with the onset of influences from the Paris Basin and the
loesslands, some 700 years later. The widespread distribution of pottery
related to Impressed Ware, and the minimal changes in genre de vie which
accompanied it, suggest the dissemination of easily accommodated novelties
such as pottery and domestic livestock among existing networks of native
Mesolithic contact, and it is doubtful whether any cultivation of cereals is
implied. Domestic livestock and a local variety of simple pottery also
appeared in parts of Brittany during this time, and the well-known shell
middens with cist burials from Hoedic and Teviec in the Morbihan date to
this period. Since some twenty metres of the contemporary coastline have
been lost in the postglacial eustatic rise in sea-level (in contrast to northern
Denmark where it has been preserved through isostatic uplift), these sites
must stand pars pro toto for a considerable concentration of indigenous
coastal settlement in that region.
   The second revelation of recent work has been the extent of Band-
keramik settlement - ultimately of central European origin - in the Paris


                                        339




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      THE    GENESIS     OF   MEGALITHS:




13 A Neolithic France, 5000-4700 BC, showing initial Impressed Ware spread
from the south, and Linear Bandkeramik (LBK) intrusion into the Paris Basin and
beyond. Data from Constantin, Joussaume, Roussot-Larroque, Lichardus-Itten,
LHelgouach.

Basin and adjoining areas at the western end of the loess zone by c.5200 BC,
and the extent to which epi-Bandkeramik influences penetrated into the
western margins (Constantin 1985). In the period from c.5000-4700 BC,
sites belonging to successive epi-Bandkeramik groups expanded westwards
in three salients, following the loess plains: along the Somme through
Picardy; into Normandy, reaching the Plain of Caen; and south-westwards
across the Plain of Beauce into the middle Loire and towards the Gate of
Poitou (see Figure 13.2). The pottery of these groups began to diverge
strongly from the mainstream Bandkeramik tradition and its successors in
the Rhineland: it carried comb-impressed ornament and had a distinctive


                                       340




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                  NEOLITHIC        NORTH-WEST          EUROPE




13.2 Neolithic France, 4700-4300 BC, showing interaction between Paris Basin
(Cerny) group and indigenous populations in the west, with early monuments.
Data from Constantin, Joussaume, Burnez, Mohen, Giot, UHelgouach, Le Roux,
Kinnes.

bone filler - features which may perhaps indicate a native contribution to
the tradition. Although western finds are mainly pottery (often recovered
from beneath later monuments), sites of these groups in the Paris Basin
show typical late Bandkeramik trapezoidal house-plans (e.g. Maisse,
Essonne).
   This far-reaching extension of the central European farming tradition,
albeit receptive to western elements, was carried further and into more
intimate admixture with indigenous groups in the following phase, that
of Cerny, which corresponds chronologically to middle Roessen in the
Rhineland (Figure 13.3). Late Roessen influence then gradually brought

                                       341




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      THE    GENESIS     OF   MEGALITHS:




133 Schematic chronological chart of the cultural succession in western and
northern Europe, on a calibrated radiocarbon timescale. Asterisks mark the
beginning of monument building: note the later onset of monumentality in the
north.

back the Paris Basin into the Rhineland orbit, while western Cerny groups
(e.g. Chambon) formed part of an emerging western complex including
Bougon, Cous and Carn wares. This phase, from roughly 4700-4300 BC,
saw the genesis of a new pattern of western farming. The complex inter-
digitation of newcomers and natives took place along three principal routes:
in Normandy and the adjacent Channel Islands; in the areas around the
mouth of the Loire; and in the departements of Charente, Charente mari-
time and Deux-Sevres (Figure 13.2). Two basic forms of monumental
tombs resulted from these contacts: long-mounds covering burials in
a timber or stone-lined space without external access; and stone-built
chamber-tombs with an entrance passage giving continued access from
outside (passage-graves). I shall argue that the former show a direct con-
nection with contemporary longhouses, and that the latter are best seen as
a native reaction; (but it should be noted that tombs enclosed by a circular
ditch and approached by a long passage formed by parallel ditches occur
in a Cerny context in the Paris Basin at Passy-sur-Yonne, so that an
explanation in terms of this origin is also possible for the circular passage-
graves).
   It is in Normandy and the Channel Islands that Cerny influences seem to

                                        342




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    NEOLITHIC       NORTH-WEST          EUROPE


be most direct, and in which its pottery is most plentiful; here, too, that the
long-mound tradition seems initially to be the dominant one (Hibbs 1983).
Indeed, longhouse villages may have existed not far away at this time, on the
rich loess soils of eastern Normandy. Important examples of long mounds
from western Normandy and the Islands are Les Fouaillages on Guernsey
(Kinnes 1982), with its stone-edged triangular or trapezoid mound covering
several cists, and the long-mound currently under excavation by Kinnes and
Chancerel at Colombiers sur Seulles near Caen. Les Fouaillages dates to
c.4600 BC; slightly later, on radiocarbon evidence, is the long (though
not trapezoid) cairn of La Hoguette near Caen, with its dozen dry-stone
passage-graves with round chambers, indicating affinities to the early
passage-graves of Brittany (L'Helgouach and Le Roux 1986).
   Long-mounds (often defined by a peristalith and enclosing cists) occur in
eastern Brittany and the Carnac region, and at the mouth of the Loire - in
the two latter cases adjacent to clusters of monuments including early
passage-graves (Figure 13.2). Pottery from the long-mounds hints at Cerny
connections along the Loire. Further round the coast of Brittany to the
north-west, where no long-mounds are known, are mid-fifth-millennium
multiple passage-graves such as Barnenez with its trapezoidal mound, and
the trapezoidal cairn (later enclosed in a circular blocking-mound) of lie
Carn. These are mostly of drystone construction, though some of the
chambers are truly megalithic. These funerary monuments are associated
with the plain Carn ware, which shows similarities with those from Bougon
and Cous further south and together define an emerging 'Atlantic' cultural
province with a stong indigenous background.
   A crucial complex of monuments near the southern salient is that at
Bougon (Deux-Sevres), with long trapezoidal mounds (one enclosing small
cists) and simple chambered tombs in round mounds, all from the mid-fifth
millennium, as well as later and more developed forms. At nearby St Soline,
multiple passage-graves occur in a trapezoidal mound; while nearer the
coast in the Forest of Benon and at Bouhet there are numerous long-
mounds, one at the latter covering a timber structure (Joussaume 1986). All
the diversity of early western megalithic forms is here present within a small
compass - unfortunately without the degree of chronological resolution
necessary to establish typological priorities, but clearly in a context where
influences from the western loesslands were interacting with native
traditions. The situation can best be described as one of morphological flux
in which long-mounds and stone-built passage-graves appeared in varying
combinations. Long-mounds seem to initiate the sequence, and to provide a
continuing influence, although small passage-graves (often combined in
composite monuments of various shapes) seem to have been more adaptable
to local needs.
   How can these developments be summarised? The pattern of monument-
building seems to have crystallised on the margins of loess-based settlement


                                         343




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     THE    GENESIS      OF   MEGALITHS:


with its longhouse villages, at a time when cereal cultivation was being
adopted within a more dispersed pattern of settlement by native Mesolithic
populations in surrounding areas. In each area, and arguably at the
beginning of the process, early monuments took the form of trapezoidal
long-mounds covering wooden structures or small stone cists. Several are
associated with pottery ultimately of Bandkeramik tradition, and contem-
porary with Roessen in west-central Europe. It is not improbable that they
were erected by colonists from the loess zone; but it is equally possible that
they were built by natives in contact with longhouse village settlements. The
two are not exclusive, since recruitment of a labour force would be an
important initial objective of early settlers, and the two groups were not
strangers to each other. Whichever was the case, these longhouse-like
models initiated a period of rapid monumental innovation.
   It appears that the external input was stronger nearer to the main loess
extension in the north (Normandy), and the native element stronger in the
south (Brittany and west-central France). Passage-graves were particularly
characteristic of areas where relatively dense Mesolithic settlement can be
inferred, especially on the coasts. Their basic design, a round chamber in a
round mound, may be a direct reference to indigenous house types; and the
provision of a passage for continued access after interment may suggest a
different attitude to the dead: but the frequent grouping of passage-graves
in trapezoidal mounds shows an accommodation to the exterior appearance
of the long-mound model. Passage-graves - at first drystone structures with
corbelled chambers, often several grouped together as a single monument,
then increasingly megalithic and with single, larger chambers with internal
subdivisions - became the most frequent form of monument in western
France, and it seems as if the initial loessland stimulus was largely absorbed
in the native reaction. The long-mound tradition did, however, survive in
certain enclaves, and was the basis for further developments on this theme
in the Middle Neolithic. I shall return to this in a later section.


THE GENESIS OF MEGALITHS: NORTHERN EUROPE
The major reservoirs of Bandkeramik population in north-central Europe
were the loess-covered basins along the major northward-draining rivers:
Vistula, Oder, Elbe and Rhine. Some penetration of farming populations
beyond the loess, especially along the Oder and Vistula, took pioneer
Bandkeramik groups into the zone of glacial-meltwater valleys (Urstrom-
taler) in Poland and eastern Germany, where they established longhouse
village settlements on small patches of fine-grained soils in Kujavia, west
Pomerania and the Uckermark. To the north of these lay the glacial outwash
sands and moraines of the North European Plain, and the shallow
coastlands of the Baltic with the Jutland peninsula and islands. Mesolithic
groups occupied many of the more productive habitats in this area,


                                       344




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   NEOLITHIC       NORTH-WEST          EUROPE




13.4 Northern Europe, 4700-4000 BC, showing imports from Bandkeramik
successor-groups (Roessen and Lengyel) to Mesolithic communities in the North
European Plain; the west Baltic maritime Mesolithic (Ertebolle culture) is
emphasised. Data from van der Waals, Brandt, Schwabedissen, Gramsch,
Kozlowski, Fischer, Jennbert.
especially by lakes and rivers but particularly on the west Baltic coastlands
where shellmounds and fishing stations demonstrate the importance of
littoral and marine resources.
    On the loesslands, later Bandkeramik was succeeded in the west by
Roessen and further east by Lengyel, with its closer links to the Carpathian
Basin and south-east Europe. The outposts of central European farming
along the Oder and Vistula retained their southern contacts, while inter-
acting with local native populations as shown by finds of imported pottery
and stone shafthole axes in later Mesolithic contexts in the surrounding area
(Figure 13.4). Pottery making, and perhaps some domestic livestock, was
widely adopted as part of the indigenous way of life, seen most notably in
the Ertebolle culture of southern Scandinavia. These coastal Mesolithic
groups achieved a considerable degree of social complexity, largely asso-
ciated with specialised marine fishing. This stable co-existence lasted for
more than half a millennium, during which no major structural trans-
formation took place (Figure 13.4).


                                        345




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      THE    GENESIS      OF   MEGALITHS:


    In the pioneer phase of Bandkeramik colonisation, the domestic
structures were clusters of longhouses, generally 25-3Om in length, grouped
in villages or in hamlets strung out along rivercourses. In the subsequent
phase (Roessen or Lengyel), beginning around 4800 BC, a new pattern
emerged, with single, larger longhouses, often associated with enclosures or
stockades. Some of these longhouses were truly vast, reaching 45-50m at
sites like Inden 1 or Biskupin 18a, and a massive >65m (the full length was
not preserved) at Bochum-Hiltrop (Miiller-Karpe 1968, Tafel 234). By late
Roessen times in the western part of this area, such massive longhouses
show a tendency to fragment into a series of smaller, square buildings, as at
Berry-au-Bac or the Goldberg. These changes reflect adjustments to the size
and composition of the domestic unit as settlement proliferated within the
loess belt and began tentatively to spread beyond it.
    During the early fourth millennium, signs of a fusion between groups
occupying the loess areas of the North European Plain and their native
neighbours became evident, indicated archaeologically in the development
of the TRB (Funnel-neck beaker) cultures. This blanket term is an unfor-
tunate one, since it carries over some outdated overtones of 'nordic influ-
ence' from an earlier phase of prehistoric studies: but it correctly identifies
the process of convergence which was taking place between the northern
loesslands and surrounding territories, at a time of general inter-regional
contact, realignment of exchange networks and cultural fusion contem-
porary with the developments of the south-east European Copper Age. This
resulted in the formation of a series of regional groupings, broadly following
the earlier pattern of Roessen and Lengyel cultures, such as Michelsberg in
the Rhineland and Baalberge on the Elbe. These, however, show a quite new
form of settlement pattern at a local level; for the domestic sites were
generally much less substantial, and instead the non-domestic sites such
as earthwork enclosures and burials became more emphasised. The former
are more common in the Rhineland, the latter on the Elbe, where
they sometimes took the form of stone cists in small mounds (Fischer
1956).
    Baalberge sites, spreading from the Middle Elbe, occurred in small
clusters in the morainic lakelands of Mecklenburg to the north, where they
seem initially to have avoided centres of native population (Preuss 1966).
In the north-west corner of Germany, in Lower Saxony and Schleswig-
Holstein, there seems to have been a greater degree of admixture between
local Mesolithic communities and the immediate successors of Roessen just
to the south; lakeside and coastal settlements from this period show a more
extensive use of pottery and may have imported cereals from their southern
neighbours. Neither of these processes of localised interaction, however,
produced a major shift towards agriculture with fundamental demographic
consequences. Hunting and fishing remained the basis of the economy:
the settlements of these marginal groups consisted for the most part of


                                         346




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   NEOLITHIC       NORTH-WEST          EUROPE


insubstantial groups of round or D-shaped huts, and there were as yet no
monumental tombs. A similar situation existed in the Rhine delta, where
Swifterbant and Hazendonk groups continued until Middle Neolithic times
(beginning c.3500 BC) to maintain a comparable relationship with
Michelsberg populations upstream on the loess.
   A somewhat different pattern characterised this process further east in
Poland, in the region centred on the Urstromtal of the middle Vistula and
Notec, the area known as Kujavia. Here the older pattern of trapezoidal
longhouses on scattered enclaves of fine-grained blackearth soils lasted
somewhat longer than in the west; and in their immediate hinterland, within
the morainic zone, there appeared a pottery assemblage which broadly
resembles Baalberge and is named after the site of Sarnowo (Kosko 1980).
The initial phases of this assemblage seem to overlap with the final phase of
Lengyel nearby (e.g. at Brzesc Kujawski), but the two groups are spatially
discrete; they might thus be considered as communities peripheral to the
Lengyel villages, but intermarrying with native groups. Their domestic sites
were insubstantial. This close juxtaposition and inter-relationship between
Sarnowo and final Lengyel explains the appearance of the monumental
tombs which characterise this group: the 'Kujavian graves'. These elongated
trapezoidal mounds, outlined by morainic boulders and covering single
burials sometimes with wooden structures, are direct copies in earth and
stone of contemporary timber houses (Midgley 1985). The significance of
these tombs is that they seem to have provided a model of monumentality
which answered the needs of pioneer farming groups, establishing
themselves in new territories and drawing in native populations, over a large
part of northern Europe. What is noteworthy about this pattern was the
way it served both to incorporate native populations and to maintain
cultural links with the loesslands to the south.
   The distribution of these forms of long funerary monuments in northern
Europe forms an interesting pattern: they occur predominantly in the zone
of glacial outwash sands, running across the North European Plain north of
the loess but south of the young-moraine and coastal belt with its continuing
concentrations of Mesolithic settlement (Midgley 1985; Figure 13.5). The
latter areas were to become the heartlands of Nordic megalith-building, in
the period after 3700 BC; but this later development can only be understood
in relation to an earlier spread of long, unchambered forms. Unchambered
long-mounds, often in groups, form the principal type of Neolithic monu-
ment in Kujavia, Pomerania and central Meckenburg, where the very large
numbers of such mounds, and the absence of later forms of megalithic
tombs, suggest that they remained the predominant form of monument
down to the later fourth millennium BC. Similar structures, the so-called
kammerlose Hiinenbetten, are found further west, along the lower Elbe, in
the Altmark and the Sachsenwald (Sprockhoff 1938). Northwards again,
they occur in central and northern Jutland, where the best excavated


                                        347




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      THE    GENESIS      OF   MEGALITHS:




13.5 Northern Europe, 4000-3500 BC, showing interaction between central
European (Michelsberg, Baalberge, Sarnowo-Wiorek) groups and indigenous
populations in the North European Plain, with early monuments. Data from
Preufi, Sprockhoff, Schuldt, Kozlowski, Midgley, Madsen, Aner. [Long-mounds are
shown as originating in central Poland before spreading westwards because of the
unique survival of the long-house model there into the period of long-mound
genesis; note also the common drinking-set: Figs 16.4, 16.5.]

examples are to be found, dated to c.3800 BC (Madsen 1979). These north
German and Danish monuments again seem to fit themselves into the
interstices of existing distributions, and should perhaps be seen as a series of
small-scale migrations, travelling from east to west, and absorbing local
populations into the new pattern at each stage; but maintaining their
exchange networks with the south.
   This pattern is evident in western Denmark, where the first unchambered
long-mounds occur in Jutland - an inland area less densely settled by
Mesolithic populations - in association with pottery of the Volling group
(Madsen 1986). A particularly noteworthy feature is the occurrence in
Jutland of perforated copper discs, imported via Poland from Copper Age


                                        348




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    NEOLITHIC       NORTH-WEST          EUROPE


groups in the Carpathian Basin. The import of copper axes is also reflected
in the design of thin-butted flint axes, whose flat sides show the influence
of copper forms. Such a small-scale intrusion of southerners, building
monuments of earth and timber as well as introducing various exotic items,
would help to explain the burst of megalith-building which took place in the
following few centuries, principally in eastern Denmark and Mecklenburg.
The first Neolithic groups in this area were associated with a somewhat
different set of flintwork and pottery types: point-butted axes (unaffected by
copper models), flake-axes of Ertebolle ancestry, and pottery of the Oxie or
A-group that links the Danish Islands both to Mecklenburg and Scania.
These features demonstrate a considerable degree of continuity from
Ertebelle and related Mesolithic groups. While ecological changes may have
played some part in destabilising native coastal populations (Rowley-
Conwy 1984), the major impetus for change seems to have been the arrival
of a foreign cultural model in adjacent parts of north Germany and Jutland.
   The megalithic forms characteristic of areas with a strong Mesolithic
background are the dolmens (Danish: dysser), i.e. closed megalithic cham-
bers made from glacial erratic blocks, set either in round or in long (usually
rectangular) mounds. Although the dolmen chambers have no passages, and
are thus not accessible from outside, they do nevertheless show some
resemblance to the size and shape of the small huts in contemporary use.
The long chambered mounds (langdysser) occur both on the east Danish
islands and in Jutland, around and including the area where unchambered
forms first appeared; the round mounds (runddysser) are largely confined to
eastern Denmark, which has the greatest density of dolmens (Bekmose
1978). The megalithic chamber is thus principally associated with areas
outside the initial long-mound area; but the two ideas were rapidly com-
bined (at Bygholm Norremark in central Jutland, for instance, a trapezoid
mound, overlying wooden buildings and graves and outlined by a post-
bedding trench, was subsequently covered by a rectangular long-mound
with a peristalith and megalithic chamber, showing the local replacement of
an early timber form by a chambered, megalithic version: Madsen 1979).
   As in France, therefore, there seems to be a spatial polarity between the
intrusive monumentalised longhouse and the development of alternative
megalithic forms in areas where substantial populations already existed.
The initial stimulus thus gave rise to complex reaction and interaction,
producing a range of monuments with overlapping characteristics, but with
a continuing set of cultural differences. This polarity is also reflected in other
ways, for instance between the rich grave goods which accompanied burials
in Jutland, and the votive deposits of similar materials (amber, stone axes)
which occur in the Islands. (These contrasts were to re-emerge in later
phases of prehistory, for instance with the spread of Corded Ware.) The
continuing external connections between the intrusive long-mound groups
and central Europe would have been responsible for introducing new


                                        349




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     THE    GENESIS      OF   MEGALITHS:


features such as the collared flask (already known in Poland: Knell 1981)
and other features which came to characterise the Early Neolithic C phase
in Denmark (see Chapters 15 and 16).
   It is even more difficult in these circumstances to distinguish clearly
between 'natives' and 'newcomers', since the whole process is characterised
by the gradual breakdown of this distinction, through intermarriage and
incorporation. Nevertheless, it is possible to perceive different mechanisms
by which farming was spread northwards: small-scale colonisation from the
loesslands, shifts of marginal groups into areas of intervening opportunity,
in situ acculturation of indigenous populations, together with isolated
pockets of resistance, where hunting groups seem to have continued to exist
alongside farmers. These form a complex mosaic, sometimes maintaining
a degree of cultural discreteness, but at the same time participating in
exchange networks that in some cases extended far back into central
Europe.


ALTERNATIVE IDEOLOGIES AND THE RHETORIC OF TOMBS
In discussing the French evidence, it was suggested that the contrasting
designs of long mounds and passage graves, tentatively attributed to a
background in incoming and native groups respectively, might have some
deeper ideological significance. This view receives some support from the
subsequent history of megaliths in this area during the Middle Neolithic
period of the French sequence (4300-3500 BC), though the exciting
possibilities arising from current French excavations can only be briefly
alluded to here.
    In this period, the morphological variety of early passage-graves had
settled down into regional varieties of a basic model with a single passage
and square, internally divided chamber or transepts, set either in a round
mound or axially in a long one (L'Helgouach and Le Roux 1986). But there
is now evidence that in parts of the Morbihan, and probably also the
Charente maritime, long-mounds with cists or inaccessible chambers were
still being built at this time. (Long-mounds may also have been constructed
in the Paris Basin at this period, as indicated by the recent excavation of a
Middle Neolithic trapezoidal mound covering a stone cist at Maisse,
Essonne.) The long-mounds of the Carnac region - which include both
'normal'-sized mounds and the gigantic examples known as Carnac mounds
- are associated with a style of pottery (Castellic ware), and also items such
as stone rings, which have a background in the Paris Basin and the central
European tradition, as opposed to the plainwares of the Atlantic group
which demonstrate growing links to the Chasseen culture of southern
France (Giot, L'Helgouach and Monnier 1979, 2 1 8 - 2 5 ) . The contrast
between long-mounds and passage-graves extends to a different attitude to
burial and the role of the dead, which in the case of long-mounds is asso-


                                       350




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   NEOLITHIC        NORTH-WEST          EUROPE


ciated with closed cists and external indicators in the form of decorated
menhirs, and in the case of passage-graves is associated with accessible
chambers which are decorated on the inside; and the contrast extends even
to a consistent difference in orientation, which is to the east in the case of
the former and south-east in the latter.
    The co-existence of these two patterns, with their respective links to
wider cultural entities generated by the early spread of farming, suggests the
possibility of competition and tension between them in these parts of
western France. The hypertrophied growth of long-barrows into Carnac
mounds (of which there are over a dozen in the Carnac-Locmariaquer area)
is perhaps best seen in the context of an ideological struggle between these
two competing patterns, in which elements of central European origin were
consciously stressed and elaborated in opposition to those of native origin.
It is all the more interesting, therefore, that recent work by L'Helgouach and
Le Roux has demonstrated that at some time around 3800 BC a massive
phase of iconoclasm occurred in the area around Locmariaquer, which
involved the pulling down of major sculptured standing stones, and their
incorporation (usually as capstones) in a new generation of large passage-
graves with large, undivided, rectangular chambers in round-mounds: and
that in at least four cases these were directly adjacent to (and presumably
intended to replace) Carnac mounds (Le Roux 1985). The largest of these
later Middle Neolithic passage-graves is Gavrinis, with its profusion of
intricately carved ornament and sensitive astronomical alignments. This
revolutionary shift of ideological dominance seems to have coincided with a
new wave of southern, Chasseen, influence (both in western France and the
Paris Basin), associated with the arrival of elements such as vase supports.
(It is tempting to interpret these as items of cult apparatus, such as narcotic
burners, which have often accompanied revivalist religious movements in
more recent ethnography - an interpretation which would also explain the
remarkable character of the Gavrinis engravings as entoptic images pro-
duced under the influence of drugs: Bradley 1989 and Chapters 15 and 16.)
Whatever interpretation is preferred, it is clear that these monuments must
be considered in the context of potentially conflicting religious beliefs and
practices; and that the most elaborate examples must be seen not as the cul-
mination of a single evolutionary series, but as increasingly emphatic
dialectical contributions to a megalithic debate.


COMPARISONS
Whereas farming had spread across the loess without substantial opposition
from native groups, its appearance in the north and west required an
accommodation to already established ways of life in a different set of
environments. The greater degree of settlement mobility required in these
circumstances, and the smaller groups needed for a greater diversity of


                                        351




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      THE   GENESIS      OF   MEGALITHS:


tasks, made substantial timber villages inappropriate. The first steps were
apparently taken by peripheral loessland communities, 'going native' in
many aspects of their everyday life as they moved into the new territories.
But colonising groups, needing to recruit a labour force - or native groups,
wishing to compete with them - required a focus for this process; and for
the major ceremonies associated with the remembrance of ancestors they
chose monumental versions of timber longhouses still in use in the
heartlands of Neolithic settlement. Where these models were available close
by, as in Normandy, the long burial mounds were present from the
beginning. In northern Europe, monumentalised forms seem to have spread
from the edges of the eastern loesslands after a first generation of farmers
had already moved north. In somewhat different circumstances, the same
solution prevailed. In both areas, moreover, this move provoked a reaction:
partly an imitation, partly something distinctively different; but monu-
mental and megalithic.
   A similar interpretation could be applied to Britain. The western end of
the loess corridor reaches the Channel at Boulogne, and the nearby long-
mound at Wimereux is only forty miles away from an English example such
as Ashford in Kent. Unchambered earthen long-mounds occupy the chalk
Downs of Wessex; circular mounds with cist-burials underlie several
trapezoid Cotswold chamber-tombs, which fuse the characteristics of both.
Trapezoid chambered long-mounds were introduced to Ireland; round
passage-graves were the reaction. The actors changed, but momentum was
conserved.
   These three areas of megalithic proliferation - western France, Britain,
and northern Europe - seem to have acted out such scenarios independently,
from different starting points on the loess periphery. They began to do so,
moreover, at different times: France during the Neolithic, northern Europe
during what in central Europe was already the Copper Age. The complexity
of northern Europe is partly due to the long-distance links with central
Europe which were present from the very beginning; the ideological conflicts
of the west were partly due to the continuing strength of native tradition and
the absence of this homogenising influence. Even so, however, we begin to
discern different patterns of reaction and external alliance in each of these
areas, rather than a static typology of 'cultures'; and such regional
differences of origin persisted, to emerge again at subsequent points in
prehistory. Behind the general regularities of European development lay the
roots of later nationalisms. Is it inappropriate in these circumstances to
speak of ethnicity?


EPILOGUE
Megaliths are perhaps the most durable structures ever erected by
prehistoric societies, and they have survived down to recent times in vast


                                       352




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    NEOLITHIC       NORTH-WEST          EUROPE


numbers: perhaps 10,000 in the North European Plain and Scandinavia,
more than 500 in a single French departement. They have dominated the
European archaeological imagination since the sixteenth century. Recent
excavation work in central Europe, however, has done something to redress
the balance of differential survival. From the less impressive evidence of
postholes, the older farming societies of the loesslands have been shown to
have had their own forms of monumentality - megaxyles rather than
megaliths - which were as fundamental to the organisation of agrarian
society on the loesslands as megaliths were in the wilder landscapes of outer
Europe. Basic to this interpretation is the idea that houses are not just
'machines for living in', as architects once misguidedly asserted, but parts of
the social system itself. Neolithic villages provided not only shelter, but the
means of creating and perpetuating social relationships. Tombs, similarly,
were not just machines for the disposal of the dead, but could on occasion
assume some of the sorts of roles otherwise played by domestic con-
structions
    The building of long mortuary mounds was both a continuation of earlier
symbols of community and a monumental focus around which new groups
were established. The idiom of monumentality was apparently then adopted
by a wider range of indigenous groups as the basis for their own assimilation
of cereal cultivation and the construction of an appropriate cultural and
social framework for a farming existence - sometimes in conscious oppo-
sition to intrusive communities. These monuments were subsequently
elaborated and transformed in western and northern Europe throughout
the Neolithic, responding both to changing demographic and social cir-
cumstances, and to the possibilities of further interpretation established by
their own material existence. Megalith building became the metaphor
within which social conflicts and ideological competition were played out.
In this sense, megaliths were as much a cause as a consequence of social
complexity.




                                        353




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                         13
      Instruments of Conversion?
      The Role of Megaliths in the
     Mesolithic-Neolithic Transition
         in North-West Europe
                                     (1995)

JVlegalithic monuments were one of the first prehistoric phenomena to be
recognised by archaeologists, and their durability ensured that they became
objects of antiquarian curiosity even before the emergence of a scientific
study of prehistory. By the later nineteenth century they had been recognised
in many parts of Europe, and even beyond. Unlike more specific categories
of artefact, however, it soon became apparent that they were not diagnostic
of a single period or culture. Like other types of prehistoric site, such as
'earthworks' or 'hillforts', they represent a category of construction which
came into existence at different times and for different purposes. Like
'hillforts', however, they are nevertheless typical of certain areas and phases
of prehistory, and demand an interpretation which is both general and
specific: general, in terms of their common social and technological
characteristics, and specific, in terms of the concrete historical circumstances
which gave rise to them. In their more general properties, European
megaliths may usefully be compared with similar constructions from other
periods and times; but in their specific characteristics they must be set in a
context that includes the whole range of prehistoric domestic, mortuary and
ceremonial constructions, both in stone, earth and timber.
   Although the use of large blocks as constructional elements may in
certain circumstances have an ergonomic rationale (depending on the nature
of the rock employed), the use of massive, relatively unaltered stones is more

This chapter presents excerpts from a paper originally given in Mannheim in 1992,
at a conference on Vergleichende Studien zur Megalithik: Forschungsstand und
ethnoarchaologische Perspektiven. It takes the arguments of the preceding chapter
one step further; in reviving (though in a very different way) Childe's conception
of megaliths as rhetorical devices - arguments in stone - concerned with the
propagation of a set of interests and incorporation of people within an ideological
and organisational framework. While treating the emergence of megalithism as a
process, it combines function with intention and genealogy.

                                        354




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               THE   MESOLITHIC-NEOLITHIC               TRANSITION


typical of pre-urban societies than urban ones. Among urban societies, the
constructional components are adapted to the design of the building, whose
plan exists independently in an abstract conception of (usually straight) lines
and spaces. Where massive blocks are employed in such a context (as with
Mycenaean 'cyclopean' walling or Inka fitted-block construction), they are
usually replicated elements modified to fit together, or else carefully shaped
obelisks or colossi. The use of largely unaltered blocks, where the shape of
the blocks themselves in part determines the nature of the construction, is
more typical of pre-urban societies - whose architecture (like other aspects
of their culture - chipped stone rather than moulded metal, for instance) is
literally less 'artificial'. Hence the major effort is devoted to transporting the
blocks rather than to altering their shape, and the resulting constructions
grow more organically from the nature of the raw material. They thus
employ 'natural metaphors' of size, permanence, etc. (perhaps in conscious
opposition to secular buildings of earth and timber); and they also embody
the symbolism of undifferentiated communal effort involved in hauling the
huge blocks. The monuments themselves are thus often emblematic of the
unity of the group, and possess a special, sacred character that is inherent in
the nature of their construction. The term 'monument' (from Latin monere,
'remind', 'warn') is specifically appropriate where a particular form of
building is not employed for domestic purposes, but is used to impress an
ideal on those who see and use it. It is typical of megalithic architecture that
its use is confined to such a single class of constructions, and not used more
generally as a technology for building everyday structures. The point is aptly
made by comic-strip cartoons of Stone Age life (whether in the context
of dinosaurs or Gaulish tribes) where a typical Stone Age family is shown
living in a dolmen-like dwelling - the reverse of archaeological reality.
    In many instances, therefore, the context in which megalithic construc-
tion is employed is that of burial. It is misleading, however, to describe such
structures simply as 'funerary monuments', since they are not just vehicles
for disposing of dead bodies, and many contemporary societies (such as
those of Neolithic south-east and central Europe) made no use of above-
ground containers for corpses.1 Nor are they 'monuments' in the sense of
memorials to specific individuals. Rather, it is the dead themselves who are
employed as a metaphor in the same way as the architecture. The co-
incidence with burial is a tactical one, and megalithic architecture may be
employed in ceremonial contexts beyond the funerary, while human bones
may be deposited or used in other places than the megalithic 'graves'. The
association comes through a common identification of death and megalithic
architecture with the realm of the 'other', perhaps a world in which the
community of the ancestors retains a powerful existence, to which access
may be gained by appropriate ritual action at particular times in the context
of the monuments. (The incorporation of astronomical alignments may
suggest that such ceremonies had a regular calendrical occurrence, calcu-


                                        355




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     INSTRUMENTS         OF    CONVERSION:


lated by phases of the heavenly bodies.) It is a not uncommon ethnographic
observation that such ceremonies may employ mind-altering drugs which
are consumed by certain individuals in the context of such ceremonies, and
whose effects are interpreted in terms of communication with this 'other
world' (Reichel-Dolmatoff 1975; Chapter 16).
    Such comments would apply fairly generally to the class of constructions
which are termed 'megalithic', in many parts of the world. This chapter is
concerned, however, with the specific appearance and development of mega-
lithism in Neolithic north-west Europe; and its purpose is to suggest a set of
circumstances in which such phenomena may have made their appearance.
Megalithism in Neolithic Europe is typical of certain areas, especially the
West and North, and also has certain manifestations in the Mediterranean.
It is not a universal feature of Neolithic societies, although it seems to have
been a latent property which could be called into existence in certain cir-
cumstances. In the most general terms, it was associated with a permanent
occupation of the soil which was typical of (though not necessarily restricted
to) the practice of farming; in this sense, the megalithic monuments have
some functional equivalence to the 'monumentality' of domestic settlements
in south-east Europe and the Near East, where Neolithic occupation is often
marked by the partly deliberate accumulation of a tell or settlement-mound:
a visible symbol of the existence of the farming community. Such symbolism
of the permanent occupation of a particular spot is not restricted to farmers,
for the (surely deliberate) accumulation of shell-mounds by sedentary fishers
and foragers such as the Ertebolle communities of the western Baltic or
late Mesolithic groups in Portugal may be considered as part of a similar
phenomenon. The particular forms of many European megaliths - in widely
separated areas - has a more specific set of references, however, in that
certain classes of monument echo the constructional characteristics of
houses (either dwelling-houses, or, perhaps more likely, club-houses). This is
particularly explicit in forms such as the allees couvertes of northern France,
or the dolmens of the western Caucasus, and relates not just to the natural
idiom of building sheltered spaces but to the organisational and ideological
importance of the house and household among the acephalous farming
communities of the Neolithic, who in other circumstances expressed the
same values in female figurines and clay models of hearths and homes. A
final feature which distinguishes these groups is the emphasis on the
communal. While later burial monuments such as Bronze and Iron Age
tumulus burials were sometimes equipped as 'houses of the dead', buried
below ground for prominent deceased individuals (for instance Ukrainian
Timber-Graves or the Hallstatt Fiirstengraber), Neolithic burial monuments
in northern and western Europe were typically structures for collective
burial. Indeed, they increasingly stressed this communal and continuing,
corporate character through their provision of ossuaries in prominent and
accessible structures above ground, in which human remains were regularly


                                         356




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               THE   MESOLITHIC-NEOLITHIC              TRANSITION


deposited (often rearranged in categories that cross-cut those of the indi-
vidual skeleton), and at which regular offerings were made to the dead.
   The distinctive character of Neolithic megalithism in Europe is thus its
highly visible symbolism of the living community, through the medium of
monumental constructions for the dead. Truly 'megalithic' monuments
formed part of a spectrum of such constructions, which otherwise used
earth, timber and smaller stones; and the beginnings of monumentalism
must be sought in the transformation of the repertoire of domestic and
funerary structures in other materials. The first element of this trans-
formation was the monumentalisation of forms already used for other
purposes, in which domestic metaphors were applied to the creation of
more permanent representations of such structures, themselves useless as
domestic dwellings, which were intended to stand for many generations -
many times the expected lifespan of the average peasant house (which in
effect was probably a single generation). The second element was the use of
large stones to produce an enclosed, three-dimensional space to which
continuing access was possible for the purposes of ritual and ceremony. In
some of the areas in which such megalithic chambers were constructed (and
especially in the far west, in areas such as Brittany and the British Isles), a
further phase of megalithic construction saw the building of open monu-
ments (like the Breton alignments, or British henges and stone circles) which
provided ritual spaces that were enclosed but not roofed, and in which the
'ceremonial' aspect was more prominent than the funerary. This whole
process occupied a period of more than two millennia.
   Megalithism, therefore, was a set of monumentalised messages. Neolithic
communities in certain parts of Europe apparently felt the need to build
permanent statements about the nature of their society. Some of these (like
the larger passage-graves) were on a scale which suggests that their messages
were intended to be read very widely within their region: veritable beacons
in stone. Whatever its original motivation, megalith building came to
embody messages which were directed to more than the local group. The
question which I would like to raise is therefore: to whom were those
messages addressed?


SYMBOLS OF COMMUNITY
A characteristic of the first farming societies, as Ian Hodder has emphasised
(1984; 1990), is their investment in domestic structures. These went far
beyond the mere requirements of shelter, and can be seen both as ideological
statements and media of social organisation and control, owing their
prominence to the role which they played as part of the cultural infra-
structure of a horticultural society without specialised social institutions
and mechanisms for maintaining unity and order. The house as an archi-
tectural and social unit was one part of a larger entity, the settlement, which


                                       357




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      INSTRUMENTS        OF    CONVERSION:


provided the face-to-face community and the permanent, ongoing unit of
organisation. The first farming settlements in the Near East - like Jericho,
Tell Abu Hureyra or (^atalhoyiik - were often spectacularly vast, and this
concentration of population and facilities was a necessary phase in the
emergence of Old World farming as a way of life. Having achieved a viable
model, these settlements were then replicated or modularised on a smaller
scale, in the form of the tell settlement as it spread into Balkan Europe in the
sixth millennium BC. That such tells were not simply dwelling units, but
embodied organisational and even cosmological principles, is shown by the
careful order and astronomical orientation with which some of them were
originally laid out (e.g. Polyanitsa, Bulgaria). The physical representation of
community, on the ground (in the form of a prominent settlement and
constituent houses), was a fundamental feature of Neolithic social organ-
isation. This 'package' of farming practices, domestic technologies (pottery,
weaving) and social infrastructure was introduced to Europe as the basis of
the first agricultural communities.
   Where farming was introduced by population expansion (the 'demo-
graphic wave of advance'), as it was in south-east and central Europe, this
package maintained its coherence. Even where some accommodation was
necessary to ecological circumstances, and a degree of pioneer simplification
occurred (for instance in central Europe, with the relatively dispersed
settlement patterns of Koros and LBK), nevertheless the tendency to
nucleation reasserted itself, and the later phases of the Neolithic in those
areas (Tisza and Roessen) once more show aggregated forms of settlement
(Sherratt 1982; Starling 1985). The houses remained large, rectilinear
structures throughout; and where large villages were not present, there was
nevertheless some effort to construct impressive ceremonial facilities, such
as Kreisgrabenanlagen, near to the domestic structures (Burgess et al. 1988).
These permanent marks on the ground were characteristic of the primary
horticultural community which formed the basis of Neolithic social
organisation.2
   The first phase of European farming, therefore, down to c.4500 BC, was
characterised by a congruence between the social community and the
physical setting of everyday life. This was possible because of the primarily
horticultural emphasis of early farming, in which livestock played a sub-
ordinate role. As economies began to differentiate (both in time and space),
however, and livestock rearing and hunting came to play a larger part in
the economy, potential tensions and contradictions developed between the
village and its domestic structures as the basis of social organisation and the
need for greater flexibility in settlement patterns. In the early-settled loess
areas of central Europe, this was primarily because of the needs of the
expanding cattle-keeping sector of the economy; on the fringes of the loess-
lands, in western France and on the North European Plain, the oppor-
tunities for hunting and foraging (in environments already exploited in this


                                         358




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
              THE   M E S O L I T H I C - N F E O L L T H I C   T R A N S I T I O N


way by indigenous Mesolithic groups) offered a comparable alternative.
Over much of the continent in the later fifth millennium, therefore, a
diversity of new forms of settlement made their appearance. Because the
social relations formerly embodied in the physical form of the village
settlement still remained important, however, some symbolic continuation
of this focal point remained necessary when the individual households split
away from their former collectivity. The new forms of settlement pattern
thus typically included an emphasis on tombs and cemeteries, making
explicit the relations formerly expressed in proximity of residence. Rituals,
including burial, which had formerly taken place within the context of the
settlement (either close to the houses themselves or in nearby small
cemeteries), now came to be associated with special locations that were not
necessarily places of habitation. These provided symbols of a community
which no longer had a permanent physical existence on the ground.


W H Y MONUMENTS?
The application of this model to the beginnings of European megalithism
has been set out in the preceding chapter, which emphasised the essential
complementarity between substantial house construction and the building
of monumental tombs in the archaeological record of Neolithic Europe. The
first farming groups in central Europe, the LBK and succeeding Roessen and
Lengyel groups, occupied substantial, timber-built villages - a temperate
European adaptation of the pattern of tell settlement in the Near East. Their
architectural investment was in domestic structures. Major monuments
were generated when this complex of village-farming reached the outer
edges of Europe, and was adapted and changed to the different circum-
stances of the Atlantic and the North European Plain. It was in this outer
arc - in Iberia, western France, Britain and Scandinavia - that the first
centres of megalithism were established. The stages by which this was
accomplished are defined below, but in general the process could be defined
as a splitting-up of the ideal pattern of domestic co-residence, the physical
community which had been the basis of early Neolithic social organisation
from Jericho to the Paris Basin, in the different conditions of outer Europe,
where cereal farming was perhaps less important and settlement patterns
more mobile; and what was absent from the early Neolithic of these areas
were precisely the large, timber, domestic structures. The underlying reason
for the appearance of megaliths, then, was the transformation of the
primary horticultural community, as it had been constructed in the Near
East at the beginning of farming. Non-domestic structures, and especially
funerary ones, supplied the focal symbolism formerly provided by domestic
architecture.
   The formative phases of this process are now becoming clearer. The
predecessors of the truly megalithic structures which survive so well in the


                                             359




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    INSTRUMENTS         OF   CONVERSION:


archaeological record were the equally monumenr                ut less robust
(and archaeologically less visible) structures of earth         timber, which
were built by a variety of groups of ultimately Bartdkeru ak origin on the
margins of their main loessland distribution, and in some cases within it.3
Timber mortuary houses were monumentalised by the addition of a long
earthen mound, typically trapezoidal in shape. Where appropriate, as in
the North European Plain, these mounds were edged with large stones, to
increase the impressiveness and permanence of the structure; and in western
France the timber internal structures might be replaced by small stone cists.
Such early earthen or stone-edged long-barrows did not cover communal
burials, and the graves were not accessible after the erection of the mound.
Structures of this kind, which occurred independently in western France,
southern Britain and Kujavia at different times between 4500 and 4000 BC,
are particularly associated with a rapid dispersal of small groups beyond the
loessland frontiers. These groups did not replicate the domestic longhouse
architecture of the farming villages in which they originated, but echoed the
shape and significance of houses in the plan and appearance of the tombs.
They might be considered as part of a small-scale colonisation movement,
which carried farming groups from the margins of the loesslands as far as
Brittany, western Britain and Denmark; but there is also some evidence of a
cultural contribution from (and hence probably interbreeding with) the
indigenous populations of those areas.
   It is this context of a breakup of the primary horticultural communities
of the loesslands which explains the significance of monument building.
From a more general perspective, these earthen long-barrows are simply one
aspect of the greater emphasis on burial and funerary elaboration which
took place in several parts of Europe in the later fourth and early third
millennia BC. It was precisely at this time in Hungary and Bulgaria,
for instance, that large formal cemeteries with rich grave-goods, like
Tiszapolgar or the more famous example of Varna, made their appearance.
These, too, were associated with the breakup of primary horticultural
communities in the form of large villages.4 But such funerary elaboration
in central and eastern Europe did not take the form of monumentality.
Elaborate burials, yes; but not funerary monuments. What was absent was
the architectural aspect: these groups in the older Neolithic heartlands did
not transfer the domestic metaphor to their tombs. The specific feature of
prehistoric megalithism in western and northern Europe which requires
explanation, therefore, is precisely its monumentality - its architectural
character. This in turn raises the question: to whom were its messages
addressed? In the case of Varna and Tiszapolgar, we can say that the
messages of the burial - whatever they might have been - were primarily
addressed to those at the graveside: members of the immediate social group
assembled for the burial. In this they resemble many later funerary practices
in prehistoric Europe. Megalithic monuments, however, have the added


                                       360




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               THE   M E S O L I T H I C - N F E O L L T H I C   T R A N S I T I O N


dimension of durable visibility. Whom were they meant to impress, and to
whom was their rhetoric directed? Was it simply the womenfolk and junior
members of their own lineages, as neo-Marxists have claimed (Tilley 1984)?
Was it their contemporaries and farming neighbours, as Lord Renfrew's
territorial model would imply (Renfrew 1976)? Or was it a wider circle of
spectators?
   The critical difference between eastern and western Europe at this time
was the existence of indigenous, Mesolithic populations. It is generally
agreed that the expansion of Bandkeramik cultures across the loesslands is
best regarded as a spread of population - a slow 'migration' (in the sense of
a demographic expansion in space through the proliferation of new
settlements on the edge of an existing distribution). By contrast, the spread
of farming to outer Europe was more a process of adoption, by which
indigenous groups absorbed farming technologies from their neighbours.
David Clarke likened the preceding demographic pattern of Mesolithic
Europe to a huge doughnut - a ring doughnut, dense on the edge but empty
in the middle (Clarke 1976,462-8). The first phase of farming spread filled
in the centre; the second phase converted the edge. It was in the second
phase that farming appeared in rich Mesolithic environments on coasts and
lakelands, like morainic northern Europe or morainic Switzerland - the
heartlands of hunting, fishing and foraging communities. In the Alpine
foreland, this involved replicating the village communities of the loess, in the
form of the rectangular timber houses of Egolzwil and Cortaillod, on the
reedswamps around the lakes. In western Europe, with its more extensive
Mesolithic populations sustained by seafood, it involved the emergence of
monumentality. Why?


INSTRUMENTS OF CONVERSION?
The clue comes in the word conversion. Mesolithic societies were converted
into Neolithic ones. We can use this word in two senses - in a general way,
to describe an economic change from foraging to farming; or in a religious
context, to describe a change in belief from Christianity to Islam, for
instance. Prehistoric archaeologists usually use it in the first sense. I want to
explore the second one, and to suggest that the messages of megaliths were
at least in part directed outwards, to Mesolithic communities, when farming
groups began to settle in landscapes that were already occupied. The idea
which I want to pursue is an old one: it was an essential part of the model
of diffusion, as presented for instance by Gordon Childe. Megalithic
monuments, in this view, were part of a religion, propagated by megalithic
missionaries. Agriculture had already reached western Europe, when groups
of ideologically committed Egyptians (rather like those tiresome American
evangelists) set out in boats to convert the Neolithic pagans of Portugal,
Brittany and Ireland. This interpretation is now clearly unworkable in the


                                              361




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      INSTRUMENTS         OF   CONVERSION:


way that Childe envisaged it (which to a large extent derives from his
knowledge of the Phoenicians); but it does contain one element of possible
truth which has been lost sight of in later models. That is this element of
conversion. This term seems to capture something of the monumental
rhetoric of megalithism.
    One assumption of Childe's model that is no longer appropriate is his
perception of the spread of farming and the spread of monumentality as
two different processes.5 Whilst megaliths in the strict sense of large-stone
constructions are indeed a somewhat later feature, it has been demonstrated
that in western France, the British Isles and northern Europe, monumental
earth-and-timber structures (non-megalithic long-mounds) lay right at the
beginning of Neolithic sequences. Monumentality was thus a fundamental
aspect of the spread of farming practices into outer Europe. It was not some
optional luxury, grafted on to the primary process: it was part of the process
itself (Thomas 1988). Why were such efforts necessary? There are many
instances in European and World prehistory of the adoption of farming by
native populations. The Cardial/Impressed Ware groups of the Mediter-
ranean, for instance, or the Pit-and-Comb Ware groups of eastern Europe;
on a wider scene, the makers of Wavy-line Ware in north Africa or Wood-
land groups in north America. In these cases, however, the process of
adopting farming was often slow and partial; many of these groups are best
described as sub-Neolithic, since they adopted pottery (for their own
purposes) and livestock, but often without cereal cultivation as a major
element, and without major changes in settlement patterns or probably in
social organisation either. The early Neolithic in western and northern
Europe, on the other hand, seems to be rather different from these: it was a
'full' Neolithic, with the whole range of characteristics taken over in a single
stage. Mesolithic communities in north-west Europe not only acquired
crops and livestock from their Neolithic neighbours, but they also 'adopted'
new forms of social organisation, and indeed new forms of architectural
construction, as well as new technologies of potting and perhaps textile-
making. The appearance of funerary architecture seems to be a specific
feature of this process. Did it therefore involve an active propagation of
organisation and ideas - a 'conversion' process in Gordon Childe's sense, as
well as just a conversion from foraging to farming? Was it, in a way, more
like the process of Hellenisation or Romanisation, in which an impressive
architecture was used as a kind of propaganda?
   It may be useful to think about the problem in this way. The most
important 'commodity' in Neolithic societies was labour. Land was not in
short supply; and the most essential items of external trade were the flint and
hard stone supplies which were needed to make labour more effective.
Recruitment of a labour force was the key to success. In spreading across the
loesslands, Bandkeramik groups were fuelled by internal demographic
growth. Culturally, there seems to have been very little intermixture with


                                         362




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               THE   M E S O L I T H I C - N F E O L L T H I C   T R A N S I T I O N


indigenous groups. The cultural network and the mating network were
largely congruent. At the western end of the loesslands, however, this
strategy began to change. In the Paris Basin, in particular, the formation of
'epi-Bandkeramik' groups was characterised by the addition of cultural
elements from an existing repertoire, and with Cerny the difficulties of
classification highlight a dual relationship with the Bandkeramik tradition,
and with other, local groups of native or southern origin (Scarre 1992). It
looks as if the earlier exclusiveness of mating networks was breaking down.
The central European farming pattern was being propagated westwards,
not just by internal demographic growth, but by external recruitment and
incorporation. In short, it was the beginning of a process of conversion - the
'reformatting' (to use a computing metaphor) of an existing demographic
pool. This process was therefore an active, social one, involving a set
of changes in relationships, rather than just the passive adoption of a set of
new practices. This incorporation was itself an active process, involving
persuasion, propaganda, and competition for recruits. A successful strategy
would be immediately rewarded by rapid growth. But how was such a
strategy discovered?


FROM EARTH-AND-TIMBER MONUMENTS TO MEGALITHS
The solution that I would like to suggest is one that arises from the
morphology of the monuments themselves. The two classes into which the
early monuments fall - unchambered long-mounds, and truly megalithic
structures with chambers (often in conical mounds) - represent different
strategies on the part of their builders. The former were simply surrogates
for houses, and were constructed - as the foci of residentially more dispersed
communities - by descendants of the Neolithic villagers who had colonised
the loesslands. Once created, however, the idiom of monumentality had a
potential for employment in other ways. The latter types of monument, the
chambered megaliths, were a further development of monumentalism
through a strategy of incorporation, and reflect the distribution of older,
native populations. This explains the distributional contrast between the
two forms of monument. The earliest monumental structures, in the form of
long-mounds covering timber mortuary structures, seem to be typical of the
areas just within the loessland centres of epi-Bandkeramik, Lengyel and
Roessen villages, or in between (or just inside) these areas on the one hand,
and the coastal concentrations of Mesolithic population on the other. This
is the case in the apparently independent episodes of long-mound creation
in western and northern France, and in northern Poland (Figures 13.2 and
13.5). It was in old coastal heartlands of Mesolithic population, however,
that megalithism - in the strict sense of stone-built monuments - reached its
greatest development. The first type of monument, the 'unchambered' long-
mounds, seem to be characteristic of a rapid movement into areas where


                                              363




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    INSTRUMENTS         OF   CONVERSION:


Mesolithic groups were less dense, and perhaps less highly organised in a
social sense; the second type of monument, the megalithic chambered
tombs, seem to be typical of the phase in which farming moved into the
optimal ecological zones of Mesolithic settlement, with dense populations
and probably more highly organised social networks - perhaps even an
existing lineage structure.
   The second phase of this process thus involved the evolution of a truly
megalithic architecture, instead of the earth-covered timber or small stone
structures which had characterised the first generation of monuments. This
process of lithicisation seems to have occurred independently in the coastal
regions of western France, western Britain, and also of Scandinavia and
northern Germany - resulting respectively in the appearance of French
passage-graves, British portal-dolmens and chambered cairns, and Nordic
dysser. It can therefore be seen as symptomatic of a general development in
the role of the monuments. The most striking feature was the employment
of large stone slabs as constructional elements for internal as well as
external features. This change in building technique from timber to stone
was functionally linked to an equally fundamental architectural change:
from unchambered to chambered structures, and often from long mounds
to round ones. The earlier mounds usually covered small cists for individual
burials; the later megalithic structures emphasised an accessible chamber
for the continuous addition of burials.6 The emphasis moved from exterior
symbols (like those on the decorated menhirs which accompanied long
barrows in Brittany) to interior symbols such as the various kinds of
passage-grave art, visible to those admitted to ceremonies inside the struc-
tures. From being simply a monumentalised burial, the use of stone allowed
the creation of an enclosed ritual space. What took place within these spaces
may also be relevant to the process of recruitment, for if recent suggestions
of the ritual employment of hallucinogens are correct, this may have been a
powerful inducement to belief in the cosmology represented by the tombs.
   It is particularly noteworthy that the areas where megalithic construction
(sensu stricto) developed and most rapidly proliferated from its antecedent
long mounds were areas of relatively dense Mesolithic population - in
Brittany, western Britain and Zealand (as also in Portugal). The two facts
seem to be connected. Various different scenarios could be envisaged: the
building of new forms of stone monuments could be seen as an indigenous
imitation of the new forms of monumentality as native groups adopted
farming,7 or as an adaptation by colonising groups to new circumstances
where native populations existed in greater numbers. In the first case, the
change indicates a shift of initiative from immigrant groups to indigenous
communities, imitating the monumentality but changing its ideology. In the
second case, there was a single, continuous process, but with a greater
emphasis on the incorporation of native populations. The two scenarios are
not necessarily exclusive, in that both processes could operate simul-


                                       364




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               THE   M E S O L I T H I C - N F E O L L T H I C   T R A N S I T I O N


taneously, perhaps with a different balance in different areas; and neither are
they necessarily distinguishable archaeologically. In both cases, however, the
process involved the propagation of a new form of social structure - the
kinds of trans-generational (lineage) groups necessary for the organisation
of work in a farming economy.
   If this model is correct, it suggests that the incorporation of native
populations was a continuing process. If so, then the proliferation and
growing elaboration of megalithic monuments is itself an index of the scale
of the process. Bursts of monument-building would thus correspond to
phases of demographic intake. Monuments such as Gavrinis or Newgrange
would mark the local climaxes of this process, where the reservoirs of native
population still provided scope for growth through incorporation. The
complexity of these outstanding megalithic structures could thus reflect a
sort of social stratification, between original, founding members of the
group, and lineages which had joined more recently. The great conical
mounds would symbolise in a physical way the conical clan structures that
resulted.8 Social ranking could build up much more rapidly in these
circumstances than on the loesslands; and in this sense the megalithic
communities of the far west may indeed have been more 'complex' than
their contemporaries in central Europe.


MESOLITHIC SURVIVAL
One implication of this idea is that Mesolithic populations survived
alongside the first farming groups in outer Europe for very much longer
than is often supposed. It suggests that there was not an instantaneous, mass
conversion of native groups, but rather a continuous and long-drawn-out
propaganda campaign. This suggestion in not inherently implausible.
Earlier Neolithic groups in western and northern Europe occupied only
relatively small areas of the total landmass. There is no ecological reason
why Mesolithic groups should not have survived in the areas between: and
there are several indications that they did, even though such populations are
inherently less visible archaeologically and harder to date. An interesting
further implication is therefore to revive the possibility of another old idea,
that of a 'primary' and a 'secondary' Neolithic (Piggott 1954; Briard and
L'Helgouach 1957). This idea was abandoned when it became clear that
'secondary' features were largely later than 'primary' ones; but there is no
inherent contradiction here, if the process of Mesolithic incorporation is
seen as a continuing and accelerating one, rather than an instantaneous
conversion. Especially after 3500 BC, when we can envisage some use of the
light plough and a spatial expansion of agricultural activity, we might expect
a further intake of surviving indigenous groups with a Mesolithic way of life
which had survived on poorer soils beyond the earlier frontiers of farming.
   One index of the absorption of indigenous populations is the appearance


                                              365




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       INSTRUMENTS         OF   CONVERSION:




14 A Skeuomorphic echoes: the shape and decoration of later Neolithic pottery
from NW Europe and its derivation from stake-frame basketry: (a) Mesolithic
fish-trap, Netherlands; (b) basket from late Neolithic lake-village, Charavignes,
Switzerland; (c) Grooved-Ware flat-based pot, southern England; (d) late Neolithic
round-based pot, Ireland; (e) TRB Middle Neolithic 'flowerpotNetherlands,       with
construction diagram for corresponding basket shape; [new drawing, after Louwe-
Kooijmans, Egloff, Thomas, Herity, Bakker],

of new cultural elements which were not part of the repertoire of the
incoming Bandkeramik-derived tradition. These arguments have been
applied to flintwork (Newell 1972), to suggest that the assemblages of
the westernmost (Younger) Bandkeramik populations contain Oldesloe
elements, in contrast to the 'purer' assemblages from more central areas of
the loesslands. This interpretation is reinforced by the appearance in the
same contexts of a category of pottery, Limburg Ware, which is equally
without parallel in more central regions, but which is based on shapes which
resemble organic containers. It is suggested that these, and the comparable
La Hoguette wares (Liming 1989), represent the ceramicisation of indigen-
ous container forms as a result of contacts with the native groups. These
form part of a general pattern of new ceramic features on the western
margins of the Bandkeramik distribution, and suggest that an admixture
with native populations was taking place in a small way from the beginning.
It is thus particularly interesting that the ceramic assemblages of many later
Neolithic groups in north-west Europe - for instance Grooved Ware in
Britain and the Middle Neolithic phase of Nordic TRB - contain many
angular and bucket-like shapes with skeuomorphic decoration that has its
origins in stake-frame basketry (Figure 14.1). This technique had been used


                                         366




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
              THE   M E S O L I T H I C - N F E O L L T H I C   T R A N S I T I O N


for many millennia by Mesolithic groups in northern Europe for the
construction of fish-traps, and it contrasts with the south-east European/
Near Eastern tradition of coiled basketry whose shapes are echoed in the
forms and decoration of Bandkeramik pottery. While this argument cannot
be pursued further here, it is symptomatic of the continuing contribution
made by the indigenous populations of outer Europe to the formation of the
Neolithic cultures associated with megalith building.
   I suggest that the elaboration of passage graves is a functional
concomitant of this process, which is reflected in the renewed vitality of the
megalithic tradition in outlying areas such as Ireland and Orkney in the
period after 3500 BC. The position of Irish passage-grave cemeteries in
particular, on a line of hills across the centre of the country, is surely
indicative of the way in which their messages were directed outwards to
populations who could see them from afar. They emphasise that the
adoption of farming and its associated belief systems was as much an
ideological conversion as a calculation of economic benefit, and that monu-
mentalised messages could play a crucial role in its propagation.
   [This cline, from the largely immigrant populations of the loesslands to
the largely indigenous populations of the far west, is reflected in the tension
between quadrilateral and circular structures: ultimately, the farmer's
timber longhouse and the hunter's tent (Figure 14.2). Quadrilateral struc-
tures continuously dominate in continental Europe, from the Passy long-
mounds to the allees couvertes; circular ones in the west, increasingly
dominant with time as further indigenous groups were absorbed. In between
was a zone of ambiguity, where the two models competed, hybridised or
passed decisively from one to the other. Even at the very end of the tradition
of megalithic construction, when the technique was used not for tombs but
for open, ceremonial monuments, the same duality was evident: on the one
hand, Carnac, whose alignments take the form of hypertrophied trapezoidal
longhouses; and, on the other, Stonehenge, whose great ring-beam echoes
that of a circular timber house. The insularity of the British round-house
tradition was still evident in the Iron Age.]


CONCLUSION
Let me briefly try to summarise what I have been trying to say. European
megalithic architecture can be seen as the conjunction of two processes. The
first was the long-term trend towards the splitting up and adaptation of the
primary horticultural community, centred on Ian Hodder's (1991) domus,
with its background in the Neolithic origins of Old World farming. The
second was the outcome of specific circumstances in northern and western
Europe, where foragers were converted to farming as a total package of
economic, social and ideological practices. This phenomenon, precisely
because it was so radical, took the form of an extended process of con-


                                             367




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
          NEOLITHIC    ARCHITECTURAL             TRADITIONS
                          t   :                                               DATE                             CIRCULAR SPACES                        QUADRILATERAL
                                                                             (BC cal)                                                                 SPACES




                                                                             2000
                                                                                                               Stonehenge
                                                                                                                                                      Carnac alignments

                                                                                        cy
                                                                             2500                                               OPEN
                                                                                                                  Avebury          SPACES
                                                                                                                  Complex
                                                                                                                                            s

                                                                                        C>                   ' W W — \      \       \ \ \
                                                                                              ^ \ ^ Irish passage-graves ^
                                                                             3000                                                                w        w
                                                                                              X ^ s^ \Newgrange Complex                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                 \ Allies couvertes i
                                                                                                                                                        Loire
                                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                              dolmens
                                                                                                             \ Danish                                 \     eg Esse \
                                                                                              v       v "> teaman ^             •                 N


                                                                                                  \    \  ^ Jaettestuer         \
                                                                             3500                                                                           WW                   x
                                                                                                              X
                                                                                                  A      \        v \   \ ENCLOSED              ! \ \ Cotswold chambered L M s




                                                                             4000
                                                                                        *
                                                                                        fcj
                                                                                        Q
                                                                                        ©

                                                                             4500


  4000
   BC \


14.2 Neolithic architecture, east and west: the contrast between quadrilateral and circular spaces in domestic and funerary structures,
from the mid-sixth to the third millennium BC; [new drawing].




                                       This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               THE   M E S O L I T H I C - N F E O L L T H I C   T R A N S I T I O N


version, taking millennia to complete. Megalithic architecture was part of
the rhetoric of this process; and its successive elaboration in different areas
was part of a deliberate strategy (or at least a feedback system with similar
effects) to extend the labour supply in areas where this was still possible.9
   It is possible to distinguish two phases in the genesis of megalithism. The
first lay largely within the village-based Neolithic cultures which had
colonised the loessland corridor from east-central Europe to central
Germany and the Paris Basin. While villages remained the foci of the
settlement pattern in the Carpathian Basin after 4500 BC, increasingly
taking nucleated, tell-like forms of the kind already established in south-east
Europe, the settlement patterns of the northern loesslands evolved in the
opposite direction. Instead of the clear sequence of village plans which had
characterised the preceding millennium or more, a bewildering variety of
non-domestic structures began to appear. Because the loesslands themselves
have been under continuous cultivation ever since, the earth and timber
mounds which formed a prominent part of this new landscape have been
subject to heavy destruction, and are only just being recognised archae-
ologically (e.g. Passy). Paradoxically, therefore, their forms are better
known from outlying examples in areas off the loess (e.g. Kujavia,
Normandy), and often adjacent to the centres of later, truly megalithic
developments (Schleswig-Holstein, Jutland, Charente, Brittany). These
examples indicate that a pattern which had its origin within the older areas
of Neolithic occupation was instrumental in the process of spread beyond
them. This phase of monumentality was generated by the splitting up of
older forms of community.
   The second phase, which took place where this process of expansion
came into contact with the heartlands of continuing Mesolithic settlement,
marks a transformation of this monumentality into an instrument of
incorporation: a 'conversion' of existing peoples, ideologies and social
structures. The incorporation is symbolised by the change from an emphasis
on the external longhouse form, covering a completed burial, to a structure
that could be periodically entered and its contents 'updated'. This mor-
phological change took different forms in different areas, as the same
underlying processes were played out in different contexts; but the
parallelisms are striking (and it is not surprising that they were formerly
attributed to direct contacts by migration or diffusion). The success of this
cultural mutation is indicated by the rapid growth of large and complex
examples, increasingly of truly megalithic construction, as Mesolithic
populations were successfully incorporated.
   It was the existence of the monumentalised longhouse model, therefore,
that determined the mode of Mesolithic incorporation in these areas. On
other parts of the loessland frontier, such as the Ukraine, there was no such
convergence on a monumental solution: Tripole/Cucuteni farming villages
became successively larger and better defended, whilst the indigenous


                                              369




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                        INSTRUMENTS         OF    CONVERSION:


population developed along quite different lines into the sequence of
pottery-using and livestock-rearing sub-Neolithic groups that increasingly
specialised in pastoralism. Rather than incorporation, there was a successive
differentiation. The Neolithic cultures of western and northern Europe, on
the other hand, created a unique synthesis of an ultimately Near Eastern
form of social organisation centred on a transformed domus, and an indi-
genous population with its own distinctive forms of culture and subsistence
base. Metaphorically, therefore, Childe was right: it was, indeed, a meeting
of the indigenous and the exotic; but it was the density of the existing, native
population which made it such a spectacular phenomenon. Childe was also
right that this pattern of investment in the physical symbolism of the
domestic community was in the end replaced by its eastern, steppe-land
alternative with its origins on the steppes: the more mobile, dispersed, and
probably livestock-centred pattern of individual warrior-burials that is
typical of the Pit-Grave culture, Corded Ware and Bell-Beakers - an econ-
omy, cosmology and settlement pattern within which the accumulated skills
of megalithic construction had no role.
   This coincidence of culture-historical and demographic factors explains
why Atlantic Europe is the classic area of megaliths. In other parts of
Europe, north Africa and the Near East - and indeed in other parts of the
world - some of these factors have recurred. Stone-using, or simple metal-
using societies have experienced the break-up of formerly concentrated
communities, and have used monumentalised house-forms, typically em-
ployed as tombs, as surrogate foci for the creation of community identities.10
The phenomenon of megalithism is associated not with a particular kind of
economy, but rather with a social process in space. Such monuments were
everywhere 'houses of the holy', associating the sacred with specific times
and places. What is remarkable about the European examples, however, is
the degree to which this pattern was elaborated, to an extent that rivalled
the monumental efforts of contemporary civilisations. It was the position of
western Europe, close enough to the nuclear centres of agriculture and
urban life to be affected by them, but sufficiently distant not to be directly
incorporated into the developing world-systems of the time, that allowed
this unique cultural experiment to flourish.


NOTES

 1. For this reason it is no more accurate to speak of 'passage-tombs' than 'passage-graves',
    and the latter has priority as a technical term.
 2. In the central and west Mediterranean, this pattern was not immediately replicated.
    Instead, various features of the package were individually absorbed by indigenous coastal
    communities, principally the more easily transferable elements of pottery and small
    quantities of domestic livestock, which appeared in the Impressed Ware culture in sites
    (often caves) which show continuity from the preceding Mesolithic. With time, however
    the full package was absorbed and more formally organised settlements appeared, usually
    accompanied by the technologically advanced forms of painted pottery which were


                                            370




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                  THE   M E S O L I T H I C - N F E O L L T H I C   T R A N S I T I O N


    produced in village communities. This pattern persisted until the spread of the plough in
    the later fourth millennium, when various megalithic phenomena began to appear in the
    Mediterranean region.
 3. These various episodes of monumentalisation, for instance in the Paris Basin (Passy:
    Cerny culture) or central Germany (Latdorf: Baalberge culture), seem to have taken place
    quite independently, and at different times (up to five centuries apart), reflecting similar
    processes of change on the basis of a common cultural background. The most impressive
    examples, however, are those just beyond the margins of the loesslands, like Kujavian
    long-mounds such as Sarnowo. It is in this last case that the most literal copying of
    domestic longhouses took place, since these elaborate dwellings were still in use amongst
    contemporary final Lengyel groups nearby (e.g. Brzesc Kujawski), at a time when such
    structures were no longer being built in central Germany and the western loesslands.
 4. Though Tiszapolgar is associated with a scattered pattern of small tell settlements.
 5. Even quite recently, it was believed that megaliths began at a 'mature* stage of the
    Neolithic in northern and western Europe: a stage of crystallisation, when populations
    were sufficiently dense to require territorial markers - what geographers would describe
    as a 'packing phenomenon'.
 6. Outside Scandinavia, the beginnings of megalithic architecture and collective burial were
    effectively simultaneous; in the Nordic region thefirstmegalithic forms (dysser) were
    mainly individual burials. The addition of a passage for continuous access developed
    some centuries later, at the beginning of the Danish Middle Neolithic c.3500 BC, in the
    form of the Nordic passage-grave (Jaettestue).
 7. On the analogy, perhaps, of those 'rituals of resistance' and 'cargo cults' with which
    native populations more recently attempted to counter foreign political and ideological
    influences.
 8. Do we not, after all, describe hierarchical social structures of the kind which
    characterised the early Egyptian state as 'pyramidal'? Are not the Pyramids themselves
    social metaphors in stone?
 9. There are many gaps in this argument, especially as it relates to Iberia. Did long-mounds
    of ultimately loessland inspiration penetrate beyond the Garonne, to stimulate the onset
    of monumentality in north-east Spain? (Note how recently long-mounds have been
    recognised in such well-known areas as the Paris Basin!)
10. This more general explanation would therefore apply to the varied examples of
    megalithic construction which appeared in different parts of Europe and surrounding
    areas in the third millennium BC and afterwards. The Levantine 'dolmens', for instance,
    date principally to Early Bronze iv, at the end of the third millennium, and are related to
    the splitting up of the kinds of large, nucleated communities established there in the
    period of Early Bronze Age urbanism. A similar explanation may lie behind the 'dolmens'
    of the northern Caucasus, in relation to their complementarity with more nucleated
    forms of settlement and social organisation. These are chronologically and culturally
    parallel to non-megalithic burial monuments in the form of the Catacomb-Graves of the
    adjacent Pontic steppe region, and emphasise the fact that the availability of raw material
    ultimately determines the expression of monumental forms, and whether they are
    constructed of earth or stone.




                                                 371




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       Section          V

  INVISIBLE FLOWS:
LANGUAGES, CULTURE
     AND DRUGS




   The golden bowls from the Vulchetrun treasure, c.1600 BC
  (National Museum of Bulgaria, Sofia; drawing by T. Taylor).




        'O for a beaker, full of the warm south

                                                                JOHN    KEATS

                                            Ode to a Nightingale       (1818)




         This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:23:56 UTC
                          All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        INVISIBLE   FLOWS:      LANGUAGES,        CULTURE       AND    DRUGS


 Ihe last section looked at built structure: fixtures in the landscape, whether
settlements or tombs. This section looks at the less tangible parts of the
archaeological record, concerned with flows of items - some of which get
caught in 'artefact-traps' on sites, but many of which escape entirely:
language and music (totally lost, in the absence of writing), organic con-
sumables (rare, apart from fortuitous residues) and precious metals (mostly
recycled, unless deliberately placed in tombs or hoards). These aspects must
be reconstructed, or the archaeological image enhanced, if our picture of the
past is not to remain an impoverished and misleading caricature of what life
was like.
    Both linguistic and genetic distributions as they are known at the present
day or in the recent past offer tantalising patterns; and both need to be
explained historically, by postulating previous stages of the pattern. With
genetic information, there is some hope that palaeo-DNA studies will one day
reveal past patterns of variability; but direct evidence of ancient languages
can never be pushed beyond the urban, literate societies of early historical
times. It remains the classic case of attempting to reconstruct diachronic pat-
terns from synchronic ones, using both the properties of the phenomenon
itself, and surrogate evidence of related phenomena, to infer past states of
the system. Given its inherent problems, it is not surprising that there is so
little unanimity about such reconstructions; but as a methodology it is more
common in archaeological arguments than might be supposed. Discussion
of 'hunter-gatherer' or 'pastoralist' societies implies precisely such a retro-
jection of recently-observed categories: an essential step in constructing a
narrative, but fraught with the dangers of anachronism (as Sections II and
III above tried to show). A large part of the prehistorian's task must be the
conscious testing of palaeo-ethnological models - reading the record in the
light of prior expectations - and the reconstruction of extinct patterns.
    One aspect of this which I have to some extent pioneered is the study
of the use of psychotropic substances in prehistory (see now Goodman,
Lovejoy and Sherratt 1995). Historical Europe was undoubtedly a realm
of 'drinking cultures', just as North America at the time of its discovery
by Europeans was a realm of 'smoking cultures'. The archaeological record
of European prehistory - together with one or two clues from the Ur-
ethnographer, Herodotus - contains tantalising suggestions about the
appearance of alcohol, and what might have preceded it. The importance of
drinking in recent Europe, as of coca-consumption in aboriginal Colombia,
is both social and economic: social, in that it structures and characterises
the major occasions of social interaction, and economic in that constant
supplies need to be assured. This concern with consumption in its literal
sense is a model for the general turnover of material goods in use by human
populations: the consumption of woollen textiles, say, or metal tableware;
and it is an important aspect of the way in which theory in the social sciences
has changed over the last two decades.


                                        374




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:23:56 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
        INVISIBLE   FLOWS:     LANGUAGES,        CULTURE       AND    DRUGS


   Whereas the comparison of static distribution-patterns (like sites) against
largely permanent backgrounds (like environmental zones) leads to a con-
cern with regular, localised movements in the winning of daily bread, a
concern with rarer types of consumable materials throws the emphasis on
to flows of materials along transport arteries. These networks, especially the
longer-distance ones carrying relatively precious materials, are often the
routes by which new consumption practices, technologies and languages
have spread across the continent. They are crucial to understanding why
certain regions stand out from others because of their wealth; and especially
to understanding the emergence of asymmetric patterns of exchange, in
which certain areas yield up their valuable raw materials in order to import
the 'added value' of manufactured products from other regions.




                                       375




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:23:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                             15
Cups that Cheered: The Introduction
 of Alcohol to Prehistoric Europe1
                                         (1987)

The study of pottery forms a large part of the work of the archaeologist:
most of the entities with which we populate prehistoric Europe are named
after their pots. Unlike many other expressive elements of material culture,
such as clothing, it has survived in large enough quantities to permit some
attempt to study it as a system of communication. Even so, it is only part of
the language of cuisine: the symbolism of the containers is closely connected
with the significance of their contents. Whatever prestige attached to pottery
is likely to have been derived from the special nature of what was consumed
from it rather than from any inherent value in the pots themselves: their
elaboration was simply appropriate for the value of what was provided in
them. While the pots may have been admired, it was on their contents that
the hospitality was judged.
    The diagnostic feature of the Bell-Beaker complex is its eponymous
vessel, the decorated drinking cup. The purpose of this chapter is to suggest
that the association between such a container and an international style of
ostentation is not fortuitous; and indeed that it forms part of a wider pattern
which may be discerned throughout the continent of Europe. Discussion of
this assertion in the following chapter falls into four sections, of differing
character: the first concerns chronology, the second deals with the arrival of

This chapter was written, shortly after having given the Munro Lectures in
Edinburgh on 'Drinking and Driving', for a conference in Oxford on the Bell-
Beaker culture. Having analysed the Early Bronze Age pottery from Sitagroi (and
studied with David Clarke, authority on British Bell-Beakers), I was well aware of
a horizon of drinking-vessels that in Hungary was explicitly associated with carts
and cart-burials (Chapter 8), and associated with massive changes in settlement-
patterns (Chapter 11). Was alcohol, too, an introduction? And if so, was the use of
animal traction equally a cultural (rather than just a subsistence) innovation f (This
piece was originally printed without its bibliography, and with the illustrations
misnumbered; it appears here for the first time intact.)


                                             376




                                This content downloaded from
              128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
     THE   INTRODUCTION          OF   ALCOHOL         TO   PREHISTORIC    EUROPE


technological innovations in later Neolithic Europe, the third looks briefly
at the sociology of stimulants, and the fourth tries to apply these ideas to the
detail of the archaeological record.


EUROPE IN THE FOURTH AND THIRD MILLENNIA BC
Europe at the beginning of the fourth millennium was a land of contrasts.
Although in its south-eastern part there were village communities whose
ancestors had been farmers there for two thousand years, on the north-
western margin of the continent the appearance of stone tombs in small
clearings marked a relatively recent shift to an agricultural way of life by
peoples who had previously lived by fishing, foraging and fowling. Along
the Atlantic coastlands, the convergent development of megalithic architec-
ture picked out a zone of communities, with varied backgrounds but often
located in the heartlands of earlier, Mesolithic population, which formed a
distinctive development on the western edge of Europe. Although the later
Iberian (e.g. Millaran) builders of collective tombs were to acquire some
skills from contacts along the Mediterranean in a more advanced phase of
their development,2 the origin of European megaliths was essentially a local
one. Nothing points up more clearly the contrast between our present
picture of European prehistory and that presented by Gordon Childe than
the interpretation of the megalithic monuments and their makers. Far from
being recent immigrants or converts to Near Eastern religions, the mega-
lithic communities of western Europe can now be seen as equally if not more
isolated, archaic and rural than the peasants of the central European loess -
themselves unsophisticated by the standards of the early-settled regions of
the south-east.
    Even the Balkan and Carpathian areas, technically and perhaps socially
the most advanced regions of the European landmass, had a curiously
isolated appearance by comparison with the technological koine which
existed over much of the contemporary Near East (Renfrew 1969). Its
copper and gold metallurgy, although typologically distinctive, was never-
theless still based on unalloyed metal shaped by single-mould casting and
hammering. After the close links with Anatolia indicated by the material
culture of its pioneer farmers, Balkan and Carpathian Europe seem to have
pursued their own, independent course; while in the adjacent central Euro-
pean loess belt the pioneer unity of Bandkeramik similarly gave way to more
localised groupings. These tendencies towards disunity, however, were
beginning to be reversed; and the core of this process was the Carpathian
Basin. The cultures of the Copper Age seem to show new properties not
possessed by their predecessors. The appearance of display gear in metal,
especially shafthole axes, was paralleled not only by new forms of flint-
working (notably long flint dagger-blades: see Chapter 12) which had to be
brought from great distances, but also by new conventions of displaying


                                            377




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                CUPS    THAT       CHEERED:




15.1 Europe in the period of long-distance connections ('linkup phase')
c.3800-3600 BC.

wealth or status at death - the appearance of rich, differentiated cemeteries
like that of Tiszapolgar (Bognar-Kutzian 1963). This pattern of individual
ostentation, and the long-distance trade needed to support it, was the motor
for spreading innovations like the domestic horses from the Pontic steppes
which appeared in Hungary at this time (Bokonyi 1978).
   Such developments were reaching their climax around 3700/3600 BC, in
what might be termed the Linkup phase (Figure 15.1). It is marked by three
related phenomena:
   1. the extension of trade routes carrying copper from the Carpathian
       Basin (already reaching the Russian steppes, perhaps in exchange for
       horses) to the newly emerged farming communities of Denmark in the
       TRB c period (Bygholm, Salten, etc.: Randsborg 1979);
   2. a pattern of stylistic convergence among adjacent cultures, forming a
       chain from Bulgaria to Poland and characterised by frayed boundaries
       and mixed groups (Bodrogkeresztur/Salcutsa IV; Lengyel-Polgar);
   3. the emergence of certain inter-cultural ceramic types, notably those
       concerned with serving food or drink.


                                             378




                                This content downloaded from
              128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
     THE   INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL         TO   PREHISTORIC    EUROPE




15.2 Inter-regional pottery forms for serving liquids, early fourth millennium BC:
eastern group (two-handled). Left, Silesia (Jordanow); centre, Slovakia (Lengyel
V); right, Bulgaria (Salcutsa IV). Various scales and sources.

All three are aspects of a process of increasing connection between regions,
in which the movement of rare commodities like metals was associated with
a degree of cultural convergence, beginning with common conventions for
ritually important activities. The first represents an interesting example of
directional drift in commodities between two demographically important
centres of settlement, along an axis that was to be of crucial importance in
later prehistory. The second probably relates to new patterns of mobility in
mating networks and the formation of kinship links of greater geographical
scope (Chapter 5). The third, most relevant for present purposes, offers in
embryo a phenomenon not dissimilar to that later represented by the Bell-
Beakers themselves.
   Two inter-regional pottery types present themselves: an 'eastern' form
and a 'western' one.3 (To these may be added the Funnel-beaker drinking set
considered in the following chapter: Figures 16.14 and 16.15.) The eastern
type is the two-handled vessel that distinguishes the latest phase (IV in
Berciu's terminology) of Gumelnitsa and Salcutsa, appears in eastern
Hungary with the distinctive Scheibenhenkeln of later Bodrogkeresztur
(Hunyadihalom), and is known from later Lengyel-Polgar contexts in
southern and central Poland, such as the copper-rich graves of Jordanow
(Figure 15.2). The western type has a single handle, and appears in the form
of a cup or tankard among the constituent groups of the later Lengyel
complex: the Balaton group in Hungary, Aichbuhl and Schussenried in
Bohemia and the east Alpine foreland, Baalberge in central Germany (Figure
15.3). If material culture is fossilised behaviour, it may be possible to infer


                                             379




                                This content downloaded from
              128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                CUPS     THAT      CHEERED:




15.3 Inter-regional pottery forms for serving liquids, early fourth millennium BC:
western group (one-handled). Top row, right and left, central Germany
(Baalberge); top row, centre, Bavaria (Wallerfing); bottom row, Slovakia
(Turchenstichker amik). Various scales and sources.

the appearance of conventions of hospitality or at least the social dispensing
of liquids (e.g. from the Schussenried jug) among the interacting groups
around the Carpathian Basin.4 It may not be coincidence that one of the
more distinctive (and again, eponymous) shapes among the pottery of the
first northern farmers, the funnel-necked beaker, should appear at this time
in an area demonstrably linked to that of the Carpathian Basin by trade in
copper. Contemporary early farming cultures in Atlantic Europe had no
such distinctive drinking vessel: they were 'bowl cultures'.
   This pattern of growing connections within and around central Europe,
centred on the prosperous, copper-using groups of the Carpathian Basin but
reaching out to include both steppe groups to the east and new farming
communities in the North European Plain, was the nucleus from which
more extensive networks of trading and cultural contact were to develop.
    In the next phase, lasting from 3500-3000 BC, this network was
decisively linked to that of the urbanising Near East by way of Anatolia and
the Aegean: its mnemonic is thus the Aegeo-Anatolian phase. These influ-
ences are unambiguous in Balkan and Carpathian Europe, but their echoes
can be traced into central Germany and Poland. An important feature of
internal development was the unification of the 'eastern' (Bodrogkeresztur)
and 'western' (Lengyel) wings of the Danubian province into a single entity,
the Baden culture.5 Baden pottery shows little continuity with that of either
group (though perhaps owing more to Lengyel than to Bodrogkeresztur),


                                             380




                                This content downloaded from
              128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
     THE   INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL        TO    PREHISTORIC   EUROPE




metal prototypes: pottery from the two male burials accompanied by paired cattle
in the cemetery of Alsonemedi, Hungary (cf. Figs 8.1, 8.2). Drawn from photo-
graphs in J. Banner, Die Peceler Kultur, 1956.

but instead it is characterised by an entirely new assemblage of forms and
decorative syntax. The shapes include many-handled vessels for dispensing
and consuming liquids, often combined in graves as a 'service' or set of
vessels of complementary types (like our decanter and glasses), either for
personal enjoyment (Figure 15.4) or social entertainment (Figure 15.5), and
also occurring in domestic assemblages (Figure 15.6). The stylistic and




15.5 Two contemporary pottery drinking-sets, inspired by metal forms, in central
Europe and the Aegean: right, Baden culture assemblage from Dfetovice near
Brandys, Czech Republic /Pravek Ceskoslovenska, 1960, p. 138 and Plate 17);
Early Cycladic grave assemblage from SE Naxos (from Renfrew 1972, Plate 16).


                                            381




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                            CUPS        THAT         CHEERED:


         SITAGROI Va
             SHAPE          DISTRIBUTION


            SHORT-TERM                                                          LONGER-TERM
             CONTAINERS                                                         CONTAINERS




                                    BOWLS         \   ~ ?



                            o -~K7 CO
         String hales   .      ..




                 0r                   o               0
                                            TEMPORARY STORAGE
                                            COOKING, SERVING




                                                       CAPACITY

15,6 The pottery assemblage from the 'burnt house' at Sitagroi, Macedonia (Phase
Va, mid-third millennium BC), arranged according to volume and rim-diameter:
note the jug/cup complex at the personal end of the scale; [from Sherratt 1986a],

morphological features of this assemblage, such as the use of strap-handles,
omphalos bases and channelled decoration, are indicative of the impact of
metal prototypes. Nandor Kalicz long ago (1963, 42-52) assembled an
impressive list of features of Baden pottery which have their origins in the
type of precious metal vessels then existing in Anatolia. This metal impact
is very clear in the Beycesultan sequence, and I have described it (Sherratt
1986a) in the north Aegean at Sitagroi, with the appearance of these metal-
related features in phase IV there. The same is true for Ezero (with specific
parallels at Troy) and also Cernavoda III and Baden (Chrpovsky 1973). Its
impact can be traced less directly further north, in some Salzmiinde types in
central Germany, and more generally thereafter with Bernburg and early
Globular Amphorae, which have the rounded, southern shapes of the Baden
'metal style' as opposed to the angular, Nordic profiles of Walternienburg
[which I suspect go back to the tradition of stake-frame basket forms:
Chapter 14; cf. also Chapter 16].
   To summarise the pattern of this phase, therefore, we can see the
establishment, in the Carpathian Basin and south-east Europe (with some
echoes further north), of a major cultural block with close stylistic connec-
tions to the adjacent areas of the Aegean and Anatolia. This style is typically
expressed in sets of drinking vessels, whose forms were inspired by metal
originals.
    Our next phase is more complex, and involves eastwards contact with the
area to the north of the Black Sea. For this reason I have called it the Steppe
phase (3000-2500 BC); and it falls into two parts. A striking feature of its
earlier part is the expansion of the Globular Amphora complex (Wislanski
1970; Nagel 1985), over an area from south Denmark to Kiev (Figure 15.8).


                                                               382




                                      This content downloaded from
                    128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                              All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
     THE   INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL        TO    PREHISTORIC   EUROPE




                                         o            10
                                                     J CMS.


15.7 Pottery characteristic of the two successive major inter-regional complexes of
the North European Plain, 3400-2400 BC: left, Globular Amphora culture (eastern
Poland); right, Corded Ware culture (western Poland).

Its essential feature is the liquid-container, the eponymous globular
amphora (Figure 15.7 left). A comparable form of vessel occurs in the areas
more immediately influenced by Aegean prototypes, including both the
Baden area and Italy. It is sometimes accompanied, in a true drinking set,
by handled cups; but this is not true everywhere. The Globular Amphora
culture picked up, on its 'eastern front', the practice of impressing pottery
with cord decoration which was already practised by Pontic Steppe groups
(Telegin 1973; Merpert 1974); and its burial practices were an eclectic
mixture of southern paired-ox burials, western megalithic cists, and eastern
tumuli. At about the same time, there was a short, temporary fashion for
cord decoration in the Balkans (e.g. at Mikhalich and Sitagroi Va; for a
general survey see Roman 1974), and what seems to be an actual steppe
intrusion of ochre-grave (= Pit-Grave,'Kurgan' or tumulus-building) groups
into the Lower Danube and eastern Hungary from the Pontic steppes
(Ecsedy 1979). This was the time when two-piece mould casting and
arsenical alloying started in south-east Europe. The Globular Amphora
diaspora had its own impact on TRB, most clearly seen in MN IV in Denmark
(E2 in the Netherlands), when the cord decoration was imitated rather
laboriously in local tvaerstik - stab and drag ornament (Bakker 1979).
   As a second stage of this process, the Corded Ware complex (Behrens
and Schlette 1969, Schnurkeramik Symposium Halle 1979) crystallised
around a further set of international (and typically male) equipment. This
consisted essentially of the shafthole stone 'battle-axe', the flint dagger,
and the cord-decorated beaker (a large drinking cup with wrapped-round
decoration) often associated with a larger liquid-container, the globular
amphora - and usually occurring with single burials in the tumuli that now
became the standard form of burial monument (Figure 15.7 right). The core
area of the Corded Ware complex lay to the west of that of Globular


                                             383




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                CUPS    THAT       CHEERED:




IS. 8 Map showing the spread of the drinking-vessel complex in Europe in its
three regional manifestations: SE Europe with vessels of shapes inspired by metal
originals; N Europe with a more rustic style incorporating cord decoration; and
Atlantic Europe with various groups of the Bell-Beaker culture. (Bell-Beaker
arrows distinguish between AOC Beakers - hatched; Maritime Beakers - stippled;
and Beaker groups appearing in former Corded Ware areas - blank, broken
outline.) Drawn by Pat Jacobs.


Amphorae (Figure 15.8), but Corded Ware took over the western periphery
of the latter, and expanded widely beyond it to the east.6 The western wing
of this complex extended from Switzerland to Scandinavia; the eastern
wing as far as Moscow and beyond. I leave on one side whether this was a
population (e.g. acculturated remnant hunters), a specialised minority (e.g.
pastoralists), or merely a set of symbols indicative of social convergence on
a common formula: for the moment I merely want to clarify the spatio-
temporal pattern.
   The last part of this process (Figure 15.8), at the far western end, was the
formation of a further international complex with maritime and riverine
links to western and south-western Europe: hence its designation as the
Maritime phase (2500-2000 BC). The Bell-Beaker sequence (Clarke 1976;
Harrison 1980), beginning with AOC (All-over-Cord) beakers in the North
Sea basin, was initially close to the Corded Ware model; it substituted
archery equipment for battle axes, but continued the daggers, single burial
under a tumulus, and especially the emphasis on a cord-decorated drinking


                                             384




                                This content downloaded from
              128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
     THE   INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL        TO    PREHISTORIC   EUROPE


vessel. This was followed by the 'Maritime' or 'Pan-European' phase, in
which the cord ornament was translated into zones of comb-stamped
decoration and Beakers spread even more widely, perhaps meshing with pre-
existing maritime trade networks to bring northern novelties to the west
Mediterranean in exchange for copper. The scale of this Bell-Beaker
diaspora was to exceed even that of Globular Amphorae and Corded Ware;
from Scotland to Sicily, Cornwall to Moravia. Nevertheless, its position
peripheral to a continuing Baden-like core should still be noted, as should
the continuing irradiation of this periphery by metal-inspired forms: the so-
called Begleitkeramik. This interaction - in which Nagyrev jugs and cups
spread into the loesslands and the north Alpine foreland, while decorated
beakers spread into central Europe from the west - was also marked by the
transfer of technological sophistication to the periphery: copper (and then
copper-alloy) daggers began to replace flint ones in Bell-Beaker graves
(Burgess and Shennan 1976; Shennan 1977).
   Comparing this sequence of maps, one may discern a pattern unfolding
over the course of a millennium, and consisting of the following features:
the establishment of a Carpathian/Balkan bridgehead of Aegeo-Anatolian
styles; two successive diasporas in the North European Plain - one in the
east, one in the west - creating a chain of common conventions from the
steppes to the Rhineland; and finally a more selective linking-up of the main
centres within the great arc of western Europe. The whole process thus took
the form of an anti-clockwise movement around the European landmass,
coming full circle in the Mediterranean: Italy in general, and Sicily in par-
ticular, received impulses from both directions - from the east, originating
in the Aegean, and from the west, along the Beaker sea-lanes (hence that
unique phenomenon, a painted Bell-Beaker).
   Each of these major, inter-regional cultural complexes had at its heart a
set of distinctive drinking vessels, usually closely associated - in the typical
burial formula, and putatively therefore in the minds of their users - with an
equally distinctive kit of personal weaponry, and more generally (as we shall
consider in the next section) with another important novelty: the use of the
horse.


EUROPE IN TRANSITION: SOME KEY INNOVATIONS
These very large-scale phenomena demand equally large-scale explanations;
so let us consider some of the major changes that were taking place at this
time or just before (Figure 0.6), which were the results of a second gen-
eration of revolutionary changes within Old World farming practices.7
These changes have been discussed in the preceding chapters; and together
they produced a fundamental alteration in social organisation, sexual roles
and settlement patterns. Horses arrived early in the open steppes of eastern
Hungary, but for another millennium spread no further into a continent still


                                            385




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                              CUPS     THAT       CHEERED:


largely forested. The existence of the plough, demonstrable from c.3500 BC
onwards, was the main incentive for an accelerated pace of forest clearance,
and prepared the way in northern and western Europe for other innovations
requiring open country, such as horse-rearing, or the keeping of sheep in
sufficient numbers for wool. I have argued that the introduction of the
light plough (ard), as part of a larger 'traction complex' that also included
wheeled vehicles, can be dated to the beginning of the 'Aegeo-Anatolian'
phase that followed the great Copper Age linkup; that is, Baden in Hungary
and earliest Middle Neolithic in Denmark. The association between the
traction complex and new features of ceramic style in central and south-east
Europe (including the coincidence of drinking sets and paired-ox burials in
the Alsonemedi cemetery) suggests a common origin; and perhaps, there-
fore, a similar route of spread via Anatolia. Animal traction was clearly a
very significant innovation, and I envisage the plough as spreading along the
Mediterranean at the same time as it did along the central European axis, to
be present in Millaran Spain (along with bastion fortifications) just as it is
known to have been in Middle Neolithic Denmark or the British Isles. The
same would probably be true of wheeled vehicles, the other application of
animal traction. This is the horizon c.3500 BC in calendar years, maybe a
couple of hundred years later in the west Mediterranean, which corresponds
to radical changes in settlement pattern and organisation in many areas,
though its full impact was only to become evident when the full suite of
innovations was present to make use of the new conditions. One continuing
effect, however, was a relative enlargement of the pastoral sector, and a
concomitant enhancement of male domination of the system of production.
This continued a trend first evident in the Carpatho-Balkan Copper Age, but
now much more widely occurring and especially marked in the North
European Plain as settlement rapidly expanded onto the easily-deforested
outwash sands in the Corded Ware period.
   Links with more open areas to the east, both through the Carpathian
Basin and across the North European Plain, continued to have a crucial
effect on the development of forested temperate Europe. Domestic horses
had both an origin and a continuing reservoir on the Pontic Steppes; and
I suspect that wool-sheep may have arrived in central and northern Europe
by the same route a little later, to replace the existing hairy varieties that had
come in with the Neolithic. The use of horses for riding can be traced by the
occurrence of their bones on settlements and in graves, and seems to have
been carried successively further west and south on our series of flor-
escences, first with Corded Ware and then with Bell-Beakers. Their associ-
ation with early Mediterranean Bell-Beakers, in Iberia, Italy, and now on
Majorca, is striking.8 The keeping of horses for riding must at this stage have
been confined to a limited elite, since they would have been very expensive
to maintain on the limited areas of grazing then available. Nevertheless, they
must have been an impressive sight to communities which had never seen


                                            386




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
    THE   INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL         TO   PREHISTORIC    EUROPE


ridden horses before, and must have conferred great prestige on their
owners: probably the same people who figure prominently in the graves as
possessors of fine stone or copper weaponry and drinking equipment. They
would have been desirable items of trade; and, as a means of transport
themselves, would have facilitated travel and the distribution of other high-
value items. They would also have had an important role in more open areas
in the enlarged scale of flock- and herd-management.
    Since linen was the universal fibre of the Neolithic (locally supplemented
by nettle or esparto grass), the introduction of wool-bearing sheep meant
the appearance of a new, prestige commodity that could be made into a
wider range of garments, potentially more colourful than before.9 Although
it was later to become a major item of trade, wool is likely to have been a
rather rare, elite commodity for many centuries after its first appearance,
and perhaps even longer in heavily forested regions. The introduction of
wool sheep is rather harder to date than that of the horse, and must be
inferred from a mixture of different types of evidence including metrical
data on sheep bones, the transition from buttons to pins, and on the very
infrequent finds of the fibres and their textiles. The combined evidence for
the first use of wool suggests a date in the later part of the 'steppe' phase,
and a slow spread westwards: perhaps later Baden in Hungary, later Corded
Ware in Germany, middle Beaker in the far west. The geometrical, zone-
filling motifs of mature beakers suggest an obvious inspiration from textiles
- perhaps garments like the woven belts10 on the Swiss/north Italian statue-
menhirs; while more elaborate clothing might be one reason for the shift
from crouched to laid-out burials, to display their finery in the grave.
Woollen textiles are therefore likely to have been carried to new areas over
the Beaker network, although an independent spread along the Medi-
terranean was probably taking place at the same time.
    To summarise: the spread of the 'drinking complex' - a common
emphasis on sets of vessels, often combined in graves, which in several cases
are so distinctive stylistically as to have given their name to whole cultures
- took place during a period of unusually rapid social, cultural and econ-
omic change. During this time, Europe was opened up - both literally, in
terms of the further deforestation of its landscapes, and metaphorically,
in terms of its new contacts and social opportunities. Fundamental to this
process was the increasing importance of livestock, and the emergence of
male warrior elites whose sub-culture was portrayed in the characteristic
combination of weaponry11 and drinking vessels in their graves. Their dis-
tinctiveness was enhanced by their possession of horses, and probably of
woollen clothing. The progress of metallurgy, keeping pace with the need for
metal equipment for fighting and display, was shortly to cross the tech-
nological threshold which allows us to speak of the Bronze Age.
    The pattern that we have so far recognised is encouragingly congruent:
the introduction of major innovations in animal husbandry, and the new


                                            387




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               CUPS     THAT      CHEERED:


lifestyles associated with them, do seem to coincide with the main currents
of cultural change as they can be reconstructed from the ceramic inventories
of the groups concerned. But can we be more specific? What was the signifi-
cance of Corded Ware, or Bell-Beakers? Can these features be tied together
as comprehensible elements of social practice? To say more will involve us
in a brief excursion.


SYMPOSIA: DRINKING TOGETHER
Our timetable - in conferences or at work - is structured by drinking-events.
The day is punctuated by social occasions which differ from one another
in their scale, character and appropriate beverage. In England, 11 o'clock
means coffee-time; water would satisfy our thirst, yet hospitality would be
lacking were that to be the only drink provided. A mild stimulant is re-
quired. Symmetrically, the British provide tea at 4 o'clock. At lunchtime it is
a common practice to drink a glass of beer; a more formal, evening dinner
would be accompanied by wine. None of these is strictly necessary for
physical well-being. What they do is to partition the day into units,
separated by events at which graded levels of social interaction take place12
- each stage and level marked by its appropriate drink (cf. Douglas 1975;
1982).
   So too with the containers (Vintners 1933). I expect my wine in a glass,
and of a different shape from that in which I would drink my beer. It may
even be specifically appropriate for the type of wine, whether it is imported
from the Rhineland, Champagne or Portugal. The hot beverages are more
appropriately presented in pottery; the tea, especially, in good china with an
unnecessary saucer. If it is not a social occasion - travelling, for instance, by
train - 1 may be content with a plastic beaker; and if I relax at the end of the
day with a private drink of cocoa, it is taken unpretentiously, in a mug.
   Each of these modest stimulants thus has its own container, its own
etiquette, its own ritual. Other rituals surround such mild narcotics
as tobacco, consumed by smoking.13 Each of the non-alcoholic drinks,
interestingly, has its origin in a different part of the world (Hobhouse 1985)
and only arrived in Britain in the sixteenth century;14 and, moreover, each
was part of a tradition of social entertainment in its area of origin: for
instance tea in China and Japan, with its ritualised 'tea ceremony'. This
beverage brought with it its own material culture, the porcelain 'china' tea-
service, subtly transformed for western use. Coffee performs a similar role
in Arabia, and more widely in the Near East: anyone who has excavated in
the Arab world is familiar with the seemingly endless sequence of cups of
coffee, without which formal negotiation is impossible. Cocoa - kakao -
was the elite drink of the Maya and the Aztecs. Tobacco, in American Indian
culture, was equally social and communal: the pipe of peace, passed around
the fire. So too were the rather stronger narcotics: cannabis in the Islamic


                                            388




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
     THE   INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL        TO   PREHISTORIC    EUROPE


world, and opium (which we associate with south-east Asia, but is only so
characteristic of this area because we promoted it there). All of these drugs
started off in well-defined and controlled social occasions - rare, special and
essentially communal. It is only with the atomisation of society that has
followed industrialisation that public use has given way to private use, and
hence to uncontrolled indulgence, abuse and addiction. Originally they were
social lubricants, agents of hospitality. So too was alcohol.
   They are also, of course, symbols. Don't ask for alcohol in Riyad; don't
smoke cannabis in the streets of Oxford. In the Arab world, cannabis - and
later coffee to complement it, as a social drink - symbolised the victory of
Islam and camel-riding desert pastoralists, with their brass drinking-vessels,
over the populations which they conquered: the Christian, wheel-going,
wine-drinking, silver-vessel-using town dwellers. The place of wine in Near
Eastern and especially Christian ritual needs no exposition: Hie est calix
novum testamentum in sanguine meo (Luke 22: 20) - the blood of the New
Testament shed for the forgiveness of sins, the chalice, the cup of sacrifice;
an image that goes back to libations poured from animal-head rhyta in
the early Bronze Age. These are powerful symbols, and people have died
for misusing them. Alcohol is especially suggestive, with its potential for
euphoria and ecstasy: one thinks of course of the cult of Dionysus, but do
not forget the Vulgate version of the 23rd Psalm: calix meus inebrians est -
my chalice inebriateth me. [These arguments are developed further in
Sherratt 1995.]
   So all of these stimulants, and most especially alcohol, are likely to have
had strict social contexts and profound symbolic and social implications
when they were first introduced. Let us concentrate first on alcohol, and try
to tie it in with some archaeology. Alcohol depends on sugar, transformed
by the fungus Saccharomyces cerevisiae (otherwise known as yeast) through
the process of anaerobic glycosis (otherwise known as fermentation). When
was it discovered? Not, I suspect, in the early Neolithic. All the encyclopedia
entries on alcohol start by saying that it began way back in prehistory: I am
not so sure. I think it is more like horses, ploughs and woolly sheep - a
second-generation development of the farming tradition, with its origins in
the south. The sugars available to prehistoric man were glucose, fructose,
maltose and lactose, available from honey, fruits, sprouting grain and milk
respectively, to produce mead, wine, beer and koumish. Few of these sources
of sugar were abundant in primeval temperate Europe, and our own sugar-
saturated environment is a poor guide to the conditions that obtained then.
Fermentation is constantly happening accidentally now - in some long-
forgotten bag of fruit in the kitchen - but only because of the highly selected,
sugar-rich varieties of fruit that are now so easily available on the super-
market shelves. Wild fruits, and this includes the wild grape Vitis sylvestris,
simply do not have enough sugar to ferment. Given that the process also
includes lengthy preparation in closed containers with the appropriate


                                            389




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               CUPS     THAT      CHEERED:




      "vT




15.9 Drinking scenes: above, beer-drinkers using straws, on an Early Dynastic
(mid-third millennium) cylinder-seal impression from Mesopotamia; below, a
wine-drinker from a Hallstatt-period (6th-century BC) situla from Kuffarn, Austria
Ifrom Sherratt 1985].

variety of yeast, I think it entirely probable that alcohol was not invented in
Neolithic Europe.
    That is not to say that they were completely without stimulants; seeds of
the opium poppy, Papaver somniferum, are well known from Bandkeramik
contexts in Germany, from Neolithic Switzerland, and from the later Neo-
lithic levels of La Cueva de Los Murcielagos in Granada (see next chapter).
While it is unlikely that opium was highly prepared and smoked, it is quite
possible that it might have been chewed or infused (Merlin 1984). Birch-
bark chewing gum, itself mildly narcotic, is incidentally also known from a
lakeside site in southern Germany.


                                            390




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
     THE   INTRODUCTION          OF    ALCOHOL        TO    PREHISTORIC   EUROPE


   So where was alcohol discovered? The most likely origin, I suspect
(Figure 0.3), is in the tree crops cultivated from the fourth millennium on-
wards in the east Mediterranean and around Mesopotamia (Zohary and
Spiegel-Roy 1975). The date palm, both in its fruits and its sap, is one of the
most concentrated natural sources of sugar (Werth 1954, 233-41; Samuel-
son 1898). Cultivated vines, Vitis vinifera, carry both sufficient sugar and
natural yeasts. Mediterranean polyculture, as practised in the east Medi-
terranean, was closely associated (as Colin Renfrew pointed out long ago)
with the elite consumption of wine (Sereni 1981), reflected in a whole range
of pouring and drinking vessels which significantly all have metal prototypes
(Renfrew 1972). The depas amphikypellon at Troy, the 'sauceboat' in Early
Helladic Greece, and the 'teapot' in EM Crete, are all regional variants of
craftsman-made, elite drinking vessels surely concerned with the con-
sumption of wine.
   The introduction of alcoholic drinks, with their properties of intoxication
and the generation of conviviality - a socially accepted alteration of con-
sciousness - is a major event for any society (Malcolm 1971). The religious
and elite overtones of wine in later European and Near Eastern societies
point to its fundamental social importance, and its use in prehistoric times
is likely to have been accompanied by cult and ceremony (Lutz 1922;
Kossack 1964; Goody 1982). The preparation of alcoholic drinks required
investment and the ability to concentrate surplus for conspicuous con-
sumption, as did also the manufacture of appropriately ostentatious vessels.
Such privileges may have been available only to the few. Such a socially
visible form of enjoyment and display is highly likely to be emulated by elite
groups in contact with those already practising alcohol consumption: the
recent history of North American Indians in contact with white settlers
offers an instructive, if more concentrated example - interestingly paralleled
by the adoption of the horse in the same context.
   Now look at the chronological relationship of the various culturally
emphasised drinking vessels that we have been considering in later Neolithic
or Copper Age Europe. East Mediterranean developments (wine and
precious metal vessels), and their Balkan/Carpathian imitations, were
clearly at the beginning of the sequence Baden, Globular Amphorae, Corded
Ware, Bell-Beakers. Are we not witnessing the spread of the 'alcohol cult',15
the socially desirable use of intoxicating drink with elite and perhaps
religious significance?
   But think again about the Baden case. Here is a set of drinking equip-
ment, clearly equivalent to that in use in the Aegean, copying similar metal
models. Yet Baden is already beyond the limits of viticulture (just as it was
beyond the area of advanced technology in which metal vessels could be
produced). Cultivated vines were not grown in central Europe before the
later Iron Age or the Roman period; and wild ones do not ferment. So what
we must be witnessing is a substitution, the development of a local alcoholic


                                            391




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                              CUPS     THAT       CHEERED:


drink as substitute for wine, most probably mead. I think this is a pattern
that we can see time and time again, on a global basis. Alcohol ultimately
became very widespread, but largely by imitation of introduced drinks (as
I shall argue below in the case of koumish). In the same way, the prestige
technologies associated with the serving of alcoholic drinks were also
imitated. Looking ahead, through later European prehistory, we can see
how the technology caught up with its imitations: first precious metal
drinking vessels, then bronze ones, and finally bulk imported wine and then
viticulture itself, under the Romans (see Chapter 17). What we see in north-
west Europe is a long-drawn-out series of substitutes, both for the drink and
for its original Mediterranean style of serving.
    We can appreciate, then, why in the third millennium there should be a
series of international drinking sets, spreading between dominant groups in
different areas as part of a complex of new subsistence technology and as
parts of new modes of social interaction. What we are actually looking at is
the origin of a tradition of alcohol-based hospitality that we will see later
on, in the Classical world, as the symposium:16 more than just a drinking
party or a forum for philosophical discussion (for that is what it became,
and why we use the word today), but originally a fundamental social
mechanism, the 'feast of merit', the gathering of a following of warrior-
companions, like the Mannerbund of early Germanic history (Murray 1982;
1983; Quiller 1981). As Morton Fried (1967, 178) recalls, ranked societies
are particularly characterised by their frequent 'intercommunity activities,
most notably feasts, parties, ceremonies and other ceremonies predicated on
organised hospitality'. It is a common and fundamental feature of later pre-
and protohistoric societies in Europe. As kinship networks became larger
and less linked to immediate communities, so the possibilities of creating
and organising an armed body of supporters became greater, and the
emphasis on warrior feasting and hospitality became more pronounced.17 It
is the genesis of this fundamentally new social fabric that we are witnessing
in the third millennium, behind the spread of drinking equipment and
weaponry which is the elusive characteristic of the beaker complex that we
are trying to tie down. And the social lubricant of this process was, I believe,
alcohol: that is what the beakers were for, and why their decoration was so
elaborate.


' W H A T BEER THE BEAKER FOLK WERE WONT T O BREW' 18
The question of what kind of drink might have been consumed from Bell-
Beakers is an old one, which can be taken further only by combining
evidence, argument and speculation. Since sources of sugar were relatively
restricted, the possibilities are likewise limited. Beer is clearly a possibility,
and will be discussed further below. We may set aside koumish, which re-
quires large quantities of surplus milk (especially the sugar-rich mares' milk)

                                            392




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
     THE   INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL        TO   PREHISTORIC    EUROPE


and is unlikely to have been produced in forested temperate Europe at this
date. Likewise tree-sap and native fruits or berries: there are few temperate
equivalents to the sugar-rich palms, and although birch-sap can be tapped
(like maple syrup in North America) it is not very sweet. Fruit wines require
added sugar (for example from honey) and are best considered as types of
flavoured mead (Gayre 1948). Beer or mead are thus the best candidates.
    On a global scale, only a fraction of cereal-cultivators convert their grain
into beer. In temperate North America, for example, no alcoholic beverages
were produced in pre-contact times despite the extensive cultivation of
maize, even though this grain was used further south (in Mexico and Peru)
to make beer (Hatt 1953, 158). It is unlikely, therefore, that beer-making
(and leavened bread) was part of the original way in which domesticated
grains were utilised (Braidwood et al. 1953). Early cereal-based diets are
more likely to have used parched and cracked grains for porridge ('grits'),
or - if ground - for coarse, unleavened bread (Mauritzio 1932; 1933; Forbes
1954; 1955). For fermentation, conversion from starch to sugar is neces-
sary; and various methods have been used. The most primitive is to chew
the grain, making use of the enzyme ptyalin (amylase) in the saliva - a
widespread technique, used both with grains and roots (and also to make
kava from Piper methysticum in Polynesia). In the rice-growing area of
south and east Asia, a fermenting fungus (Aspergillus oryzae) is used, that
accomplishes both saccharification and fermentation. The most common
method today in Eurasia and Africa is malting, using the naturally produced
enzyme diastase which occurs during sprouting. This last method may not
be as ancient as the first beer production in Europe, however: finds of
sprouting grain are not known to me before the Roman period (though
there may be many reasons for this), and the chewing method may have
been the original one in Europe (with malting confined to the Near East). It
has certain echoes in folklore: bear-spittle was used to induce fermentation
in one episode in the Finnish Kalevala epic.
    A good deal is known about the production of beer in the ancient
civilisations of Egypt and Mesopotamia (Lutz 1922; Oppenheim 1950;
Forbes 1954). Written evidence indicates that beer was made in both areas
from the beginning of the historic period, and brewing-vats are shown in
Predynastic Egyptian figurines. Not only barley was used, but also emmer.
Dry malt-loaves (sometimes spiced) were often made as a durable com-
modity that could be converted into either bread or beer. The yeasts,
perhaps originally gained from making palm-wine, survived in the brewing-
vats, or from the remains of a previous mash; and the mixture could be
strengthened by the addition of honey or date-juice. The grains were not de-
husked, and the beer was either strained or drunk through straws. The first
illustration of such straws occurs in the Protoliterate (Jamdat Nasr) period,
around 3200 BC, and the custom was still encountered by Xenophon
(Anabasis IV, 5, 26) in Asia Minor in 400 BC. By this time it was probably


                                            393




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                              CUPS     THAT       CHEERED:


a rather rustic survival: in lowland areas a 'strong drink' (shekhar), largely
made from dates, had become more common.
    Perhaps surprisingly, beer was not produced in the Aegean in Classical
times, and the only tentative indication of its earlier use is an MM III jug from
Knossos with what resemble barley-ears moulded in relief. It is not clear,
therefore, whether the production of beer was a widespread early habit that
was ousted in the Aegean by wine, or whether - as is perhaps more likely -
we are dealing with two quite separate regional traditions that grew up in-
dependently in the Near East and Europe, and may have used quite different
methods. The beer of Egypt was sufficiently unfamiliar to the Greeks to be
thought worthy of remark by Herodotus (Histories, II, 26); while the god
Dionysus was said to have fled to Greece from Mesopotamia in disgust at
its inhabitants' liking for beer. On the other hand, the Greeks and Romans
also associated beer with the Celts: Pliny (Natural History XIV, 29)
recorded that the natives of western Europe (principally Gaul and Spain)
intoxicated themselves with a drink made from corn and water, while
Dionysius of Halicarnassus (Roman Antiquities XIII, 10) snobbishly noted
that 'the Gauls at that time had no knowledge of wine ... but used a foul-
smelling liquor made from barley rotted in water'. The Latin word for beer,
cerevisia (Spanish cerveza), is relatively late and is itself a compound of the
Latin for cereal plus a Celtic element meaning 'water' and surviving today
in the word 'whisky'. Tacitus (Germania XXIII) records the use of beer
amongst the Germans, and both he and other writers mention the use of
wheat as well as barley to make beer in the north.
    We can also turn to the kinds of cereals grown in later prehistoric Europe
to see if they contain any clues. The most useful survey (for northern
Europe) is by Hopf (1983), and the results are somewhat surprising.
Modern brewers prefer the hulled form of two-row barley (Hordeum
distichum); but there was no two-row barley in prehistoric Europe, only the
six-row form (H. hexastichum); and the naked form, in contrast to the Near
East at this time, was the predominant one down to the Urnfield period.
Since the naked form has no advantage for brewing, it seems unlikely that
its major use was for beer, whose production on any scale may have been
one of the many innovations of Urnfield times. Thus the oft-cited general
trend towards barley in the later Neolithic and Early Bronze Age is unlikely
to be related to beer-making, and most probably it simply reflects the spread
to secondary soils. There are some indications, in fact, that emmer was the
cereal used for brewing in northern Europe: we shall return to this point
after considering the evidence for mead. Tentatively, however, we may con-
clude that beer as such probably only gained its prominence in continental
Europe in the Late Bronze Age or Iron Age, and may only have become pre-
dominant in the Middle Ages, by which time it consumed 20-30 per cent of
the total cereal crop.
   We may next consider honey and its product, mead (Gayre 1948). Honey


                                            394




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
    THE   INTRODUCTION            OF   ALCOHOL        TO    PREHISTORIC   EUROPE


was the most concentrated source of sugar in prehistoric temperate Europe,
and no doubt a valuable and much-traded commodity (Forbes 1957). Quite
how much was available, however, is an important question. 'The collection
of wild honey must have been a laborious business involving movement over
wide areas' (Clark 1942, 210); and Eva Crane (1983) has usefully sum-
marised the ways in which the natural production of honey can be increased
by human intervention. One system of domestic bee-keeping existed among
the ancient civilisations, and is shown on Egyptian Old Kingdom reliefs.
It was based on the use of a horizontal hive, of the type known ethno-
graphically from many parts of Africa, and in Egypt used in stacks of several
hives. Horizontal hives (in a pottery form still used in the Cyclades) are
known from Classical times in Greece, and wood or wicker ones are
described in Roman Italy by Columella. This ancient type of formal bee-
keeping, typical of unforested areas and characterised by the horizontal
hive, did not spread to temperate, Transalpine Europe. Instead, the tradition
of forest bee-keeping - managing wild populations in living trees - lasted
down to historic times. It is known from England in the Middle Ages, and
remained the sole method in the Slav lands (in competition with the bears)
down to fairly recent times. The erection of artificial beehives, in the form
of vertical logs mimicking the trees, is known from the early centuries AD
on the north German heathlands, and may be older if the more doubtful
example from an Urnfield context near Berlin is accepted as a beehive. The
first wicker skep - the typical Medieval form of west European beehive -
again dates to the early centuries AD, at Feddersen Wierde. (All references in
Crane 1983.) The keeping of domestic bees, therefore, although of some
antiquity in the Mediterranean, was largely a development of the historical
era in temperate Europe. The quantities of honey available to earlier
Bronze Age populations are likely to have been neither large nor easily
increased; honey would have been a prestige commodity. Although
in Bronze Age Greece mead may have been a major competitor of wine,
and even preceded it in general use (as some of the myths indicate:
Zafiropulo 1966), it must have been much more restricted further north.
The supply of honey in temperate Europe is not likely to have sustained
a mass production of mead, which even in the Middle Ages was four times
as valuable as ale.
    Not surprisingly, therefore, the first evidence for a pure mead in tem-
perate Europe dates to the Iron Age, and comes from the Hallstatt princely
wagon-burial dated to around 500 BC at Hochdorf near Stuttgart (Korber-
Grohne 1985). In an imported bronze cauldron set in one corner of the
grave-chamber was an organic deposit consisting largely of pollen grains
and beeswax. The 'tide-mark' on the vessel indicates a capacity of c.350
litres, and the mass of pollen indicates a 15-60 per cent honey content: a
very high-quality mead. Some sixty different plants were represented in the
pollen, covering a wide variety of ecotopes including heathland with wild


                                            395




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                              CUPS     THAT       CHEERED:


thyme, pastures, meadows and bean-fields: several honeys of different origin
(perhaps four or five by comparison with modern samples) would have been
used. This clearly represents, like the elaborate material fittings of the tomb,
a very considerable concentration of wealth. It also testifies to a rather open
landscape, with many communities of honey-bees, using fields and pasture:
looking towards the Medieval pattern rather than typical of the conditions
of earlier prehistory.
    The most direct indicator of the kind of honey known in Beaker times is
the material from a spilled S4 Beaker in a cist-burial on Ashgrove Farm,
Methilhill, Fife, associated with a fine metal dagger (Clarke 1970, fig. 1016;
Dickson 1978). Pollen samples from a mass of leaves and moss next to the
recumbent vessel gave a pollen spectrum matching the smaller quantities
still adhering to the vessel wall, and presumably reflecting its original con-
tents. It is dominated by small-leaved lime (Tilia cordata) at 54 per cent,
followed by meadowsweet (Filipendula cf. ulmaria) at 15 per cent, and with
Calluna heather and ribwort plantain (P. lanceolata) around 7 per cent each.
Perhaps two honeys were used; certainly several ecotopes are represented:
lime-forest (i.e. mixed oak forest selectively sampled by the bees), and much
smaller areas of pasture and heath - a very different picture from Hochdorf.
Interestingly, the find lies at least 100km north of the boundary of T. cor data
at that time, and must reflect a honey traded from northern England. The
meadowsweet (medesweete = mead-sweet) seems likely to have been added
as a flavouring, and is known from other Bronze Age finds. Since the c n-
tents of the vessel as a whole were not examined, it would be wrong to
conclude that this was necessarily a pure mead; we can only be certain that
(no doubt fermented) honey was a component.
    The best guide to the nature of Bronze Age brews is still the famous birch-
bark container from an oak-coffin burial in the tumulus at Egtved, Denmark
(Thomsen 1922, 184). The residue in this vessel had three components:
1. honey, indicated by pollen of lime, meadowsweet and clover; 2. fruits and
leaves used for flavouring, notably Vaccinium (probably cranberry) fruits,
and leaves of sweet gale (see below, note 22); and 3. cereal grains, identified
as wheat (and therefore most probably emmer). Precisely the same mixture
was found in the Danish Juellinge find of the Roman Iron Age. This is a
mead, an ale, and a fruit wine all in one!
    Such a mixture was almost certainly more typical of early temperate
European alcoholic drinks than the 'pure' forms which probably began to
appear during the first millennium BC. Before that, all sources of sugar were
pressed into service, and techniques of alcohol were probably much less
effective than those in use at that time in the Near East. The answer to the
question of what drink was consumed from Bell-Beakers cannot be given
in a single word. Alcohol was a precious substance, hard-won (no doubt
with much ritual and mystique) from a temperate environment, and often
adulterated with other things. Its effects would have been a remarkable


                                            396




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
     THE   INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL        TO    PREHISTORIC   EUROPE


experience, perhaps not available to society at large, and monopolised by
the powerful.


A FINAL CLEW
It remains to explain one important thread in the argument which I have just
discussed, the significance of which occurred to me only after writing this
text in 1986. The thread is, of course, the strand of twisted cord that linked
the societies of the North European Plain, from the Pontic steppes to the
British Isles, and was a fundamental feature of the first generation of Bell-
Beaker, the All-over-Cord type (Figure 15.10). Why was cord decoration so
prominent, albeit temporarily, in that area? Can we follow the logic of our
explanation further? I believe that we can.
    Cord ornament started earliest on the steppes, in Sredni Stog and Pit-
Graves (Telegin 1973; Merpert 1974). It was also widespread in east Asia
from quite early Neolithic times (the Sheng-wen horizon in China and
Jomon in Japan: both terms mean 'corded ware'); but not in the northern
forest belt of Eurasia, where rather similar, coarse, impressed pottery was
nevertheless decorated only with pit-and-comb ornament, not cord im-
pressions. Cord decoration spread west with Globular Amphorae, and then
with Corded Ware, and it was painstakingly imitated as false cord and
stamped comb decoration. Why? Think about the steppes. The drinking
complex - jugs and cups related to metal forms, or even distinctive drinking
vessels of any type - did not penetrate until very late; not till Greek colonial




15.10 Cord impressions on a cord-impressed (AOC) Bell-Beaker from Cassington,
Oxfordshire (Clarke 730); (Ashmolean Museum); [new photograph],


                                            397




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               CUPS     THAT      CHEERED:




15.11 Equipment for inhaling cannabis smoke from Barrow 2 at Pazyryk, Altai
Mountains, Siberia (late 5th/early 4th century BC: bronze 'censers' with charcoal
and hemp seeds, and wooden framework for small tent (after Rudenko 1970);
[new drawing],

influence in Scythian times. That is probably when the steppe tribes invented
koumish - like mead, a local wine substitute. So how did they amuse them-
selves? The answer is in Herodotus, supported by the archaeology of the
Pazyryk tombs (Figure 15.11):
   On a framework of tree sticks, meeting at the top, they stretch pieces
   of woollen cloth. Inside this tent they put a dish with hot stones on it.
   Then they take some hemp seed, creep into the tent, and throw the seed
   on the hot stones. At once it begins to smoke, giving off a vapour un-
   surpassed by any vapour bath one could find in Greece. The Scythians
   enjoy it so much that they howl with pleasure.19
Poor Herodotus: he thought it was an alternative to washing. Years before,
the inhabitants of the steppes had discovered the joys of the native hemp
plant, Cannabis sativa, that they cultivated for its fibres, and converted it
into a socially approved intoxicant (Merlin 1972). I think that those people
were the Sredni Stog group, and that they celebrated its importance by
imprinting it on their pottery.20 They passed on their knowledge, and their
cultigen,21 to their neighbours, the eastern wing of the Globular Amphora
culture, who incorporated it in the complex of male-associ ired para-


                                            398




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
     THE    INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL         TO   PREHISTORIC         EUROPE


phernalia inspired by the southern alcoholic tradition. They may even have
mixed them in some amazing combination22 - the trick, apparently, is to
heat the hemp leaves in butter - and passed on their secret to their Corded
Ware successors. Did the All-over-Cord beaker, like those Late Bronze Age
Cypriot opium jugs in the shape of a poppy, actively advertise its contents
through its ceramic form and decoration? It is an attractive thought.
   Cord decoration remained typical of northern Bronze Age pottery well
into the second millennium. Hemp was probably ousted, as a fibre by wool,
and as an intoxicant by better brews of alcohol, perhaps beer. It survived on
the steppes, of course, and it was passed on, via the Persians, to the Arabs.
The rest you know. But what of Beakers? Hemp seems to have remained
a northern plant, until it was introduced into the Mediterranean from
Anatolia by Hellenistic Greeks and Romans, who wanted it for ropes. As
Bell-Beakers spread south, they left their cord decoration (and presumably
their hemp) behind them. For a short time its memory was kept alive
by imitative comb decoration, but then incised panels, drawing their
inspiration from woollen textiles, took over. And the Beakers themselves
diminished in size as they spread further south. I like to think that alcohol's
long journey, through remote northern regions where it was adulterated by
other infusions, was coming to an end. In the west Mediterranean, the
alcoholic tradition found once again sunshine, and sugar, and strength
(Walker 1985). It was like coming home.


EPILOGUE: DAS GLOCKENBECHERSYMPOSION 23
The specific interpretation offered above may or may not be true. The
general point remains: beakers were for drinking, and most probably for
drinking alcohol. This form of (usually male) entertainment has been a
characteristic feature of European culture ever since, and is still a familiar
part of the pattern of social life. It is basic to an understanding of our
everyday modes of interaction.
    The fabric of social relations is held together by knots of hospitality:
social occasions at which the participants come together in larger numbers
than usual to display their achievements, to compete with their neighbours,
choose their partners and cement their alliances. The character of a culture
takes its tone from these events. That we can understand these aspects of
Beaker society - far better than we can think ourselves into the ways of their
megalithic predecessors - is because these motives are still with us. Our cups
still cheer; our conferences are still symposia.

NOTES

 1. On the subject of drinking, it is hard to avoid literary allusions: hence both the title, and
    the quotation which introduces this section. William Cowper's interest was in temper-
    ance: the 'cups / That cheer but not inebriate' (A Winter Evening; 1785) were part of the


                                              399




                                 This content downloaded from
               128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 CUPS     THAT      CHEERED:

   new, middle-class tea ceremony. John Keats' intentions (Ode to a Nightingale; 1818)
   were alcoholic, but misguided. His beaker 'full of the warm south, / Full of the true, the
   blushful Hippocrene, / With beaded bubbles winking at the brim, / And purple-stained
   mouth' could have been no more than a mirage - for the Hippocrene was in fact a spring,
   the 'horse's spring' supposedly created where the foot of Pegasus struck Mount Helicon
   in Boeotia. Although the well was sacred to the Muses and said to be the inspiration of
   poets, Keats may have found red wine more effective in his quest, 'That I may drink, and
   leave the world unseen.'
2. The Millaran Kiippelgraber seem to represent a somewhat different phenomenon from
   the other; truly megalithic burial monuments which occur from Iberia, through Brittany
   and Britain to Scandinavia and north Germany. The former are distinctive not only in
   their more sophisticated architecture and the quality and quantity of their grave-goods,
   but also in their association with large, nucleated settlements (like Los Millares itself).
   The more northerly megalithic tombs, while they may in certain phases be associated
   with ritual enclosures, seem to be in some way an alternative to nucleated settlement on
   the pattern of central and southern Europe. The social units represented by the two sorts
   of megalithic collective tombs, and the social organisation and ideology underlying them,
   may thus have been very different.
3. Whether this development was a purely European phenomenon, or whether there was
   already some connection with the Late Chalcolithic cultures of Anatolia (where handled
   jugs and cups were prominent features of pottery assemblages) is unclear: unfortunately
   this phase is not yet represented in well-excavated levels in the central Bulgarian tells
   (e.g. Dipsiska Mogila, Ezero, which has a hiatus at this point). Neighbouring areas,
   including both Greece and Moldavia, seem more conservative in their culture at this
   time, and their assemblages continue to be dominated by painted pottery,figurines,and
   other archaic elements. The Carpathian Basin (and, on a smaller scale, areas like Thrace)
   had the combined advantages of dense populations, copper and gold sources, and open
   land for stock-raising. This area thus became the focus of European developments; and
   it is possible that already by this stage it had links to Anatolia. The rich finds at the
   cemetery of Varna suggest that the Danube/Black Sea trade route to northern or western
   Anatolia was already in use. These latter areas, however, are very poorly known at this
   period.
4. Since they are open, handled shapes, then the alternative explanation, that they were
   containers for traded organic commodities, seems less likely (although some later inter-
   regional shapes, like the TRB collared flask, almost certainly were).
5. One reason for this is a large-scale internal redistribution of population (probably con-
   sequent on use of the plough), which produced a move to the foothills and interfluves,
   filling in the Danube-Tisza interfluve which formerly separated these blocs. On a large
   scale, this is typical of the shift from riverine to interfluvial patterns of settlement, and
   the changed topology of interaction which it brought about.
6. Although the Corded Ware complex seems to have spread initially in areas formerly
   influenced by the Globular Amphora complex, the two complexes existed in parallel for
   some centuries in distributions which were to a large extent mutually exclusive (Kruk
   1980). The Globular Amphora 'heartland' in Kujavia and the middle Vistula resisted
   the pattern of Corded Ware expansion (which engulfed surrounding areas) down to the
   emergence of the Chlopice-Vesele group.
7. For the evidence behind these assertions, see previous chapters.
8. The use of domesticated horses in the west Mediterranean seems to show a striking
   association with the Bell-Beaker culture, even if they then became very rare before be-
   coming more common in the Bronze Age. The association with Beakers was first pointed
   out for Spain by Schtile (1969), confirmed for Italy by the site of Sesto Fiorentino near
   Florence, and now for Majorca at Ferrandell-Oleza by Waldren. The same picture seems
   also to apply to Ireland, and probably the British Isles as a whole. I thank Lawrence
   Barfield and Bill Waldren for their comments on these finds.
9. Wool has a very high affinity for dyes, and takes the colour well and evenly; linen has a


                                              400




                                 This content downloaded from
               128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
      THE   INTRODUCTION            OF   ALCOHOL        TO    PREHISTORIC       EUROPE

    very poor affinity (worse than cotton) and its structure prevents an even penetration of
    dyestuffs. I am much indebted to Mrs Beatrice Clayre (Beatrice Blance) for confirming
    this point and providing me with a photocopy of From Fibre to Fabric (1946), a hand-
    book printed for the staff of G. and R. Wills.
10. It is, of course, significant that we describe Bell-Beaker ornament as being organised in
    zones, using the Greek word zone meaning a belt. The association of belts and warrior
    prowess is an old-established one. The elite troop of Greek soldiers are the Evzones, the
    'well-belted ones'; and the various colours of belt ('Black Belt' etc.) are still used to
    denote grades of attainment in the martial art of judo. The bone belt-fastener is a
    characteristic feature of rich male Corded Ware and Bell-Beaker graves (Clarke 1970,
    265 and 299, fig. 144), and the tangless buckle survives today in English heraldry in the
    insignia of the Order of the Garter. The belts on the Aosta statue-menhirs are particularly
    emphasised and decorated with (possibly woven) geometric motifs. They may have been
    worn with leather armoury or possibly quilted clothing, to give the characteristic lozenge-
    shaped decoration found also on later Bell-Beaker pottery (and onto which the Clandon
    lozenge would perhaps fit?).
11. It is possible to define different regional traditions in weapon use (oi; more often, dis-
    play). The axe was characteristic of central Europe, supplemented by the dagger (perhaps
    for younger males, as hinted by the gravefinds);in western Europe the bow and arrow
    was more common, with the dagger being somewhat rarer - perhaps equivalent to the
    axe further east. Several of the characteristic features of the 'Beaker complex' relate to
    archery (and perhaps to leather armour). Daggers became the standard personal weapons
    of the early Bronze Age throughout Europe, supplemented in the later phase by pole
    arms: halberd and spear.
12. As Mary Douglas has remarked (Douglas and Isherwood 1980): 'The ultimate object of
    consumption activity is to enter a social universe whose processes consist of matching
    goods to classes of social occasions.'
13. Tobacco is a particularly privileged substance, with its own social conventions: if I cadge
    a cigarette, it is polite also to accept a light for it - to light one's own in such circum-
    stances is to deny the essentially social character of the transaction by treating one's
    partner as a machine.
14. Tea, coffee and drinking-chocolate all arrived in London in 1657; but coffee was already
    being drunk in Balliol College, Oxford, twenty years before; while Oxford had its first
    coffee-house (the 'Angel') in 1650.
15. Direct comparison with the drug-based cults of the New World such as Mescalinism (the
    Peyote Cult) in North America is misleading, since this was related to the breakdown of
    native cultures in the post-contact period. Indeed, in some aspects this cult mimics the
    Christian Eucharist, and it forms part of an ideology of accommodation to Western
    culture, after the rebellion of the Ghost Dance. What is interesting, however^ is the way
    in which the use of the peyote cactus did not spread into the Great Basin, because of the
    existing use there of Jimsonweed. There may be some analogy here with the apparent
    failure of the drinking complex to spread on the Pontic steppes in the third millennium
    BC. (For discussion of hallucinogenic substances and their cult significance see Furst
    1976; Harner 1973; and La Barre 1972.)
16. See Athenaeus for extended descriptions of feasting, and especially drinking (Book XI),
    in the Graeco-Roman world. The book itself is cast in the form of an after-dinner
    discussion, and its various participants introduce quotations from older writers and
    information from their own experience to provide an extensive 'ethnotaxonomy' of
    drinks and drinking-culture in the Ancient World.
17. Cf. C. A. Wilson (1973, 331) on early Medieval England: 'Mead was a warrior's drink,
    the drink of the aristocracy both Celtic and Saxon. Not for nothing was the great hall of
    the Saxon palace called the mead hall. In the highland zone mead drinking had a special
    significance. The bodyguard who surrounded a Celtic chief or princeling consumed his
    mead, but in recompense fought his battles, a service known as "paying for mead". When
    300 Celtic warriors met the English at Catraeth in the late sixth century, "the pale mead


                                              401




                                 This content downloaded from
               128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                CUPS     THAT       CHEERED:

    was their feast and their poison"; for all except one gave their lives in battle in payment
    for their mead.'
18. The quote is from Stuart Piggott's famous Ballade to Gordon Childe, written in 1935:
       All secrets of the past are here laid bare -
       What beer the Beaker Folk were wont to brew,
       The answer to a Lausitz maiden's prayer
       The recipe for Maglemose fish glue ...
        You'll find them all in footnotes in The Dawn.
    The reference is to a footnote on what became p. 223 of the seventh edition of The Dawn
    (Childe 1957), where millet grains are reported from a Beaker in Portugal (International
    Institute of Anthropology Congress 1930, Portugal, 356).
19. Herodotus, Histories IV, 75.
20. It is worth noting that the early use of cord-impressed pottery in China - the so-called
    Sheng-wen horizon - was associated with an early use of hemp and an appreciation
    (explicit in the early historical records) of its narcotic properties.
21. Thefirstcertain identification of hemp in Europe is in the Hallstatt-period Fiirstengrab of
    Hochdorf near Stuttgart, dated to c.500 BC. The report on the organic remains (Korber-
    Grohne 1985) is the most thorough summary of data on the question of the introduction
    of Cannabis sativa. It corrects the list of finds reported by Willerding (1970) and removes
    as uncertain all the claimed pre-Iron Age occurrences; and it provides a pioneering set of
    criteria for microscopic identification. These now need to be systematically applied to the
    well-preservedfibresfrom Swiss lake-village textiles, usually identified macroscopically as
    linen. My suspicion is that hemp was introduced to Europe in the third millennium, but
    largely died out and only became common again under Scythian influence.
22. This may seem far-fetched; but do we not even today flavour our beer with lupulin from
    another member of the Cannabiaceae: the hop, Humulus lupulus, a close relative of
    hemp? Other historically recorded European beer-flavouring plants were the sweet gale,
    Myrica gale, and members of the genera Salvia, Artemisia and Laurus: see Behre 1984;
    Hartley 1954; 1964. There are records also of Tamarix germanica and Vitex agrius-
    castus among the ancient Germans, and yarrow, Achilloea millefolium (a plant with
    medicinal properties) in Iceland. In ancient Egypt, lupin, Lupinus termis, and skirret,
    Sium sisarum, were apparently used: Lutz 1922. In Mesopotamia the work of the brewer
    in the Akkadian period 'consisted mainly in the grating of aromatic substances and their
    mixing into liquid or fatty carriers for the preservation of their specific smell or taste'
    (Oppenheim 1950, 9). The method of heating hemp-leaves in butter to make a ganga-
    drink was used in Pakistan early this century.
23. Forgive the double entendre: I have argued that Bell-Beakers were symbolic of hospi-
    tality; and a major conference on the Bell-Beaker culture took place in Oberried in 1974
    - the Glockenbechersymposion - at which David Clarke gave a famous paper.




                                              402




                                 This content downloaded from
               128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                          16
      Sacred and Profane Substances:
       The Ritual Use of Narcotics
        in Later Neolithic Europe1
                                      (1991)

T he opposite of sacred is secular;2 the concept of profanity is dependent on
the pre-existence of a division between them. Just as dirt is matter out of
place, so profanity is part of the sacred which has escaped from its proper
context, into the realm of the secular. It is this structure which underlies our
colloquial usage of the word 'profanity' to mean an oath or swear-word: for
even the trivial emphatic 'bloody' began life as a religious invocation ('by
Our Lady').3 It is a religious utterance made in a secular context. The fact
that we no longer see it in this light is a consequence of the way it has lost
its religious force and has been dulled by repetition.4 In current usage the
term 'profanity' has almost lost its distinctive meaning, and the words
'profane' and 'secular' are practically interchangeable. In understanding
pre-industrial Europe, we need to regain our sensitivity to such distinctions.
    Like other categories of cultural classification, the distinction between
sacred and secular begins by partitioning the world into paired opposites,
and so can generate further qualities from the mixture of the two (Leach
1976; Douglas 1966). Profanity is a form of pollution resulting from this
mixture: the sacred-out-of-context as opposed to the sacred-in-context.
But what distinguishes the sacred/profane distinction from the merely
inappropriate collision of categories - putting one's feet on the dining-table,

The conclusions of the last chapter raise the question: what came before alcohol?
Surely not sobriety! In recognising the central significance of consumption-events
involving psychotropic substances3 this approach offered suggestive interpretations
for some of the most prominent artefacts in the archaeological record. (The pre-
diction concerning Grooved Ware was magnificently fulfilled recently by the dis-
covery of henbane (Tlyoscyamus niger^ seeds in a pot at Balfarg, Scotland.) This
particular account was prepared for another Oxford conference, under the title
'Sacred and Profaneand I used the opportunity to explore the contrast between
megalithic and succeeding cultures in terms of what I would now call'shamanic'
and 'hospitable' uses of psychotropic substances - the domestication of ecstasy.


                                         403




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                  SACRED      AND    PROFANE       SUBSTANCES:


for instance - is the degree of supernatural power iherent in the sacred.
Where the power which attaches to sacred thingr as to be restricted to
its proper places, the fana or shrines, it is important that it should be
confined within these limits; taken outside this conceptual boundary, the
sacred becomes literally pro-fane. Within such a religious system, profanity
is a particularly powerful form of pollution. This does not mean that it never
happens; but when it does, it has important consequences.5 Unless
traditional values are reasserted, the sacred can be allowed to atrophy; or it
can be actively subverted, and used to new ends. In this case it may be an
important lever of social change, as I shall try to exemplify later in this
chapter.
    When the sacred has spatial boundaries, it also has temporal ones. Sacred
time is periodic, punctuated by appropriate ritual observance and visits to
sacred places (Leach 1961, 124-36). Objects used at these times will pass
into the category of sacred things, after which they have to be treated in a
special way - as with the consecration of the host in the Christian Eucharist.
With food, this is usually consumption within the context of the sacred; that
is, within particular spatial and temporal limits. Theological arguments over
the reservation of the sacrament hinge upon this point: to what extent can
the power of consecrated elements be carried over from the ritual meal of
which they form part? This dilemma is more acute where the ritual involves
an inedible residue, as in the case of animal sacrifice where the bones and
offal are left over. Consumption by fire, or by burial, is often an appropriate
response.6 Neolithic 'ritual pits' may find an explanation in this context, as
an appropriate way of disposing of inedible remains of sacrificial meals by
returning them to the earth. In the same way, pottery containers used in
ritual may be deliberately smashed: they belong to the world of periodic
time.
    In prehistoric communities the distinction between sacred and secular
power is unlikely to have been a sharp one; priestly and elite activities are
unlikely to have been strongly differentiated, as they often are in literate
societies. Nevertheless, the basic opposition, sacred: secular, was undoubt-
edly present, and is likely to have been congruent with structures of social
power, although potentially in several different ways. Thus the various
'elites' recognised by processual archaeologists can also be seen as social
categories with preferential access to supernatural force, whether they are
recognisable by megalithic monuments or by burial with such apparently
secular items as drinking-cups and copper daggers. The profound changes
in the later Neolithic of north-west Europe, indicated by the shift from the
former set of artefacts to the latter, have often been seen as a process of
secularisation: in caricature, as the replacement of communities of religious
devotees by groups of boozy warriors. Yet such a crude contrast is undoubt-
edly an oversimplification, however disguised in structuralist or Marxist
clothing. The purpose of this chapter is > review some of the phenomena


                                         404




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
   THE   RITUAL   USE   OF   NARCOTICS        IN   LATER    NEOLITHIC       EUROPE


which cross-cut this division, and to trace some of the common 'super-
natural' elements in the construction of social power in the two periods.
Having identified this continuity, however, I shall return to the contrast; for
it suggests that 'profanity' is a concept which makes sense in one sort of
religious universe but not in another.


T H E ANTHROPOLOGY OF INTOXICATION
Archaeologists, by the very nature of their raw material, tend to place undue
emphasis on durable artefacts. Anthropologists and historians, observing
their societies in the round, have given equal emphasis to perishable, organic
items as distinguishing characteristics of cultures and social groups: and the
subtle languages of clothing and cuisine have both been illuminated by
structural analysis (e.g. Douglas 1975; 1982; 1987). Following this lead,
archaeologists have to follow such indirect clues as pin types and pot shapes,
supplemented occasionally by the analysis of organic clothing or food
residues. This often requires an imaginative leap: but our vision of pre-
historic Europe is likely to be more misleading if we ignore these clues than
if we mis-identify their detail. That is the justification for this essay in
speculation.
   In approaching any pre-industrial society, there are many features of the
modern world which we must leave behind. The loudest noise in Medieval
Europe was the sound of church bells; the brightest colours were the clothes
of the rulers and the vestments of the priests. The sweetest taste was honey;
the sharpest spice was, for most people, something like wild mint. Neolithic
Europe had even fewer sensual stimulants, and it is hard for us to imagine
how powerful would be the impact of even modest innovations in this mon-
otonous sensory spectrum. Conversely, there would have been an extensive
knowlege of the various mood-altering substances which occur in the
natural flora, and which survive today in the attenuated form of 'herbal
remedies'. Temperate Europe, however, was not rich in such herbs, which
are more abundant in Mediterranean and sub-tropical areas where sun-
shine, seasonal aridity and competition factors produce a greater variety of
stimulating and aromatic chemical substances in plants. There was thus
considerable potential for the spread of even mild stimulants, and of
methods of preparation which enhanced their effectiveness.
   The acts of eating and drinking, however, like the wearing of clothes, are
not simply private responses to individual needs. In societies other than the
present capitalist world of takeaway junk food and TV dinners, such con-
sumption is a public affair whose structure and organisation say much
about the social relationships of those involved. Special foods are for special
occasions, and the composition of the social grouping at such times is of
special significance, providing opportunities for exercises either in inclusive-
ness or exclusiveness. This is true both for overtly religious feasting and for


                                        405




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                  SACRED      AND   PROFANE       SUBSTANCES:


forms of conviviality which while not explicitly 'sacred' are nevertheless
episodic and meaning-laden. While we cannot predict the precise form that
such consumption ceremonies will take, we might expect the archaeological
record to be particularly eloquent about such phenomena, since the
equipment for the occasion is likely to be the focus of unusual elaboration
and the residues especially copious. With care, one might hope to discern
various cycles of feasting, from domestic celebration to communal occasions
requiring the large-scale slaughter/sacrifice of animals7 and the brewing of
drinks.
    Eating and drinking themselves, however, are only a part of the spectrum
of expressive consumption behaviour. Organic substances are also used for
cleansing and scenting, and so can form part of purification ceremonies
- often, though not necessarily, combined with occasions for feasting.
Although it appears common sense to modern western observers that
cleansing is achieved by washing, it may equally be carried out by fumi-
gation. The northern steam-bath and sweat-house has its counterpart in the
smoke-bath and fumigation-tent; and both may use scented media to en-
hance the effect. In more concentrated form, these may be available as
perfume and incense - the close relationship between them indicated by the
name perfume (par fume, 'by smoke'). These bodily applications in turn
grade into other categories such as cosmetics and paints, and the use of
ornaments and special clothing. All are likely to be combined in periodic
special occasions, as aspects of ritual.
    Expressive behaviour of this kind is especially significant in such rituals
if it is accompanied by changes of mood and metabolism. Of particular
importance on such occasions, therefore, is the consumption (either by
ingestion or inhalation) of substances which have psychoactive effects,
inducing excitement, inebriation, hypnosis, phantasy or euphoria (to use
conventional pharmacological categories). The quantities of the stimulant
may be small, but if the sensation is an unusual one it will have a
corresponding effect, which may be enhanced by fasting or breathing
control. Such experiences are likely to be deliberately sought in the course
of ceremony or religious ritual, when they can be interpreted within a cos-
mological scheme and perhaps seen as a means of access to other worlds.
Such shamanistic rites must go back to an early phase of prehistory, perhaps
shortly after the emergence of Homo sapiens sapiens; and the emergence of
a written record provides ample evidence of the employment of drugs in this
way: the ritual use of Nymphaea caerula as part of the Osiris cult is known
from Dynastic Egypt, just as the Inkas used coca leaves and the Aztecs con-
sidered hallucinogenic mushrooms to be teonanacatl, the flesh of God; the
Aryans of the Rig Veda drank the intoxicating soma as a divine beverage;
while Herodotus described the Scythians' practice of inhaling Cannabis
smoke in communal (male) ceremonies (Emboden 1979). Wine was the gift
to Greece of Dionysus, praised in the dithyramb hfore drinking at the


                                        406




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
   THE   RITUAL   USE   OF   NARCOTICS        IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC        EUROPE


symposion; and the Christian whose 'cup runneth over' echoes the cry of the
psalmist: 'My chalice inebriateth me'. Any account of prehistoric Europe
which omits a consideration of such substances is likely to be incomplete.


NARCOTIC ARCHAEOLOGY
There are two avenues of discovery which may potentially lead to the
kind of information which is needed. One is paleobotany, which can
demonstrate the occurrence of plants producing narcotic8 substances;
though this is not in itself sufficient to show that they were used as such.
The other type of evidence, less direct but more abundant, is material
culture, principally pottery. Certain distinctive and widely distributed
artefacts can find an explanation in this context.

Palaeobotanical      evidence for prehistoric       narcotics
Although many plants contain substances with psychoactive properties, two
in particular stand out as possibilities for narcotic use: the opium poppy
(Papaver somniferum) and the hemp plant (Cannabis sativa). The former
was a member of the native European flora (perhaps with a southern or
Mediterranean distribution), while the other has an eastern and Steppe
distribution. Both were grown and utilised in Neolithic times.
   The evidence for the early history of opium has been reviewed by Merlin
(1984). Poppies occur as weeds in fields of cereals, and their seeds are
nutritious and tasty, so that they may initially have been cultivated for this
purpose. The complex of narcotic alkaloids (morphine, codeine, papaverine,
etc.) known collectively as opium occurs most abundantly in the sap of the
unripe seed-head (capsule), from which it may be extracted in dilute form
by soaking and in a stronger form by puncturing or scoring the surface of
the capsule. Dilute forms of opium were used medicinally in the ancient
world to assuage a variety of conditions and as an analgesic, as noted by
Galen in the second century AD. Earlier literary and iconic references show
that it was often used in religious contexts in the first and also the second
millennia BC.
   Poppy seeds were identified as early as 1878 among material from the
Swiss Neolithic lake villages; and more recently they have been identified
among the earliest Bandkeramik assemblages in the Rhineland. They have
also been found in Neolithic caves in Spain. The very wet and very dry sites
preserve capsules as well as seeds. As with other early cultigens, the tax-
onomy of early cultivated forms is complex, but indisputably domesticated
forms may be identified (as with the non-shattering rachis in cereals) by loss
of the ability to seed themselves. In the case of poppies, this is the closure of
the dehiscent ring of pores around the head of the capsule, through which
the seeds are ejected by jactitation. This condition has been identified in
prehistoric specimens. The general view is that the opium poppy was


                                        407




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                  SACRED      AND    PROFANE      SUBSTANCES:


domesticated in the West Mediterranean, perhaps as early as Impressed
Ware times, and spread from there to other parts of Europe.
   The most explicit indication of its cultural significance in Neolithic times
comes from discoveries in a burial-cave fifty metres above the bed of a ravine
at Albunol near the coast of Granada in southern Spain. This site, the Cueva
de los Murcielagos ('Bat Cave') was explored and largely destroyed by dig-
ging for bat-guano and minerals in the mid-nineteenth century; but the finds
were published by Gongora (1868) and have recently been restudied and
radiocarbon-dated to c.4200 BC (Giner 1980; see especially plate 1, p. 147 9 ).
A large number of burials was reported to have been found, accompanied
by globular bags of esparto grass (Stipa tenacissima) with a variety of items
inside them, including large numbers of opium-poppy capsules. This find
suggests that poppy-heads had a symbolic significance beyond the simple
use of their seeds as a source of food, and that this symbolism was particu-
larly appropriate as an accompaniment for the dead.
   The case for cannabis is similar. Its use in the Iron Age, from western
Europe to China, is established by the abundant finds from the Hochdorf
Hallstatt D wagon-burial, from Herodotus' famous account of the Scyth-
ians (whose accuracy has been confirmed by the Pazyryk finds), and from
references in Han medical texts (Chapter 15). The plant has been spor-
adically noted in earlier contexts, and there are two finds from the early
third millennium which establish its probable use as a narcotic at that time
in eastern Europe (Ecsedy 1979, 45). The first is from a Pit-Grave (Kurgan)
burial of the later third millennium BC at Gurbane§ti near Bucharest in
Romania, where a 'pipe cup' containing charred hemp-seeds accompanied
one of the burials in the tumulus.10 The second is a more or less con-
temporary burial belonging to the north Caucasian Early Bronze Age, where
a similar 'pipe-cup' with hemp-seeds in it came to light.11 The appearance of
these items coincides with the rise of the Pit-Grave culture on the steppes,
and its westward penetration to Romania, Bulgaria and Hungary. This
agrees with the botanical data for a steppe distribution of Cannabis sativa,
and its spread from this region as a cultivated plant into Europe and China.
   In both these cases, the plants were known to early farmers in Europe,
and some familiarity with their narcotic properties may be presumed. The
varieties with a stronger narcotic content probably evolved later (perhaps
by conscious selection?), but even a weak narcotic effect would have been
appreciated in Neolithic times. The early varieties may well have gone out
of use when other psychoactive substances such as alcohol came into wide-
spread use, to reappear when stronger forms were available and perhaps
also had the social cachet of exotic, introduced novelties. Their social
history is thus likely to be a complex one. Various other plants with similar
weak narcotic properties may also have been used in prehistoric times,
though their use has been forgotten since they did not evolve more potent
varieties.


                                        408




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
  THE   RITUAL    USE   OF N A R C O T I C S   IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC       EUROPE




16.1 Pottery *altar' (probably a lamp or aromatic-burner) from a deposit of
pottery vessels in the Vinca-period copper mine at Rudna Glava, Serbia; height
20cm (after Jovanovic).

   Such narcotic substances could have been used in several different ways:
either by inhaling fumes or by ingestion in solid or liquid form. All of these
methods may have been used, before the Industrial Revolution provided the
means of preparing chemically pure forms; but there are suggestions from
the archaeological record (see below) that burning was the original mode of
narcotic use, and that it survived in peripheral parts of Europe when in-
fusion had become more common. It is likely that the context of consump-
tion by whatever method was a ritual one, and the particular mode of use
was probably dependent on the prevailing symbolism of burning, eating and
drinking, and its significance as a means of purification, communion, or
whatever. (The causation is complex, for such significance could be re-
cursively affected by the appearance of new psychoactive substances with a
single mode of use, as I shall argue for alcohol.) Such 'religious' uses would
no doubt have included 'medicinal' uses as well, since it would be artificial
to separate physical healing from ritual observance.

The ceramic evidence: 1. smoke                 inhalation
Among the ceramic items of the Balkan Neolithic, and especially common
in the fifth millennium BC, is a group of objects which have long been
described as 'ritual' and discussed in the context of figurines and models of
houses, ovens and shrines. These objects are usually described as 'altars'
(Figure 16.1), and consist of a small dish on three or four feet. They often
incorporate representational elements such as animal-heads at the ex-
tremities, and they are usually richly decorated in the manner of con-
temporary fine pottery. It has been suggested that they are lamps (Nandris
1973), but this 'common-sense' interpretation may conceal an expressive


                                         409




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   SACRED     AND    PROFANE       SUBSTANCES:




Chasseen period from the ceremonial site of Er Lannic, Morbihan, Brittany;
height c.lOcm (after Le Rouzic). Some 160 vessels of this kind were recovered
from the site, an enclosure of standing stones.

dimension beyond simple functionality, which is suggested by their
elaborate form and decoration. Fire and smoke have a particular potential
for symbolic meaning (and can be enhanced by the burning of simple
aromatic substances such as pine resin);12 such vessels may have combined
the characteristics of lamps and incense-burners (thymiateria), rather than
simply providing illumination. They are sufficiently common to suggest a
context in domestic ritual. However, fragments of such elaborate vessels
have been found in the Vinca-period copper mine of Rudna Glava in north-
east Jugoslavia (Jovanovic 1982), which might suggest that an element of
(propitiatory?) ritual may have accompanied the extraction of metal ores.
    Such items do no more than suggest the widespread symbolic importance
of small braziers in the minor rituals of households or work-groups of a
variety of cultures in Neolithic south-east Europe; but a more specific sig-
nificance may attach to various classes of 'inter-cultural' braziers which
appeared later on in the Neolithic. One of these is the so-called vase-support
(Figure 16.2): a characteristic artefact of Middle Neolithic France in the
early fourth millennium BC, associated with the spread of the Chassey
culture - a convergent grouping of heterogeneous megalithic and non-
megalithic societies, from the Midi to Brittany and the Paris Basin. They are
associated with a particular style of pottery decoration, which seems to have
spread from south to north. Again, they are shallow, bowl-like containers of
limited capacity, set within a cylindrical or cubic stand, and almost in-
variably carrying profuse decoration; and some of the bowls carry traces of
burning. The suggestion that these were stands for round-bottomed bowls
is less convincing than the interpretation expressed in their alternative name:
brule-parfums. These objects occur in caves in the south, and in ditched


                                        410




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
   THE   RITUAL   USE   OF   NARCOTICS        IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC        EUROPE


enclosures in the Paris Basin, and they occur not infrequently in megaliths
in the west. In Brittany, they occur in vast numbers on the sacred site within
an arc of standing stones (cromlech) on the hilltop (now an island) of Er
Lannic, opposite the great passage grave of Gavrinis in the Morbihan.
   Their use in group ritual, within sacred contexts in space and perhaps in
time, seems rather clear; and their inter-regional distribution suggests that
they were associated with a cult which spread from south to north over a
large area of western Europe, uniting groups of different ultimate origins -
Impressed Ware in the south, Bandkeramik in the north, indigenous in the
west. Were they also, therefore, associated with the use of a particular
substance, perhaps with psychoactive properties, which was the focus13 of a
specific ritual? There are many ethnographic examples of the spread of cults
centred on the use of narcotics, of which the north American peyote cult
(based on an intoxicating cactus) in the historic period is perhaps the best
known, though tobacco provides an older example of a widespread New
World ritual narcotic (cf. Hopewell stone smoking-pipes). Is it coincidence
that the appearance of the apparatus of a southern cult should occur in
northern France at the same time as Breton megalithic art reached its
psychedelic climax in the entoptic forms and hallucinogenic images of the
Gavrinis carvings (Bradley 1989; Chapter 13)? Since the palaeobotanical
evidence suggests a west Mediterranean focus for the use of Papaver
somniferum, this would seem to constitute a prima facie case for the ritual
use of opium as a narcotic.
   Such 'inter-cultural5 artefacts, suggestive of the cult use of narcotics,
appear on an even wider scale in the later Neolithic. One of the clearest
examples, commonly interpreted as a brazier, is the polypod bowl, often
with a radiating star or 'sunburst' design of incised or cord-impressed orna-
ment within it, which occurs in several parts of eastern Europe in the early
third millennium BC (Figure 16.3). Its occurrence has recently been usefully
reviewed by Ingrid Burger (1980). The earliest examples occur on the Pontic
steppes, in the fortified settlements of the Mihailovka culture. It spread
westwards to the Carpathian Basin, where it is particularly characteristic of
Vucedol, and then into southern Germany and Czechoslovakia where it
occurs in Cham and llivnac contexts, and it survives in EBA contexts (Caka,
Nagyrev) in the Carpathian Basin. This westward progression parallels the
spread of the system of decorative elements based on cord-impressions
(although this also occurs beyond the distribution of the braziers, as we shall
see below). The point to note is its retention of highly specific characteristics
of form and decoration over a thousand miles and half a dozen cultures,
spreading from the steppes into temperate Europe. This, too, is suggestive
of a cult context: and in view of the palaeobotanical evidence discussed
above for the use of Cannabis sativa, is strongly suggestive of its interpret-
ation as a ritual hemp-burner (perhaps in conjunction with a small tent of
the kind described by Herodotus).14


                                        411




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   SACRED     AND    PROFANE       SUBSTANCES:




16.3 Pottery polypod bowls (Tufechalen - braziers, perhaps for cannabis?) from
eastern and central Europe: left, Mihailovka period, Ukraine; right, Vucedol
period, Slovenia; heights are 11 to 14cm. The design has been interpreted as a
solar symbol (after Gimbutas).

The ceramic evidence:       2. eating and         drinking
Bearing in mind these indications for the possible reflection in material
culture of the social use of psychoactive substances by burning, let us turn
to other means of consumption, by ingestion. The elaboration of particular
sets of eating and drinking equipment may indicate a comparable role for
the ritual uses of food and drink, and its sanctification in ceremony. Some of
these recipes, especially by the late Neolithic, may have involved special
ingredients.
   It is important to bear in mind that all assemblages of pottery containers
are likely to reflect a culinary syntax, more or less elaborate, and that such
an elaboration of cuisine is one of the characteristics of farming societies.
A perception of this kind of difference lies behind our classification of
Ertebolle (with its simple repertoire of large point-based pots) as Mesolithic,
and TRB (with its variety of bowls and amphorae) as Neolithic, despite the
fact that both are formally ceramic, used polished stone axes, and had not
dissimilar subsistence economies.15 With increasing elaboration of cuisine,
one might expect an increasing differentiation of pottery according to
the contexts in which its contents were consumed. Neolithic pottery
assemblages, however, have traditionally been analysed on the assumption
that coherent styles represent either the different periods or regional varia-
bility, with some allowance for a functional contrast between coarse and
fine wares. This minimal model is often enough to produce a sufficiently


                                        412




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
   THE   RITUAL   USE   OF   NARCOTICS        IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC        EUROPE


coherent ceramic sequence for the purposes of dating and correlation.
Increasingly, however, this model is causing confusion: the data are not
patterned in this simple way; and this kind of complexity is especially
evident in the assemblages of the later Neolithic.
   In Britain, for instance, it is apparent that Grooved Ware has a totally
different pattern of variability from that predicted on the expectation of
tight regional or chronological groups; the various sub-styles are distributed
without regard to the geographical zonation of other classes of artefacts
such as stone axes, and, moreover, Grooved Ware occurs on its own in
specific contexts such as monuments or isolated pits, without other wares
known to have been in contemporary use. In this respect its deposition
resembles that of metalwork, which is notoriously difficult to integrate into
conventional ceramic sequences. Although it is not in itself of intrinsic value
(as could be argued, for example, with the finer types of Bell-Beaker),
Grooved Ware seems to have had a special quality which set it aside from
everyday containers. It can therefore be suggested that this quality lies in the
context in which it was used, and that this is likely to have been some form
of ceremonial meal with sacred connotations, taken at central cult places
throughout the length of Britain. If this is so, then what was consumed at
such a meal may also have some sacramental significance, and may have
involved more than everyday ingredients: something more sugary, spicy, or
exciting (even narcotic) than was encountered in secular existence. There is
at present no evidence to suggest what it might have been.
   The taxonomic problems of later Neolithic pottery are not peculiar to
Britain; and a particularly knotty example is presented by central Germany.
Baalberge, Salzmiinde, Walternienburg, Bernburg, Globular Amphorae,
Corded Ware: all these 'cultures' are represented in a single settlement cell
within a span of 500 years (Bakker 1979). There is certainly a chronological
dimension: the list is roughly in sequence. There is also a spatial dimension:
Walternienburg has the angular shapes of the Nordic area, Bernburg the
rounded shapes of the south, Globular Amphorae (with their cord-
decoration) relate to the east. But there is no simple partition of units in time
and space, as distribution maps (Behrens 1973) make clear. Some, such
as Salzmiinde, have a more restricted, central, distribution within the loess
heartland of central Germany;16 the others occur more generally within it.
Why such rapid alterations of style and decoration, in a series of apparently
competing configurations? The answer is likely to lie in competing forms
of ceremonial, even cult, use of the most distinctive types of vessel, which
together in their particular assemblages formed the appropriate containers
for the ritual consumption of their own, liturgically appropriate, food and
drink.17 The complexity of the ceramic sequence records a competing variety
of possible approaches to the sacred.
   How can we make sense of this? At the risk of reductionism, I want to
suggest that all of these could have involved psychoactive substances,


                                        413




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   SACRED     AND    PROFANESUBSTANCES:




flask (perhaps for infused opiumf) and a funnel-beaker; from a grave under a long-
barrow at Tovstrup, Denmark: heights are c.30, 15 and 9cm respectively; (after
Knoll). This 3-piece set is especially characteristic of Jutland.

including both the narcotics postulated above, and also alcohol, in various
permutations. I have suggested that early narcotics (both in temperate
Europe and on the steppes) were consumed by smoking. During the fourth
and third millennia BC, ceramic assemblages in all parts of Europe were
transformed by the appearance of distinctive drinking-cups and vessels for
manipulating liquids. This is particularly striking in the case of the metallic
style of pottery drinking-sets of the Baden culture, which echo the silver
drinking vessels of the kind preserved in the Troy II treasure - whose influ-
ence (in the form of globular shapes, strap handles, channelling, omphalos
bases, etc.) can be traced northwards into the Carpathian Basin and adjoin-
ing areas (Chapter 17). More rustic forms of standardised drinking vessels
came to characterise the areas further north and west, most spectacularly in
the case of the Bell-Beaker complex. For reasons which I have set out else-
where, I believe that what this reflects is the impact of alcohol on prehistoric
Europe.18 These arguments indicate a southern origin, originally based on
the fermentation of sugar-rich fruits, and adapted further north to other
sources of sugar and flavouring - honey, milk, grain, and wild temperate
fruits. Thus while wine was known in the Aegean, substitute concoctions
took over further north.
   The first 'inter-cultural' drinking-sets were the jugs and cups which are
characteristic of 'Aeneolithic' assemblages c.4000-3500 BC: the phase
which saw the beginning of the various TRB cultures in northern Europe,


                                         414




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
   THE   RITUAL    USE   OF   NARCOTICS       IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC        EUROPE




16.5 Pottery assemblage of early TRB consisting of a lugged amphora, collared
flask and a handled cup, from a grave at Chruszczow Kolonia, near Lublin,
Poland; heights are 18,9 and 6cm respectively; (after Knoll). This combination is
characteristic for south-eastern TRB, occurring e.g. in graves under long-barrows.

and the first imports there of Carpathian copper. Indeed, it can be argued
that what gives the variety of local versions of TRB their distinctive character
is essentially the appearance of a particular drinking complex. Consider the
name: TRB, Trichterrandbecher, Funnel-necked Beaker culture - the first of
a long line of 'beaker' cultures which superseded the older 'bowl' cultures.
The various cultures (such as Danish Early Neolithic, Baalberge, and Polish
TRB groups) which are grouped together under this label have diverse
origins, but their common feature (at least in the formative phase) is their
equipment for handling liquids. This is not just the eponymous drinking-
vessel (which is principally characteristic of the Nordic area, and whose
place further south is taken by handled cups of central European type), but
the formalised set of vessels (Figures 16.4 and 16.5) consisting of the beaker
or cup, long-necked flask or amphora, and the smaller, round flask with
a distinctive collar (Knoll 1976; 1981). This assemblage occurs together in
graves (with individual burials) over an area from southern Poland to
Scandinavia, in a consistently replicated set of associations - not unlike the
combination of cut-glass decanter, water jug, and tumbler or thistle-glass for
Scotch whisky (cf. Piggott 1959) - providing a complementary set of vessels
appropriate for ritual consumption. It seems to represent a local adaptation
of the south-east European drinking sets which I have related to the intro-
duction of wine and other alcoholic substitutes.
    What, then, was the elixir (cf. whisky = Uisge bheath, 'water of life')?
Invert the TRB decanter, the collared flask. Is it not absurdly like a poppy-
head? Does this not give us a clue? Are we again dealing with opium, this
time in soluble form? Far-fetched as the suggestion may seem, it has a well-
documented prehistoric analogy. For precisely such an interpretation was


                                        415




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   SACRED     AND    PROFANE       SUBSTANCES:




16.6 Selection of pottery vessels from the mortuary house at Tustrup, Jutland:
pedestalled conical bowls Cfruitstands') and pottery spoons, some with sockets for
wooden handles; height of the tallest vessel is c.28cm; (after Kjaerum). These
elaborate vessels (for communal consumption of some special food?) are
characteristic ofTRB (MN) I, and especially of such ritual sites.

suggested by Robert Merrillees (1962) for a common type of Late Bronze
Age flask or juglet, the base-ring bilbil manufactured in Cyprus and widely
exported to the adjacent lands of Egypt and the Levant. Analyses of organic
residues from several such vessels has recently been undertaken by Dr John
Evans, of the North London Polytechnic: and in two cases he has been able
to confirm that the contents did, indeed, include opium. Reading the record,
even upside down, may sometimes reveal a hidden iconography. If this
reading is correct, and it can potentially be tested by the same methods of
organic chemistry, then it fits perfectly with the reconstruction offered
above: the use of traditional intoxicants in new medium, as the result of an
introduced model: consumption by mouth in liquid form. The full set of
ritual equipment for its consumption - containers for the concentrated
elixir, the dilutant, and the cup - became the hallmark of T R B . 1 9
    Could this model be further extended? In the previous chapter I sug-
gested that precisely this phenomenon was involved in the spread of cord-
decoration, from a steppe origin: the cord was hemp, Cannabis, and in
northern Europe the cannabinol was infused rather than smoked, as it was
in its area of origin (and as it was to be again, in a further phase of steppe
influence associated with the spread of 'sunburst' braziers). By the time of
the emergence of the Corded Ware beaker it may well have been combined
with alcohol itself (as we still do in the case of the close relative of Cannabis,
the hop, Humulus lupulus, to make bitter beer). In this case, too, the cord


                                        416




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
  THE   RITUAL    USE   OF   NARCOTICS        IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC        EUROPE




                  SMOKED       INFUSED        INFUSED      SMOKED
                   OPIUM        OPIUM         CANNABIS     CANNABIS



                                   X Z
                                   ALCOHOL


16.7 Postulated relationships between various indigenous and introduced
narcotics and intoxicants in later Neolithic Europe. The arrangement is roughly
geographical: horizontally E to w, and vertically N to s.

decoration would be a hidden iconography, continued in early Bell-Beakers.
   Small wonder, then, that the central German ceramic sequence shows
such a frenetic proliferation of ritual pots, for this area was the crossroads
of these various intoxicating currents, and its successive ideological trans-
formations had potentially powerful lubrication.20 After the early TRB
(Baalberge) phase, elaborate Walternienburg bowls take the prominent
place of jugs and cups; and a similar development took place in con-
temporary Middle Neolithic Denmark, with the appearance of forms such
as the distinctive conical bowls on stands found with pottery spoons in
mortuary houses such as Tustrup and Ferslev (Figure 16.6). These seem to
indicate more solid sustenance as the core of the consumption event: a food,
rather than a drink.21 This seems to be a particularly north-west European
feature (as with Grooved Ware in Britain and Late Neolithic pottery in
Ireland),22 and may represent a native reaction to the earlier foreign drinking
practice; and this north-western pattern spread to central Germany with the
Nordic influences evident in Walternienburg.23 The competing southern and
eastern influences evident in Bernburg and Globular Amphorae, on the
other hand, continued the emphasis on drinking vessels and amphorae with
their associated cord decoration: alcohol and, if you believe it, infused
cannabis. This pattern was again to spread northwards and westwards in a
new form, that of Corded Ware and Bell-Beakers.
   It is possible, therefore, to summarise a large part of the ceramic varia-
bility of later Neolithic Europe in terms of different ceremonial pottery sets,
each probably appropriate for a specific type of food or drink, with the
suggestion that psychoactive substances played a part in each of them. The
various oppositions which I have identified are diagrammed in Figure 16.7.


T H E SOCIAL CONTEXT OF DRINKING
To place these typological changes in a social setting, we must turn to the
very different types of archaeological context in which they are found; for
there is a profound contrast between the communal pot-smashing of Nordic

                                        417




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   SACRED     AND    PROFANE       SUBSTANCES:




16.8 The 'death-pit' at Nitriansky Hradok-Zamecek, Slovakia (after Tocik).
For description, see text. Note the lugged amphorae in channelled ware, and
the handled cup. The amphora/cup combination occurs in contemporary
'rich' graves with paired cattle burials in western Hungary.

Middle Neolithic, for instance, and the individual graves with Corded Ware
beakers which succeeded them in large parts of northern Europe.
   First, central Europe: in the Carpathian Basin in the later fourth and third
millennia there is a clear association between drinking equipment and other
indicators of 'wealth' in individual burials such as the flat-grave cemeteries
of the Baden culture. Thus, for example, in the Alsonemedi cemetery in


                                         418




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
   THE   RITUAL   USE   OF   NARCOTICS        IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC        EUROPE


Hungary the two male graves (one accompanied by a younger female) which
contained assemblages consisting of a bowl, jug and cup, also contained
copper ornaments and were accompanied by burials of paired cattle.24 In
common with others of my generation, I have been prone to describe such
assemblages as an 'elite drinking set' (e.g. Chapters 8 and 15). While justi-
fiable etymologically, this usage carries a secular, even military, connotation
which may be inappropriate for the societies under consideration. It is
appropriate, therefore, to draw attention to another find which illustrates
a ritual dimension to their use.
   The site in question also belongs to the Baden culture, and was en-
countered by chance during excavation of the important EBA fortified hilltop
settlement of Nitriansky Hradok in western Slovakia (Tocik 1981, 25). It is
a truly remarkable discovery (Figure 16.8): a bell-shaped pit, four metres
deep and widening out to a chamber some 2.75 metres in diameter, within
which lay several layers of sequential deposit that must have been made on
a single occasion.25 In the lowermost layer, thrown in with the fill, are a two-
lugged amphora and a one-handled drinking cup. This deposit is sealed
by a layer of burnt material. Above it is a deeper layer, within which ten
skeletons are disposed around the perimeter of the chamber, each kneeling
(on a layer of clean earth) but with the bodies upright, the arms uplifted and
with the hands held before the face. The posture of each of the individuals
is similar, and must be a ritual gesture rather than an attempt to avoid
asphyxiation, since each one has maintained the same pose in alignment
with the others as the pit was filled over them. Above them, in the same
layer, lies the articulated skeleton of a dog; and at the same level is a
perforated stone 'battle-axe' and another amphora. A final layer of burnt
material seals the chamber, and the shaft is filled with soil.
   Of its many significant features, two must be singled out. The ten indi-
viduals must have been interred willingly; there are no signs of struggle or
disorder.26 Equally, however, they must have been stupefied, and perhaps
also poisoned: truly der Trunk des Abschieds.27 The stupefient was pre-
sumably contained in the amphorae, and drunk from the cup: a sacrament
of death. Both the substance which it contained, and the beliefs of those who
drank from it, must have been extremely powerful to carry out such a
ceremony. It is hard to generalise from the unique, but this was surely the
realm of sacrifice and the sacred.28 The use in this ceremony of vessels which
are otherwise associated with 'elite' graves suggests that preferential access
to the sacred through intoxication was one of the elements employed in the
construction of social power.
   This element lies behind the appearance of drinking sets in early TRB in
northern Europe. After this brief appearance, however, drinking vessels
north of the Carpathians were not thereafter associated with individual
burials until the Corded Ware period. As with the Danish Middle Neolithic
and Walternienburg bowls, drinking vessels in the Bernburg and Globular


                                        419




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   SACRED     AND      PROFANE     SUBSTANCES:




                                   '     '     '   '    '
16.9 Long cist of the Bernburg period at Nietleben, central Germany (after
Sprockhoff, from Kruse). For description, see text. Note the large handled cup
and pottery drum.
Amphora cultures seem to have a communal rather than individual context.
Similarly, some of the features of the Alsonemedi cemetery occur in the con-
text of communal burials in stone cists of the Globular Amphora culture,
which sometimes also contain burials of domestic animals including paired


                                         420




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
   THE   RITUAL   USE   OF   NARCOTICS        IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC        EUROPE


cattle: sacrifice again seems to play an important role. The communal
character of drinking vessels at this time can be illustrated by the Bernburg
tomb at Nietleben, in the Saalkreis of central Germany (Figure 16.9). This
is a trapezoid stone cist of the general class of Hessische Steinkisten, with
incised drawings on its covering-stone that may resemble the cart-drawings
from the famous example at Lohne (Ziischen). It dates to c.3200 BC,
approximately contemporary with the Nitriansky Hradok death-pit. It is in
three parts. In the larger, innermost section, defined by a low cross-slab, lie
two opposed skulls and crossbones, one in each of the end corners. In the
centre of the chamber is a low wooden structure of two tabular planks
separated by timbers, beside which stand three small pots. In the second,
smaller compartment is a single, centrally placed pot: a globular, one-
handled cup or Bernburger Tasse. An upright slab closes off the narrower
end, and defines a small vestibule half filled with deposit, on top of which,
again centrally placed, stands a pottery drum (Sprockhoff 1938, 109).
   The tomb itself falls into a class of later Neolithic stone monuments,
including the allees couvertes, which evoke communal cult-houses. 29 This
is not the burial of an individual; the cup does not appear as an item of
personal equipment but as a more generalised symbol forming part of a
larger conceptual unity. Although the vessel form is ultimately a foreign,
southern, one, it is incorporated into a local context. The cup is sealed in the
tomb as part of the interment ritual; outside, but covered by its roof, is
a musical instrument, the Tontrommel,30 which was a characteristic part of
the elaboration of pottery forms indicative of communal ritual, which began
in Salzmiinde and continued to be a feature of central Germany until the
beginning of Corded Ware. As part of the ceremonies, therefore, we should
imagine the artificial production of loud noise, probably for a large audience
(including both the living and the dead) during the performance of com-
munal and mortuary rituals.31
   In the North European Plain, therefore, the second half of the fourth
millenium BC was characterised by investment in communal ceremony,
frequently involving the dead, which in the east took the form of drinking
rituals and in the west - perhaps in conscious reaction - took the form of eat-
ing rituals. Features of southern origin (not only the drinking complex but
also paired traction for wheeled vehicles and the plough, as well as the circu-
lation of imported items of copperwork) were absorbed into local contexts
and interpreted in terms of the ideology of common ceremony and burial.
   The radical break with this pattern occurred with Corded Ware. In the
new pattern of individual burial, adult males were often interred with a
specific kit: the stone battle-axe and a drinking set consisting of a cord-
decorated beaker and an amphora. 32 No continuing offerings were made at
the tomb, which was not a focus of ceremonial in the same way as earlier
burial monuments. Nor are there comparable ceremonial centres separate
from the tombs where drinking ceremonies could have taken place:


                                        421




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   SACRED     AND   PROFANE       SUBSTANCES:


the ritual cycle was apparently constructed in an entirely different way.
This pattern was propagated westwards with Bell-Beakers (the battle-axes
being replaced by daggers and archery equipment, the beaker no longer
accompanied by an amphora), to intrude on other communal, monument-
building societies in the British Isles, Brittany and Iberia.


T H E PROFANITY OF BEAKERS
What interpretation can be placed on this change in ritual eating and
drinking, from an initial pattern of shrine-centred cult to a more personal
association? It is important to note that this devolution of drinking
paralleled a devolution in settlement and in burial itself, from the centralised
villages, ceremonial centres or mortuary shrines of the later TRB groups to
the scattered hamlets and tumuli of Corded Ware (Starling 1985). The new
pattern was more fluid, and less permanent. The settlements were less sub-
stantial and less long-lasting; the tombs were less durable, no longer built of
large stones to last for eternity. The general dispersal of settlement units was
accompanied by a change from collective graves (often megalithic in con-
struction) to single graves (often under smaller, round, mounds). Centralised
ritual observance thus gave way to practices associated with particular indi-
viduals in smaller (family?) units. The 'sacred places' were de-emphasised:
earthwork enclosures and mortuary shrines went out of use (some megaliths
being deliberately sealed), and burial became a different type of event. Stone
structures above ground were replaced by pits below ground;33 the bodies
were buried once and for all, rather than being de-fleshed and remaining
accessible in a built structure. Personal possessions, including drinking
equipment and weapons, were stressed for the first time and buried with
individuals. The shift from an elaboration of monuments to a concern for
items of personal equipment is indicative of a change in emphasis from
collective representation, often associated with remembrance of group
ancestors, to a society more oriented towards personal possession and per-
haps to more specific lines of ancestry. The changed context of drinking was
thus congruent with a larger social transformation.
    The occurrence of personal drinking equipment does not mean that
substances such as alcohol were generally available, but rather that from
being a prerogative of individuals acting on behalf of the community, in
a shamanic or priestly role, their consumption became a hallmark of some
more general status category, probably that of older males in positions of
familial authority. (Even today, among the Tuva Mongols, the drinking
of alcohol is only permitted to males over forty!) Instead of being part of
communal ceremony by stable and long-lasting groups, drinking could be
used tactically through hospitality and the formation of horizontal relations
among a more fluid pattern of communities: a class of event whose best-
known representative is the Greek symposion (Chapter 15).


                                        422




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
   THE   RITUAL   USE   OF   NARCOTICS        IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC        EUROPE


   Despite this structural transformation, what continued was the con-
sumption of psychoactive substances in a socially constituted context.
Differential access to the sacred through intoxicating experiences could be
seen as part of the ritual definition of authority in both cases; it was simply
deployed in a different way. It is possible, therefore, that the ideological re-
sources available for the construction of social power at the transition from
TRB to Corded Ware were to a large extent already present in existing ritual
systems. Seen in this way, the devolution of drinking was not a process of
secularisation, but of profanation: the escape of a sacred medium from its
place in the established shrines, and its successful propagation in new loci.
It was a redeployment of the religious properties associated with drinking
rituals and more generally with the consumption of psychoactive sub-
stances.
   Such a redeployment of the resources of the sacred is a characteristic
feature of certain types of social change, as Edmund Leach has pointed out
in the contrast between what he calls 'icons of orthodoxy' and 'icons of sub-
version' (Leach 1983). Leach argues that superficially similar sets of beliefs
and symbols can be used in radically different ways. He draws attention to
two contrasting theologies in the early history of the Christian church,
before and after its adoption as a state religion. 'One of these can serve to
support the legitimacy of an established hierarchical political authority,
the other is appropriate for an under-privileged minority seeking justifi-
cation for rebellion against established authority' (Leach 1983, 84). These
theologies are based on different conceptions of the relationship between
God and Man, through the mediation either of sacrifice or of direct
inspiration. In the former:
  The mediator is a human being, the priest of the sacrifice, who acts on
  behalf of a lay congregation. The sacrificial rite is viewed as an 'offer-
  ing' to the Deity, and the priest, who stands in a superior position to his
  congregation, is in a suppliant status vis a vis the Deity ... In the second
  pattern it is God who takes the initiative by offering grace to the faith-
  ful. The individual devotee is directly inspired. The charisma is a direct
  gift from God which is in no way dependent on the efficacy of a
  mediating human priest. (Ibid., 67)
This model neatly summarises a continuing duality within the Christian
church, in which the second mode was to reappear with the Reformation;
but it can also be applied more generally in the sociology of religion: Leach
points to analogies between his second pattern and protest movements such
as the cargo cults of Melanesia, the Ghost Dance, and the Taiping rebels of
nineteenth-century China. Viewed in this light, the transition from TRB to
Corded Ware has certain formal analogies with the Protestant Reformation
in the same area 4500 years later: the shift from a hierarchical model with
a mediating priesthood and elaborate shrines intended to last in perpetuity,


                                        423




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                  SACRED      AND    PROFANE      SUBSTANCES:


to an emphasis on personal salvation, individual responsibility, architectural
and liturgical simplification, often with a millenarian perspective of impend-
ing cosmic change. It was also, of course, marked by a shift from a female
imagery - expressed in devotion to the Virgin Mary - to an exclusively
male imagery consistent with a strengthening of patriarchal authority.
    The parallel should not be pressed beyond its usefulness, but it is a
provocative analogy for the formal contrast between earlier and later Neo-
lithic Europe. Investment in sacred places and sharply defined sacred events
was characteristic of megalithic and monument-building societies with their
plentiful traces of 'ritual' activity in the form of enclosures, astronomical
alignments, esoteric paraphernalia, pits and sacrificial offerings - the resi-
dues of public ceremonies. TRB and Grooved Ware belong to this category.
Its perspective was one of cyclical change within eternal changelessness, in
which access to the sacred was constrained to specific times and places.
These would have provided the rhythms within which everyday life was
organised, including the slaughter of livestock and the exchange of goods
and marriage partners. This pattern was subverted by one in which the
sacred was no longer tied to ritual cycles and specially constructed shrines.
The perspective of time was shorter, and did not require such permanent
monuments; while the burial-mounds (and perhaps also the patterns of
exchange) were organised in terms of particular events, rather than being
accommodated to a predetermined cycle.34 Opportunity and mobility re-
placed predictable regularity. This attitude began in northern Europe with
Corded Ware, and penetrated, initially as a minority ideology, into areas
such as Denmark. 35 The older pattern survived longer in the west, where
a similar pattern of penetration was repeated with Bell-Beakers.
    This way of thinking about the problem is particularly instructive be-
cause it situates ideological change within a social and economic context.
Leach instances the rise of a new economic class, 'a self-identifiable com-
munity which can readily be led to perceive itself as alienated from the
interests of the paramount political power' (Leach 1983, 71). This descrip-
tion accords well with the situation that can be reconstructed in the later
Neolithic of northern Europe. The increasing areas of pasture opened up by
deforestation, following the introduction of plough 36 agriculture, made
possible more flexible economic and social arrangements involving a larger
role for animal-keeping. It was to those parts of the population involved in
herding activities that such a revolutionary ideology would have made its
appeal. The transfer of legitimacy and social power to such nascent political
groupings, however, required the capture of means of access to the super-
natural, and its liberation from the established fana: the profanation (but
not secularisation) of psychoactive substances, and especially alcoholic
drink.
  True or not, this parable offers a model for the relationship between
economic, social and ideological change. Ritual is not an autonomous


                                        424




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
  THE   RITUAL    USE    OF   NARCOTICS       IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC       EUROPE


domain, obeying only the laws of structural symmetry; it can be, and is, one
of the levers by which groups within society attain ascendance and temporal
power. Nor is its metaphorical content arbitrary, for the images of family
relationships and 'female' values are important in constructing wider con-
cepts of community and social order on a consensual basis, while warrior
images and 'male' values are important in breaking up and realigning such
groupings, with the more explicit threat of force. Each produces its own
ritual and iconography, sometimes (perhaps even typically) by the trans-
formation or partial inversion of its predecessor. While the first pattern is
perhaps easier to recognise as more formally 'religious', it would be a mis-
take to categorise the second as simply 'secular'.
   Is it, then, 'profane'? Yes, from the point of view of a stable orthodoxy,
with shrines and sacrifices; but not from the point of view of the subversives,
for whom the concept has no meaning in a world scheme which is structured
on different principles, and in which shrines as such do not exist. Pro-
fanation as a process, therefore, is characteristic of the transition from one
type of system to the other, which then redefines the world in its own terms.
  Treason doth never prosper; where's the reason?
  If it do prosper, none dare call it treason.
Successful profanity, like successful treason, rewrites its own history.


[On a visit to the Soviet Union in July 1990, two strands of this argument
came together in an unexpected way. Discussing Prehistoric narcotics
above, I mentioned finds of Cannabis sativa from 'pipe-cups' in the Early
Bronze Age of eastern Europe, without knowing quite what this term im-
plied. Later on in the same section, I singled out polypod bowls or braziers
as a typical inter-cultural form of the kind likely to have been associated
with narcotics. I was therefore delighted to learn that the term kurilnitsa,
which had been translated as 'pipe-cup', was in fact the common Russian
term used to describe such footed bowls, and that they are interpreted as
small braziers. The connection between these two lines of evidence has, in
fact, been completed. These forms begin, in the Pontic steppe region, in the
period from c.4000 to 3600 BC. This is the period when cord-impressed
ornament appears, for the first time, on the Pontic steppes, before spreading
westwards with Globular Amphorae. This considerably strengthens the
arguments, presented in Chapter 15, for an association between corded
ornament and the use of Cannabis as a fibre-plant and potentially as a
narcotic.]

[In the Proceedings     of the Society of Antiquaries      of Scotland for 1993 is
the information which answers my question in the section on The ceramic
evidence: 2. eating and drinking above, concerning Grooved Ware - which


                                        425




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    SACRED    AND    PROFANE           SUBSTANCES:


                                                          Balfarg / Balbirnie




                           ® i j F 1 0 0 2
                conjoining  \                   .
                 sherds    ^ w?
                  of P63

                                                        STRUCTURE 1
            0        10m         v    /                (open enclosure
            1          i                            for corpse exposure?)

                      CONTEXTS OF DISCOVERY
16.10 The Grooved Ware vessel from Balfarg/Balbirnie with preserved food-
residues; the plan shows the features inside and outside Structure 1 (an open
timber enclosure) which yielded sherds of this vessel [new drawing, after Barclay
and Russell-White 1993].
I suggested should contain something 'more sugary, spicy or exciting (even
narcotic) than was encountered in secular existence'. A botanical report by
B. Moffatt (in Barclay and Russell-White 1993, 108-10) on the carbonised
residue preserved in a pot from Balfarg Riding School, Glenrothes, Fife
(Figure 16.10) describes it as representing a porridge-like substance pre-
pared from barley and oats, sweetened with honey (minute droplets of
beeswax were observed) and flavoured with meadowsweet (Filipendula
ulmaria), with other potherbs such as fat hen (Chenopodium album), and


                                          426




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
   THE    RITUAL     USE    OF   NARCOTICS         IN   LATER    NEOLITHIC        EUROPE


some species of Brassica and one of the Umbelliferae (probably as a condi-
ment), and a little flax (perhaps as oil). The cereals were identifiable from
seeds, the other herbs from pollen. One further plant was indicated both by
seed remains and pollen, in some quantity: henbane, Hyoscyamus niger.
Sweet, spicy and narcotic: using a classic 'Saturnian herb', long associated
with witchcraft. Was this also the food dispensed from the TRB 'fruitstand'?
A further article is in preparation ...]

NOTES

 1.1 use the term 'narcotic' to cover a range of psychoactive substances including some
    which are more correctly described as stimulants. Despite the fact that the technical
    meanings of the two words are in fact quite opposite (i.e. sleep-inducing versus arousing),
    their usage is now irremediably confused - largely for bureaucratic and legal reasons!
    I have avoided the word 'drug', which is best applied to the refined substances. The
    opening remarks of this paper were prepared for general discussion at the conference;
    the paper itself was written afterwards. I must thank the organisers and editors for their
    invitation to contribute, and especially Paul Garwood for his perceptive comments on
    the text.
 2. The literal meaning of secular is 'lasting for an age1 (cf. in saecula saeculorum, 'for ever
    and ever'): the idea of continuity is opposed to periodic or cyclical occurrence, as in the
    term 'secular trend' (i.e. a continuous, long-term process). The sacred, on the other hand,
    is characterised by regular^ periodic, rites and festivals, usually on an annual cycle.
 3. As did the now extinct Shakespearian exclamation 'Zwounds!' ('by God's Wounds').
    Such expressions imply a Catholic theology, which is one reason why they have atrophied
    in a largely Protestant context. The difference between Catholic and Protestant theologies
    in this respect is an example of a more fundamental contrast in religious attitudes, to
    which I shall return at the conclusion of this paper; for in this more abstract form it has
    a surprising relevance to Neolithic Europe.
 4. A similar pattern can be discerned in words for other emotionally charged but culturally
    regulated activities, such as sex. Thefirstunexpurgated edition of D. H. Lawrence's Lady
    Chatterley's Lover contained, if I remember rightly, a preface by Richard Hoggart in
    which he neatly exemplified the change of role in the word for which that text was then
    chiefly famous. A soldier returning from service abroad, was reported as saying: 'Three
    effing months in effing Africa and what do I effing-wellfind?My wife engaged in illicit
    cohabitation with another man.' I quote from memory. The whole point of Lawrence's
    novel was to reassert the sanctity of the sexual act and to rescue its terminology from
    casual profanation, as many eminent witnesses pointed out at the trial of its publisher,
    Penguin Books, in 1960.
 5. Note, for example, the political dimension (and hence the historical significance) of
    events such as the 'Profanation of the Eleusinian Mysteries' by Alcibiades in 415 BC.
 6. There is an analogy here in Catholic practice in the appropriate treatment of the con-
    secrated wafer if the communicant fails to digest it; a regurgitated wafer should be burnt.
    (I have a similar attitude to the Christmas tree after it has been ritually decorated and is
    then unceremoniously taken down after Twelfth Night - it seems inappropriate just to
    consign it to the dustbin, so I usually burn it.)
 7. The killing of animals has always been an act of social significance. In hunting and forag-
    ing societies, the meat is typically shared among the group, while gathered products are
    consumed by individual family units. In many farming and pastoral societies, the relative
    rarity with which domestic livestock was slaughtered (by comparison with the more
    regular flow of vegetable- and secondary-products) has often made it a principal event
    within the periodic observances of the ritual cycle. In some societies, all slaughter is
    sacrifice, and can only take place within the context of the sacred, after appropriate kinds


                                             427




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       SACRED      AND    PROFANE       SUBSTANCES:

    of purification. This is likely to have been one of the activities which took place at Neo-
    lithic ceremonial centres. (It is worth remembering that a 'sacrificial stone knife' was
    discovered within a niche within one of the altars in the Tarxien temple in Malta.) Such
    structures could perhaps be envisaged as elaborate abattoirs, much as certain Near
    Eastern Bronze Age temples contain metallurgical debris and must have operated as
    foundries: their categorisation as 'religious' structures should not exclude a range of
    activities which we would now think of as purely mundane.
 8. As noted before, I use the word in its colloquial sense, to include all psychoactive sub-
    stances, including stimulants, inebriants, etc. - in fact, the complex mixtures of organic
    compounds which occur naturally in plants often combine several of these properties.
 9. The date, on esparto grass, is 5400 ± 80 BP (CSIC-246).
10. The seeds, being the most resistant, form the carbonised residue - the flowers and leaves,
    which have the greatest concentration of cannabinol, having been burnt away. Unfortu-
    nately the 'pipe-cup' was not illustrated.
11.1 am grateful to Istvan Ecsedy for pointing out these finds, whose significance he drew
    attention to in 1979.
12. Substances such as birch-bark resin were also chewed, as indicated by an Alpine lake-
    village find with toothmarks!
13. Focus = 'hearth'; the metaphor is not accidental.
14. Finally, and beyond the chronological scope of this paper; one should note the occurrence
    of comparable artefacts in earlier Bronze Age contexts in Britain: the 'Aldbourne cups' -
    some with perforated sides - and related 'grape-cups' or 'incense cups' that are associated
    with 'rich' burials of the Wessex culture in Britain (e.g. Gerloff 1975). These have long
    been interpreted as small braziers for aromatic substances (though I am not aware of any
    suggestion of a narcotic use), and apparently represent a more localised cult/elite practice
    than the 'inter-cultural' forms discussed above, which seem to relate to thefirstspread of
    specific types of narcotic use over long distances.
15. Thomas Harriot observed just such a point-based cooking pot in Virginia in 1590: 'Their
    woemen know how to make earthen vessels with special Cuninge and that so large and
    fine, that our potters with [their] wheels can make no better ... After they have put them
    uppon an heape of erthe to stay them from fallinge, they putt wood under[,] which being
    kindled ... they or their woemen fill the vessel with water; and put in fruite,fleshand fish,
    and let all boil together like a gallimaufrye which the Spaniarde call, olla podrida.' This
    he contrasts favourably with the complexity of contemporary European cooking, which
    he considers responsible for 'many kynes of diseases which wee fall into by sumtwous
    and unseasonable blanketts, continually devisinge new sawces, and provocation of
    gluttonye to satisfie our insatiable appetite' (D. B. Quinn, The Roanoke Voyages,
    London: The Hakluyt Society, Ser. II, Vol. 104,1955). This neatly summarises both the
    polarity between 'primitive' and 'civilised' cuisine, and also the strain of iconoclastic
    utopianism (usually espoused by a rising bourgeoisie) which can potentially challenge this
    elite cultural elaboration and seeks a return to the purity of the primitive. Modern
    organically grown wholefoods are a good example of this in practice. For the anthro-
    pological significance of this polarity, see the final section of this article.
16. The Saale-Mittelelbegebiet (Starling 1985).
17. Although such vessels are often associated with tombs, they should not be considered
    as 'tomb pottery' in the sense of being specially made for burial (like Greek vases for
    Etruscan tombs!); rather, they occur as offerings, usually in the forecourt, and should
    thus be seen as ritual food containers in the context of a feast that included the dead.
    Such vessels may be poorly represented on settlement sites, except those larger or
    centrally placed sites where communal ceremonies took place.
18. This article should be considered as complementary to the present paper, and I have tried
    to avoid repeating its arguments. It is shortly to be reprinted without the many editorial
    alterations and deficiencies which marred its publication in 1987.
19. Compare the flagon, cruets and chalice of the Christian communion-set. Other pieces of
     standardised 'ritual' equipment, in a modern, secular context, would include the silver


                                              428




                      This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
   THE    RITUAL     USE    OF   NARCOTICS         IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC         EUROPE

    cocaine-spoons, made by expensive jewellers and occasionally worn as neck ornaments
    by the smart set; or even the standardised shape of the Coca-Cola bottle (which now
    contains neither coca nor kola, though originally it was made of both these stimulants).
    Psychoactive substances, whether sacred or profane, create their own material culture.
20. The symbolic significance of intoxicants in relation to specific, competing ideological
    systems is well exemplified in the contrast between Judaeo-Christian wine and Islamic
    cannabis.
21. This probably excludes alcohol, but might still contain opium, cannabis, or other psycho-
    active herbs. A similar transformation from drink to food is indicated in the British Early
    Bronze Age by the shift from Bell-Beakers to Food Vessels, which Professor Hawkes has
    suggested might contain a substance such as frumenty.
22. Both, incidentally, skeuomorphs of organic containers - made perhaps of leather on a
    withy framework - which may have their origin in native (ultimately Mesolithic?) vessels.
    This is pursued further in Sherratt (in prep.).
23. The collared flask, however, continued its inter-cultural spread westwards, to appear in
    the TRB West Group in the Netherlands and in SOM contexts in northern France shortly
    after it disappeared from Denmark (Huysecom 1986).
24. Symbolising, if not actually accompanying, wheeled vehicles of the kind represented in
    the Szigetszentmarton and Budakalasz models, which were themselves handled cups.
25. This pit is No. 107, and was excavated in 1952. Another pit, No. 119, apparently similar
    and containing 19-25 skeletons, was found in 1949 but not recorded in detail. Other
    remains of the Baden culture on the hill included the ovens and hearths of a domestic
    settlement, and many storage pits. Two smaller pits also contained double graves, one
    that of two infants, one of an infant and an adult.
26. An alternative, but rather less likely, explanation is that they were mummified. For other
    mass 'ritual' burials, though in an explicitly elite context, see Woolley's account of the
    'death pits' at Ur, and more generally such royal graves with slaughtered retainers as the
    Shang royal tombs at Anyang.
27. The parting drink, or cup of farewell; the final song of Mahler's Das Lied von der Erde,
    translating a Chinese poem, uses it as a symbol of release from earthly cares.
28.1 cannot resist the observation that such a sacrifice would be the structural inverse of the
    Christian Eucharist, whose cup offers life and the grace procured by the sacrifice of the
    Crucifixion. What both rites have in common, however, is a union of the themes of
    drinking and sacrifice.
29. See my forthcoming article on Neo-megalithism (Sherratt in prep.) for a justification
    of this statement. In France, such structures are associated with a specifically female
    iconography (breasts, 'guardian goddesses').
30. See the article Trommel in J. Filip (ed.) Enzyklopadisches Handbuch zur Ur- und
    Friihgeschichte Europas, 2, 1494 (Prague 1969), and further references therein, especially
    Seewald and Mildenberger.
31. Loud noise may be associated with events in the other world: cf. the 'Last Trump'.
32. The occurrence of drinking vessels in graves and their use in communal ritual are not, of
    course, mutually exclusive: priests in medieval times were sometimes buried with a token
    chalice of non-precious metal, often of lead.
33. The classic Corded Ware (Single Grave) sequence is a progression from earth graves to
    tumuli: 'Under-graves' (Untergraber); 'Ground-graves' (Bodengraber); 'Over-graves'
    (Obergraber) in the body of the barrow: i.e. from simple pits to a new, though simpler,
    form of monumentality.
34. There is a direct analogy here with the change in the concept of time which came about
    with the Reformation: the other-worldly, ritual time of the Medieval church was
    challenged by the bourgeois concern for commodified time and opportunistic trade.
    Usury was condemned by the church as 'selling time'. See Jacques Le Goff, Time, Work
    and Culture in the Middle Ages (Chicago, 1980), esp. pp. 59-61. Perhaps bronze hoards
    fit into an 'opportunistic' pattern, rather than a 'cyclical' one (unlike Neolithic 'ritual'
    deposits of pots and axe 'hoards'?).


                                             429




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       SACRED     AND    PROFANE        SUBSTANCES:

35. There is not space here to go into detail, but there is considerable evidence that the
    Corded Ware 'culture* began in Jutland while the final phases of TRB (V and perhaps IV)
    dominated in the Danish Islands. (Denmark often shows this regional pattern, as it did
    with EN longbarrows: Sherratt 1990.) While there is a similar chronological overlap in
    the Netherlands between Corded Ware and TRB phases F and G, the contrast is con-
    textual rather than regional. After c.2700 BC (in the 'Ground-grave' phase) the Corded
    Ware pattern became the single dominant one in both areas. A similar pattern of limited
    penetration, ideological competition and recruitment, and finally total subversion, can be
    reconstructed for Bell-Beakers in Britain. It was at this point that many of the
    monumental tombs were blocked and symbolically sealed.
36. Like such symbols as drinking and the use of wheeled vehicles, the plough in northern
    and western Europe was initially absorbed into traditional social structures, and was
    associated during the MN period of TRB with a settlement system based on stable and
    long-lasting patterns of land use associated with large settlements or megaliths and ritual
    enclosures, of the kind established by the initial, horticultural, communities. Only with
    the ideological transition to Corded Ware was the potential fluidity of the new economy
    unleashed. ('Religion* retarding 'progress', as Gordon Childe would have described it!)




                      This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                          17
 Metal Vessels in Bronze Age Europe
   and the Context of Vulchetrun
                          (with T. Taylor)
                       (1984,       published            1989)


METAL VESSELS AND THEIR SOCIAL SETTING
IN BRONZE A G E EUROPE
One of the recurring themes of Bronze Age archaeology is the occurrence
of drinking equipment. This theme was present from its very inception:
the beginning of the Bronze Age in the Aegean is defined by the arrival of a
pottery assemblage containing handled jugs and cups (with good prototypes
in metal), while contemporary third-millennium cultures further north are
distinguished by 'Globular Amphorae', 'Corded Ware beakers' and 'Bell-
Beakers'. This interest in the social uses of alcohol - whether mead, beer,
koumish or wine - was to continue throughout later prehistory, and is
presumably related to the importance of hospitality and competitive feasting
in Bronze Age society: a ritualised practice of communal drinking that was
to emerge in the literary record of archaic and classical Greek times as the
symposium.
   Throughout the Bronze and Iron Ages, the style of such entertainment in

This chapter was put together with Tim Taylor for a conference in Amsterdam,
and is reproduced here in abbreviated form. Tim had just examined the Vulchetrun
treasure in Sofia, and concluded that it was a conflation of two assemblages of
different dates (see technical details in the original publication). Isolation of an
earlier part produced a convincing local context, reflected in mid-second-millen-
nium ceramic forms, and so providing evidence of contemporary goldsmithing
techniques and contacts with craft workshops in neighbouring areas; it also illus-
trated a 'drinking set3 or 1symposium kit' of the kind otherwise known only from
the Troy treasures or the Mycenae Shaft-Graves. This interest in alcohol and
ostentation parallels my colleague Michael Vickers' work on the relationship be-
tween pottery design and precious metalwork in the classical period, and has a
common inspiration in the work of our Oxford predecessors Arthur Evans and
J. L. Myres, and their pupil V. G. Childe.


                                         431




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               METAL     VESSELS     IN   BRONZE     AGE     EUROPE:


Europe was set by Aegean practice - a land of exotic fruits, wine and sun-
shine, and also the most advanced area in terms of economy and technology.
Basic to this style was the use of metal - especially precious metal - vessels,
which were frequently copied in pottery. This theme can be traced from the
treasures of Troy II, through the Shaft-Graves of Mycenae, to the metal
prototypes that lie behind the typological proliferation of archaic and
classical Greek vases. The set of mixing, serving and drinking vessels defines
a 'wine ceremony' that may be compared with the oriental 'tea ceremony'
and the appropriate set of equipment which accompanied its diffusion in
eighteenth-century Europe.
    Europe beyond the Mediterranean initially lacked both the practice of
viticulture and the technological expertise for making metal vessels. The
spread of wine, first by large-scale import and then by local production, is
a story that belongs to the later first millennium BC. Nevertheless, the style
of temperate European drinking equipment in the second and early first
millennia owed much to Mediterranean models; and the technological
development of European sheet-metal industries can usefully be considered
in the light of this relationship. The three maps which accompany this article
are an attempt to chart the spread of sheet metalworking techniques as
applied to the manufacture of drinking vessels; and although presented only
as summary sketches, they effectively demonstrate a zonation of techno-
logical sophistication and a progressive northwards spread of technical
capability. These patterns are useful both as illustrations of the socio-
economic context of European metalworking, and as a means of defining
possible areas of origin for the often enigmatic and unaccompanied
examples of Bronze Age goldwork. They provide a necessary background to
the interpretation of the Treasure of Vulchetrun (or at least a part of it) and
the other recently discovered pieces related to it that form the subject of this
chapter (see now also Vulpe and Mihailescu-Birliba 1985).
    The use both of copper and gold has a long history in Europe before the
beginning of the Bronze Age. Although the manufacture of sheet bronze did
not appear in temperate Europe until the Late Bronze Age in the later second
millennium, beaten goldwork was already present in the Copper Age and
was extensively represented by the time of the Varna cemetery (c.4500 BC),
even in quite large pieces. Significantly, however, it was not made into
vessels, although it was in fact applied in powdered form as a paint in the
manner of contemporary graphite-painting on large, open bowls. Sheet-
metal vessels first appeared in southern Europe at the same time as the first
evidence for the production of wine in the Early Bronze Age, as part of the
life-style of a new elite.
    The initial use of sheet-metal for vessels probably began with gold and
silver in Anatolia or the northern Levant, represented in the fourth millen-
nium BC by the bowl from a tomb at Tell Farah North, Israel; and expertise
in decorated metalwork was undoubtedly promoted in the urban craft


                                          432




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                     THE         CONTEXT                OF       VULCHETRUN


centres of fourth-millennium Mesopotamia in the Uruk period, even though
examples of the products are rare, in the absence of rich graves (for a
peripheral exception see Maikop in the northern Caucasus: Chapter 17).
The technique was used to make spouted bowls (e.g. at Tepe Gawra) in the
later Protoliterate period, although the first extensive sample of the products
of this technology in Mesopotamia comes from Early Dynastic tombs such
as the royal cemetery at Ur. By this time the technology was also represented
in adjacent areas, for instance at Alaca Htiyiik and Troy where both gold,
silver and copper-alloy sheet-metalwork occur. Such products were at this
date closely related to the existence of craft workshops in palaces or early
urban centres, which were also capable of using other advanced gold-
working techniques such as filigree or granulation. Beaten gold and silver
vessels slowly made their appearance among the 'barbarian' societies of
temperate Europe during the second millennium, but it was another eight
hundred years before their Late Bronze Age successors acquired the tech-
niques of sheet bronzework for vessels and armour, which had continued to
be restricted to the palace workshops of the Aegean.
   This disparity reflects two factors. In the first place, there is the tech-
nological aspect: the malleability of gold makes the manufacture of sheet
and the raising of vessel shapes much easier than with bronze, whose brittle-
ness requires constant annealing. Secondly the attractiveness, incorrupti-
bility and scarceness of gold made it a natural first choice of a restricted elite,
perhaps anxious that their sumptuary prerogative should not be diluted
by the greater availability of comparable forms in baser metal. A similar
sequence can be seen underlying the succession from precious metal to
bronze coinages in the first millennium BC, and a similar principle is evident

        ATLANTIC
          .. .   EUROPE
                 „ .     „          CENTRAL EUROPE          CARPATHIAN BASIN     AEGEAN AREA        EAST MEDITERRANEAN       KESOPOTAMIA 5 IRAN
       (Britain, Brittany)          (Rhine, Danube)         (5 Lower Danube)    (Greece,W.Turkey)   (incl. Anatolia)          (incl. Caucasus)


         || ATLANTIC LBA1|^|LATE_URNFIELD||                                    -»|[ GEOMETRIC*!

                                        t                                            1
                                  ' " " • " " I -                              UTE       »    „
         | ATLANTIC EBA~]<-- ^ f U M U L U s V          | VULCHETRUN           MYCENAE SHAFT GRAVEsl

                     '                                  ,      t                      t_
                                 UNEtICE^ CUPS <•     I OTOMANI      — ( 2 ) — j W   CRETE*



                     (BEAKER)*       BEGLE ITKERAMI K< - NAGYREV



                                                                                                                         || UR   [[MAIKOPj




                 »       Transmission of techniques                        m") skeuomorphic strap-handles,
                                                                                                                            T . GAWRAj
                 >       Probable transmission of techniques
                                                                                omphalos bases
                 >       Stylistic influence
                                                                           ^ ^ simple pold cups
       II TROY|           Precious metal and copper alloy vessels          ®   accuratelv centred
                                                                               vessels-, conical rivets
       | OTOMANI1         Precious metal vessels only
                                                                           ^ ^ sheet bronze-working
         BADEN           Skeuomorphs of metal vessels in pottery
       (BEAKER)          Other drinking vessel
                         (Dates in calibrated C14 years BC)


17.1 The spread of technologies of sheet-metal vessels.


                                                                      433




                                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               METAL     VESSELS     IN   BRONZE     AGE     EUROPE:


in the trend from highly decorated, individual weapons to more uniform,
mass-produced ones within the Bronze Age itself.
   The technological history of Europe (Figure 17.1) during this period
thus reflects the social background of a rising, and broadening, elite that set
and maintained its style by reference to more sophisticated Mediterranean
neighbours, from whom it occasionally imported finished models and ab-
sorbed techniques. These styles were set by wine-drinking, semi-urbanised
communities in the Aegean (which were themselves on the fringe of more
sophisticated societies in the Near East). Unable to import the substance,
since wine was difficult to transport in bulk with Bronze Age organisation
and technological capacities, the inhabitants of temperate Europe attempted
to imitate the style; and many rustic brews must have been drunk from gold
and silver vessels originally inspired by wine.
   The technological and cultural history of metal vessels in Bronze Age
Europe and the Near East can best be summarised in a series of maps,
sketching the variety of regional traditions from the rare surviving examples
of metal vessels, and from their skeuomorphic echoes in pottery.

Stage I: 3500-2000 BC (Figure 17.2)
During the later fourth and third millennia the only area of Europe to manu-
facture metal vessels was the Aegean, which lay at the western end of a belt
of urbanising societies in contact with Mesopotamia. The Ur royal graves
illustrate the skill of metropolitan craftsmen, while neighbouring areas show
distinctive styles: decorated with animal figures in the Caucasus and Iran,
or with plentiful channelling and fluting in central Anatolia - as shown both
by the gold vessels of Alaca Hiiyiik and the Early Bronze Age pottery of
Beycesultan, whose contrast with the preceding Late Chalcolithic 4 wares
is marked by the appearance of thin, brilliantly polished and often fluted
fabrics, indicating a close dependence on metal models. Egypt's skill in sheet
goldwork (even gold leaf) is well known, though surprisingly few gold
vessels have escaped the tomb-robbers to place alongside the plentiful
copper examples from royal and aristocratic tombs. (For examples of Near
Eastern metalwork see illustrations in Piggott 1961.)
    These areas shared a common basic technology that was capable of
producing sheet-metal, gold, silver and copper-alloy vessels (though some of
the last were still produced by solid-casting). The westernmost assemblage
demonstrating the whole of this range of competence is that represented
by the seventeen vessels (two-thirds of silver, the rest either of electrum, or
copper alloy) from Treasures A, B and s from Troy II, and other hoards from
the Troad (Schmidt 1902; Bittel 1959); but precious metal vessels were also
made on the other side of the Aegean, under strong west-Anatolian influ-
ence. Examples include gold vessels in the local 'sauceboat' shape, that were
probably made in craft workshops attached to fortified centres such as
Lerna, as well as small silver bowls in the Cyclades, and the possibly


                                          434




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       THE   CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN




17.2 Map of metal-vessel style zones, 3500-2000 BC: (1) Mesopotamian classic;
(2) Iranian figured; (3) central Anatolian channelled; (4) Egyptian sheet-goldwork
and bronze vessels; (5) Aegean plain; (6) Baden culture (pottery skeuomorphs).
There are other pottery skeuomorphs in the Levant, (a) boundaries of style-zones;
(b) finds of metal vessels; (c) style-zones defined on metallic skeuomorphs; (d) finds
of metallic skeuomorphs; (e) imports (metal vessel finds or skeuomorphs); ( f ) the
limit of sheet-metalworking in copper alloys; (g) sheet-metal finds other than
vessels.
imported gold bowls from Euboia (Renfrew 1972; Buchholz and
Karageorghis nos 1072-82). Even so, Helladic goldwork was simpler than
that from western Anatolia: the sauceboats have riveted strap-handles
rather than tubular ones like the two-handled cups (depata) from Troy
(Childe 1924).
   The appearance of tubular spouts on the pottery 'teapot' vessels from
Early Minoan Crete (Figure 17.3) is very suggestive of metal prototypes
(known in silver from the Levant in the next period) which may have been
in bronze or more likely in precious metal (Evans 1921, 79-82). The Cretan
case resembles that of the Levant itself in this period, when metal types can
be inferred from the pottery but are not so far represented by finds of metal
objects. More generalised skeuomorphs of metal features occur in northern
Greece and as far north as the Carpathian Basin. High-flung strap-handles
and omphalos bases (Figure 17.4) are characteristic of the Ezero and Baden
cultures (Kalicz 1963), which also have pottery examples of the suspension-
vase known in silver from the Troy treasure. Since there are no 'proto-
palaces' of the Lerna type in this area, it is unlikely that metal prototypes
would have been locally manufactured: probably, rare examples circulated


                                         435




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                METAL    VESSELS     IN   BRONZE     AGE     EUROPE:




173 Pottery and metalwork: above, Early Minoan 'teapot3 from Vasilike, Crete;
below, early first-millennium BC bronze spouted vessels from Luristan: the tubular
construction of the spout is characteristic of the metal form and skeuomorphic in
pottery (Ashmolean Museum); [new photographs].

from further south. This is also likely to be the explanation for the very rare
metal-derived shapes in pottery from TRB and related contexts further north,
in Bavaria at Lengfeld-Alkofen and, more surprisingly, at Oldendorf (Kr.
Luneburg) in northern Germany (Sprockhoff 1952; Milojcic 1953: see
Figure 7.3). These postulated examples of metal vessels circulating outside
their zone of manufacture would interestingly prefigure the route over


                                          436




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     THE    CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN




Museum); [new drawing].



which techniques of local production were to spread in the following
millennium.

Stage II: 2000-1300 BC (Figure 17.5)
This span of time encompasses a series of changes, which for convenience
have been conflated within a single map. The undoubted presence of
precious metal vessels in the Near East is only sparsely represented in the
archaeological record, mainly because of the rarity of ostentatious royal
tombs. However, the geographically marginal site of Trialeti in the Caucasus
(some of whose tombs date back to the previous millennium) shows the
complexity that goldwork could attain (Schaeffer 1948, figs 288-92), and
the numbers of bronze vessels from humbler tombs in the Luristan region by
the end of the period show that they were no longer confined to a restricted
elite. Although whole areas (including potentially very important ones like
western Anatolia) are still definable only through pottery skeuomorphs,
royal and aristocratic tombs in the Aegean and the Levant provide good
examples of contemporary products in the east Mediterranean.
    Among the earliest are the royal tombs at Byblos (Schaeffer 1948, fig.
63), with silver vessels - including a teapot - that resemble the massive silver
treasure from a temple context at Tod in upper Egypt, datable to c.1900 BC
(Bisson de la Roque et al. 1953). This silverwork is either Levantine or -
conceivably - Cretan, where local production of silver vessels is shown by
the crinkly kantharos from Gournia and from skeuomorphic representation
in Kamares ware (Evans 1921,191-3). Cretan goldwork in a similar style is
illustrated by the vessels of the 'Aigina' treasure, probably from northern
Crete (Higgins 1979), while further connections between Byblos and the
Aegean are demonstrated by the occurrence in both areas of a type of
carinated, two-handled cauldron (Schaeffer 1948, fig. 78; cf. Catling 1964,


                                         437




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               METAL     VESSELS     IN   BRONZE     AGE     EUROPE:




17.5 Map of metal-vessel style zones, 2000-1300 BC: (1) Near Eastern figured;
(2) Aegean-related gold- and silver-work in the east Mediterranean; (3) west
Anatolian (pottery skeuomorphs); (4) Cretan crinkly; (5) Mycenaean; (6) Balkan
(pottery skeuomorphs); (7) west-Pontic zone of Vulchetrun-related vessels;
(8) Otomani goldwork; (9) Unetice (pottery skeuomorphs); (10) west European
EBA gold and silver cups. (Symbols as in Fig. 17.2)


fig. 18, 5). These examples illustrate the increasing links between various
parts of the east Mediterranean.
   For the Aegean Late Bronze Age (Davis 1977) the best sample comes
from the sixteenth-century Shaft-Graves at Mycenae, which contain gold
vessels in both the Cretan tradition (cf. the cups from Vaphio) and in simpler
shapes in the tradition of Middle Helladic pottery (e.g. the simple two-
handled cups). The development of this school of metalworking can be
followed at nearby Dendra where a tholos and chamber-tombs of the
fourteenth century have produced technically more advanced pieces, giving
evidence both of lathe-finishing in the manufacture of bowls, and of the
application to vessels of the kinds of black inlay previously used on weapon-
blades (Buchholz and Karageorghis 1973, no. 1108, cf. 1684). Bronzework
is particularly plentiful at this time, both on the mainland and in Crete
(Matthaus 1980), where a good example of a set of personal drinking
equipment comes from the warrior-burial in tomb 14 at Zapher Papoura
(Buchholz and Karageorghis 1973, fig. 33).
   It is to this period that a bronze cup said to have been found at Dohnsen
north of Hannover (Sprockhoff 1961) can be a -ributed; and a possible


                                          438




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    THE    CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN




indication of a somewhat earlier metal vessel import from the Aegean is the
pottery pillar-handle (like those on the Vaphio cups) from Nienhagen in
Saxony (Gimbutas 1965, 58). While some doubt must attach to both of
these pieces (Harding 1985, 108), there is nothing inherently improbable in
such rare long-distance imports, which are paralleled in the previous period
at Oldendorf and by many instances in the first millennium.
   In any case, the local production of precious metal (but not bronze)
vessels had already begun in central and western Europe. The earliest are the
gold vessels of the Hajdusamson metalworking phase of the Otomani
culture in the Carpathian Basin, dating to c.1800 BC and preceding the
Shaft-Grave period in Greece. The Otomani area provided an advanced
economic context (though not a palatial one), with its stone-built hillforts,
skilful gold- and bronzework, and even experimental ironworking (Vladar
1973). Four one-handled gold cups or bowls, found in Co. Bihar, Hungary
in 1922, have vertical channelling, and one has incised compass-based orna-
ment of the kind known from contemporary bronzework (Mozsolics 1968,
Tafeln 4-10; Figure 17.6). (Forms with elaborate toreutic shapes are sug-
gested by contemporary pottery copies: Figure 17.7.) Probably slightly later
is the example from Biia (Magyarbenye) with repousse bosses and con-
centric circles, and incised lines of dots (Moszolics 1968, Tafel 12). Like the
Bihar examples, the handles are formed of one piece with the rim of the
vessel, and are not attached at their lower end. The double-spiral terminals
of the two handles of the Biia vessel resemble gold bracelets of c.1600-1400
BC from Hungary. Probably of similar date is a hoard of sheet-gold orna-
ments from §mig (Somogyom) (Mozsolics 1968, Tafeln 13-16) associated
with part of a globular bronze bowl with a distinctive flat, outwards-rolled
rim. As virtually the only sheet-bronze vessel in Europe before the Urnfield
period, this bowl is likely to represent an import, even though it has no
obvious correspondence with contemporary Aegean types and may well be
an import from the Caucasus or Anatolia.


                                       439




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               METAL     VESSELS     IN   BRONZE      AGE    EUROPE:




17.7 Pottery cup, Otomani culture, probably Berettyo JJjfalu, Hungary
(Ashmolean Museum); [new drawing].

   The area between the Carpathian Basin and the Aegean was probably
capable of producing gold vessels by at least the middle of the second
millennium, and metallic 'kantharos' shapes in pottery (distantly related to
Anatolian Middle Bronze Age and Middle Helladic ones, though not wheel-
made) strongly hint at their presence (Bona 1975). These shapes, especially
the pottery of the Monteoru culture, provide the best analogies for the
simpler pieces in the Vulchetrun treasure and related recent finds from
Radeni and Kryzovlin that are discussed below (Vulpe and Mihailescu-
Birliba 1985). If Vulchetrun is not a unity, as we suggest, then there is no
difficulty in assigning these pieces to such a horizon. It would be later than
the Bihar vessels but perhaps overlapping with the later products of the
Otomani tradition. A postulated contemporaneity with the goldwork of the
Shaft-Grave period would accord well with the generalised similarities
between these pieces and the kantharoi from grave IV of circle A and the one
from Kalamata in Messenia (Buchholz and Karageorghis 1973, no. 1086;
Hartmann 1982, no. 4367; Figure 17.8). The gold vessels of the Vulchetrun
group in the lower Danube and west Pontic area, with their riveted handles,
are more confident and sophisticated pieces than the Otomani examples;
and some contacts between goldsmiths working in the lower Danube and


                                          440




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      THE    CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN




Sherratt 1987e].

those of the Late Bronze Age Aegean or western Anatolia is clearly shown
by the Per§inari dagger, with its close analogies to the sword from Shaft-
Grave delta of Circle B. The possibility of similar overseas connections with
Anatolia is hinted at by the crinkly kantharos shapes in pottery, recalling the
Shaft-Grave and Cretan examples in silver and marble, which may have
a common background in Anatolian metalwork (as Childe suggested in
1956).
   The next area with plentiful evidence of gold and silver vessels is western
Europe, with its small, handled cups with carinated or sinuous profile. Their
distribution ranges from Rillaton and Cuxwold in Britain to Eschenz in
Switzerland (Gerloff 1975; Bill and Kinnes 1975; Taylor 1980), and they
date to the period 1800-1400 BC. Although not directly evidenced in the
Unetice and Tumulus cultures that lay between here and the Otomani
examples, the characteristic (Jnetice pottery cup with its sharp carination
and concave upper section is closely paralleled by the gold cup from
Fritzdorf in the Rhineland (von Uslar 1955), which may well have travelled
there from the CJnetice area. The small gold and silver cups which are typical
of later Breton and Wessex tumuli are echoed in amber and shale examples
(Gerloff 1975), and in Denmark in the tree-trunk coffin burials there
are small wooden cups ornamented with tin nails (e.g. Glob 1970; the
associated horn spoons recall the sheet-gold example associated with the
Ploumilliau gold cup: Eluere 1982). The two Breton silver examples, St
Adrien and St Fiacre (Briard 1978), are notable as the first silver vessels
known outside the Aegean. These small cups, in very diverse materials and
occurring over a very wide area, are nevertheless remarkably uniform in
conception; and the same idea was occasionally translated into pottery, as
in the case of the Scottish handled 'food vessel5 from Balcuick.
   This evidence demonstrates a chronological cline in the spread of
precious metal vessel production: crudely - Troy, Otomani, Wessex. In each
case the idea of metal vessels was added to a local competence in the
working of gold sheet (Copper Age in central Europe, Beaker in the west),
and a local repertoire of prestige drinking vessels in pottery. In south-east
Europe rather larger and more sophisticated gold vessels were produced


                                         441




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                METAL     VESSELS     IN   BRONZE     AGE     EUROPE:




17.9 Map of metal-vessel style zones, 1300-850 BC: (1) Near Eastern goldwork
(Urartian-Assyrian-Baby Ionian); (2) Egyptian gold and silver vessels in oriental
style; (3) Cypro-Levantine (bronzes and pottery skeuomorphs); (4) Urnfield
goldwork. (Symbols as in Fig. 17.2)
than in the north-west. The capacity to produce gold and silver vessels was
not, however, paralleled by an ability to produce bronze ones, even though
smaller pieces of sheet bronzework were used for ornaments in all these
areas. The production of gold and silver vessels in this period thus seems to
have devolved from a skill available only in palace workshops and craft
centres to one more widely available to barbarian elites. Its spread took the
form of successive steps, with each new area taking a general model from its
predecessor but creating its own local form, often widely shared among
neighbouring elites. (These metal forms probably explain some of the more
widespread forms in pottery.) Although there are possible examples of indi-
vidual vessels travelling along the northwards axis from the Aegean, the
process of technological spread owed nothing to Mycenaean imports; it
began before the Mycenaean period and was to continue after it. Only the
typology of certain pieces of goldwork in the lower Danube area suggests
some kind of contact, probably during the Shaft-Grave period.

Stage III: 1300-850 BC (Figure 17.9)
This period corresponds to a time of fundamental transition in the economic
and social life of Europe and the Near East, as well as a major technological
shift from bronze to iron in the southern part of the area. The new pattern
well reflects the radical nature of these changes. Very little goldwork, and

                                           442




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                     THE    CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN


no gold or silver vessels, are known from the Aegeo-Anatolian area where
Mycenaean and Hittite civilisation collapsed and in which Geometric
Greece and Phrygian Anatolia were emerging. This is consistent with the
brown-painted, basket-like ornament on shapes which only indirectly reflect
metal forms. Somewhat greater continuity in elite craftsmanship is probable
in the Cypro-Levantine area (especially in the production of Egyptianising
bronze tripods in Cyprus: Catling 1964 - though his dates are compressed:
see Matthaus 1985), but precious metalwork is only well demonstrated in
Egypt and northern Iran. In Egypt the important hoard dated by inscriptions
to the late XlXth Dynasty from Tell Basta (ancient Bubastis) includes a
silver jug with gold theriomorphic handles which strikingly anticipate
Achaemenid forms (Simpson 1959). Further east, the undoubted wealth of
the Assyrian, Urartian and Babylonian areas is best exemplified archae-
ologically from the site of Hasanlu in Iran, though otherwise known from
representations in Assyrian reliefs. (Many of these features were to spread
westwards with the orientalising movement in the eighth and seventh
centuries.) Goldwork from the Marlik Tepe tombs included gold beakers
with repousse animal friezes (somewhat in the manner of the Ishtar Gate at
Babylon) showing the links between Achaemenid metalwork and earlier
Mesopotamian and Iranian traditions, and the continuity of (presumably)
Bactrian gold sources. Bronze objects, including vessels, are known from
this time in enormous numbers from looted Luristan tombs. The lack of
precious metalwork in the Aegean/Anatolian area is striking, but the
continuing production of sheet bronzework there indicates that metalsmiths
were restricted by supplies of precious metal rather than by any lack of skill:
and if gold or silver vessels were produced, they were too valuable to con-
sign to the ground. Even the Gordion tombs are remarkable for their
emphasis on bronzework alone, much of it of the highest order.
   In temperate Europe quite a different situation obtained. Metalwork,
both in bronze and gold, greatly expanded in the Late Bronze Age -
especially in the Urnfield area of central Europe. Here several hoards of gold
vessels are known (as well as more extraordinary sheet-gold creations, like
the golden 'hats' of Schifferstadt and Ezelsdorf (which may actually be hats:
Menghin and Schauer 1977) and for the first time bronze vessels made their
appearance outside the Aegean. The technology of sheet bronzework is
demonstrated by two sets of items from chieftains' graves: handled cups,
and sheet-armour cuirasses (Sprockhoff 1930; Childe 1949; von Merhart
1969; Piggott 1959). By 1000 BC there was a full array of buckets, bowls
and sieves, as well as the remarkable wheeled cauldrons (Piggott 1983).
   Although the precise dating is disputed, this new technology appeared in
Europe not at the peak of Mycenaean power but during and after the collapse
of the palaces, in the later LH IIIB and IIIc periods. It is tempting to suggest
that large-scale bronze sheetworking had been virtually a palace monopoly,
and that the new conditions allowed experienced craftsmen to work for


                                        443




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               METAL    VESSELS      IN   BRONZE     AGE    EUROPE:


other patrons (not necessarily the richest) - especially further north where
opportunities were expanding (Sandars 1983). (At the same time, tech-
niques of solid-casting of swords and spearheads went south, to appear in
the Aegean.) A major school of sheet-bronzeworking grew up in the long
pre-eminent Carpathian area, whose products were widely distributed,
going north as far as Denmark. A characteristic product (that seems to have
taken the place of the large, two-handled bowl of Vulchetrun type as the
container at the symposium), was the biconical bronze 'amphora' (von
Merhart 1969, Tafel 48) that is echoed in pottery as the Villanovan urn. The
continuing vitality of central European metallurgy, especially sheet bronze-
work like armour and vessels, contributed to the revival of these skills in
Greece and Italy during the early first millennium.
   Beyond the Urnfield area, in Atlantic Europe and Scandinavia, the
traditions of cast bronzework continued, and were carried to new heights
in the creation of 'belt-boxes' (Hangebecken), lurer, or Irish horns. Sheet-
bronzeworking was slower to penetrate, though it eventually spread from
central Europe to start a local tradition of buckets and patch-built cauldrons
(Hawkes and Smith 1957; Gerloff 1975). The only bronze cups known from
the early first millennium in the British Isles, however, are cast ones (e.g.
Welby) and despite the craftsmanship attested by the Mold gold cape or the
abundance of Irish gold ornaments, there are no gold cups. Sheet-bronze
cups were used in Denmark from the equivalent of the early Urnfield period
(Thrane 1962). Even in Denmark the famous gold cups from the
Mariesminde Mose hoard were probably imported from northern Germany,
and only the handles added locally. Horns were probably the main osten-
tatious drinking vessels, and occasionally occur in Danish treetrunk-coffin
burials; and they are known from the early Iron Age in central Europe by
their bronze or gold mounts.


T H E CONTEXT OF THE VULCHETRUN A-TYPE VESSELS
The Vulchetrun hoard came to light in 1924 near the village in Pleven
district, N. Bulgaria, after which it is named.1 It was not recovered under
scientific conditions and part of it was dispersed on discovery. Of fourteen
objects which were documented, thirteen arrived at the archaeological
museum in Sofia. At least three of these remaining objects are incomplete.
Only five of the objects from the hoard are of importance in this discussion
- five vessels which appear to be elements of a drinking set (illustrated on
p. 373 above); it will be necessary to justify the treatment of these separately
from the other objects which form part of the hoard in its present state.
    That the Vulchetrun hoard does not constitute a unity in either the tech-
nological, chronological or cultural sense of the word has already been
argued by one of us (Taylor 1985, 131; 1986). The hoard is listed in Table
17.1: objects Vx-V5 are grouped as Vulchetrun 'A', the rest as 'B'.2 The

                                          444




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                        THE   CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN


fourteenth object reported at the time of the discovery can be given the
number V14; it may well have been the pair to one of the objects V 7 -V n if
their function as cymbals is accepted (Minchev, pers. comm.). The obvious
incongruousness of the forms and implied functions of the objects in the
hoard immediately suggests that it represents a hotch-potch of objects
hastily deposited at a time when some of them may already have been
antique. It is not just on the basis of the various forms and implied functions
that the objects can be separated, rather it is pre-eminently in terms of tech-
niques and materials that a primary assemblage 'Vulchetrun A' can be
distinguished from the remaining, and apparently later, set of material
designated 'Vulchetrun B\ Vulchetrun B may itself be of heterogeneous
origin and display various phases of construction.

Table 17A     The Vulchetrun Hoard.
VULCHETRUN A
Vj         : a large double-handled bowl; gold (c.10% Ag) (Inv. No. 3192)
V2         : a large single-handled vessel; gold (Inv. No. 3193)
V3-V5      : three small single-handled cups; gold (Inv. Nos 3194, 3195, 3204)
VULCHETRUN B
V6         : a curious 'triple vessel' consisting of three tear-drop shaped bowls
             of gold, connected by tubing and a trident construction of electrum
             (Inv. No. 3203)
V 7 -V n   : five small 'lids', two of which have an onion-shaped central boss
             surviving (Inv. No. 3198, 3199) and three of which have sections
             broken away and missing; (c.20% Ag) (Inv. Nos 3200, 3201, 3202);
             gold
V12, V13   : two large 'lids', both with onion-shaped central bosses; gold, decorated
             with silver (Inv. Nos 3196, 3197)

   On the basis of appearance alone, the objects, when viewed under
uniform lighting conditions, seem to be made up of three different golds.
The vessels Vj-V^ appear to have the most 'neutral' gold colour with no de-
tectable variation among them, whilst the 'lids' V7-V13 are uniformly greener
or more 'brassy'; the three teardrop-shaped dishes of the triple vessel V6 are
redder or more 'coppery'.
   It is not only on grounds of a proposed variation in the materials used for
different parts of the hoard that its basic disunity is proposed, however, but
also from the evidence of different manufacturing technique. The five vessels
Vj-V5 are constructed in hammered gold plate, raised into open forms and
finished with repousse work. Their handles are joined back to their bodies
with conical-headed rivets. These techniques demonstrate a fundamental
dissimilarity between these vessels and the rest of the hoard, which are of
much more complex construction: V6, for instance, is joined with solder to
a cire perdue cast electrum trident; V7-V13 display complex polymetallism,
being constructed of gold over cast bronze, and the two larger examples


                                          445




                    This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                     All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               METAL     VESSELS     IN   BRONZE     AGE     EUROPE:


V12-V13 have been pattern-silvered within zones delimited by punched lines.3
It is clear from this appraisal that the objects V6-V13 display quite different
and much more complex metal-working techniques than Vj-Vj. We suggest
that manufacture within an urban context is likely for these complex
objects. The closest parallel for the 'lids' seems to support this - a gold and
silver banded 'lid' with a pomegranate-shaped central boss from Karmir
Blur, Urartu, which carries an inscription dating it to the eighth century BC.4
A similar date could be proposed for the triple vessel.
    Essentially, the dating and provenance of V6 to V13 need not concern us in
this discussion as, whatever their origin, they clearly distinguish themselves
from Vulchetrun A in terms of shape, function, fabric and construction: on
the one hand we have complex polymetallism with casting, soldering and
bonding, whilst on the other hand we have five pure sheet-gold vessels, ham-
mered and riveted. Further, within the last five years, two new discoveries of
sheet-gold vessels have been published which display the same technology
and a range of similar forms. These represent the first true parallels to the
Vulchetrun A drinking set to appear so far. They are the vessel found near
Kryzhovlin in the Ukranian S. S. R. (Dzis-Rayko and Chernyakov 1981) and
the five vessels found near Radeni in the Neamf district of Romania (Revista
Muzeelor 1981 (8); see now Vulpe and Mihailescu-Birliba 1985). Figure
17.5 shows the distribution of the three findspots. We shall discuss each set
of material in turn.


VULCHETRUN A
The assemblage put forward as Vulchetrun A comprises the five vessels
Vj-V5. They are made of gold of a similar colour, hammer-worked from
sheet into open forms. The strap-handles are in all cases integral, rising from
the lip in 'high-handle' form and curving back down onto the outside of the
vessel to be held in place by three gold rivets apiece. In our illustrations
(Figure 17.10, and p. 373 above) the handles of the large vessel Va have been
reconstructed to what is considered to be their original height. The hoard
was recovered in a crumpled state and only partial restoration has taken
place; compare the photograph of the hoard as discovered (Mikov 1958,
pi. 1) and as it is presently displayed (Venedikov and Gerassimov 1975,
pi. 33). It seems sensible to assume that the form of the double handles
originally followed that of the less damaged vessel V2. This fits with the
proposed reconstructions of the Kryzhovlin and Radeni vessels (see below).
Vessel Vj weighs about 4.395kg; a rough volumetric calculation suggests
that it could have conveniently held between 7 and 8 litres of liquid. Vessel
V2 weighs 0.919kg. Vessels V3, V4 and V5, the three small cups, are nearly
identical in shape and size and their rivets are made as smaller versions of
the rivets on the two larger vessels; they weigh 123 :m each. The cups would
have held about 0.2 litres of liquid, according tc >w full they were. This


                                          446




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      THE    CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN




17.10 Gold vessels (to scale): (1) Vulchetrun; (2) Kryzhovlin; (3)-(5) Radeni;
(6) Mycenae, Shaft-Grave IV.

falls somewhere between two of the modern European standard wine
measures - the glass, at between 0.115 and 0.125 litres, and the German
'Viertel' or quarter-litre glass (0.250 litre). The cups stand upright only
when filled and would presumably have to have been hung up when not in
use. On the inner surface of all three cups there is a small indentation; it
occurs in the centre of the base and seems to have been caused by a tool with
a compass-like point. It is not visible on the outside and is probably an index
of a particular production method in which either the tool or the vessel was
rotated to enable the vessel to be formed symmetrically.
   All five of the vessels are decorated. The body of V1 is plain with a distinct


                                         447




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               METAL    VESSELS     IN   BRONZE     AGE    EUROPE:


shoulder two-thirds of the way up. The handles are decorated in five parallel
bands or ridges, pressed up out of the thick gold sheet. The central three
bands link to form what Venedikov and Gerassimov have termed a 'fish-tail'
terminus to either end to the handle (1975,351). The central band, or spine,
is patterned with diagonal slashes which appear to have been excised with
a sharp graving tool,5 the two edges of the handle are decorated with the
same diagonal pattern but in much narrower bands, and probably punched.
Vessel V2 is decorated in exactly the same way, although lacking a shoulder.
The three vessels V3, V4 and V5 are decorated in a slightly different manner
to the two large vessels. There are only three raised bands on the handles -
the central band with diagonal slashes, with the outer bands, forming the
edges, merely punch-dotted. The same 'fish-tail' termination is present,
except that on the inside the ends, after dividing, become a continuous
repousse band around the vessel rim; immediately below this are two further
bands so that three bands in all define the rim of each cup.
   The bases of all five vessels have standing surfaces formed by regular
upraised circular bands. On both and V2 there are two such raised bands,
organised concentrically (Mikov 1958, figs V and VIII). The small cups V 3 -
V5 have a flattened basal plane with a single raised ring on which they stand
(Mikov 1958, fig. XI).


KRYZHOVLIN
The Kryzhovlin bowl (Figure 17.10, 2) was discovered by chance in the
Balta region, north of Odessa. No associated finds were recorded. It was
published by Dzis-Rayko and Chernyakov in 1981 under the title 'A gold
bowl of Vulchetrun type from the north-west Pontic region'. It weighs
765.59gm; its maximum diameter is 17.9cm. The handles of the vessel have
undecorated 'fish-tail' termini (similar though not identical to Vulchetrun
Va) which were originally held in place on both sides with four rivets apiece;
these rivets are rounded on their outer faces and hammered down against
the inner surface of the vessel. Like Va the bowl has a distinct raised base.
On Kryzhovlin this consists of two concentric rings beaten down to form a
standing plane between which six rivets have been hammered (Dzis-Rayko
and Chernyakov 1981, 153, fig. 3:3). A rough volumetric calculation sug-
gests that the vessel could once have held around 2 to 2.5 litres of liquid.


RADENI
Information concerning a hoard of badly damaged vessels from near the
village of Radeni in Romanian Moldavia (Figure 17.10, 3-5) has been slow
to emerge since its accidental discovery during farm work in 1965 or 1966
(Vulpe and Mihailescu-Birliba 1985, 47). Three vessels reached Piatra
Neamj museum in 1977 and appeared on the cover of Revista Muzeelor


                                         448




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       THE   CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN


1981 (8) but with little documentation. A fourth vessel passed, by way of
a jeweller in Oradea, Transylvania, into the collection of the National
Museum in Bucharest in 1971. A fifth passed from private hands into the
Romanian National Bank between 1979 and 1980. It seems that the hoard
had consisted of as many as eight small gold vessels which had been
hung from a larger two-handled vessel by means of (Pgold) wire (Vulpe and
Mihailescu-Birliba 1985, 48). The five vessels, R F - R 5 , which can be
documented are listed in Table 17.2.

Table 17.2 The Radeni Hoard.
Rj (Figure 17.10, 5) Piatra Neam{ Inv. No. 5548: a two-handled gold vessel with
   distinct shoulder and decorative engraving on the handles; weight 458.6gm; the
   strap-handles are integral, rising from the rim to be fixed back against the body
   using two rivets apiece. The base is formed by two concentric rings with six
   rivets hammered flat between them, very similar to the base of the Kryzhovlin
   vessel.
R2 Piatra Neamj Inv. No. 5549: a two-handled gold vessel with distinct shoulder
   and 'fish tail' decoration; weight 243.10gm; the strap-handles are integral, two
   rivets apiece; the base appears to be defined by a single raised ring but without
   rivets.
R3 (Figure 17.10, 3) Piatra Neamj Inv. No. 5550: a single-handled gold vessel with
   distinct shoulder and 'fish tail' decoration; weight 203.7gm; the handle is in-
   tegral, with two rivets; there is a distinct circular pressed-out base (see Vulpe
   and Mihailescu-Birliba 1985, 52 and Abbildung 5:le).
R4 (Figure 17.10, 4) National Museum, Bucharest Inv. Nos B 32/1-9: (frag-
   mentary) a two-handled gold vessel, similar to R 2 , with 'fish tail' decoration;
   weight of fragments 198.17gm; two rivets per handle.
R5 Romanian National Bank, Bucharest: (five fragments) a gold vessel with either
   one or two handles, integral with the rim and fixed with a row of three rivets;
   'fish tail' termini to the handle(s) are clearly visible; weight of fragments
   158.5gm.

The five vessels appear like a set of miniature variations on the Vulchetrun
Vj type, with high strap-handles and conical-ended rivets. A rough volu-
metric calculation suggests that they could have held between 0.2 and 0.25
litres, a little more than the three cups V3-V5. They seem to have been con-
structed from at least two types of sheet; Vulpe and Mihailescu-Birliba note
that Rj and R 5 appear to be much 'redder5 than the other vessels.
    The vessels from Vulchetrun, Kryzhovlin and Radeni display a large
number of shared traits. Despite their different sizes, they have forms and
decorations which appear as variations on a theme. They were all con-
structed from sheet-gold and using similar workshop techniques. They
occur in the extra-Carpathian zone which links the Steppe to the Lower
Danube Basin (Figure 17.5, zone 7), but, given their close similarity, the


                                         449




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               METAL    VESSELS     IN   BRONZE      AGE    EUROPE:


distances between their respective findspots is remarkable - as the crow flies,
about 250km between Radeni and Kryzhovlin, about 400km between
Radeni and Vulchetrun and about 650km between Kryzhovlin and
Vulchetrun.
   It seems reasonable that a similar date should be sought for the pro-
duction of all of the vessels; however, the fact that no associated material
was documented at any of the three findspots which might have helped in
suggesting a date (for the depositions at least), makes this endeavour a hard
one.6 The history of scholarship concerning Vulchetrun is long and complex
(see Bonev 1977). During the last sixty years various datings ranging from
the late third millennium BC to AD 700 have been put forward. Because
the hoard has been considered a unity, the postulated dates have had to
accommodate both components. Furthermore, no close parallels were
known until recently for any of the objects in the hoard; thus specialists
tended to ascribe the 'treasure' to the period with which they were most
familiar.
   The most favoured time-bracket has always been between the thirteenth
century BC and the eighth century BC. We hope to demonstrate here that this
is absolutely the least likely period within the entire date range in which
to countenance the production of gold vessels of the type described. We
consider that the distinction of more than one techno-cultural complex
within the Vulchetrun hoard marks a major step forward in the attempt to
understand the material. Ridding ourselves of the 'lids' with their bizarre
technology and unknown function immediately removes all the arguments
for dating the Vulchetrun A component on the basis of the curvilinear
meanders on the 'lids' (general parallels for which can be found in many
periods - they formed the basis of Filov and Kazarov's medieval ascription).
Arguments based on the form of the bronze components to the 'lids' (Mikov
1958; Venedikov and Gerassimov 1975,27f., pi. 36; Bonev 1984, figs 8-11;
Taylor 1986, fig. 1) are also spurious, as these are both incomplete and of
a very different form to that supposed by most authors.
   Given the lack of associated material at Kryzhovlin and Radeni, and
the problematic material 'associated' with Vulchetrun A, we are left with
four indirect means of proposing a cultural and chronological context for
the phenomenon of the Vulchetrun A-type vessels. These are contextual
analysis, formal analysis, functional analysis and technological analysis.
   The absence of material associated with the gold vessels itself suggests
a certain depositional and cultural mode. All the finds were uncovered in
a crumpled state (at Radeni apparently deliberately crushed); none of the
finds was part of a burial; likewise none was found within, or in any close
association with, any known prehistoric settlement. Although, strictly, the
Vulchetrun hoard must be ruled out of this discussion (having argued above
that the vessels in it were incorporated into a secondary deposition), the
finds from Radeni give enough support to the idea that the original eight


                                         450




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      THE   CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN


small vessels there may have formed part of a hoard in which a large two-
handled vessel of Vj type may have been the centrepiece. Such deposition of
drinking equipment seems to have been widespread during the period after
2000 BC in Europe (Figure 17.5) with a number of hoards from the Otomani
area (zone 8) and individual pieces in central western Europe (zone 10).
After 1300 BC no such depositions are known from south-east Europe, the
Aegean or Anatolia (Figure 17.9) until the appearance of the Kazicheni gold
vessel ('Sofia treasure') in the eighth or seventh century BC. Indeed, the lack
of goldwork from eastern Europe at a time when it is plentifully represented
in the Urnfield area further west (e.g. Menghin and Schauer 1977) suggests
that alluvial gold in the Carpathian area may have been coming to an end
after three thousand years of exploitation from the Copper Age onwards.
Later goldwork of the Classical and Hellenistic periods was mostly made
from mined gold, probably from the area of Mount Pangaion where ancient
authors describe it (see Unger and Schiitz 1982).
   In the absence of datable contexts for finds of gold vessels of Vulchetrun
A-type, further clues may be sought in the local pottery shapes. Double-
handled vessels resembling the Vulchetrun large vessel (Vx), with two high
strap-handles rising from the rim and joining at the shoulder, are found in a
broad arc of related cultures stretching from the Balkans to the North Pontic
area, and including the Tei, Monteoru and Costisa cultures. Particularly
close parallels occur in the Classic phase of the Monteoru culture (1800-
1500 BC) - notable also for the abundance of small sheet-goldwork in the
form of hair-rings (Zaharia 1959). The parallels extend to the presence of
a median ridge along the strap-handles in the manner of the Vulchetrun,
Radeni and Kryzhovlin examples (e.g. Gimbutas 1965, fig. 152, 2). Even in
pottery, such vessels were valuable and significant enough to accompany
individuals to their graves, as in cemetery 4 at Sarata-Monteoru itself (ibid.,
fig. 153).
   From the point of view of function, the Vulchetrun A-Kryzhovlin-
Radeni group fits very well into the Bronze Age 'symposium' category. We
have already outlined the form taken by the development of this elite custom
or pastime in the commentary on the maps (above). If we consider these
finds as the remains of elite drinking sets, then we can imagine them
originally consisting of a central, communal, liquid-holding vessel -
Vulchetrun V p Kryzhovlin and the inferred Vj-type vessel from Radeni - for
use with a number of individual drinking cups holding roughly the same
volume as a modern large wine glass - Vulchetrun V3-V5 and Radeni R j - R ^ .
In such chance finds it is by no means unreasonable to postulate similar
small drinking cups for use with the Kryzhovlin vessel. The vessel V2 prob-
ably represents an elaboration on the basic drinking ceremony (perhaps like
the later role of the rhyton in relation to the crater and phiale, or as a 'loving
cup' for communal use). It is interesting to note that the small vessels from
the Radeni hoard were apparently discovered hanging with wire from the


                                        451




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               METAL    VESSELS     IN   BRONZE      AGE    EUROPE:


now missing larger vessel, as the balance of the Vulchetrun A drinking cups
(referred to above) suggests that they too would have to have been hung
from something if they were not to roll around and become damaged; the
central vessel Vt would present the ideal choice. Pingel has calculated that
Vx would have weighed around 15kg when full and therefore would have
been kept in a fixed position (1982,176).
   The analysis of depositional context, form and function do no more than
suggest a general milieu for the production and use of drinking vessels of
the Vulchetrun A-type. We have suggested that the period from 2000-1300
BC is the only viable one in which to place them. Within this long period,
however, it is only technological analysis that can tie down the date of
production further.
   We will attempt to argue for a date between 1600 and 1400 BC for the
vessels of the Vulchetrun-A-Kryzhovlin-Radeni group. The Vulchetrun A-
type vessels display a technology which, although practised locally, owes
much to the type of metalworking known from the Mycenaean Shaft-Grave
and Palace periods; therefore they must date to the period in which contact
between the Aegean and those areas around the Black Sea where they were
made was at its height.7
   The techniques with which we are dealing are much more sophisticated
than those of the native Otomani goldworking tradition, and bear little
direct debt to it. They might well be seen as in response to the influence
of Trojan or Mycenaean contacts with the Black Sea coastlands. It is in
the Shaft-Grave period that these stylistic links are most obvious, as long
recognised in the compass-decorated bonework (mostly horse-gear) with a
Carpathian background, and more demonstrably in the occurrence of Baltic
amber in Greece - though this followed an Italian rather than a Balkan route
(Harding 1984, 79f; Bouzek 1985). Metals may have been the motive for
such contacts (a trade perhaps later marked by the copper ox-hide ingots
off the Gulf of Burgas and inland, and the double axes of apparently
Mycenaean type from Bulgaria, Romania and the Ukraine (Panayotov
1980; Buchholz 1983), since Carpatho-Balkan copper and Bohemian tin
was potentially available to Trojan or early Mycenaean traders. The influ-
ence of such contacts on local goldworking traditions is best exemplified in
the Perginari dagger with its Shaft-Grave parallels (e.g. circle B grave Delta),
and the nearby Macin gold daggers, from the Lower Danube Basin (Figure
 17.5; and see Gimbutas 1965, pi. 8b, 1; Mozsolics 1965/66, Tafel 1, 1 and
2). These imply a much closer relationship during the sixteenth century BC
between these areas than possible imports in other areas (e.g. Dohnsen) can
suggest.
  It is in this context that the Vulchetrun A-type vessels should be viewed.
We suggest that the following developments took place in south-east Euro-
pean metal vessel production as a result of the influence of palace work-
shops (in terms either of emulation following imported models or of the

                                         452




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                    THE   CONTEXT        OF   VULCHETRUN


actual movement of craftsmen). None of the following traits is characteristic
of the Otomani sheet-gold vessel horizons, but all of them are found in
Aegaeo-Anatolian (including Cretan-Mycenaean) metalworking and in the
Vulchetrun-A-Kryzhovlin-Radeni group:
   1. The raising of sheet vessels with regular circular cross-section in the
      horizontal plane: this is lacking in the early second-millennium gold
      vessels of the Otomani group, and was achieved - perhaps inde-
      pendently - in the Atlantic Early Bronze Age (Fritzdorf, Rillaton) at a
      date approximately contemporary with the Shaft-Grave goldwork
      and the suggested date of Vulchetrun A.
   2. The sharp shouldering or carination of the vessel body: again
      apparently developed independently in the west (Fritzdorf), it is un-
      known in the Otomani group. The shoulder, which brings the vessel
      over into a closed form, is much more difficult to achieve while re-
      taining a regular horizontal section, than it is when raising an open
      shape.
   3. The use of the classic 'kantharos' form with two strap-handles: this
      form, which probably originated in Anatolia or Crete (Gournia; and
      the imported silver kantharoi from Tod, dating to c.2000 BC; Davis
       1977, figs 52 and 53) is well known in the Mycenaean world. The
      example from Mycenae Shaft-Grave IV is illustrated for comparative
      purposes here (fig. 4:6); it is similar in scale to the Radeni and
      Kryzhovlin vessels, but the shoulder is set much lower. The twin-
      handled bowls in the Otomani region may owe something to early
      Cretan types, but if so then they have not retained the shoulders or
      riveted-back handles and are unlikely to have served as a starting-
      point for the Vulchetrun A-type vessels.
   4. Concentric ring bases and raised circular bases: these are typical of
      early Cypro-Levantine production (Tod, Ain Samieh) and are charac-
      teristic of all Cretan-Mycenaean non-footed sheet-metal vessels.
      The slightly raised sub-circular bases which occur on some Otomani
      vessels (Bihar) might be related, but the competent concentric basal
      rings of the Vulchetrun A-type vessels seem unlikely to represent
      a development from these; rather, they are more likely to follow
      Aegean models directly. Compare the raised base of Radeni R 3 (Vulpe
      and Mihailescu-Birliba 1985, fig. 5:ld, le) with Cretan-Mycenaean
      examples.
   5. The use of high strap-handles and conical rivets: nearly all the handles
      of the Mycenaean metal vessels are attached at both ends, using rivets;
      only a few of the 'teacups' have handles which are integral with the
      rim at one end (e.g. Ayios Ioannis). Neither riveting nor high strap-
      handles are used at all in the Otomani goldwork; while in the west the
      separately made handles are held in place both top and bottom by flat,
      rhomboidal, 'washer-rivets' which are a feature peculiar to this group.


                                       453




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                METAL     VESSELS     IN   BRONZE     AGE    EUROPE:


    If taken together, these traits suggest that there was an important link
between the production of the Aegean workshops and the Vulchetrun
A-Kryzhovlin-Radeni group. These similarities effectively rule out a pre-
Mycenaean date (cf. Pingel 1982). There is only one important divergence
from the tradition represented at Mycenae. As mentioned above, few
Mycenaean vessels have integral handles, and those that do are not of the
kantharos type which, we suggested, provided the basic model for the Wx
type. The vessels of the Hajdusamson period (2000-1800 BC) all have such
integral handles, joined at the rim and open at the bottom. Because of the
strong general influence of early Mycenaean techniques and overall lack
of similarity with the Otomani tradition, the Vulchetrun A-type vessels are
clearly of Mycenaean date; nevertheless, the integral handles may indeed
reflect continuation of this single feature from Otomani goldwork.
    Vulpe and Mihailescu-Birliba suggest that the Radeni and Kryzhovlin
vessels were made in the same workshop (1985, 57) but this is perhaps to
over-interpret their clear similarity as a group. The differences among the
Vulchetrun A-type vessels, with rivets from two to four per handle, sizes
from fractions of litres to several litres, and the various ways in which the
'fish tail' motifs have been rendered, all suggest a common style rather than
the production of a single atelier. The very fact that, after appearing to be
unique for so many years, Vulchetrun now has parallels, should suggest
both that more vessels are to be found and that more vessels have been
found during the period of 3500 years or so since the deposition of such
hoards. The full documentation of eleven vessels from three widely dis-
persed findspots, unmarked by any burial monument, in three separate
countries after so long a period seems to provide ample grounds for the be-
lief that many more existed, probably with a sequence of internal develop-
ments.
    These considerations require there to be a zone of common contact
around the western margin of the Black Sea over which a common form of
luxury symposium set was in use, and that this zone was in contact with the
Aegean world. This is exactly what Dzis-Rayko and Chernyakov feel to be
a prerequisite for the production of their bowl (1981, 157f) and believe it
to exist between the fifteenth and thirteenth centuries BC. This is indeed
a possibility. We believe, however, that the vessels should date a little earlier,
to the sixteenth to fifteenth centuries BC, because this is the period of most
obvious Mycenaean influence (Perjinari) and because of the continuation of
the Otomani goldsmithing tradition of raising the handles directly from the
up.
   In conclusion, the arguments presented for the various technical and
chronological phases in the production of sheet-metal vessels from 3000 to
850 BC lead to a much clearer understanding of the place of the Vulchetrun
vessels and their relatives within a broader European p a r < The view that
such vessels were used for the presentation and distrii     m of alcoholic


                                           454




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                         THE   CONTEXT        OF   VULCHETRUN


drinks in a formalised social context sheds light on the function of many
types of ceramic vessels which survive from areas and periods when precious
metal has failed, for one reason or another, to be well represented in the
archaeological record. From 3000 BC down to the end of the Aegean palaces
we can see how important the axial position of western Anatolia, Greece
and the Mediterranean islands was in mediating the transmission of tech-
niques and fashions often originating in the urban centres of the Near East.
It is the effective collapse of this network which divided gold and silver
vessel-working into isolated oriental and occidental schools.
   It is unnecessary for present purposes to pursue this story in subsequent
periods: the effect of the Mediterranean revival and the orientalising move-
ment, the spread of further types of Mediterranean buckets, amphorae
and jugs along the central European axis (e.g. Stjernquist 1967; Schaaff and
Taylor 1975; Werner 1954; Eggers 1951), and the arrival of wine itself
through the agency of the Greeks and Romans. The theme is a continuing
one. Whether the vessels of Vulchetrun held wine or mead, beer or koumish,
they were part of an aristocratic 'golden age' of alcoholic hospitality.
   The goldwork of the Vulchetrun group would thus represent a metal-
working tradition influenced by the advanced workshop practices of the
Aegean palaces, and perhaps acting as intermediary between these and
the more distant workshops of temperate Europe. Such contacts between
the west Pontic area and Mycenaean Greece did not outlast the Mycenaean
period itself; but they interestingly prefigure the future pattern of Archaic
and Classical Greek colonisation and its introduction of the set of vessels
which were to characterise the second golden age of Thrace, that of
Panagyurishte.


NOTES

1. Vulchetrun is romanised from the village name B'bJIHHTFbH following Venedikov and
   Gerassimov's 1975 English transliteration. Other romanisations in the literature include
   VBLCl TRBN (Ebert), Vulchi Trun (Hoddinott), Valcitran (Matthaus) and V'lci-Tr'n
   (Harding).
2. Observations carried out by T. E Taylor in May 1985 with the permission and guidance
   of the Antiquities department. We would particularly like to thank Prof. Venedikov and
   Dr Lazov for their help.
3. These punch-marks are made by a different tool from those on V3-V5.
4. This inscription is of the King Argishti I who came to the throne in the second quarter of
   the eighth century BC (Piotrovsky 1959, pi. 42). Although not argued in detail here, a re-
   ferral of V7-V13 to an urban and possibly Urartian production context seems to us to be
   reasonable; their incorporation and deposition with a set of locally made antique drinking
   vessels does not seem inherently unlikely. Filov and Kazarov's medieval ascription (cited
   Wilke 1925) is also worthy of consideration in this respect. The incorporation of a chance
   discovery of gold vessels (Vulchetrun A) into a later church treasure (Vulchetrun B) is an
   attractive scenario.
5. These are dissimilar in detail to those on V12 and V13. Both the tool and the technique
   differ.


                                            455




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                  METAL     VESSELS      IN   BRONZE     AGE     EUROPE:

6. None of the finds was excavated scientifically, and important material may have gone
   unrecognised and/or missing.
7. The Troy II treasures form the best source for third-millennium metal vessels in the
   Aegean; the Mycenae Shaft-Graves the best for the second millennium. Both were
   probably typical of both sides of the Aegean in their respective periods and it would
   be a mistake to attribute similarities specifically to either.




                                              456




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                         17
          Troy, Maikop, Altyn Depe:
          Early Bronze Age Urbanism
               and its Periphery
                                     (1991)


T h e early history of the Old World was centred upon the Near East: a
unique conjunction of environments created by the intersection of the Arid
Zone and the chain of recent mountains which runs from the Alps to the
Himalayas. The complex geography of this region, with its intimate mixture
of mountains, deserts and oases, contrasts with the more uniform zones
which surround it - forest, steppe and desert. It was in the Near East that
farming began, that irrigation and plough agriculture developed, and in
which urban civilisation appeared. The northern boundary of this nuclear
zone is interrupted by the Black Sea and the Caspian, so that three land
bridges mark the points of contact between the Near Eastern core area
and the northern zones: western Anatolia, the Caucasus, and Turkmenia.
Anatolia is the point of contact with forested Europe, the Caucasus
overlooks the steppes, and Turkmenia the desert. Each of these has played
a special historical role, on the frontier of Near Eastern farming and
urbanism.
   Three famous sites mark these meeting-points in the fourth and third


This chapter was written for a conference at Novorossiysk, where the northern
flanks of the Caucasus meet the Black Sea, on the subject of the Maikop princely
burials - the easternmost phenomena discussed in Childe's Dawn. Participants
then travelled to St Petersburg to view the material in the Hermitage: thirty-two
surprisingly comfortable hours by train. Culturally; this area forms a bridge be-
tween Greater Mesopotamia and the steppes (just as Troy and Anatolia do with
the Balkans); and it provides an opportunity to relate the well-understood Tripole
sequence of painted pottery styles - perhaps the longest and most finely-divided
such sequence in prehistory - to the uncertainties of the Near Eastern sequence as
urbanism crystallised and colonial contacts were set up for the first time. Thanks
are due to Professor V. M. Masson, the excavator of Altyn Depe, who organised
the conference; and to Dr Roger Moorey, Donald Matthews and Professor Michael
Roaf for their Mesopotamian insights.


                                        457




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       TROY,    MAIKOP,       ALTYN    DEPE:


millennia BC, when urban civilisations first had contacts with their northern
neighbours: Troy, Maikop and Altyn Depe. Each of them marks the edge of
the area of cultural and technological sophistication shown, for instance, by
elite craft production of metal vessels, complex jewellery and lost-wax cast-
ing, or by the production of wheelmade pottery. Beyond them lay simpler
societies - whether in Bulgaria, where precious-metal vessels were imitated
in hand-made pottery by Early Bronze Age farmers, who could reproduce
the new design of bronze axes using two-piece moulds, but not the more
advanced skills of palace metalsmiths; on the Pontic steppes, where
emerging pastoral tribes adopted the use of wheeled vehicles in a distinctive
new culture; or in the deserts of the Kyzyl Kum, where a foraging existence
continued relatively unchanged. At each of these points there was contact
and interaction with northern neighbours: but each marked a boundary.
Each of these sites, therefore, sits on the frontier between socially more
complex societies, with dense local populations already organised in
hierarchical forms and linked by long-distance trade, and an outer periphery
of less complex societies which were still 'tribal' in their organisation,
technology and attitudes to wealth. Each of these sites, moreover, has
provided a unique archaeological treasure-house of urban craft skills, in
the hoards of objects from Troy II, the wealth of the Maikop and
Novosvobodnaya burials, and the priestly quarter of Altyn Depe. Such
frontier sites have therefore revealed aspects of elite culture which are often
unmatched by contemporary sites in the urban heartlands of Mesopotamia.
    From this point of view, therefore, these sites are very similar; but in their
concrete aspects they are very different. Troy is a stronghold destroyed by
fire, preserving its metal finds by chance. Altyn Depe is an urban settlement,
whose wealth was concentrated in its religious complex: a massive mud-
brick temple. Maikop is not even a settlement, but a spectacularly rich
group of tombs, the only deliberate deposit of material wealth. In this
respect it is the first of a long line of 'barbarian' societies which have
flourished on the edges of urban civilisations, and are characterised (like the
Scythians in the same area in the first millennium) by the ostentatious
display of material goods in the context of burial. If these are 'complex
societies', they are all complex in different ways; and by comparing and
contrasting, we can sharpen the concept.


U R B A N CORES AND HIGHLAND PERIPHERIES
The common background to all of these sites, however, was the new scale of
urban production, trade and transport which developed in the fourth and
third millennia BC. The dense mass of consumers in hierarchically organised
societies, concentrated in the alluvial basins and sustained by irrigation
farming, made possible a division of labour in which raw materials were
moved over long distances to supply urban manufacturers and craft centres.

                                        458




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
         EARLY    BRONZE     AGE    URBANISM       AND    ITS   PERIPHERY


River transport was fundamental in moving bulk products, but these
arteries were linked to overland routes (using newly domesticated transport
animals such as the donkey and camel) which could carry high-value
materials over long distances.
   In the fourth millennium the urban heartlands were confined to a
relatively restricted area of Sumer and Elam, but in the third millennium
a number of different core areas appeared, with competition for access
to routes and resources. The fourth-millennium situation is especially
interesting, however, since there are fewer analogies for this situation in later
history: a single dominant core area with long feeder routes reaching widely
into surrounding territories. During this time (Late Uruk), a set of colonies
(like Habuba Kabira and Jebel Aruda on the Euphrates in Syria) were
established on the main riverine transport routes at points where they
articulated with overland routes reaching deep into the highlands (Algaze
 1989). The ramifications spread out as far as the Levant (perceptible in
Gerzean Egypt, the Nagada II period), and also in eastern Anatolia, for
instance in the Keban region (Frangipane et al. 1993). Another linked
region, with evidence of writing, seals and trading activity, was Godin Tepe
in Kermanshah on the Hamadan route to the plateau, and so to the Anarak
copper sources and lapis lazuli supplies from Badakhshan (Young 1986).
This is a truly vast area, already interacting over almost the whole range of
the Bronze Age world system: but it was a relatively simple structure with
only one major core area, albeit divided into many independent political
units.
   By the early third millennium, the proto-Elamite area centred on Susa
was already competing, and controlling not only the Zagros but a further
set of overland routes across the Persian Plateau, with tablets in its own
writing system from Hissar, Tepe Yahya and Shah-i-Sokhta. These areas
developed their own manufacturing capacity, in lapis lazuli, chlorite and
steatite; and it was in this context that sites like Altyn Depe achieved
prominence perhaps as a supplier of turquoise. Sumer in the Early Dynastic
period received these materials and products by, sea along the Gulf, and
obtained its copper from Oman. By the mid-third millennium, new polities
were also developing on the western supply routes at key points such as
Ebla, with their own hinterlands in Anatolia (at sites like the yet unlocated
Purushanda). This demand led to the development of urban centres in
Anatolia, as far west as the Aegean coasts. Akkadian Mesopotamia con-
tinued to look west - in the famous campaigns to Cedar Forest and Silver
Mountain - and also by sea to the newer civilisation of the Indus, which
channelled highland materials through its own territory (Marfoe 1987).
These maritime links became increasingly important, and at the end of the
third millennium led to the renewed importance of southern Mesopotamia
in the Ur III period. Such, in crude outline (Figure 18.1), is the economic
history of the period under consideration.


                                        459




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
           4000 - 3500 BC         ^       /       1           ^                           3500-3000 BC                      /         )                   ^
           T                .           /^v      i        J \             THE FORMATION                                     7            lfm                  —COLONIAL EXPANSION
                                                                                     >> P,p 8 '»».s                              N. t<^      \       | T         IN MESOPOTAMIA
                    \      P               ^ v            1   i            °F A C O R E




                                                                                                                                                                                            H
                                                                                                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                                                                            *

           3000 - 2500 BC                             ^       ^                 2500 - 2000BC                      K       , /           >                ^                                 2
               v.                       J L/     \)               —EXPANSION ON THE                                                                                                         >
                    Y'-»        »'««/                     f >                     V.
                                                                      PERSIAN PLATEAU                                       y         \                  fU   —      MARITIME LINKS:
                                                                                         c.ucomb^B'K"                  J            yWv              r             FJ?0A# m£ DANUBE         *
                                                                                        \**r                                      VP . ?             1/           \ TO THE INDUS            o
o\
©                                                                                                                                                                                           >
                                                                                                                                                                                            r1
                                                                                          «;                                         {           \                       (HX                *H
                                                                                                             V
                                                                                                    (imuittn j \                                                         1 (CIVILIZATION]   z
                                                                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                                                                       uf                   m
                                                                                                                                                                                            M




     18.1 Summary maps of Near Eastern culture history by successive half-millennia, 4000-2000 BC: (a) early fourth millennium -
     regional integration; (b) later fourth millennium - first cities and Uruk colonial settlements; (c) early third millennium - colonial
     settlements on the Iranian plateau, and expansion of Transcaucasian influence; (d) proliferation of secondary states and their
     temporary incorporation in the Akkadian Empire (clusters of secondary states in the Levant and central Anatolia labelled after
     the military propaganda of Sargon of Agade!). Boundaries are schematic.
         EARLY   BRONZE      AGE   URBANISM        AND   ITS   PERIPHERY


   Where, then, do our sites fit into it? At the western end, the spectacular
finds at Troy belong to the later third millennium, when Syria was an
important consuming area in its own right. Out east, the high point of
Turkmenian prosperity was the urban period of Namazga V in the later
third millennium, when it was also part of a network of secondary states
including Harappan India. What about Maikop?


T H E CONTEXT OF MAIKOP
The traditional dating of the Maikop complex, suggested by lessen, placed
it c.2500-2400 BC, at a time which would broadly correspond to the
context of Troy II and Altyn Depe, and thus to a developed stage of the
Near Eastern economic system. This would provide some obvious analogies
for vessels of precious metal, which are known from sites in Iran and
Afghanistan. An obvious starting point for such comparisons is the
Asterabad treasure, discovered in the 1840s at the site now known as
Tureng Tepe on the south-east Caspian (published in the English journal
Archaeologia in 1844 and never seen since), which contained not only silver
and gold vessels but also copper objects such as a transverse axe-adze,
bident, and poker-butt spearhead with analogies in the Maikop complex.
The assemblage also contained objects like an alabaster vase (known from
examples in sites like Shahdad), metalwork such as 'trumpets' and spouted
jars like those from the hill of treasures in Tepe Hissar III, and an icon-
ography on the metal vessels which would connect them with later third-
millennium products of Bactrian or neo-Sumerian workshops. Other similar
'treasures' have appeared in recent years: the Kosh Tepe/Fullol hoard, re-
covered in Kabul market, with metal vases decorated with Namazga V
motifs; the Quetta hoard, again with precious metal vessels, a bull's head
like Altyn Depe, and again the alabaster vessels like Shahdad. All of these
are closely related to the intensive trade in lapis lazuli across the Persian
Plateau (Maxwell-Hyslop 1982; Amiet 1986). The date of these various
hoards seems to cluster in the Ur III period, shortly before 2000 BC. At first
glance, therefore, it is tempting to relate the florescence of Maikop to an
advanced stage of Near Eastern economic development, roughly coeval with
Altyn Depe and slightly later than Troy II.
    However, as Andreeva has already indicated (1977; 1979), the Maikop
finds do not belong to this period. The best analogies for the most distinctive
features, the iconography of the silver vessels and the gold bull figures, are
to be found in the art of the Late Uruk period, at least a millennium earlier.
(See Figure 18.2 and accompanying note.) This would also agree with other
evidence: ceramic parallels in the F phase of the Amuq sequence, the hoard
of poker-butt spearheads (and solid-hilted swords) recovered from level VI A
at Arslantepe near Malatya (Frangipane and Palmieri 1983), as well as the
parallels for the Krasnogvardeskoe cylinder-seal (Nekhaev 1986) in Late


                                       461




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
18.2 Comparative cultural and stratigraphic sequences from east-central Europe, the steppes, the Caucasus and Greater Mesopotamia, on
a calibrated radiocarbon timescale. Note that the Gawra sequence might be relatively older than indicated here (M. Roaf, pers. comm.).
The relative sequences in the Balkan, steppe, Caucasian and Near Eastern regions have been plotted according to a calibrated radiocarbon
chronology. Individual sequences have been compiled, with minor modifications, from Dergachev and Manzura, Trifonov, and Vertesalji,
to whom I should record my thanks and apologies. (Note that other interpretations of the Gawra sequence would place it earlier, taking
levels XII and below back to cUbaid.) The aim of the exercise is to demonstrate that accepted parallelisms are perfectly compatible with
a calibrated radiocarbon chronology, provided it is consistently applied. Traditional chronologies for the Near East have been based on
historical sources for the third millennium, with speculative dates for earlier units such as Jemdet Nasr and Uruk. However, it is now in-
creasingly recognised (Algaze 1989; Hassan and Robinson 1987; Nissen 1987; Oates 1987; Vertesalji 1987; 1988; Young 1986; Weiss
1986) that these periods can only be dated by radiocarbon, and that such dates - fewer in number than for comparable phases in pre-
historic Europe - require calibration. One implication of this is the much greater length of time required for Uruk: dates even for terminal
c
  Ubaid indicate that this period lasts only into the mid-fifth millennium. Early Uruk may well begin before 4000 BC; Late Uruk before
3500 BC. Many more samples are required to make these estimates more precise. Nevertheless, there is no conflict between these dates and
calibrated radiocarbon dating of the Tripole-Cucuteni sequence; and the Caucasian cultures fit well between the two. What is perhaps
alarming are the great spans of time now occupied by these units, and how limited is our sample of archaeological material from this time;
but this is a fact which must now be faced.
                      TROY,    MAIKOP,        ALTYN    DEPE:


Uruk cylinder seals (though probably not with the stamp-seals with similar
motifs from Tepe Gawra, which are probably rather older). These indi-
cations are unanimous in placing the Maikop complex in a much earlier
cultural context, and thus in the formative initial phase of Near Eastern
urban economies and trading networks - a conclusion that was already
hinted at in 1920 by Rostovtzeff.
   The absence of comparable metal vessels from Mesopotamia itself at this
period can be attributed to the lack of aristocratic tombs before the Royal
Cemetery at Ur in the Early Dynastic III period. For this reason there are no
vessels of precious metal which can provide a direct comparison, although
the rich iconography of contemporary seals and sealings provides a wealth
of detailed analogies. In this respect, the situation closely resembles that
of the Scythian tombs three millennia later, which have yielded examples of
craftsmanship in precious metal which are unknown from classical Greece
itself. Nevertheless, there are many points of comparison between the
Maikop vessels and Late Uruk representational art as preserved especially
on seals and on other objects of stone: animal scenes without human figures,
especially rows of beasts, sometimes with mixtures of different species. In
matters of detail, it is easy to find points of comparison for bulls, lions,
boars, caprids, vegetation; and the style and treatment are closely similar,
e.g. the bulls' horns, tails and hooves, and the pig's bifurcate tail (Figure
18.3). As well as metropolitan examples, we can find good comparisons on
impressions and sealings from the 'colonial' sites such as Habuba Kabira
and Godin Tepe. Nevertheless, the mountains on the Maikop vessels, and
the portrayal of horses, argue against the importation of these vessels from
Mesopotamia, and indicate the existence of local workshops (either in the
northern Caucasus or perhaps Transcaucasia) which were capable of
producing such advanced craft metalwork, and absorbing elements of
metropolitan iconography (and perhaps of religious belief).
   This conclusion is of major historical importance, both in the pattern of
inter-regional connections and in the social and cultural history of the
period: for Maikop appears as the world's first 'barbarian' society, generated
on the fringe of the area of initial urban expansion, and preserving in its
ostentatious tombs a sample of the kind of elite equipment so far unknown
from the urban heartlands at this time. The Caucasus was involved right
from the beginning in the process of urban expansion in the Uruk period
and the social changes consequent upon it. Moreover, the mountain chief-
doms of the northern Caucasus played an important role in transmitting
elements of culture and technology to the steppe region, leading to the
genesis of the Pit-Grave complex which fundamentally affected societies
further west. The Maikop region thus forms a crucial link between the
historical events of the Near East and the slower transformation of pre-
historic Europe.
   The concentration of rich tombs in a relatively limited period confirms

                                        464




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                    10                                       11
18.3 The Maikop style and its Uruk background: (1) and (2), transcribed scenes
from the two figured silver vessels from the Maikop royal tomb; (3)-(ll), icon-
ological analogies in greater Mesopotamia. These include both Late Uruk sealings
from 'colonial' sites - (3) Nineveh, (4) Habuba Kabira, (S)-(9) Godin Tepe - and
also later parallels (10) and (11) on a silver vessel from Early Dynastic Ur (after
Rostovtseff, Collon, Young, Muller-Karpe).

                                         465




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      TROY,     MAIKOP,      ALTYN     DEPE:


the impression that these political developments were a temporary phase in
the historical situation, and the absence of tin alloys in this region in the
third millennium (when they had come into widespread use in the Near
East) suggests that no long-term economic articulation took place. The
picture that emerges, therefore, is of the Caucasus as a peripheral region
rather suddenly penetrated by outside influences - most probably motivated
by the desire for precious metals - and not thereafter closely involved in the
international trading system which grew up and circulated high-value
materials such as lapis lazuli and precious metals among the major urban
centres of the Bronze Age world. Like the Shaft-Graves of Mycenae, it had
a burst of imported wealth; but unlike them, it did not develop into a
palatial bureaucracy.


DIFFERENT SORTS OF PERIPHERY: DEFINITIONS
AND COMPARISONS
The terms 'core' and 'periphery' can be used in a variety of situations. In
a very general way, we may contrast the Neolithic societies of south-east
Europe using painted pottery with the simpler Neolithic societies of the
north-west, which were both later in adopting agriculture and simpler in
their economic organisation. In this sense, Europe had an 'inner' and an
'outer' zonation from the beginning. On the other hand, in describing the
industrial world, economic historians use the words in a more technical
sense, to contrast manufacturing areas with suppliers of food or raw
materials. Here there is a structural relationship between the two areas,
which are inter-dependent zones of the same economic system (Kohl 1989).
What sort of contrasts can we draw for the Ancient World?
   It is clear that certain elements of advanced technology were able to
spread from the urban area of the Bronze Age world into agrarian societies
beyond: wheeled vehicles are the classic example, as well as alloyed copper
metallurgy with the use of the bivalve mould. On the other hand certain
advanced technologies remained limited to urban contexts: either because
their production needed craft skills, like the metal vessels and jewellery of
the Troy treasure, or because they represented economies of scale - for
instance the use of the potters' wheel in the mass production of ceramics.
Technologies which required large investments, such as the construction of
sailing ships, or the production of oil and wine on a large scale, were
therefore restricted to urban economies. Other features which distinguished
'urban' from 'barbarian' economies were the use of precious metals as a
medium of exchange in standardised equivalents, as opposed to the
circulation of copper artefacts and their dedication in votive hoards. Only
the more advanced economies were capable of organising long-distance
trade for the purpose of sustaining manufacturing industries.
  Within the Near Eastern zone, a characteristic sequence can be recog-

                                       466




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
         EARLY    BRONZE      AGE    URBANISM       AND    ITS   PERIPHERY


nised in which areas that were at first only important as suppliers of raw
materials to the urban heartlands developed their own social hierarchies,
belief-systems and manufacturing capacity, to become independent core
areas or 'secondary states'. Syria or highland Iran are good examples of this
process. The formation of such secondary cores required certain pre-
conditions, such as an appropriate position within the network of economic
relations, access to raw materials for manufacture, and outlets through
adequate transport systems to export their goods. The Aegean demonstrates
a process of increasing integration with such an international system during
the Bronze Age, when it was successively promoted from being a supplier
of silver to an independent producer of textiles, wine and olive oil in bulk
shipments from the Cretan and Greek mainland palaces to the east
Mediterranean.
    In Balkan and Carpathian Europe, however, this economic linkage did
not occur. The impact of Early Bronze Age craft centres in western Anatolia
can be traced in the Baden, Cernavoda III and Ezero cultures, where it is
especially marked in the pottery, which has new, 'Anatolian' types such as
drinking vessels in metallic shapes. These new features are found, together
with paired cattle or representations of wheeled vehicles, in 'elite' graves
in cemeteries such as Budakalasz or Alsonemedi. A selective integration
of exotic features formed the basis of an economically independent Late
Copper Age/Bronze Age culture. This contrasts with the Aegean during the
same period, where very specific supply routes, probably related to silver,
replicated Anatolian complexity on a small scale on the opposite side of the
Aegean: sites like Lerna, with bastion fortifications, central buildings, craft
workshops, seals, and soon with wheelmade pottery. The Aegean became
proto-urban, climaxing in the Minoan palaces and secondary state
formation.
    By way of complete contrast, we may turn to Bronze Age Turkmenia with
its highly urban, irrigation-based, temple centres like Altyn Depe (Masson
1976), which had continuing economic relations with neighbouring
Kel'teminar groups in the Kyzyl Kum, where (as Vinogradov's work has
shown: Tosi 1974) turquoise was actually mined and traded southwards.
What is striking in this case is the lack even of any cultural influence on a
neighbouring supply area at a much lower level of economic and cultural
development: Kel'teminar remained a dispersed hunting and foraging
economy, collecting and mining the turquoise on a seasonal basis. One is
reminded of the south-east Asian forest hunters who supplied camphor to
the Chinese in the historic period. There was no cultural convergence
between urban economies and their suppliers, as there was on the north-
west frontier of Bronze Age urbanism; when Kel'teminar populations were
ultimately subsumed into a wider cultural grouping, it was with the ex-
panding Andronovo culture complex of the steppes (Tazabag'yab variant)
rather than by being incorporated in the urban networks of the south.


                                        467




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       TROY,    MAIKOP,       ALTYN    DEPE:




18.4 Map of the major cultural regions in the later fourth millennium BC: (A) Late
Uruk (plotted from the distribution of bevel-rim bowls); (B) the Kura-Arax culture
(after Munchaev); (C) the Maikop complex; (D) the central Anatolian EBA culture
area (after Mellaart).

T H E ROLE OF THE CAUCASUS IN THE
EARLY BRONZE AGE
Having surveyed both its historical context and some comparative
examples, we may now return to consider the nature of the Maikop
phenomenon. It is no surprise that major new developments should occur
at the time of Late Uruk expansion, with trade networks which were
capable of moving high-value materials like lapis lazuli from Badakhshan to
Egypt, and feeding the growing economies of lowland Mesopotamia. The
founding of deliberate colonial settlements on the upper Euphrates and the
Great Khorasan Road is reflected in the occurrence of typical Late Uruk
bevel-rim bowls both in the Keban region (Arslantepe, Tepecik: Frangipane
and Palmieri 1983) and in north-west Iran (Tepe Qabrestan). Both routes
gave access to Transcaucasia, either via Erzurum or through Azerbaizhan.
Discoveries by I. G. Narimanov at Leila Tepe on the Karabagh steppe may
demonstrate the importance of the latter route (Kohl in Algaze 1989, 593);
though both are likely to have been important in the introduction of new
technologies and ideas. (See Figure 18.4.)
   The result of these contacts was to transform the Eneolithic cultures of
Transcaucasia into a successful and independent bloc of highland peoples,
the Kura-Arax culture, which resisted incorporation into lowland polities
but absorbed many of the characteristics of contemporary urban civi-


                                        468




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
         EARLY    BRONZE     AGE    URBANISM       AND    ITS   PERIPHERY


lisation. The prominence of wheeled vehicles in the archaeological record of
this and neighbouring areas suggests that animal traction and the adoption
of plough agriculture was the subsistence basis for this florescence; the
elaboration of domestic hearth structures and the absence of specialised
temple buildings suggests that this did not reproduce a classic, lowland
'urban' pattern; but the occurrence of advanced metallurgy and wheelmade
pottery argues for some degree of economic specialisation and elite culture.
The richness of metal sources in this area offers an explanation for the
wealth of the region, as well as its role in the exchange of domestic animals
and plants which was a feature of this period (horse, donkey, Pcamel, vine).
Difficulties of transport prevented this area from following a comparable
path of development to that which took place in the Aegean, or even in
central Anatolia; a powerful state did not develop until the first millennium
(Urartu), although the Kura-Arax culture did spread during the later part of
the Early Bronze Age into both highland Iran and down to the Levant
(Khirbet Kerak complex) - perhaps in part as a result of the breakdown of
more complex economic and social organisation in those regions.
    There is abundant evidence of the penetration at an early stage of
elements of Kura-Arax culture through the main passes in the Great
Caucasus into the upper Terek headwaters from its northern focus in the
Kvemo Kartli area. The ecological contrast between the northern and
southern slopes would have provided an incentive for the exchange of local
products (e.g. horses: see Chapter 7). This penetration must be accounted
the primary stimulus in the transformation of north Caucasian Eneolithic
groups, and the consequent spread of advanced features from the south.
However, the settlement pattern and social organisation of this region
started from a completely different base, since local groups formed part of
the Circumpontic steppe network with links to Eneolithic cultures on the
Volga, Don and Dnepr. A basic feature of this region was the elaboration of
funerary monuments rather than settlement sites as focal points in the social
landscape - a common feature of the breakup of the primary Neolithic
village community in many areas of Europe at this time. The feature which
distinguishes the Maikop complex, therefore, is the occurrence of elements
of elite culture in kurgan burials, which are especially richly furnished in the
Kuban region with its metal sources and wide steppe hinterland. Its location
allowed it to absorb features of ultimately urban origin, and to develop its
own leading position in relation to steppe neighbours. This provided both
a channel whereby metallurgy and animal traction was transmitted north-
wards, and provided a model for emerging steppe elites.
   The northern Caucasus thus maintained its independence from the Kura-
Arax bloc to the south, and became instead an independent core area in
relation to the steppes. One reason for this is the plentiful occurrence of
a variety of metal sources in the southern Caucasus: there was no incentive
for southern traders to penetrate further to gain additional supplies in the


                                        469




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      TROY,    MAIKOP,       ALTYN     DEPE:


north Caucasus (while horses came to be supplied from the western end
of the Black Sea: see Chapter 7). Instead, Caucasian metal replaced Balkan-
Carpathian metal supplies in the steppe region, and the Caucasian copper-
working tradition (using two-piece moulds and arsenical alloying) exerted a
technological influence on the development of south-east European metal-
working across a chain of steppe cultures (Chernykh 1983). Until this time,
the northern Caucasus was effectively part of the steppe zone of prehistoric
Europe. Its culture, in the Early and Middle Bronze Age, is characterised by
the elaboration of specific cultural features, such as metal or stone battle
axes, hammer-head pins and dress ornaments, smoking rituals (perhaps in-
volving cannabis, burnt in a kurilnitsa) and wagon burials in kurgans, which
link the northern Caucasus and the steppes into a single cultural zone, and
differentiate it from Transcaucasia.
   The early part of this transformation coincided with the arrival of
Anatolian influence in south-east Europe, and the emergence of the Ezero-
Cernavoda III-Boleraz complex, which independently introduced wheeled
vehicles and metal-influenced pottery drinking-vessels to this region. At the
same time the Tripole culture, maintaining a more traditional culture, broke
up into regional groupings under the influence of its neighbours. These
developments are discussed in other chapters in this volume: but these
western groups also contributed to the emerging steppe complex, before
being in turn influenced by the spread of the Pit-Grave culture. Some aspects
of these interchanges may have been important in the differentiation of the
Novosvobodnaya group, although parallel causes (such as the influence of
metal types on dark burnished pottery) and local traditions (cist burial)
should not be neglected.
   The Maikop phenomenon, therefore, marks a crucial formative stage in
the emergence of an independent northern focus and way of life. It indicates
an early impact from the south, and an important role in transmitting
secondary farming to the steppes, and it is the beginning of a metallurgical
tradition which was to act as a model for the Balkans and the Urals. It may
also have been an intermediary in providing northern special products to its
southern neighbours, just as Scandinavia was linked to central Germany
from the Bronze Age to the Roman period; but it was never an integral part
of Near Eastern trading networks on a large scale. It was not, therefore, to
be a focus of political development or a proto-state. No doubt the northern
Caucasus, with its variety of metal sources, was to be as diverse ethnically
and politically in prehistory as it has been in more recent times. Complex,
yes: but not a complex society in the sense of Troy or Altyn Depe.




                                       470




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                         17
 The Archaeology of Indo-European:
        An Alternative View
                     (with E. S. Sherratt)
                                     (1988)

T h e study of linguistic prehistory is an important but inherently frustrating
exercise: linguistic evidence is by definition the product of later, literate
cultures, while languages have no direct correlates in the record of pre-
historic archaeology. Any attempt at writing the prehistory of languages
must therefore attempt to build a bridge between the detailed, technical
reconstruction of linguistic relationships on the one hand and more general-
ised, archaeologically-based models of cultural change on the other. By
extrapolating each of these incomplete sources of evidence onto a problem
of common interest, we may hope to define patterns which are compatible
both with linguistic and archaeological arguments.
   In conducting such an exercise, however, the properties of the different
types of evidence have to be borne firmly in mind. There are unlikely to be
any simple equations between the entities used by linguists and pre-
historians, not least because of the differences in timescale involved. The
advantage of archaeology is that it can range much further backwards in
time to address questions not yet asked by linguists; while linguistic


Before 1987, it was commonly assumed that Indo-European languages had spread',
perhaps by small migrations, around 3000 BC; most prehistoric archaeologists
simply avoided the problem. In 1987-8, they spoke of little else. The book which
broke the silence, and which put what Jim Mallory called 'a pigeon among the
cats', was Colin Renfrew's Language and Archaeology with its assertion that the
Neolithic colonists of Europe spoke (proto-)Indo-European languages. The
authors of this piece had respectively reviewed this volume and Jim Mallory's
In Search of the Indo-Europeans (AGS in Current Anthropology 1988; ESS in
Antiquaries Journal 1989), and together wrote this alternative scenario for an
Antiquity special section. Both authors agree on the importance of socio-linguistic
models of convergence; ESS (as a trained linguist) is perhaps more sceptical as to
whether the question of Tndo-European origins' is a scientifically soluble problem
or a myth of Romantic-period Europe.


                                        471




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                THE   ARCHAEOLOGY          OF   INDO-EUROPEAN:


arguments may force on the attention of archaeologists some features of
later periods which prehistorians are prone to ignore.
   Thus archaeologists may justifiably point out that the 'billiard ball'
model used for instance by Gamkrelidze and Ivanov (1985b), which
assumes that early Indo-European languages were originally placed in a
tight cluster that was then scattered across the map to their present
positions, is incompatible with a modern view of European prehistory
which sees large, stable cultural groupings evolving in situ for many
millennia. On the other hand, such phylogenetic models derived from
linguistic comparison cannot simply be scaled up by archaeologists to cover
a greater time depth, since the very definition of a proto-Indo-European
entity is based on surviving languages and historical evidence and may only
be valid for a relatively late point in time.
   This short chapter, stimulated by Colin Renfrew's pioneering essay
in relating modern archaeology to linguistics (1987), attempts to define
possible phases in the evolution of Indo-European, and to suggest models
appropriate to the different stages of this process.

Since we can only know languages which were spoken in recent times or
which were written down by already complex societies, it is clear that much
of the previously existing diversity of languages must be missing from our
sample. This includes not only entire language-groups overlaid by dispersals
such as that of Indo-European, but also languages within Indo-European (or
even whole branches of it) which have not been written down or given rise
to living successors. In addition, the time-depth for which relationships can
be reconstructed from surviving and historically documented languages
must have a limit. As languages drift apart and differentiate from a common
ancestor, they must inevitably pass a point beyond which their common
origin is no longer evident in terms of their taxonomic similarity (either
lexical or structural) or in regular phonetic and semantic correspondences.
Because of the absence of a 'fossil record', the relationships which are easiest
to reconstruct from comparative study of surviving specimens are those
resulting from relatively recent divergence. For both these reasons, language
trees may be misleading models with which to approach 'deep' prehistory,
since they inevitably give prominence to the products of recent differ-
entiation and dispersal at the expense of older events.
   A further problem is that the process of linguistic reconstruction,
focusing back on postulated common ancestral forms, inevitably produces
a model that emphasises divergence as the principal form of language
change - even though convergence may be an equally common
phenomenon. It would be misleading, therefore, to see the 'family tree'
structure as any simple representation of the historical process: it can only
be a partial model. It could be argued that convergence, by processes such
as pidginisation or creolisation, would become an increasingly important


                                         472




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                           AN   ALTERNATIVE         VIEW


feature of language change in the historical circumstances of increasing
inter-regional trade which characterises the Bronze Age.
   All these points can be summarised in the observation that linguistic
comparison is intended to throw light on the relationships between known
languages; it cannot reconstruct the totality of an earlier linguistic situation,
and in any case linguistic relationships differentially preserve more in-
formation about recent events than more ancient ones. These points have
long been recognised by linguists (e.g. Robins 1964, 323).
   Archaeology has the advantage of being able to work forwards rather
than backwards. We can therefore set out certain expectations about the
long-term context of linguistic change, and see at what point they meet the
retrospective models produced by linguistic comparison.
   The emergence of relatively discrete linguistic communities may well be
a fairly recent feature of human evolution, perhaps specifically associated
with Homo sapiens sapiens; though even Upper Palaeolithic 'languages'
may rather have taken the form of open dialectal chains in which each com-
munity could understand the speech of its near neighbours but not more
distant ones. The beginning of farming is likely to have had a significant
effect on the form of linguistic patterning, as a more dense network of
sedentary communities gave rise to more circumscribed language groups
than were previously prevalent. It is therefore at this point that the develop-
ment of distinct language families of the sort known in historic times is most
likely to have taken place.1
   The patterns of language distribution resulting from the spread of farm-
ing would then have depended on the balance between two processes:
'demic diffusion' and indigenous adoption. At one extreme, where the
spread of farming was associated with the expansion of a particular popu-
lation group, a pattern of linguistic dispersal would result - an initially more
uniform pattern, breaking down with time into more differentiated but
related languages. At the other extreme, however, where farming spread
through its adoption by existing native populations, no transfer of language
need have been involved. A pattern of increased diversity, resulting from the
crystallisation of local dialects into separate languages, might be expected.2
   The pattern of uniform linguistic dispersal would have predominated
wherever farming carried human populations into new environments; either
empty areas (as in the Pacific) or into new zones within already occupied
areas (as in western Asia and sub-Saharan Africa). Such a pattern could also
be generated by secondary expansions associated with the spread of special-
ised forms of farming into hitherto under-utilised environments, such as
pastoralism (as in central Asia or North Africa).
   After the establishment of farming populations, regional patterns would
again have depended on the balance between opposing tendencies: the
continuing differentiation following initial dispersal, and integration
resulting from the needs of trade and political expansion. The patterns of


                                        473




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                THE   ARCHAEOLOGY          OF   INDO-EUROPEAN:


phylogenetic relationship deduced from linguistic comparison could in
theory relate to any of the mechanisms which produced uniformity followed
by differentiation; though in practice it is the latest one which is likely to
produce the dominant surviving pattern in a given region.

We may now attempt to apply these arguments to prehistoric Europe. Here
both modes of agricultural spread seem to be represented: demic diffusion
by the Balkan Neolithic and its central European Bandkeramik extension;
the adoption of farming by the west Mediterranean Cardial Ware group and
most of the cultures in Atlantic Europe and the North European Plain. In
the light of the principles discussed above, and by analogy with the ethno-
graphic examples, there would have been considerable continuity in western
and northern Europe; while the spread of early farmers belonging to the
Bandkeramik complex in central Europe could well have been associated
with a 'Polynesian' pattern of initial linguistic uniformity, followed by frag-
mentation. These central European Neolithic languages are likely to have
belonged to a larger family, including for instance the contemporary
languages spoken in the Balkans and Anatolia.
    However, given the early date of the agricultural dispersal in Europe, it is
most unlikely that this language group would have survived in recognisable
form down to historical times, and the resemblance between any surviving
members of this group would be radically different from the very specific
correspondences between existing languages of the Indo-European group.
There is thus no reason to equate the initial spread of farming with the
phenomenon reconstructed by linguists on the basis of comparisons be-
tween them, and indeed there are specific reasons why this is improbable.3
This does not rule out some deeper affinity between Neolithic Balkan
languages and historical Indo-European ones (cf. Diakonov 1985): but it
implies that there are other events which must be invoked in order to explain
the historical pattern of languages - there is no simple answer to the puzzle.
    At the other end of the prehistoric timescale, however, there are some
very plausible correspondences which can be postulated (e.g. Clarke 1965,
fig. 73) between the expansion of members of the Late Bronze Age 'Urnfield'
group (c.1400-700 BC) and the spread of Italic and Celtic languages (and
others which have not survived as spoken languages). This would imply the
continuing existence at this time in western Europe of other language
groups: perhaps the descendants of indigenous (non-Indo-European) Meso-
lithic and western Neolithic languages, or perhaps branches of Indo-
European now extinct. Yet such a late extension of the Indo-European area
into western Europe could only have been the final stage of the story: Indo-
European languages are known to have been spoken in Anatolia at least a
thousand years earlier, and there must have been important intervening
steps in the spread of this group, perhaps associated with the massive east-
wards expansion which carried Indo-European languages to India. It is im-


                                        474




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                           AN   ALTERNATIVE         VIEW


portant, therefore, to look more closely at eastern Europe and the role of the
steppes.
    The farming systems of the early Neolithic were very limited in character
by comparison with those of later prehistory: cultivation systems were based
on the hoe rather than the plough, animals were exploited primarily for
meat rather than for secondary products, and transport animals and the
 associated technology of wheeled vehicles were not yet used (see Section III).
The extent to which dry areas could be utilised was thus severely limited.
During the fourth and third millennia BC, however, a second generation of
farming technologies appeared in the Near East and surrounding areas,
leading to greater opportunities for mobile forms of exploitation such as
pastoralism. This revolutionised the scope of farming economies in western
Eurasia, and provides an economic context for a post-Neolithic spread of
Indo-European languages.
    This is most evident in the east, where an important consequence of these
innovations was the extensive occupation of the Eurasian steppe and semi-
desert areas, using horses, camels and vehicles as well as new breeds of
wool-bearing sheep and perhaps also the light plough. Although this must
not be confused with the emergence of true nomadic pastoralism, which was
a feature of the first millennium BC, it resulted in an eastwards movement
of population across the central Asian steppes, and links as far as China
(reflected in the transmission of wheeled vehicles) by the second millennium
BC. This infilling of the steppe zone (represented archaeologically by the
spread of the Pit-Grave and Andronovo cultures of the third and second
millennia BC) can be associated primarily with the spread of eastern Indo-
European languages - the Indo-Iranian or 'Aryan' group which gave the
Indo-European family as a whole its impressive territorial extent.4
    During the later first millennium BC, however, this eastwards pattern of
flow was reversed, as groups speaking Turco-Tartar languages spread west-
wards to take over the steppe areas previously dominated by Indo-
Europeans. This historical picture has lent plausibility to the idea that the
steppes were the original homeland of common Indo-European, and thus
the source of western (i.e. European) as well as eastern Indo-European
languages.
   This idea, which has a long history in Romantic conceptions of pre-
history (Bernal 1987, chapter 5), has been given its clearest archaeological
expression in recent times by Marija Gimbutas (e.g. 1961, map 9) who sees
a westwards incursion of proto-Indo-Europeans from a homeland beyond
the Volga as the beginning of the process of expansion across the Pontic
Steppes and into Europe.
   A modified version of this idea, based on the importance of the horse and
its domestication by fourth-millennium groups north of the Black Sea
(Mallory 1976; 1977; Telegin 1986; Anthony 1986), offers an intermediate
position. This envisages a spread of Indo-European languages both east and


                                       475




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                THE   ARCHAEOLOGY          OF   INDO-EUROPEAN:


west from the North Pontic area, associated with the spread of the horse.
It is not clear, however, whether this offers an adequate explanation for the
appearance of Indo-European languages in Greece, and in Anatolia where
Indo-European languages are first evidenced. Since the economic changes of
the fourth millennium affected a much wider area of the Old World, it may
well be that the steppes provide an important component of the story, but
not the whole answer.
    The earliest recorded Indo-European languages are the second-
millennium Anatolian ones, Hittite, Luwian and Palaic.5 These form a
separate sub-group within the Indo-European family which may have a
collateral rather than directly ancestral relationship with other branches of
Indo-European, and is not easily derived from these other groups. The
already differentiated nature of these three recorded languages implies some
greater time-depth to the existence of this group, and Gamkrelidze and
Ivanov (1985a, 14) have adduced technical arguments such as correspon-
dences with neighbouring Semitic and Kartvelian (Caucasian) languages to
argue for a long-standing geographical proximity. They thus argue that
Anatolia itself should be considered as a primary part of the Indo-European
area: though they are reduced to some implausible long-distance folk move-
ments around the Aral Sea in order to relate the Anatolian languages to
other members of the Indo-European family.
    While there is no necessary reason why Indo-European languages should
be earliest in the area where they were first recorded (since this relates to the
spread of writing systems from Mesopotamia), it would be wrong to over-
look the possibility that this may, indeed, be the case. Given the important
role which Anatolia has played in relation to adjacent areas of south-east
Europe, Colin Renfrew is right to explore the significance of this area in the
origin of Indo-European languages as a whole (Renfrew 1987). While the
evidence of Hattic suggests that their presence in eastern Anatolia does not
long predate the second millennium, it is entirely possible that western and
central Anatolia may have formed part of the early area of distribution of
ancestral Indo-European.

We are thus presented with not one but several puzzles, converging on the
area around the Black Sea: Anatolia, the Balkans and the Pontic Steppes.
Was Anatolia the centre of ancestral Indo-European languages? What was
the relationship between these and the languages of the Balkan Neolithic?
What relationship did they have with the languages which spread eastwards
across the steppes in the third millennium? At what point can one postu-
late the unity of Indo-European speech reconstructed by comparative
linguistics?
   It is important at this stage to go beyond conventional definitions in order
to provide a common vocabulary between linguists and archaeologists.
Within a historical timescale we are justified in speaking of Indo-European


                                        476




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                           AN   ALTERNATIVE         VIEW


languages. Moving into later prehistory, we may adopt the linguists'
convention of using an asterisk to indicate reconstructed forms based on
rules derived from surviving evidence: hence *proto-Indo-European (*PIE)
to describe the common language reconstructed as underlying known
examples of the family. Moving further back in time, one can postulate an
ancestral language or group of languages which ultimately gave rise to *PIE
and its successors (and no doubt to others now extinct). Although beyond
the limits of reconstruction, its existence is a logical necessity; and we may
recognise its hypothetical status by a double asterisk - hence **pre-proto-
Indo-European (* * PPIE ).
   We can now reformulate our questions in terms of a series of stages.
Where did **PPIE emerge, and what was its connection with the origins of
farming; where did *PIE appear, and what was responsible for its dispersal;
and when did IE languages finally attain their present limits of distribution?
   It would clearly be optimistic to attempt to answer even one of these, but
there may be some advantage to tackling the group of questions as a whole.
The solutions proposed below represent a scenario (or, if you like, a 'just so'
story) of how the various components may fit together. They are presented
in the form of three hypotheses.

1. The nuclear region of western Old World farming, the Near East, was
large and internally diverse; and it gave rise to population expansion in
several directions (Sherratt 1980, fig. 15.5). It is unlikely, therefore, that this
dispersal was associated with the spread of a single language group, 6 and
it probably gave rise to several major language families on the basis of
ancestral groups situated around the edge of the nuclear region. The result-
ing pattern (Figure 19.1a) would have resembled the petals of a flower,
radiating from the area where farming began.
   Since literacy came early to this part of the world, it is likely that many
of the language groups represented in this process lasted long enough to be
represented in the historical record. Candidates would include the Indo-
European, Afroasiatic, Caucasian, 7 and (perhaps) Dravidian language
families. Each of these achieved a wide distribution and are represented by
many individual successor languages, and it is logical to postulate that their
**pre-proto-forms achieved prominence as a result of the primary spread of
farming.
   Since each of them would have undergone expansion at the same time,
their main direction of propagation was outwards - away from the core area
of farming. 8 (This reverses older assumptions by which Indo-Europeans
traditionally came off steppes and Semites emerged from deserts.) The
ancestors of the Caucasian languages found their exit blocked by the
mountains and steppe belt beyond, but those ancestral to the Indo-European
family were able to penetrate beyond Anatolia to the Balkans and central
Europe before meeting the resistance of native peoples in western and


                                        477




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                THE   ARCHAEOLOGY          OF   INDO-EUROPEAN:


northern Europe. Together, these Anatolian and Balkan languages would
constitute the **PPIE group, predating the period of *PIE unity.9 This stage
is represented on the first map of Figure 19.2.

2. As noted previously, many hypotheses concerning *PIE origins converge
on the Black Sea area, postulating a homeland in Anatolia (Gamkrelidze and
Ivanov), the Balkans (Diakonov) or the steppes (Gimbutas). May all contain
some element of truth?
   The problem is essentially a topological one: how to generate a spatial
pattern which is congruent both with the reconstructed relationships of the
Indo-European family tree and also with the major cultural areas recognised
by archaeology. Each of the models listed above can cope with one major
branch of Indo-European but has difficulty with the others. A comprehen-
sive model requires another flower-like pattern, with a common centre but
scope for expansion in different directions. The epicentre of this nuclear
region would lie in the Black Sea.
   This difficulty becomes less insuperable if considered in the light of
mechanisms of linguistic convergence. One of the phenomena noted by
linguists in areas such as the Caribbean or Melanesia is the formation of
pidgins and Creoles in connection with the growth of trading networks,
especially those based on coastal contacts. If we postulate a coastal koine
around the shores of the Black Sea (and perhaps also the Aegean - the
'international spirit of the EBA': Renfrew 1967) in the third millennium,
bringing together elements from **PPIE languages already existing in
Anatolia and perhaps in the Balkans and west Pontic area, these require-
ments are fulfilled. After all, boats - both large and small - are attested in
the protolexicon as well as horses and carts, and the wealth of Troy II indi-
cates the potential scale of trading activity at this time. The actual area of
this 'homeland' would not be large, but its circumference was considerable:
enough to establish a wide range of potential contacts in many directions
(Figure 19.1b). This stage is represented in the second map of Figure 19.2.




19.1 Models of three stages of Indo-European expansion, based on the spatial
arrangements of major language groups. Each expansion coincided with major
economic and social changes. (A) represents the formation of four major language-
families as a result of the expansion from different ancestral speech-communities
within the nuclear area of Old World farming (interrupted circle); 1 represents
 * *pre-proto-Indo-European. (B) represents the expansion and differentiation of
different groups of Indo-European languages around the Black Sea: (1) Anatolian;
(2) hypothetical circum-Pontic *proto-Indo-European; (3) earlier European
languages derived from **PPIE; (4) *proto-Greek; (5) central European - ancestral
to groups shown in (C); (6) north European - ancestral to Germanic, Baltic and
Slav; (7) *proto-Indo-Iranian. (C) represents the expansion and differentiation of
the central European group associated with Late Bronze Age Urnfields and with
movement into Anatolia.




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                THE   ARCHAEOLOGY          OF   INDO-EUROPEAN:




19.2 Reconstructed distributions of the constituent groupings of Indo-European
languages over four millennia (calibrated radiocarbon chronology). The bound-
aries are conventional. Stages in the differentiation of neighbouring language
families are also shown. (See note 4 for Tocharian.)




                                        480




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                          AN   ALTERNATIVE         VIEW


3. In thinking about the further propagation of Indo-European languages,
the descendants of * P I E , it is important to bear in mind the potential com-
plexity of factors operating in later prehistory. One of these is undoubtedly
migration, even though it is unlikely to be the dominant mechanism that
was once imagined. As an archaeological example, one might cite the west-
ward penetration of Pit-Grave groups from the Pontic Steppes into dry areas
of Romania and Hungary (Ecsedy 1979), and compare it with the south-
ward penetration of Athabascan speakers in the dry areas of North
America, taking the Navajo and Apache to the Southwest.
   Trade is another, and perhaps more fundamental, factor. Just as Neolithic
trade patterns took the form of multiple step, 'down the line' exchanges, so
Bronze Age trade patterns show an increasing emphasis on directional trade
(Figure 19.3). Whereas the former can be handled (as in highland New
Guinea) through the use of bilingual speakers at each step in the chain, more
direct forms of contact and trade increasingly require a common language.
The spread of features of secondary farming like woolly sheep or horses
would have involved the transmission of items of valuable livestock from
one end of Europe to the other. The growth of the pastoral sector would in
itself have provided opportunities for the monopolistic control of animal
herds, potentially giving an advantage to particular ethnic groups in a way
comparable to that involved in the spread offish-weirsand Salish languages
on the intermontane plateau of the American Northwest (Nelson 1973).
Metals were increasingly traded in the form of prestige objects during the
period in question; while less tangible influences may be discerned in the
spread of cult practices involving alcohol or cannabis (Chapters 15 and 16).
Each of these could have been accompanied by new forms of language,
perhaps initially a special-purpose trade or elite language, used specifically
in communicating within the context of extra-territorial exchanges.
   The spread of Indo-European languages from a postulated Circumpontic
area of * P I E would have involved all of these mechanisms, although in
different contexts. The eastern wing of Indo-Iranian languages would have
spread by expansion into a relatively empty zone.10 Within Europe three
main zones of development could be envisaged. In the south, *proto-Greek
would have evolved in the context of EBA maritime contacts with north-west
Anatolia which brought advanced metallurgy and Anatolian pottery forms
to eastern Greece. In the centre, along the main Danube/Rhine axis in the
area of the Baden culture, there would have developed a branch of central
European languages ancestral to those which differentiated in the Urnfield
period - Celtic, Italic, Illyrian, Thracian and Phrygian. Along the North
European Plain a continuum of languages ancestral to Slav, Baltic and
Germanic would have evolved in the context of the cultural contacts indi-
cated by the distribution of Globular Amphora and Corded Ware elements.
These processes are represented by the second and third maps of Figure
19.2, which should be compared with Figure 19.1b. With the exception of

                                       481




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                 THE     ARCHAEOLOGY               OF   INDO-EUROPEAN:



   T H E 'NEOLITHIC' PATTERN




                                                                          Down the line'
                                                                            trade.




                    ^ Bilingual ism


                                                   Typical artefact
                                                   distribution
                                                   e.g. stone axes.

                                origit


   T H E ' B R O N Z E AGE'     PATTERN



            A   Y        6                c Xy                        E
                                                                           Directional
                                                                              trade-
                 t r a d e               l o n g    u a g         e
       v*                                                             w




                                  Typical artefact distribution
                                     e.g. bronze swords.


                              W ? J m n m m T n T m f f / / / /'h.m
                     origin


19.3 Contrasting patterns of language and trade. Above, trade chain in many
short steps, accomplished by bilingualism (e.g. New Guinea, Neolithic Europe).
Below, directional trade necessitating a special trade language (e.g. Bronze Age
Europe and the Near East).




                                               482




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                           AN   ALTERNATIVE         VIEW


the eastern group, none of these should be envisaged as a simple equation
between languages and archaeological cultures, resulting from a straight-
forward migration in the old-fashioned sense: but each represents an axis of
demonstrable cultural contact at the period in question. Moreover, this
pattern is congruent with the major expectations derived from comparative
linguistics.

These postulated stages of development take the story down to the threshold
of historical times, when linguistic distributions can be reconstructed with
greater certainty (fourth map of Figure 19.2). Besides the continuing ex-
pansion of Indo-Iranian languages, the most notable feature is the further
spread of languages from the central European zone, caused by Urnfield
expansion and the contemporary recession and political collapse in the east
Mediterranean. Thus Celtic11 and Italic languages would have reached their
historical positions at approximately the same time as Phrygian replaced the
earlier, Anatolian languages in what is now western Turkey (Figure 19.1c).
This phase marks the last major expansion of Indo-European languages
before the great imperial conquests of the Achaemenid Persians, which
began another chapter of the Indo-European story.
   The attainment of a continuous distribution of Indo-European languages
from Ireland to India in the first millennium BC created a continuum of
related 'barbarian' societies across the Eurasian landmass, marked by
several common features such as horse-gear and weaponry, aspects of
funerary practice like wagon burial, and the influence of animal-style art. In
the period before this continuity was severed by the arrival on the steppes of
Turco-Tartar peoples from further east, there would have been the oppor-
tunity for the transmission across this area of myths and religious motifs as
well as features of material culture. It may be this period, rather than the
time of proto-Indo-European unity, that is tantalisingly reflected in the
evidence of comparative Indo-European mythology.12

Any attempt to grapple with a problem as intractable as that of Indo-
European origins must essentially be an essay in controlled speculation.
Nevertheless, it is permissible to describe some possible processes which fit
with our current understanding of prehistoric cultural and social change.
   An important part of this exercise is to go beyond the raw material of
immediate observation to infer missing categories of evidence. Since many
languages remain only as peripheral survivals,13 afirststep is to fill in a more
realistic estimate of their original distributions. We may then go on to make
allowance for extinct forms, and for ancestral groups beyond the limits of
our direct evidence. In carrying out this exercise in relation to the evolution
of Indo-European, we have set out a multi-stage model which takes account
of the main currents of economic and social change in later prehistory as we
perceive them (Figure 19.4).


                                        483




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   THE      ARCHAEOLOGY          OF    INDO-EUROPEAN:

-RT
 BC




                                                              INDO I R A N I A N     J
                                                                LANGUAGES
 2000'


 3000

                   *    -    *
 4000'                           I      I
                   ? * * PRE- PROTO-
                            INDO-EUROPEAN                        NON- INDO-
 5000                       FARMING LANGUAGES                   EUROPEAN
                                                                FARMING LANGUAGES
                                        (Primary                (Semitic, H u m a n ,
 6000                                       •farming             Dravidioin)
         PRE-FARMING                         expansion)
         LANGUAGES                                                             I     I
 7000                                                                    I     I     I
              survival
                                                                       PRE-FARMING
              extinction (or survival
              as substrates)                                           LANGUAGES
 8000                                                                    I     I     I

19.4 Summary diagram of the major phases of Indo-European expansion in
prehistory, showing recorded languages and inferred ancestral groups and extinct
branches. The diagram extends from NW Europe (left) to central and s Asia (right).

   The reconstruction which we propose implies a relatively slow rate of
spread over a period of 6000 years, made up of several advances into new
areas which coincide with periods of economic innovation and consequent
opportunities for expansion. It consists of successive overlays of new
generations of Indo-European languages in radial patterns from a series of
nuclear zones, moving outwards from an original centre, and reflecting
the continuing importance of the Near East as a source of economic and
cultural change. Such a sketch can only present a caricature of the com-
plexities of the real process: but it may nevertheless be helpful as a first step
in the controlled comparison of models of linguistic prehistory.

NOTES

 1. Thus it may not be profitable to extend any kind of phylogenetic model much further
    back than c.10,000 BP, or to talk of a single 'common ancestor' for groups such as Indo-
    European and Afroasiatic.
 2. The classic examples of a successful marriage between linguistics and archaeology are
    the dispersals of the Polynesian and Bantu language families. The reasons for this are
    twofold: first, the predominance in both cases of demic diffusion; and secondly the
    relatively recent date at which the dispersals occurred, so that the linguistic relationships
    are still clearly evident. It is instructive to compare these examples with the case of
    Melanesia, where agriculture appeared much earlier (as long ago as it did in Europe),


                                              484




                       This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               AN   ALTERNATIVE          VIEW

    and where adoption probably predominated over demic diffusion. Although the pattern
    is perhaps exaggerated by the rugged terrain, New Guinea is notorious for its extreme
    linguistic diversity. There is no reason why this pattern should not be equally character-
    istic of Neolithic societies in other parts of the world, wherever these conditions applied.
 3. These arise from the pattern of inter-relationships generated by this assumption (Renfrew
    1987, fig. 7.7), which would predict a close genetic resemblance between Greek and
    Italian, for instance, or between the Slav and Indo-Iranian groups. This is not the case.
 4. A complicating factor is the existence of Tocharian in Sinkiang. Two solutions are
    possible. One would see Tocharian as representative of the earliest phase of Indo-
    European steppe expansion, before the emergence of Indo-Iranian and its interaction with
    European neighbours (reflected for instance in satemisation): this is the option shown on
    the maps of Fig. 19.2. The alternative, and perhaps preferable, view is that it is a much
    later language connected with trade along the Silk Route - since the first written evidence
    is known from the first millennium AD. It might thus be considered as a Creole.
 5. Later ones, such as Phrygian and Armenian, are more recent and can be related to the
    period of expansion represented by the Urnfield phenomenon; their spread into Anatolia
    would have prefigured the Celtic expansion which brought Galatian.
 6. This observation is likely to be a general one, since the world's major language groups do
    not show the simple, concentric patterns of distribution which such an equation would
    predict. The largest areas of linguistic uniformity, in Polynesia and sub-Saharan Africa,
    resulted from unidirectional expansion on the margins of a nuclear area.
 7. The Caucasus is a complex refuge area with many different languages. Armenian is a
    branch of Indo-European (see n.5). The Caucasian languages proper form two groups,
    North Caucasian and South Caucasian, of which the former appears to be a descendant
    of Urartian and ultimately of Hurrian, which occupied a larger area in eastern Anatolia
    and Syria; the latter may be indigenous.
 8. A more specific version of the hypothesis might envisage the Levant as the origin of the
    Afroasiatic family, north Syria/north Mesopotamia as the origin of the branch of
    Caucasian which gave rise ultimately to Hurrian and so to Urartian and Kartvelian,
    central and western Anatolia as the origin of the Indo-European family, and south-west
    Iran as the origin of the Dravidian family. While hypothetical, these equations are not
    entirely speculative, and deserve to be evaluated against competing hypotheses (cf.
    Mellaart 1975, ch. 11).
 9. This might include the language later written in Crete in Linear A, and also the pre-Greek
    language whose toponyms survive in Greece and the Balkans.
10. The spread of Pit-Graves into Romania and Hungary would on this hypothesis represent
    a westward incursion of speakers of Indo-Iranian languages, prefiguring the later
    Scythian expansion into the same areas.
11. Perhaps in places (e.g. the British Isles) overlying extinct branches of northern zone Indo-
    European, if these had spread further in association with Bell-Beaker contacts. Since any
    such Beaker-related IE language would have had affinities with Germanic and the other
    northern zone languages, it cannot have been an early form of Celtic, whose affinities lie
    rather with Italic and the languages of the central European zone.
12. This would be the explanation for the common features described by Dumezil. It would
    be no accident, therefore, that Greece - no longer a member of this barbarian community
    - should be 'an embarrassing exception to the tripartite division of functions' (Kirk 1970,
    210).
13. An obvious example is the 'Celtic fringe', or the survival of Romance languages
    (Romanian and Vlach) in south-east Europe. Other mountain relicts would include
    Illyrian, and the various Caucasian languages; while on a larger scale Iranian might be
    seen as a montane survival from a larger original area on the steppes.




                                             485




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                             Section           VI

       A      CONVERSATION
              WITH C H I L D E




    <

   Childe at the UISPP conference at Zurich, 1950, in Schaffhausen Museum
 with (left to right) Dame Kathleen Kenyon and Professors Richard Atkinson,
Robert J. Braidwood, Stuart Piggott, Grahame Clark and Christopher Hawkes
                   (photograph from Professor Stuart Piggott).




  Now I confess that my whole account may prove to be erroneous;
   my formulae may be inadequate; my interpretations are perhaps
    ill-founded; my chronological framework - and without such
          one cannot speak of conjunctures - is frankly shaky.
             Yet I submit the result was worth publishing.
                                                     V. G O R D O N   CHILDE   (1957)




                This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:31:27 UTC
                                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                       CONVERSATION           WITH    CHILDE


 lhe archaeological generation of which I form part can be justly proud of
having helped to fill in a major missing element of the evidence of European
prehistory with which Childe worked: the regional analysis of patterns on
the ground, distilled from the much more abundant evidence of post-war
fieldwork and excavation, which took place on a scale undreamed of before.
It is not surprising that geography seemed to be a paradigm-discipline in this
enterprise, even though that subject has now suffered a sharp decline in
general academic esteem, especially in the USA. The need to build ecological
and demographic realities into archaeological models of the past was one
which it shared with contemporary history and other social sciences, and led
to notable advances in understanding. In European prehistory, for instance,
the altered conception of early farming - from rootless slash-and-burn
Wanderbauerntum to a horticulture with a long-lasting commitment to
particular places - represented a notable advance on Childe's under-
standing.
    Nevertheless, there was a price to pay: too great an attention to the forces
of production led to a neglect of the forces of consumption: here Childe's
Marxism and New (Processual) Archaeology shared a common blind spot.
Stuart Piggott's sensitivity to the nuances of style in elite ostentation,
for instance in matters of transport (1992), well illustrate this missing
dimension; and it is the most positive contribution of Post-Processual
Archaeology to have drawn attention to this aspect of the importance of the
materiality of culture. While social evolution is difficult to demonstrate,
cultural evolution is plain to see; and rather than seeking abstract and
untestable social formulations of the nature of change, it may be more
profitable to theorise the cultural record itself. (These thoughts, moreover,
have now occurred to social anthropologists, too, making possible a degree
of theoretical convergence.) Materiality, however, does not imply mere
materialism, for material creations only make sense in the context of the
social and the cognitive. Recognition of this fact helps to revive two aspects
of Childe's account which had been neglected in the enthusiasm for local
factors of demography, ecology and agrarian productivity: the diffusion of
desirable forms of consumption (literal or metaphorical), and the cultural
phenomena of substitution and skeuomorphism to which it gives rise.
    By making use of these insights, it should be possible to combine the best
of both approaches, and to overcome the dialectical conflicts built into the
'alternation of generations' between Enlightenment and Romantic models
outlined in Section I; and in so doing it may be possible to retrieve a sense
of overall direction and 'grand narrative', of the kind which I attempted to
specify in my David Clarke Memorial Lecture for 1995 (Sherratt 1995b).
Shorn of the Eurocentric bias which has so far accompanied all accounts
of 'the rise of the West', such a grand narrative is no longer an account of
the inevitability of European progress. Rather, it chronicles how, for a brief
period following the discovery of the New World, the Atlantic coastlands


                                        488




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:31:27 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                      CONVERSATION           WITH    CHILDE


acquired a centrality which made them masters of the global economy; a
centrality, however, which they are now in the process of losing to the lands
of the Far East and the Pacific Rim. Yet this shift in perspective brings
Childe's question once more to the fore (Rowlands 1994). What was the
origin of Europe's conception of liberty and freedom? Were these merely
stages in the final disembedding of the economy from social constraints;
or are they a precious inheritance to be preserved, as economic dominance
shifts to a new continental configuration? The answers to these questions
require an archaeological perspective, which arises from, and gives meaning
to, our everyday preoccupations with stones and potsherds.




                                       489




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:31:27 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                         20
                       Gordon Childe:
                       Right or Wrong?
                                      (1995)

Every prehistoric archaeologist has to come to terms with Childe.1 The
European prehistorian feels the need to measure his or her ideas against a
classic like the Dawn of Civilisation, to see how far we have progressed;
even prehistorians in areas outside Europe need to look back to the earlier
phases of their discipline, which began in Europe, and in which Childe's
synthesis forms a milestone. Nor (I think) is this just a matter of national,
or at least anglophone, pride: even those continental scholars who regard
modern British scholarship with suspicion can agree that Childe was a figure
of European stature. Indeed, his chief critics are themselves English or
English-speaking: from his own literary executor, Grahame Clark (1976:
accusing him of being misled by Marx), to Colin Renfrew (1973: revolution-
ising his chronology) or to any aspiring young graduate student wanting to
patronise an older and better exponent of his craft (e.g. Sherratt 1972,477;
Chapter 2). At the centenary of his birth, when most intellectuals are being
subjected to revisionist critiques (or at least to scandalous revelations about
their private lives), Childe remains a revered ancestor to a wide variety of
schools of archaeology - many of which (like diffusionists, processualists,
and post-processualists) are quite incompatible with one another, and
indeed are mutually hostile.


The 1990s have seen no diminution of interest in Gordon Childe: a special issue of
Australian Archaeology No. 30 in 1991 (including Sherratt 1991), an important
conference in Melbourne (Gathercole, Irving and Melleuish 1995) and a London
meeting (Harris 1994) all threw fresh light on his politics, early career and
relations with Soviet archaeology. Yet this same half-decade saw the effective
collapse of Marxism as the official political philosophy of a large part of Eurasia.
When my old friend and fellow Childe-enthusiast Jacek Lech asked me to write
something for a Polish conference on the contribution of Childe, these thoughts
underlay what I wrote.


                                         490




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:31:27 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                RIGHT      OR   WRONG ?


    With such a reputation, not just within the subject but also outside it
(since Childe is one of the few 'intellectual' archaeologists whose name is
familiar beyond the discipline), it is often surprising to present-day students
that his work now seems so old-fashioned. As a figure who achieved his
major responsibility (the Directorship of the Loftdon University Institute
of Archaeology) in the post-war era, and is still remembered - with great
affection - by an active generation of pupils, he might be considered as
a near-contemporary, marking the beginning of a 'modern' approach to
prehistory. Yet much of his writing seems in many ways to be closer to the
nineteenth rather than the twentieth century: his grand themes, archaic
terminology (who dares talk of 'savages' nowadays?), his studied ignorance
of the New World, curious ragbag anthropology with its stereotypes like the
'primitive metalsmith' - all these have an oddly antiquated ring.
    In part, this is because the whole subject of prehistory is itself so young.
As a product of Enlightenment rationalism, Romantic enthusiasm for exotic
origins, and scientific Positivism with its belief in the value of observation
and classification, it needed all these movements to create the kind of subject
which exists today; and its scope and methods only became clearly recog-
nised by some time around 1865, along with its name. For this chrono-
logical reason, prehistoric archaeology is 'out of phase' with other
humanistic disciplines, and still enjoying its childhood (and juvenile tan-
trums) well into the twentieth century. It is easy to forget how recently we
have acquired some quite fundamental information about the prehistoric
past - like the use of the plough in the Neolithic - or how recently so much
of our information (for instance about ecology and settlement patterns) has
accumulated. To take an example: Childe's account of the Neolithic Rev-
olution was written (like the classic Enlightenment evolutionary narratives
of the eighteenth century) essentially from first principles, and without much
real archaeology to put to it: the1 discovery of a pre-pottery Neolithic, at
places like Jericho, came as a disturbing surprise. Whereas history and phil-
ology have been 'tempered' and matured by many changes of intellectual
climate, archaeology is simultaneously acquiring both intellectual maturity
and basic observations: 'learning on the job', as we might say. As a subject,
it is still very much a teenager, with adult methods but immature ideas and
emotions with which to approach its new-found wealth of observations.
Childe helped to take archaeology out of its childhood - it makes a good
pun in English, and one that was not neglected by Childe himself! - but now
himself looks Childeish. It is a mark of how rapidly archaeology has
progressed, by comparison with other historical disciplines, that something
written in the 1950s now seems quite so outdated. So the conundrum of
Childe is how he manages to be, at one and the same time, such a chrono-
logical zone-fossil for a past epoch in European prehistoriography and yet
also a positive inspiration for a wide range of present-day workers in the
field. The answer that I would like to suggest is that he first identified some


                                            491




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  GORDON         CHILDE:


of the fundamental structures of prehistory by using the evidence of archae-
ology. Like some early scientist with a new optical instrument, he first put
names and definitions to what can be observed in prehistory, and described
what we can still recognise in the record. The details multiply and change,
but the structures survive, even when the interpretation changes. Some
aspects of Childe's vision were personal idiosyncracies; some were the
inevitable perceptions of the time; but above all these temporary aspects
there stands his recognition of the essential outlines of prehistory, in a way
that continues to be clarified by new information. Ifindthis reassuring: it is
a demonstration that the past is real, and not just a fluctuating fantasy
which projects contemporary dreams and desires on to something essen-
tially unknowable; though it is also something whose significance changes
with successive generations and new angles of vision. Childe remains
fascinating because his perceptions are at once so familiar and so strange.
   To recognise his enduring contribution, it is therefore essential to
recognise those aspects of his imagination which were time-bound and
idiosyncratic. First, the personal aspect. It is not necessary to be an amateur
psychologist to discern the powerful influence of his father, Stephen Childe:
not by imitation, but by reaction. Stephen Childe was an Anglican clergy-
man, of catholic (ritualistic) tendency not greatly tempered by humanity
(Green 1981, 6-7). His congregation, at least, did not like him; and his son
must surely have found him as oppressive in childhood as he did when,
visiting his paternal home as an adult, he was not allowed to smoke his pipe.
His defences to this treatment were brilliance and radicalism. Not dissi-
pating his efforts in mere socialising (at which he had limited skills), he
concentrated a powerful intelligence on proving himself outstanding as an
academic. At the same time, he devoted himself, as soon as he had left home,
to radical and idealistic causes which questioned the basis of his family's
relatively privileged background. (His Marxism was, in a sense, a substitute
for his lost Anglican Christianity.) To a generation which takes youthful
revolt as a token of normality, this may seem nothing strange: in a British
colony at the time of World War I, however, it took the courage of con-
viction. Recent research on Childe's early political career in Australia has
revealed a picture that seems strikingly reminiscent of totalitarian regimes in
the Europe of more recent years: secret censorship and political persecution,
including debarment and dismissal from teaching positions (Mulvaney
1994). Childe hammered out his idealistic philosophy from experience and
opposition, not from the comfort of an armchair.
    This oppositional attitude persisted throughout his life, even through
the time when he was a recognised international leader in his subject -
chosen, for example, to represent prehistoric archaeology among the sixty
scholars selected to address the Conference of Arts and Sciences organised
by Harvard University to celebrate its Tercentenary in 1936. As a Marxist
and communist sympathiser (though not a party member), Childe had

                                            492




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                RIGHT      OR    WRONG ?


difficulties in the USA after World War II, in the era of McCarthyism: it is
salutary to be reminded that intellectual intolerance (and a specific hostility
to evolutionism and prehistory) has been an occasional characteristic of
the 'land of the free', even as Morgan and Engels became the orthodoxy of
the opposing power-bloc in the other hemisphere. Politicians recognise the
importance of prehistory, which is why we must never let them take it out
of the hands of an international and critical community of scholars. In
Childe's case, this experience had the somewhat unexpected consequence
of revealing with what affection he was regarded by his staff: 'when
McCarthyism was rife in America ... the staff [of the Institute of Archae-
ology] all came to the conclusion that if there was any backlash on the
Director, we would all go to jail with him': Rachel Maxwell-Hyslop, 1994.
From an impeccably upper middle-class establishment, this was com-
mitment indeed.
   This personal and political background had two consequences for
Childe's prehistory, one good and one bad (as far as archaeology was con-
cerned). The first was a vision of social change which was to inform and
underlie his writing of prehistory, giving it shape and relevance (Rowlands
1994). It was Childe's opposition to the inwardness of White Australia and
the New Protectionism that later informed his search for a social dynamic
in diffusionism, interchange and hybridisation: themes that constantly recur
in his prehistoriography, and which have lost none of their relevance today.
This goes a long way to explaining why Childe's vision has continued to
occupy the attention of succeeding generations. It is a feature of Childe's
writing that it combined an unsurpassed mastery of arcane detail (expressed
in now legendary footnotes) with a sweep that is often described as
Hegelian; and most particularly in a sustained commitment to making the
often unpromising raw material of prehistory say something that is
important about society. Criticisms of his work often focus upon the gap
between these achievements: the lack of explicit methodologies and case
studies that could convert a vision into working theories. It is important also
to recognise the moral imperatives behind his writing, and his often
metaphorical treatment of the subjects which he brought to prominence.
The way that metal production in Bronze Age Europe escaped from the
political control of courts and temples, which had characterised its develop-
ment in the Near East, was not so much a narrow technological history as
an attempt to translate Hegelian concerns with the origin of Western
freedoms into the subject matter of prehistoric archaeology. Childe took
archaeology seriously, because it mattered.
   On the other hand, Childe's view of the prehistoric past was distorted by
these experiences in what may be considered a negative way. Rationalism is
easily combined with anti-clericalism; and reacting against an oppressive,
Anglo-Catholic fatherfiguredid not make Childe sympathetic to religion, or
subtle in his interpretation of it. He was, in short, against it. While I have no

                                            493




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  GORDON        CHILDE:


moral objection to this view (though I do not share it), it cannot            o
be an advantage in interpreting either the recent or the distant p          ad
especially not the cultures of theocentric Sumer in the Uruk pt. a, or
megalithic Pomerania. For Childe, religion was an incubus (or possibly even
a succubus): a diversion of energy into a vain and fruitless activity that was
essentially parasitic upon society. Religion was a dead hand upon develop-
ment, a social pathology preventing progress - almost a disease. While he
was sensitive to the nuances of secular symbolism (for instance the signifi-
cance of buried grave-wealth), the social importance of religion, and hence
the organisational (and thus local) role of megaliths, for instance, was
neglected: he therefore saw megalithism as spreading like a contagious epi-
demic along the seashore of Atlantic Europe, rather than springing up as
an expression of indigenous values among Mesolithic groups faced with
longhouse-building Danubian newcomers. On a larger scale, he missed the
long-term significance of the repeated shifts from communal to individual,
Wertrationalitat to Zweckrationalitat, manifested in Uruk to Early
Dynastic, TRB to Corded Ware, Bronze Age palatial civilisation to Iron Age
mercantile city states in the east Mediterranean, communism to capitalism
- in which his sympathies would not necessarily have been unidirectional.
Childe's accounts need rewriting to give a more sympathetic and under-
standing (though still critical) role to religion - one of the most enduring, if
constantly changing, modes of social integration. (Marxism is, after all, one
of the great heretical movements of Christianity, with its own established
churches and schisms.)
    A second 'blind spot' was warfare (Flannery 1994). Again, not perhaps
surprising in a pacifist and member of the No-conscription Fellowship
(whilst a student at Oxford), and in an intellectual both temperamentally
and philosophically opposed to war; but, as with anti-clericalism, perhaps
an unhelpful sentiment in understanding the motivations and concerns of
the Early Dynastic rulers of Mesopotamia or Egypt, or the nature of early
states in general. His dislike of conflict extended to the internal divisions
within society. Unlike his contemporaries in the CP Historians Group or
Past and Present board (like Rodney Hilton, Christopher Hill, or Eric
Hobsbawm), his models of social progress were consensual rather than
conflictual. (Often, it was just religion that seems to have held things up!)
Perhaps not surprisingly for a person of such likeable and unworldly views,
he was an appallingly incompetent administrator; which is one reason why
his successor as Director of the Institute was chosen for administrative
ability rather than any intellectual spark. It is an experience from which that
institution is only just recovering. Administrators can be hired; intellectuals
like Childe are irreplaceable.
    Childe's third 'blind spot' was luxury: pleasure in consumption. Not that
he was personally frugal - he was known to enjoy champagne (reputedly in
 pints) in his London club, the Athenaeum - but because he disapproved of

                                            494




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                RIGHT      OR     WRONG ?


ostentation. This was a natural consequence both of his personality and his
political philosophy, and fits with the attitudes discussed above. Like anti-
clericalism and anti-war sentiments, hostility to ostentatious consumption
forms part of a tradition of popular protest and radical rationalism in Euro-
pean culture (that goes back at least to the Anabaptists of Miinster and
beyond), which received more general acceptance in the French Revolution
and the Enlightenment reaction to Baroque. Radicalism often carries with
it a streak of puritanism, that is part of the natural rhetoric of social protest,
and which has a certain tendency to present a moralistic view of history: for
instance to interpret the past in terms of the present, and both in terms of
rather puritan ideas of what is believed to be important in life. In the case of
nineteenth-century philosophies which reflected the experience of the In-
dustrial Revolution, like Marxism, the result has often tended towards a
somewhat mechanistic materialism, a tendency to reduce things to calories
in the belief that the bread is more essential than the butter; a trend still
perpetuated in the 'cultural materialism' so dominant in American anthro-
pology.2 This attitude has only recently been questioned, as part of the post-
modernist critique; and it is not surprising, therefore, that despite Childe's
sophistication, he tended to share its assumptions. One of these was the
emphasis on production rather than consumption,3 and thus a stress on
technology as instrumental rather than expressive - each step was an
advance in the 'conquest' of 'nature', an instrument of domination rather
than something to be enjoyed in itself. This rather stern moral attitude
would condemn 'magic' as false consciousness, but approve of increased
efficiency in changing the world; yet to approach prehistoric societies in this
way is to espouse a naive anthropology, in the same way as neglecting
religion.
    Childe's explanations, therefore, tended to concern means rather than
ends, mechanisms rather than motivations. His explanation for the Urban
Revolution, for instance, was couched in terms of 'inventions' (plough, cart,
sailing-boat, metallurgy), rather than in examining the contexts in which
these innovations appeared, and the contemporary problems to which they
might have been solutions. In the same way, he saw the need to import stone
and metal resources to the alluvium, and the interactive growth of popu-
lation and irrigation, largely in terms of the efficiency of subsistence
farming. The achievement of a 'surplus', leading to the emergence of greater
social and cultural complexity, was thus an accident rather than an
objective. Childe's distrust of luxuries - it fits with the rather puritan streak
in both Protestant rationalism and Marxism - helps to explain his emphasis
on basic production rather than long-distance trade as the main determinant
of economic growth. Yet it is the cultural significance of such exotic luxuries
(embodying all the social propensities for ostentation and conspicuous
consumption that Childe found so objectionable in his contemporaries) that
is much discussed by anthropologists nowadays, in a way that his stark


                                            495




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  GORDON        CHILDE:


dichotomy of 'luxuries' versus 'necessities' would not allow. Interestingly,
it is the same deficiency that has been identified in the work of Immanuel
Wallerstein on the medieval and early modern world-economy: and it is a
general point of criticism of Childe's work to which I shall return.
    Having paraded his deficiencies, to the extent that the reader might
conclude that 'Childe was wrong', I want now strongly to assert the con-
trary viewpoint, that 'Childe was gloriously right'. I want to do so by dis-
cussing an aspect of my own work; and this involves situating my academic
life in the rhythms of intellectual development since Childe. Childe was
unique among his contemporaries, at least in Britain, in having a social
model behind his interpretations. Others, like Grahame Clark, emphasised
environmental reconstruction; but that was not a dynamic view, and cer-
tainly not a social dynamic. The rest were largely historicist in interpretation
- a word I use to characterise the attitude summed up in the preface (dated
1936) to H. A. L. Fisher's History of Europe: 'Others, wiser and more
learned than myself, claim to have discerned in history a plot, a rhythm, a
predetermined pattern. Such harmonies are concealed from me ... I can see
only... the play of the contingent and the unforeseen.' (I quote from memory:
it was our major history textbook at school.) Childe was a generalist and
used models - even if to prove the uniqueness of the West, and to assert the
culturally specific nature of human achievement ('Man makes himself'). It
was intellectually subtle, but practically sui generis as a point of view even
in history, and certainly within a lowbrow subject like archaeology.4
    In the 1960s, and coming to prominence a decade after Childe's death,
was the diverse series of movements together termed the 'New Archae-
ology'. Some were more subtle than others (notably that of my teacher
David Clarke at Cambridge): but all had as common elements an emphasis
on ecology and a more deterministic outlook than that of Childe. For
American New Archaeology in particular,5 the dynamic of cultural change
was population growth; the mechanism was endogenous advance or
adaptation rather than 'outside intervention' - all changes were local
changes, and ultimately concerned with calories. ('Extrasystemic inputs'
were mainly climatic perturbations.) In short, it was evolutionary rather
than historical; its major metaphor was 'thresholds of change': continuous
growth in one variable (usually population, or the ratio of population to
resources) reached a point at which systemic change and restructuring was
necessary. Each of these thresholds was a miniature revolution, but also a
local manifestation of some more general change of category - from bands,
to tribes to chiefdoms, or some such succession. The Enlightenment mission
of New Archaeology was to clarify these categories. Noting a very wide-
spread horizon of change across prehistoric Europe in 3500 BC, coincident
more or less with the onset of urbanisation in Late Uruk Mesopotamia, I
postulated a revolution. Its most tangible characteristic was its association
with the first evidence for the plough and wheeled vehicles; but this was


                                            496




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               RIGHT       OR    WRONG ?


quickly followed by the first evidence for wool and the spread of the dom-
esticated horse beyond the steppes. In the Near East, this period saw the
domestication of the ass and the camel. Innovations in animal husbandry
were paralleled by changes in plant husbandry, such as the domestication of
tree-crops. All these added up, in my opinion, to a shift from the primary
product yielded by livestock - meat - to the various secondary products:
traction, use as a pack- or ridden animal, wool (and probably milk, too,
with the suggestion that the whole thing was made possible by the evolution
of lactose tolerance). In temperate areas it was made possible by growing
deforestation, creating grazing; in steppe areas it opened up otherwise
unusable pasturelands to exploitation; but its heartlands were the open
areas of the Near East, where the potential of animal domestication was first
realised. Hence the Secondary Products Revolution, a second generation of
innovations in agriculture which made possible the settlement of new areas
and the formation of new types of economy such as specialised pastoralism
(Chapter 6).
   Not a bad generalisation, but note how it was conceptualised: as an eco-
logical threshold, concerned with animal management, which made farming
more efficient at supporting a growing population. This reading of the
record tended to do two things. Thefirstwas to assume that logically related
features - like milking and wool-using - would probably occur together, and
was thus to align a rather varied range of phenomena into a single horizon.
The second was to 'edit out' other contemporary phenomena (not con-
cerned with animal rearing) which might have been combined in a different
configuration: for instance in a 'transport revolution' involving cart, trans-
port animals and boats with sails. The 'Secondary Products Revolution' was
presented, therefore, as a biological and deterministic change rather than as
a historical event; and the model was seen by some readers (because of
one of the diagrams rather than the text) as beginning with population
growth. Indeed, some revisionist (or rather, fundamentalist) critics of my
presentation (Chapman 1983; Barker 1985) took it further: whereas from
the beginning I had stressed its restricted Near Eastern origins and con-
sequent spread to Europe, these commentators were happy to imagine use
of the plough and woolly breeds of sheep apparently appearing spontane-
ously, wherever they were necessary because of pressure on resources.
(Incidentally, they also attributed transhumant pastoralism not to a special-
ised exchange economy, but to a continuity from Palaeolithic hunting
patterns.) This accommodation to the fashionable 'continuity + threshold'
model, and complete rejection of anything that smacked of diffusionism,
stretched economic and environmental determinism to the limits of their
credibility, and beyond. In reaction, I emphasised the parallelism of the
Secondary Products Revolution with the Neolithic Revolution itself: the
conjunction and explosive dispersal of several different elements, each with
an older history in different parts of the Near East (Chapter 7). Thus while


                                           497




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  GORDON          CHILDE:


individual elements might have older origins, it was the conjunction that
provided the revolutionary effect.
   But what was the revolution? It was, in fact, nothing other than Gordon
Childe's Urban Revolution, perceived in terms of its spin-off and effects on
outer, still prehistoric, Eurasia. Not to have seen it in this way from the
beginning was excusable on my part, however, since Childe himself missed
the major linking element: the plough, which in his writings he assumed to
be a Bronze Age introduction in Europe. Yet he had worked out (and be-
queathed to Stuart Piggott as a topic on which to write a classic book:
1983), a chronology for the spread of wheeled vehicles, involving a Meso-
potamian beginning and an impact on south-east Europe with the Baden
culture. With the current evidence of Neolithic plough-marks, putting the
two elements (plough and cart) together as a 'yoked traction complex'
becomes a particularly compelling model. This would have begun within the
Taurus-Zagros arc, and only broken out of it at the time of Uruk colonial
expansion in the mid-fourth millennium BC.6 The Urban Revolution was
thus the crucial agent of integration and dispersal, and crucially affected
contemporary Europe at the same time as it transformed the Near East - as
Childe quite correctly claimed. His perception of the structure of the long-
term history of the Old World was in the long run to prove more plausible
than the views of his ecologically better-informed critics. There is no doubt
in my mind that the plough was 'diffused', in the sense that Childe gave to
the word, and did not just magically appear whenever population passed a
particular density threshold.7
   What about his other classic examples of 'diffused' technologies? One of
the realisations since his death has been the age and duration of the south-
east European Copper Age, and the degree to which it developed in isolation
from Near Eastern models (Renfrew 1969). This might seem to displace
metallurgy from the role that he assigned to it, as an ultimate consequence
of the Urban Revolution. Yet recent work at Troy and in south-east
Hungary have suggested, within the context of a calibrated radiocarbon
chronology, that the spread of tin bronze and the specific types associated
with it (and also other technologies such as faience) came about as a result
of contacts up the Danube around 2500 BC (summarised in Sherratt 1993b,
22f); and this in turn would lie behind the florescence of Aunjetitz
metallurgy. It was arguably at this point that bronze became a useful metal,
rather than simply a spectacular substitute for stone, as unalloyed copper
had been. On this basis, Childe's interpretation might be summarised as
'right model, wrong evidence'! It was not copper metallurgy itself which
followed his pattern, for copper-working had spread much earlier, but
advanced forms of copper-alloy metallurgy which fit perfectly with his pre-
dictions. Copper Age metallurgy was playful by comparison (look at Varna
and Nahal Mishmar), but Bronze Age metallurgy with its consistent suites
of weapons was a serious international business.


                                            498




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                RIGHT       OR    WRONG ?


   In the same way, we may see the beginnings of the Baden culture itself
as an earlier episode of such spin-off. I have suggested that the pottery
container-forms which characterise that culture, such as handled jugs
and cups, reflect the spread of an elite consumption of alcoholic drinks,
originally from precious metal sets of serving-vessels, and beginning among
urban elites in the Near East. Echoes of these practices would lie behind the
subsequent importance of drinking vessels in the Corded Ware and Bell-
Beaker complexes in northern and western Europe. These examples shift the
emphasis from 'technology' to 'consumption habits'. The 'irradiation of
barbarian Europe' (in Childe's famous phrase, caricaturing his own position
- which lacked this sensitivity to consumption) took the form of acquiring
new habits and lifestyles, new modes of ostentation and new media in which
to create and in which to trade. These elements of style were at least as
important (and often provided the motivation for) improvements in the
efficiency of subsistence practices. The wagon, and even the plough (which
often substitutes for it on Italian statue-menhirs: Figure 6.3) were prestige
possessions and symbols of power, as were the first woollen clothes and
metal weapons. Thus although the structure of Childe's model of the re-
lationship between Europe and the Near East was correct, its nuances and
'feel' are somehow misleading. The innovations which spread were not
practical improvements for everybody, which were immediately applied in
workshops throughout the continent; more often, they were the rare and
exotic tastes of the elite. History was less moral than he imagined.
   What is becoming clear (to me, at any rate) is that there were many
successive episodes of cultural transmission to Europe from the Near East,
from the spread of the Neolithic to the arrival of Christianity: but these need
to be grouped and classified by the social relations involved in the trans-
mission. Some were the product of intimate trading relations; others were
simply the gradual adoption of practices from further south. Childe's
accounts tended to stress the former mechanism: his descriptions of the
European Bronze Age suggest that the circulation of bronze objects in
temperate Europe, and the progress in opening up new sources of metal, was
'rooted in the Aegean market' (Childe 1958, 166). In fact, his descriptions
of Bronze Age Europe (as opposed to his descriptions of the Bronze Age of
the Near East) increasingly appear to be anachronistic projections of a situ-
ation which only occurred in the first millennium BC: the colonisation of the
west Mediterranean by Greeks and Phoenicians, and active commercial in-
volvement north of the Alps, even the travelling smith. (In interpreting
bronze hoards, his rationalism and anti-clericalism again led him astray:
whereas he saw them as the stock-in-trade of a travelling smith, hidden for
protection, we would now recognise a large number of them as votive
offerings, transactions with the gods.) In short: Childe seems to have
conflated the very different sets of conditions which existed in the late
Neolithic/Copper Age, Bronze Age and Iron Age into effectively a single


                                            499




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 GORDON        CHILDE:


model of culture-contact, usually involving fac >-face relations and direct
travel. His models need to be loosened up, elaborated, and made more
specific to a whole range of very different conditions.
    And so here I come to a remarkable paradox. Childe, who was by
profession a European prehistorian, seems to have been consistently right
about the Near East - although often quite wrong about Europe: megalithic
missionaries, wandering bronzesmiths, even the whole chronology of the
Neolithic and earlier Bronze Age.8 Moreover, although within European
prehistory his major field of research was Neolithic and Bronze Age, his
detailed models often have more relevance to the Iron Age, about which he
wrote very little.
    Some clues to this paradox have been mentioned above: his highly
literate, middle-class, urban background; his university training (classics);
his antipathy to religion - which arguably is the most essential element in
understanding the past. Childe did not really understand or empathise with
the primitive: he came to Europe from Australia precisely to discover how
such savagery had been left behind, and how civilisation had dawned. His
views of the earlier stages of prehistory (although technically excellent when
discussing relative chronologies and archaeological stratigraphies) are,
really, a bit of a caricature.9 One feels that, had Childe been asked (not un-
reasonably, as a native Australian) about savages he had known, he might
well have replied in the famous words of Sir James Frazer: 'Heaven forbid!';
for Childe, like Frazer, believed in the same progressive sequence of magic,
then religion, then science. Childe's sympathies with prehistoric societies
grew progressively with increasing complexity: fundamentally out of touch,
in many ways, with the Palaeolithic and Neolithic; better in the Bronze Age
(at least in the more civilised parts); most accurate in the period he knew
best, the classical world of the first millennium BC. In fact, however, most
of European prehistory consists of societies for which models derived from
the Greeks and Phoenicians are fundamentally misleading (for surely those
'megalithic missionaries' in Childe's mind were Neolithic Phoenicians).10
Whether or not it was accidental, his chronology compressed (as we now
know) those bits of prehistory with which he was least sympathetic, and
magnified the rest as a percentage of the whole. Thus time seemed to pass
more quickly than it had done in prehistoric reality, and was made to appear
more event-like than the slow, long-term processes that he was really study-
ing - and more like the rapid changes of the period in which he was trained.
In this respect, processualist archaeologists have made a genuine improve-
ment in the interpretation of prehistoric Europe, going far beyond Childe;
and it is this aspect which is perhaps the most important implication of the
'radiocarbon revolution': the slowness of change in Neolithic and earlier
Bronze Age Europe, by comparison with the kaleidoscopic changes en-
visaged by Childe, Milojcic, or Miiller-Karpe.11 What at first seemed to
archaeologists to be like events v. ere in reality slow transformations.


                                            500




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                               RIGHT      OR     WRONG ?


   Part of the problem in Childe's conceptualisation of the Neolithic was
precisely his rather literal and rationalist interpretation of technology. He
separated science sharply from what he thought of as mumbo-jumbo: one
was effective in changing the world, the other was mere illusion that was
best discarded in the long term - error to be purified and burnt out.12 An axe
was an instrument for chopping down trees: any further cosmological or
sexual symbolism it might have, and any social obligations which it might
embody, were irrelevant to its 'real' purpose. Ornamentation and display
were frivolous epiphenomena: 'the objects of Stone Age trade were always
luxuries - if not merely shells or similar ornaments at least things that men
could easily have done without' (Childe 1951, 35). This is not merely his
puritan streak, but the voice of a man who does not himself indulge in the
social display of ornaments and the symbols of wealth, and disapproves of
those that do. It is not a good basis for understanding Neolithic motivations
and the nature of Neolithic trade.13
    Interestingly, the same prejudice is shared by one of the most influential
and widely quoted left-wing theoreticians of world trade, Immanuel
Wallerstein: 'long-distance trade was a trade in luxuries ... which depended
on the political indulgence of the wealthy... not really what we mean today
by trade' (1974, 41f); again, the puritanism so often associated with radical
critique. But as Jane Schneider has brilliantly pointed out (1977), this is
thoroughly to misunderstand the nature of the pre-capitalist world, where
the trade in 'useless luxuries' (like gold!) was often the major incentive for
inter-regional relationships and the channel by which other commodities,
ideas and techniques came to move. Such materials and contacts are as
fundamental to an understanding of the evolution of the world economy as
the inner meanings and symbolism of materials are to understanding the
Stone Age trade in flint axes and shell ornaments. Wallerstein only allows
the capitalist world-system to come into existence in the sixteenth century
AD, with bulk exchanges of grain for manufactured goods; Childe saw it
already in the sixteenth century BC, with Mycenaean entrepreneurship in the
Alpine region: both operate with similar definitions but make arbitrary
choices of threshold, early or late, within a continuous story.
   What is missing in this debate is a terminology that recognises the
different degrees of intervention between the 'inner' and 'outer' parts of the
process: the core areas of change and the surrounding areas which are trans-
formed in the process, and thus in turn affect the environment of the core
itself. Following a suggestion of Jane Schneider (1977,21), I have suggested
a terminological distinction between periphery and margin (Sherratt 1993a;
1993b; 1994). In the classic definition of a periphery, there is a com-
plementary (and exploitative) relationship whereby the periphery yields
up its raw materials and imports the core's manufactures14 - while trying,
through import substitution, to rid itself of such dependency and become a
core itself. (A process often resisted by the core, which may use imperial


                                           501




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 GORDON          CHILDE:


expansion to prevent it.) Crudely adapting this definition to the ancient
world, the 'core' represents already urban societies ('civilisations'), and the
periphery represents the ring of chiefdoms which supply them and have a
continuing relationship with them ('barbarians', like those directly in touch
with the Phoenician and Greek colonies around the shores of the first-
millennium Mediterranean). These latter societies are thus typically tran-
sitional between prehistoric illiteracy and urban literacy. The Hallstatt
phenomenon would be a good example from prehistoric Europe; and the
occurrence of Prunkgraber with southern imports is a convenient archae-
ological clue to the existence of such a situation (Mycenae Shaft-Graves,
Thracian tumuli). But because of this transitional character, such societies
form only small segments of the archaeological record; they are sandwiched
between longer periods of preceding prehistory (which they typically bring
to a close) and succeeding history. So for much longer periods than these
phases of direct interaction, European societies have been indirectly affected
by their civilised southern neighbours: and it is a mistake (as in the case of
the supposed 'Mycenaean horizon' in Bronze Age Europe) to conceive of
this in the same way as the emergence of barbarian societies in the Iron Age.
Hence the usefulness of the term margin: precisely the element which is
missing in Childe's models, but which encompasses at least three millennia
of later European prehistory.
    Within this sequence, bulk exchanges and direct commercial engagement
with the 'civilised' world are fairly late features of European prehistory: in
the Bronze Age affecting only Greece and perhaps peninsular Italy, and only
reaching trans-Alpine Europe slowly in the Iron Age. Before that, it was the
indirect ideological and technological influence (the two are not really
opposites, but complements!) that penetrated into the temperate parts of the
continent, carried often in quest of things which were remote, valuable and
useless - like gold and amber - and bringing knowledge of new luxuries -
like alcohol, wool and bronze. All this is far from a puritan view of progress,
and man's enhanced mastery over the environment. The slow transform-
ation of European culture and society can be crudely broken down into
millennial phases. From 3500-2500 BC, innovations of general desirability
spread across Europe over a broad front, creating new and enlarged cultural
units: Baden, Pit-Grave, Globular Amphorae, Corded Ware, Bell-Beaker.
Then from 2500-1500 BC, as bronze came to be used universally across
Mediterranean and temperate Europe as a medium of exchange, more
specific pathways and routes of trade emerged; while cultures themselves
became both more uniform in essentials (bronze weapons and associated
technologies) but more distinctive in idiosyncratic ways. From 1500-500
BC, Europe went from a peak of indirect exchanges with the Mediterranean,
through a fundamental transition from bronze to iron (and thus a differen-
tiation of currency-metal from utilitarian metal) that brought partial
collapse to the urban world, before renewed expansion on a yet larger scale


                                            502




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                RIGHT      oR    WRONG ?


brought more intimate interaction between north and south, between
temperate Europe and the Mediterranean. Only in the latter half of the third
of these millennial phases do many of Childe's models even begin to work;
and before that time, it is necessary to invent15 an anthropology which is
capable of understanding Europe's extinct cultures: but the effects of Near
Eastern innovations were no less real for being transmitted indirectly.
   What was so powerful that it was capable of causing this extended
transformation in the continent of Europe? It was the qualitatively different
nature of urban economies, and the contrast with surrounding non-urban
ones, which created the conditions for such a patterning of spatial relation-
ships. What is evident from archaeology is that the Urban Revolution pro-
duced more complex economic structures, not just in local terms (cities
and their hinterlands) but in regional and global terms as well, because
civilisations depended fundamentally on their barbarian peripheries, and
together came to affect all the world's remaining populations; just as, four
millennia previously, the appearance of farming in the same nuclear area
had irrevocably altered the future history of Europe's hunting and gathering
populations. It was these two revolutions which compare with the Industrial
Revolution as the great turning points in the history of the human species;
and it is to Gordon Childe that we owe their explicit recognition and the
exploration of their conceptual consequences. It is tempting, then, to com-
pare the continuing significance of these revolutions with those canonised by
Karl Marx. With hindsight, the transitions from antiquity to feudalism and
from feudalism to capitalism appear not as global shifts but as local episodes
in the fortunes of Europe, created by shifts in the world-system from the
Mediterranean to the Indian Ocean, and back to the Atlantic; transitions
whose consequence was magnified in Marxian theory by their identification
as precursors to the great future transition to socialism. Their revolutionary
character, then, was established only through a retrospective eschatology.
Childe was probably nearer the mark, in believing that aspects of capitalistic
behaviour go back to the Bronze Age; though any starting-point is arbitrary,
and the Stone Age would probably be more realistic. What is misleading
is to associate capitalism with rationalism: its commodities are surely as
fetishised as were Neolithic stone axes. It is a false perception of the past to
make it the antithesis of the present, or to make the present the antithesis of
the past. It is not in some intangible essence like 'rationality' or 'capitalism'
that the answer to world history lies, but in the concrete transformations
identified by Childe. Yet it would be equally misleading to mistake con-
creteness for mere materiality. The Neolithic and Urban Revolutions were,
indeed, demographic and calorific thresholds: but they were also revolutions
in cultural memory (houses, tombs, wall-paintings, writing), in which the
material was merely a token for the ideal. It is the challenge to post-Childean
archaeology, as to post-Marxist philosophy in general, to overcome the
radical rhetoric of its intellectual origins and to paint a more nuanced


                                            503




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                    GORDON          CHILDE:


picture: an account of material change that is not materialist in a re-
ductionist way, and encompasses religious sacrifice as much as improve-
ments in productivity. Consumption is always communication, not just the
satisfaction of bodily needs.
   Within the same structure, therefore, the interpretation can alter. Childe
had a pioneer's clarity of vision: it is his sense of structure which can still
inspire us as we continue to accumulate the detail. Today, however, we both
know more and understand more than Childe could have done; and we no
longer read him for revelation, as if he were a prophet rather than a fallible
scientist. It is a hagiographic convention to ask what a great man would
make of developments since his death: and Childe has already been invoked
in this capacity - 'if Childe were alive today' (Trigger 1982). But he is not;
he was a creature of his times, and should be celebrated as such. He will,
however - like his mentor Marx - always be present, in ghostly form, for a
dialogue with his pupils and successors: in Childe's case, likeable as well as
stimulating, and still, perhaps, with carefully calculated eccentricities to
startle the unprepared.

NOTES

 1. Some of the thoughts in this essay were provoked by the publication of the 1992 London
    conference on Childe, published as Harris 1994, and reviewed by myself in the TLS,
    October 1995.
 2. And in the assumption that there is a global food crisis in relation to present and pro-
    jected population levels. There isn't: only a stark choice between growing food or cash-
    crops, for luxury consumption. It is humankind's desire for the latter, not simply its need
    for the former that is the problem.
 3. Perhaps it is just our different standpoints in the economic cycle that make us today see
    the problem differently from Childe: whether we see the ability to produce or the desire
    to consume as the more problematic. In times of poverty, production is the problem: in
    times of boom, the need to stimulate consumption. It is important to recognise to what
    extent our perceptions mirror the experience of our own times!
 4. Childe's problem was that, as archaeology's lone intellectual, he didn't have anyone to
    talk to. His fellow historians on the CP Historians Group had such radically different
    ideas and timescales: Childe, remember, saw the origins of capitalism in the Bronze Age,
    the others took it as axiomatic that it began in the sixteenth century AD! Archaeologists
    and historians of the 1950s did not talk in terms of models, except in terms of Marxism,
    which was one of the few forms of historical generalisation. The patrician Grahame
    Clark, who might have been most sympathetic to such model-building, was certainly
    no Marxist (even though, in his own way, quite a rebel - and even known as 'corduroy
    Clark' whilst a graduate student, in reference to his informal style of dress: pers. comm.
    from the late Glyn Daniel). One reason why the New Archaeology really was so rev-
    olutionary was that it made explicit comparison and generalisation respectable. In
    Childe's day, that just wasn't done, at least in the humanities - which is why he generally
    didn't do it, and why it is such hard work trying to sort out what explicit models he
    actually held.
 5. Reflected at Cambridge, England in the school of Eric Higgs (the 'palaeoeconomists')
    rather than David Clarke.
 6.1 do not accept the single Grn- radiocarbon date of 3620 ± 60 bc for Sarnowo as
    providing an estimate of the age of the ploughmarks under the barrow there.


                                              504




                                 This content downloaded from
               128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  RIGHT      OR     WRONG ?

 7. Even though it should be added (in fairness) that this latter model may be appropriate for
    certain innovations like irrigation, in appropriate climatic conditions.
 8. He consciously chose a short chronology (see Childe 1938), in the light of his views on
    diffusion, rather than simply failed to anticipate a timescale that was ultimately revealed
    by dendrochronology and calibrated radiocarbon.
 9. Though it should be remembered quite what a revelation was the Man the Hunter
    conference (Lee and de Vore 1968), with its combination of archaeologists and anthro-
    pologists. Many stereotypes died at that conference, perhaps the most important one
    being that hunters have no spare time to build higher culture. Quite to the contrary: it
    is farmers and townsmen who work longer and longer hours.
10. Many of Childe's attitudes to European prehistory can be summarised in terms of the
    following equations:
    1. Neolithic = oriental = religion = bad
    2. Bronze Age = western = capitalism = good.
11. 'Prehistory' is, in this sense, different from 'history': though not in an etiological sense -
    that prehistory is 'determined' by process, but history is 'made' by individuals and events.
12. His famous example (1956,171) was making a side-scraper: probably it was supposed to
    be done at full moon after fasting, imprecation and sacrifice; but all these aspects were
    irrelevant to its usefulness. Not merely were they (fortunately) lost to the archaeological
    record, but they were ultimately lost to the cumulative tradition of technology: 'futile
    accessories, expressive of ideological delusions ... Error expunged, knowledge stands out
    all the clearer     The vehemence of Childe's imagery on this topic is reminiscent of
    Carlyle's description of the Puritan government of England under Cromwell, when 'great
    quantities of dross and crypto-poisonous matter' were burnt out to secure her future pro-
    gress (History of Frederick II of Prussia, 1, 1872, 188f). There is a Protestant rectitude
    about both attitudes, which expresses itself in hostility to ritual: arguably the single most
    important aspect of most anthropological descriptions.
13. It is notable that Childe, despite his antipodean origins, made very little reference to the
    ethnography of New Guinea, which in the last 20 years has been the richest source of
    models for Neolithic life in Europe. This betrays a rather narrow, and perhaps even
    insecure, Eurocentrism.
14. Note that this definition would make the USSR economically a periphery, not a core,
    despite its political might and superpower status. The latter was achieved by massively
    extending its own sub-periphery, and spending a large proportion of its income on
    armaments. The fact that the attempt failed in the long run suggests that such economic
    'laws' are ultimately determinant; but the fact that it succeeded for so long before
    collapsing is a warning not to be deterministic about applying them. As a realistic
    generalisation, one might assert that theocratic (whether Marxist or Islamic) command
    economies in the twentieth century are more likely to occupy peripheral rather than core
    positions.
15. 'Invent', because it cannot be studied directly, only reconstructed from two imperfect
    analogies: the European 'peasant' cultures of much later times, and the pre-urban
    societies of non-European parts of the world.




                                              505




                                 This content downloaded from
               128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                          BIBLIOGRAPHY

Adams, R. M. 1965 Land Behind Baghdad, Chicago and London: Chicago
   University Press.
Adams, R. M. 1972 'Patterns of Urbanization in Early Southern Mesopotamia',
   pp. 735-50 in P. Ucko, G. W. Dimbleby and R. Tringham (eds) Man, Settlement
   and TJrbanism, London: Duckworth.
Adams, R. M. 1974a 'Anthropological perspectives on ancient trade', Current
   Anthropology 15, 239-58.
Adams, R. M. 1974b 'Historic patterns of Mesopotamian irrigation agriculture',
   pp. 1 - 6 in T. E. Downing (ed.) Irrigation's Impact on Society, Tucson:
   University of Arizona Press.
Adams, R. M. 1981 Heartland of Cities: studies of ancient settlement and land use
   on the central floodplain of the Euphrates, Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Adams, R. M. and Nissen, J. 1972 The Uruk Countryside: The Natural Setting of
   Urban Societies, Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Allan, W. 1965 The African Husbandman, London: Oliver and Boyd.
Allan, W. 1972 'Ecology, techniques and settlement patterns', pp. 211-26 in
   P. Ucko, G. W. Dimbleby and R. Tringham (eds) Man, Settlement and
   Urbanism, London: Duckworth.
Algaze, G. 1989 'The Uruk expansion: cross-cultural exchange in early
   Mesopotamian civilisation', Current Anthropology 30(5), 571-608.
Algaze, G. 1993 The Uruk World System: the dynamics of expansion of early
   Mesopotamian Civilization, Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Alon, D. 1976 'Two cult vessels from Gilat', Atiqot 11,116-18.
Amiet, P. 1986 L'age des echanges inter-iraniens, 3500-1700 avant /.-C., Paris:
   Editions de la Reunion des musees nationaux.
Amoroso, E. C. and Jewell, P. A. 1963 'The exploitation of the milk-ejection reflex
   by primitive peoples', pp. 126-38 in A. E. Mourant and E E. Zeuner Man and
   Cattle (Royal Anthropological Institute Occasional Paper No. 18).
Andel, K. 1961 'Tibava - Eneolityczny zespol osadniczy u stop Wychorlatu', Acta
   Archaeologica Carpathica 3, 39-59.
Andersen, S. H. 1983 'Monstrede areblade fra Tybrind Vig', Kuml 1982/3, 11-30.
Andreeva, M. V. 1977 'K voprosu o yuzhnykh svyazyakh Maikopskoi kul'tury',
   Sovetskaya Arkheologiya 1977(1), 39-56.
Andreeva, M. V. 1979 'Ob izobrazheniyakh na serebryanykh Maikopskikh
   sosudakh', Sovetskaya Arkheologiya 1979(1), 22-34.
Angel, L. 1968 'Human remains at Karataf', American Journal of Archaeology
   72(3), 260-3.
Anthony, D. W. 1986 'The "Kurgan culture", Indo-European origins and the
   domestication of the horse: a reconsideration', Current Anthropology 27,
   291-313.


                                         506




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Anthony, D. W. and Brown, D. 1991 The origins of horseback riding', Antiquity
   65, 22-38.
Appadurai, A. 1986 The Social Life of Things: commodities in cultural
   perspective, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Applebaum, S. 1954 'The agriculture of the early Iron Age as exemplified at
   Figheldean Down, Wiltshire', Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 20,103-14.
Artzy, M. 1994 'Incense, camels and collared rim jars: desert trade routes and
   maritime outlets in the second millennium', Oxford Journal of Archaeology
   13(2), 121-47.
Athenaeus of Naucratis [Loeb Classics Edition, 7 vols] 1955-61 The
   Deipnosophists with an English translation by C. B. Gulick, London: Loeb.
Aurenche, O., Evin, J. and Hours, E (eds) 1987 Chronologies du Proche Orient /
   Chronologies in the Near East, Relative chronologies and absolute chronology
   16,000-4000 B.P. (BAR Int. Ser. 379 ii), Oxford.
Bakker, J. A. 1979 The TRB West Group (Cingula 5), Amsterdam: University of
   Amsterdam Subfaculty of Pre- and Protohistory.
Bakker, J. A., Vogel, J. C. and Wislariski, T. 1969 'TRB and other C-14 dates from
   Poland (Part A)', Helinium 9, 3-27.
Balassa, I. (ed.) 1972 Getreidebau in Ost- und Mitteleuropa, Budapest: Akademiai
   Kiado.
Banner, J. 1942 Das Tisza-, Maros-, Koros Gebiet bis zur Entwicklung der
   Bronzezeit, Leipzig: Archaeological Institute.
Banner, J. 1956 Die Peceler Kultur, Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Bar-Adon, P. 1980 The Cave of the Treasure: the Finds from the Caves in Nahal
   Mishmar, Jerusalem: Israel Excavation Society.
Barber, E. 1991 Prehistoric Textiles: the development of cloth in the Neolithic and
   Bronze Ages, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Barclay, G. J. and Russell-White, C. J. 1993 'Excavations in the ceremonial
   complex of the fourth to the second millennium BC at Balfarg/Balbirnie,
   Glenrothes, Fife', Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland 123,
   43-210 + microfiche.
Barker, E. 1927 National Character and the Factors in its Formation, London:
   Methuen.
Barker, G. 1985 Prehistoric Farming in Europe, Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press.
Barth, F. 1964 Nomads of South Persia, London: Allen and Unwin.
Barth, F. (ed.) 1969 Ethnic Groups and Boundaries, London: Allen and Unwin.
Bates, D. G. and Lees, S. 1977 'The role of exchange in productive specialisation',
   American Anthropologist 79(4), 824-41.
Bath-Bilkova, B. 1973 'K problemu pavodu hriver - Zur Herkunftsfrage der
   Halsringbarren', Pamatky Archeologicke 64, 24-41.
Battaglia, R. 1943 'La palafitta del Lago di Ledro nel Trentino', Memorie del
   Museo Civico di Storia Naturale della Venezia Tridentina 7.
Bauch, W. 1988 'Eine Nachbestattung der Einzelgrabkultur mit Pferdeschadel in
   einem Megalithgrab von Borgstedt, Kreis Rendsburg-Eckernforde', Offa 45,
   43-73.
Bayless, T. M. and Rosenzweig, N. S. 1966 'A radical difference in incidence of
   lactase deficiency\ Journal of the American Medical Association 197, 968-72.
Beale, T. W. 1973 'Early trade in highland Iran: a view from the source area',
   World Archaeology 5(2), 133-48.


                                         507




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Becker, C. J. 1954 'Stenalderbebyggelsen ved Store Valby i Vestsjaelland:
   Problemer omkring Tragtbaegerkulturens aeldste og yngste Fase', Aarbeger
   for Nordisk Oldkyndighed og Historie 1954, 127-97.
Becker, C. J. 1959 'Flint mining in Neolithic Denmark', Antiquity 33, 87-92.
Behre, K.-E. 1984 'Zur Geschichte der Bierwiirzen nach Fruchtfunden und
   schriftlichen Quellen', pp. 115-22 in W. van Zeist and W. A. Casparie (eds)
   Plants and Ancient Man, Rotterdam: Balkema.
Behrens, H. 1964 Die neolithisch-friihmetallzeitlichen Tierskelettfunde der Alten
    Welt (Veroffentlichungen des Landesmuseums fur Vorgeschichte in Halle, 19),
   Berlin: VEB Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften.
Behrens, H. 1973 Die Jungsteinzeit im Mittelelbe-Saale-Gebiet, Berlin: VEB
   Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften.
Behrens, H. 1981 'Der Walternienburger und der Bernburger Keramikstil und
   die Walternienburg-Bernburg Kultur', Jahresschrift fiir Mitteldeutsche
    Vorgeschichte 63,16.
Behrens, H. and Schlette, F. 1969 Die Neolitischen Becherkulturen im Gebiet
   der DDR und ihre Europaischen Beziehungen (Veroffentlichungen des
   Landesmuseums fiir Vorgeschichte in Halle, 24), Berlin: VEB Deutscher Verlag
   der Wissenschaften.
Bekmose, J. 1978 'Megalitgrave og megalitbygder', Antikvariske Studier 1, 47-64.
Bender, B. 1978 'Gatherer-hunter to farmer: a social perspective', World
   Archaeology 10, 204-22.
Bender-Jergensen, L. 1986 Forhistoriske tekstiler i Skandinavien / Prehistoric
   Scandinavian Textiles (Nordiske Fortidsminder B9), Copenhagen: Kongelige
   Nordiske-Oldskriftselskab.
Bender-Jorgensen, L. 1992 North European Textiles until AD 1000, Aarhus:
   Aarhus University Press.
Benecke, N. 1994a Der Mensch und seine Haustiere, Stuttgart: Theiss.
Benecke, N. 1994b Archaozoologische Studien zur Entwicklung der
   Haustierhaltung in Mitteleuropa und Sudskandinavien von den Anfangen
    bis zum ausgehenden Mittelalter (Schriften zu Ur- und Friihgeschichte, 46),
    Berlin: Akademie Verlag.
Benecke, N. 1994c 'Zur Domestikation des Pferdes in Mittel- und Osteuropa.
    Einige neue archaozoologische Befunde', pp. 123-44 in B. Hansel and
    S. Zimmer (eds) Die Indogermanen und das Pferd, Budapest: Archaeolingua.
Berciu, D. 1961 Contribupi la Problemele Neoliticului in Rominia in Lumina
    Noilor Cercetari, Bucharest: Romanian Academy of Sciences.
Berlin, I. 1976 Vico and Herder: two studies in the history of ideas, London:
    Chatto and Windus.
Bernal, M. 1987 Black Athena: the Afroasiatic roots of classical civilisation,
    volume 1: The fabrication of ancient Greece 1785-1985, London: Free
   Association Books.
Bibikova, V. 1.1969 'Do istorii domestikatsii konya na pivdennomu skhodi
    Evropi', Arkheologiya (Kiev) 22, 55-67.
Bibikova, V. I. 1975 'Formen der Viehzucht bei den aneolitischen Stammen
    Siidosteuropas', pp. 237-45 in K. H. Otto and H.-J. Brachmann (eds) Moderne
    Probleme der Archaeologie, Berlin: Akademie Verlag.
Bill, J. and Kinnes, 1.1975 'A gold beaker from Switzerland', Antiquity 49,132-3.
Binford, L. R. 1968 'Archeological perspectives', pp. 5-32 in S. R. Binford and
    L. R. Binford (eds) New Perspectives in Archeology, Chicago: Aldine.


                                         508




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY


Birdsell, J. B. 1968 'Some predictions for the Pleistocene', pp. 229-40 in R. B. Lee
   and I. Devore (eds) Man the Hunter, Chicago: Aldine.
Biro, K. T. 1988 'Distribution of lithic raw materials on prehistoric sites', in Acta
   Archaeologica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 40, Budapest: Akademiai
   Kiado.
Bisson de la Roque, F., Contenau, G. and Chapouthier, F. 1953 Le Tresor de Tod,
   Documents de Fouilles de l'lnstitut Fran^ais d'Archeologie Orientale du Caire,
   XI, Cairo.
Bittel, K. 1959 'Beitrage zur Kenntnis anatolischer Metalgefasse der zweiten Halfte
   des dritten Jahrtausends', Jahrbuch des Deutschen Archaologischen Instituts
   74, pp. Iff.
Bokonyi, S. 1962 'Zur Naturgeschichte des Ures in Ungarn und das Problem der
   Domestikation des Hausrindes', Acta Antiqua Academiae Scientiarum
   Hungaricae 14,175-214.
Bokonyi, S. 1968 'Die geschichtliche Entwicklung der Tierhaltung in Mittel- und
   Osteuropa', Agrdrtorteneti Szemle 10,1-4. (In Hungarian, with German
   summary.)
Bokonyi, S. 1974 History of Domestic Mammals in Eastern and Central Europe,
   Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Bokonyi, S. 1978 'The earliest waves of domestic horses in east Europe', Journal
   of Indo-European Studies 6, 17-76.
Bokonyi, S. 1979 'Copper Age vertebrate fauna from Ketegyhaza', pp. 101-18 in
   I. Ecsedy The People of the Pit-grave Kurgans in eastern Hungary, Budapest:
   Akademiai Kiado.
Bokonyi, S. 1987 'Horses and sheep in east Europe in the Copper and Bronze
   Ages', pp. 136-44 in S. N. Skomal and E. Polome (eds) Proto-Indo-European:
   the archaeology of a linguistic problem (Studies in honour of Marija Gimbutas),
   Washington: Institute for the Study of Man.
Bokonyi, S. 1991 'Late Chalcolithic horses in Anatolia', in R. H. Meadow and
   H.-P. Uerpmann (eds) Equids in the Ancient World, vol. 2, Wiesbaden:
   Reichert.
Bokonyi, S. (ed.) 1992 Cultural landscape changes in south-east Hungary I:
   Reports on the Gyomaendrod Project, Budapest: Archaeolingua.
Bokonyi, S. 1993 Pferdedomestikation, Haustierhaltung und Ernahrung
   (Archaeolingua, Series Minor 3), Budapest: Archaeological Institute of the
   Hungarian Academy.
Bokonyi, S. 1994 'Uber die Entwicklung der Sekundarnutzung', in Beitrage zur
   Archaozoologie und prahistorischen Anthropologic: im Andenken an Joachim
   Boessneck (8: Arbeitstreffen der Osteologen, Konstanz 1993): Stuttgart 1994,
   21-8.
Boelicke, U. 1976/7 'Das Neolitische Erdwerk Urmitz', Acta Praehistorica et
   Archaeologica 7/8, 73-121.
Boessneck, J. 1956 'Tierknochen aus spatneolithischen Siedlungen Bayerns',
   Studien an vor- und friihgeschichtlichen Tierresten Bayerns 1.
Bognar-Kutzian, I. 1958 'Polgar-Csoshalom (Archaeologische Forschungen im
   Jahre 1957)', Archaeologiai Ertesitb 85, 201.
Bognar-Kutzian, I. 1963 The Copper Age cemetery of Tizapolgar-Basatanya
   (Archaeologia Hungarica N.S. 42), Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Bognar-Kutzian, I. 1966 'Das Neolithikum in Ungarn', Archaeologia Austriaca 40,
   249-80.


                                         509




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bognar-Kutzian, I. 1972 The Early Copper Age Tiszapolg r         ture in the
   Carpathian Basin (Archaeologia Hungarica N.S. 48), B;        est: Akademiai
   Kiado.
Bognar-Kutzian, I. See also Kutzian, I.
Bogucki, P. 1984 'Ceramic sieves of the Linear Pottery culture and their economic
   implications', Oxford Journal of Archaeology 3(1), 15-30.
Bogucki, P. 1986 'The antiquity of dairying in temperate Europe', Expedition
   28(2), 51-8.
Bogucki, P. 1988 Forest Farmers and Stockherders: early agriculture and its
   consequences in North-Central Europe, Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press.
Bogucki, P. 1993 'Animal traction and households in Neolithic Europe', Antiquity
   67, 492-503.
Bona, I. 1960 'Clay models of Bronze Age wagons and wheels in the Middle
   Danube Basin', Acta Archaeologica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 12,
   83-111.
Bona, I. 1975 Die Mittlere Bronzezeit Ungarns und ihre sudostlichen Beziehungen
   (Archaeologia Hungarica 49), Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Bonev, A. 1977 'Sustoyaniya na prouchvaniyata na zlatnoto sukrovishte ot
   Vulchitrun', Arkheologiya (Sofia) 19(4), 11-19.
Bonev, A. 1984 'Datierung des Goldschatzes von Valchitran', Studia Prehistorica 7,
   164-77.
Boserup, E. 1965 The Conditions of Agricultural Growth, London: Allen and
   Unwin.
Bouzek, J. 1985 The Aegean, Anatolia and Europe: cultural inter-relations in the
   second millennium BC (Studies in Mediterranean Archaeology 29), Goteborg:
   Astrom.
Bradley, R. 1971 'Trade competition and artefact distribution', World Archaeology
   2(3), 347-51.
Bradley, R. 1980 'Subsistence, exchange and technology - a social framework for
   the Bronze Age in southern England c.1400-700 BC', pp. 57-75 in J. Barrett
   and R. Bradley (eds) Settlement and Society in the British Later Bronze Age
   (BAR Brit. Ser. 83), Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
Bradley, R. 1989 'Deaths and entrances: a contextual analysis of megalithic art',
   Current Anthropology 30, 68-75.
Bradley, R. and Edmonds, M. 1993 Interpreting the Axe Trade: production and
   exchange in Neolithic Britain, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Braidwood, R. J., Sauer, J. D., Helbaek, H., Mangelsdorf, P. C., Cutler, H. C.,
   Coon, C. S., Linton, R., Steward, J. and Oppenheim, A. L. 1953 'Symposium:
   Did man once live by beer alone?', American Anthropologist 55, 515-26.
Brandt, K. H. 1969 'Ein neuer Holzpflug vom Walle-Typus [Mehlbergen, Kr
   Nienburg]', Bremer Archaologische Blatter 5,17-20.
Briard, J. 1978 'Das Silbergefass von Saint-Adrien, Cotes-du-Nord',
   Archaologisches Korrespondenzblatt 8,13-20.
Briard, J. and L'Helgouach, J. 1957 Chalcolithique, Neolithique secondaire et
   survivances neolithiques a I'Age du Bronze ancien, Rennes: Travaux du
   Laboratoire d'Anthropologic prehistorique de la Faculte des Sciences de
   Rennes.
Brookfield, H. C. and Hart, D. 1971 Melanesia: a geographical interpretation of
   an island world, London: Methuen.


                                        510




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Brothwell, D. and Higgs, E. S. (eds) 1969 Science in Archaeology (2nd edn),
   London: Thames and Hudson.
Brunn, W. A. von 1959 Die Hortfunde der fruhen Bronzezeit aus Sachsen-Anhalt,
   Sachsen und Thuringen, Berlin: Akademie Verlag.
Bryan, K. 1929 'Floodwater farming', Geographical Review 19, 444-56.
Buchholz, H. G. 1983 'Doppelaxte und die Frage der Balkanbeziehungen des
   agaischen Kulturkreises', pp. 43-134 in A. Poulter (ed.) Ancient Bulgaria,
   Nottingham: Nottingham University Department of Classical and
   Archaeological Studies.
Buchholz, H. G. and Karageorghis, V. 1973 Prehistoric Greece and Cyprus: an
   archaeological handbook, London: Phaidon.
Bulliet, R. W. 1975 The Camel and the Wheel, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
   University Press.
Burger, I. 1980. 'Die chronologische Stellung der FufSschalen in den
   endneolitischen Kulturgruppen Mittel- und Siidosteuropas', pp. 11-45 in
   Spindler, K. (ed.) Vorzeit zwischen Main und Donau, Erlanger Forschungen,
   Reihe A 26, Erlangen: Universitatsbund Erlangen-Niirnberg.
Burgess, C. and Shennan, S. 1976 'The Beaker phenomenon: some suggestions',
   pp. 309-31 in C. Burgess and R. Miket (eds) Settlement and Economy in the
   third and second millennia BC (BAR Brit. Ser. 33), Oxford: British
   Archaeological Reports.
Burgess, C., Topping, P., Mordant, C. and Maddison, M. (eds) 1988 Enclosures
   and Defences in the Neolithic of Western Europe (BAR Int. Ser. 403), Oxford:
   British Archaeological Reports.
Buringh, P. 1957 'Living conditions in the lower Mesopotamian Plain in ancient
   times', Sumer 13, 30-46.
Burrow, J. W. 1966 Evolution and Society: a study in Victorian social theory,
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Burrow, J. W. 1981 A Liberal Descent: Victorian historians and the English past,
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Burton, J. 1989 'Repeng and the salt-makers: "ecological trade" and stone axe
   production in the Papua New Guinea Highlands', Man (NS) 24, 255-72.
Butzer, K. W. 1970 'Physical conditions in eastern Europe, western Asia and Egypt
   before the period of agriculture', pp. 35-69 in Cambridge Ancient History
   vol. 1(1) (3rd edn), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Butzer, K. W. 1972 Environment and Archaeology, London and Chicago:
   Aldine.
Butzer; K. W. 1976 Early Hydraulic Civilization in Egypt, Chicago: Chicago
   University Press.
Bylund, E. 1960 'Theoretical considerations regarding the distribution of
   settlement in inner north Sweden', Geografisker Annaler 42, 225-31.
Cantacuzino, G. and Morinz, S. 1963 'Die Jungsteinzeitlichen Funde in Cernica
   (Bukarest)', Dacia (NS) 7, 27-89.
Carneiro, R. L. 1960 'Slash and burn agriculture: a closer look at its implications
   for settlement patterns', in A. F. C. Wallace (ed.) Men and Cultures,
   Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Cassau, A. 1935 'Ein Feuersteindolch mit Holzgriff und Lederscheide aus
   Wiepenkathen, Kreis Stade', Mannus 199.
Catling, H. 1964 Cypriot Bronzework in the Mycenaean World, Oxford: Oxford
   University Press.


                                        511




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY


Caulfield, S. 1978 'Neolithic fields: the Irish evidence', pp. 137-43 in H. C. Bowen
  and P. Fowler (eds) Early Land Allotment (BAR Brit. Ser. 48), Oxford: British
  Archaeological Reports.
Cauvin, J. 1994 Naissance des divinites, Naissance de Vagriculture, Paris: CNRS.
Chang, C. and Koster, H. A. 1986 'Beyond bones: towards an archaeology of
  pastoralism', Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory 9, 97-148.
Chapman, J. C. 1983 'The "Secondary Products Revolution" and the limitations
  of the Neolithic', Bulletin of the Institute of Archaeology [University of
  London] 19 (1982), 107-22.
Chapman, R. 1981 'The emergence of formal disposal areas and the "problem" of
  megalithic tombs in prehistoric Europe', pp. 71-82 in R. Chapman, I. Kinnes
  and K. Randsborg (eds) The Archaeology of Death, Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press.
Chappell, J. 1966 'Stone Axe Factories in the highlands of East New Guinea',
  Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 32, 96-121.
Charles, J. A. 1967 'Early arsenical bronzes - a metallurgical view', American
  Journal of Archaeology 71, 21-6.
Charles, J. A. 1969 'Metallurgical examination of south-east European copper
  axes' (Appendix I in Renfrew 1969), Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 35,
  40-2.
Cherednichenko, N. N. 1976 'Kolesnitsy Evrazii epokhi pozdnei bronzy', pp. 135-
  50 in Eneolit i bronzovyi vek Ukraini, Kiev: Institute of Archaeology.
Chernykh, E. 1966 Istoriya drevneishei metallurgiia Vostochnoi Evropy, Moscow:
  Nauka.
Chernykh, E. 1971 'Spektralen analiz na metalnite nakhodki ot praistoricheskoto
  selishche do s. Ezero', Arkheologiya 13, 55-61.
Chernykh, E. N. 1978 Gornoe delo i metallurgiya v drevneishei Bolgarii, Sofia:
  Bulgarian Academy of Sciences.
Chernykh, E. N. 1983 'Friihmetallurgische Kontakte in Eurasien', Beitrage zur
  allgemeinen und vergleichenden Archaologie 5,19-34.
Chernykh, E. N. 1992 Ancient Metallurgy in the USSR: the Early Metal Age,
  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chernykh, E. and Radunceva, A. 1972 'Starite medni rudnitsi okolo gr. Stara
  Zagora', Arkheologiya 14, 6 , 1 - 7 .
Cheynier, A. 1936 Jouannet - Grand-pere de la Prehistoire, Paris.
Childe, V. G. 1915 'On the date and origin of Minyan ware', Journal of Hellenic
  Studies 35, 254-75.
Childe, V. G. 1916 'The Influence of Indo-Europeans in Prehistoric Greece'
  (University of Oxford B.Litt. thesis, not preserved).
Childe, V. G. 1923 How Labour Governs: A Study of Workers' Representation in
  Australia, London: The Labour Publishing Company Ltd.
Childe, V. G. 1924 'A gold vase of Early Helladic type', Journal of Hellenic Studies
  44,163-4.
Childe, V. G. 1925 The Dawn of European Civilisation ('History of Civilisation'
  series), London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. (Successive editions thereafter: 2nd,
  1927; 3rd, 1939; 4th, 1947; 5th, 1950; 6th, 1957.)
Childe, V. G. 1926 The Aryans: A Study of Indo-European Origins ('History of
  Civilisation' series), London: Kegan Paul.
Childe, V. G. 1928 The Most Ancient East: The Oriental Prelude to European
  Prehistory, London: Kegan Paul.


                                         512




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Childe, V. G. 1929 The Danube in Prehistory, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Childe, V. G. 1930 The Bronze Age, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Childe, V. G. 1931 Skara Brae: A Pictish Village in Orkney, London: Kegan Paul.
Childe, V. G. 1933 'Is prehistory practical?', Antiquity 7, 410.
Childe, V. G. 1934 New Light on the Most Ancient East, London: Routledge and
  Kegan Paul. (Successive editions thereafter: 2nd, 1935; 3rd, 1952; 4th, 1954;
   5th, 1958.)
Childe, V. G. 1935 The Prehistory of Scotland, London: Kegan Paul.
Childe, V. G. 1936 Man Makes Himself London: Watts and Co.
Childe, V. G. 1938 The Orient and Europe' (Presidential address to Section II,
  Anthropology, of the British Association), The Advancement of Science 1938,
   181-96.
Childe, V. G. 1942 What Happened in History, Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Childe, V. G. 1944 Progress and Archaeology, London: Watts and Co.
Childe, V. G. 1947 'Archaeology as a social science', University of London,
   Institute of Archaeology, Third Annual Report, 49-60.
Childe, V. G. 1949a 'The first bronze vases to be made in central Europe', Acta
   Archaeologica 20, 257-65.
Childe, V. G. 1949b 'The origins of Neolithic culture in northern Europe',
  Antiquity 32,129-35.
Childe, V. G. 1950 Magic, Craftsmanship and Science (Frazer Lecture 1949),
   Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.
Childe, V. G. 1951a 'The first wagons and carts - from the Tigris to the Severn',
  Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 17, 177-94.
Childe, V. G. 1951b Social Evolution, London: Watts and Co.
Childe, V. G. 1952 'Trade and industry in barbarian Europe till Roman times', pp.
   1-32 in M. Postan and E. Rich (eds) The Cambridge Economic History of
  Europe 1, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Childe, V. G. 1954a 'Early forms of society', pp. 38-57 in C. Singer, E. J. Holm-
  yard and A. R. Hall (eds) A History of Technology 1, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Childe, V. G. 1954b 'Prehistory', pp. 3-155 in E. Barker, G. N. Clark and
  P. Vaucher (eds) The European Inheritance 1, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[Childe, V. G.] 1955 'Contributions to Prehistoric Archaeology offered to
  Professor V. G. Childe in honour of his sixty-fifth birthday by twenty-seven
  authors', Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society NS 21.
Childe, V. G. 1956a Society and Knowledge: the growth of human traditions, New
  York: Allen and Unwin.
Childe, V. G. 1956b Piecing Together the Past: the interpretation of archaeological
  data, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Childe, V. G. 1956c 'Notes on the chronology of the Hungarian Bronze Age', Acta
  Archaeologica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 7, 291-9.
Childe, V. G. 1957a 'The Bronze Age', Past and Present 12, 2-15.
Childe, V. G. 1957b The Dawn of European Civilisation (7th edn), London:
  Routledge.
Childe, V. G. 1958a [1957] 'Retrospect', Antiquity 32, 69-74.
Childe, V. G. 1958b [1957] 'Valediction', Bulletin of the Institute of Archaeology,
   University of London 1,1-8.
Childe, V. G. 1958c The Prehistory of European Society, Harmondsworth:
  Penguin Books.
Childe, V. G. 1963 (revised edn) Social Evolution, London: Fontana.


                                         513




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Childe, V. G. 1980 [1957] letter and memoir reproduced in editorial, Antiquity 54,
   1-3.
Chippindale, C. 1988 The invention of words for the idea of prehistory',
   Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 54, 303-14.
Chisholm, M. 1968 Rural Settlement and Land Use (2nd edn), London:
   Hutchison.
Chorley, R. J. and Haggett, P. (eds) 1967 Models in Geography, London: Methuen.
Christiansen-Weniger, F. 1967 'Die anatolischen Sapfliige und ihre Vorganger im
   Zweistromland', Archaologischer Anzeiger 2, 151-62.
Chrpovsky, B. (ed.) 1973 Symposium iiber die Entstehung und Chronologie der
   Badener Kultur, Bratislava: Slovak Academy of Sciences.
Cipolla, C. 1978 The Economic History of World Population (7th edn),
   Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Clark, C. and Haswell, M. 1964 The Economics of Subsistence Agriculture,
   London: Macmillan.
Clark, J. G. D. 1942 'Bees in antiquity', Antiquity 16, 208-15.
Clark, J. G. D. 1946 Prom Savagery to Civilisation, London: Corbett Press.
Clark, J. G. D. 1952 Prehistoric Europe: The Economic Basis, London:
   Methuen.
Clark, J. G. D. 1965 'Traffic in stone axe and adze blades', Economic History
   Review 2nd ser. 18,1-28.
Clark, [J.] G. [D.] 1976 'Prehistory since Childe', Bulletin of the Institute of
   Archaeology, University of London 13,1-21.
Clark, J. D. 1976 'The domestication process in sub-Saharan Africa with special
   reference to Ethiopia', paper presented to the IXth UISPP Congress, Nice.
Clark, R. M. 1975 'A calibration curve for radiocarbon dates', Antiquity 49,
   251-66.
Clarke, D. L. 1968 Analytical Archaeology, London: Methuen.
Clarke, D. L. 1970 Beaker Pottery of Great Britain and Ireland, Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
Clarke, D. L. 1973 'Archaeology: the loss of innocence', Antiquity 47, 6-18
   (reprinted in D. L. Clarke 1979 Analytical Archaeologist, Academic Press,
   83-103).
Clarke, D. L. 1976a 'The Beaker network - social and economic models', pp.
   459-76 in Glockenbechersymposion Oberried 1974, Bussem/Haarlem: Fibula-
   van Dishoeck (reprinted in D. L. Clarke 1979 Analytical Archaeologist,
   Academic Press, 333-62).
Clarke, D. L. 1976b 'Mesolithic Europe: the economic basis', pp. 449-81 in
   G. Sieveking, I. Longworth and K. Wilson (eds) Problems in Economic and
   Social Archaeology, London: Duckworth (reprinted in D. L. Clarke 1979
   Analytical Archaeologist, Academic Press, 207-62).
Clarke, D. L. 1979 'The economic context of trade and industry in Barbarian
   Europe till Roman Times', in D. L. Clarke 1979 Analytical Archaeologist,
   Academic Press, 263-332.
Coghlan, H. H. 1961 'Some problems concerning the manufacture of copper shaft-
   hole axes', Archaeologia Austriaca 29, 57-75.
Cohen, A. P. 1985 'The Symbolic Construction of Community', London and New
   York: Tavistock.
Cohen, J. 1970 'The palaeoecology of south central Anatolia', Anatolian Studies
   20,119-37.


                                         514




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Cohen, J. and Erol, O. 1969 'Aspects of the palaeogeography of central Anatolia',
   Geographical Journal 135, 389-98.
Cohen, M. N. 1977 The Food Crisis in Prehistory, New Haven: Yale University
   Press.
Compagnoni, B. and Tosi, M. 1978 The camel: its distribution and state of
   domestication in the Middle East during the third millennium in light of finds
   from Shahr-i Sokhta', pp. 91-103 in R. H. Meadow and M. A. Zeder (eds)
   Approaches to Faunal Analysis in the Middle East, Cambridge, Mass.: Peabody
   Museum, Bulletin 2.
Com§a, E. 1967 'Ueber die Verbreitung und Herkunft einiger von den
   jungsteinzeitlichen Menschen auf dem Gebiete Rumaniens verwendeten
   Werkstoffe', A Mora Ferenc Muzeum fcvkonyve, Szeged 1967, 26-8.
Com§a, E. 1974 'Die Entwicklung, Periodisierung und relative Chronologie der
   jungsteinzeitlichen Kulturen Rumaniens', Zeitschrift fur Archaologie 8,1-44.
Com§a, E. 1976 'Les matieres premieres en usage chez les hommes neolithiques de
   l'actuel territoire Roumain', Acta Archaeologica Carpathica 16, 239-49.
Constantin, C. 1985 'Fin du Rubane, Ceramique du Limbourg et post-Rubane:
   le neolithique le plus ancien en bassin Parisien et en Hainault', Oxford: British
   Archaeological Reports, International Series 273.
Cooke, R. U. and Reeves, R. W. 1976 Arroyos and Environmental Change,
   Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Crane, E. 1983 The Archaeology of Beekeeping, London: Duckworth.
Cranstone, B. 1969 'Animal husbandry: the evidence from ethnography', pp.
   247-64 in P. J. Ucko and G. W. Dimbleby (eds) The Domestication and
   Exploitation of Plants and Animals, London: Duckworth.
Cribb, R. 1991 Nomads in Archaeology, Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press.
Crosby, A. W. 1986 Ecological Imperialism: the biological expansion of Europe,
   900-1900, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
D'Arcy Thompson, W. 1917 On Growth and Form, Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
D^browski, M. J. 1971 'Analiza pylkowa warstw kulturowych z Sarnowa, pow.
   Wroclawek', Prace i Materiafy Muzeum Archeologicznego i Etnograficznego
   w Lodzi (Ser. Arch.) 18,147-64.
Dahl, G. and Hjort, A. 1976 Having Herds: pastoral herd growth and household
   economy, University of Stockholm (Studies in Social Anthropology, 2).
Dalton, G. (ed.) 1968 Primitive, Archaic and Modern Economies: Essays of Karl
   Polanyi, New York: Doubleday.
Dalton, G. 1977 'Aboriginal economies in stateless societies', pp. 191-209 in
   T. K. Earle and J. Ericson (eds) Exchange Systems in Prehistory, New York:
   Academic Press.
Daniel, G. 1962a The Megalith Builders of Western Europe (2nd edn),
   Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Daniel, G. 1962b The Idea of Prehistory, London: Watts and Co.
Davidsen, K. 1978 The Final TRB Culture in Denmark: a settlement study
   (Arkaeologiske Studier 5), Copenhagen.
Davis, E. N. 1977 The Vaphio Cups and Aegean gold and silver ware, New York:
   Garland.
Davis, S. J. M. 1984 'The advent of milk and wool production in western Iran:
   some speculations', pp. 265-78 in J. Clutton Brock and C. Grigson (eds)


                                         515




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY


   Animals and Archaeology Vol. 3: Early Herders and their Flocks (BAR Int. Ser.
   202), Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
Davis, S. J. M. 1987 The Archaeology of Animals, London: Batsford.
Davis, S. J. M. 1993 The zoo-archaeology of sheep and goat in Mesopotamia',
   Bulletin on Sumerian Agriculture 7, 1-7.
Demoule, J.-R and Guilaine, J. 1986 Le Neolithique de la France: hommage a
   Gerard Bailloud, Paris: Picard.
Denes, J. B., Makkay, J. and Miklos, S. B. 1989 Bekes Megye Regeszeti
   Topografidja: A Szarvasi Jaras IV 12 (Magyarorszag Regeszeti Topografiaja, 8),
   Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Dergachev, V., Sherratt, A. G. and Larina, O. 'Recent results of Neolithic research
   in Moldavia (USSR)', Oxford Journal of Archaeology 10(1), 1-16.
Deschler, W. 1965 'Native cattle-keeping in west Africa', in A. Leeds and A. Vayda
   (eds) Man, Culture and Animals, Washington: American Association for the
   Advancement of Science.
Deutsch, K. W. 1953 'The growth of nations: some recurrent patterns of political
   and social integration', World Politics 5, 168-95.
Diakonov, I. M. 1985 'On the original home of the speakers of Indo-European',
  Journal of Indo-European Studies 13, 92-174.
Dickson, J. H. 1978 'Bronze Age mead', Antiquity 52, 108-13.
Dietz, U. L. 1992 'Zur Frage vorbronzezeitlicher Trensenbelege in Europa',
   Germania 70(1), 17-36.
Dobosi, V. T. 1972 'Mesolitische Fundorte in Ungarn', Alba Regia 12 (1971),
   39-59. (Also published separately in Die Aktuellen Fragen der Bandkeramik,
   edited by J. Fitz and J. Makkay, Szekesfehervar: Co. Feher Museum.)
Dobosi, V. T. 1976 'Prehistoric settlement at Demjen Hegyeskoberc', Folia
   Archaeologica 27, 9-39.
Dohle, H.-J. 1994 Die Linienbandkeramischen Tierknochen von Eisleben,
   Bordekreis (Veroffentlichungen des Landesamtes fur archaologische
   Denkmaler Sachsen-Anhalt, Bd. 47), Halle (Saale): Landesmuseum fur
   Vorgeschichte.
Dorrell, P. 1978 The uniqueness of Jericho', pp. 11-18 in P. R. S. Moorey and
   P. Parr (eds) Archaeology in the Levant, Warminster: Aris and Philips.
Douglas, M. 1958 'Raffia cloth in the Lele economy', Africa 28,109-22.
Douglas, M. 1966 Purity and Danger: an analysis of the concepts of pollution and
   taboo, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Douglas, M. 1967 'Primitive rationing: a study in controlled exchange', pp.
   119-47 in R. W. Firth (ed.) Themes in Economic Anthropology, London:
   Tavistock.
Douglas, M. 1975 'Deciphering a meal', pp. 249-75 in M. Douglas (ed.) Implicit
   Meanings, London: Routledge.
Douglas, M. 1982 'Food as a system of communication', pp. 82-104 in
   M. Douglas (ed.) In the Active Voice, London: Routledge.
Douglas, M. 1987 Constructive drinking: perspectives on drink from
   Anthropology, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Douglas, M. and Isherwood, B. 1978 The World of Goods: towards an
   anthropology of consumption, Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Driehaus, J. 1960 Die Altheimer Gruppe und das Jungneolithikum in
   Mitteleuropa, Mainz: RGZM.
Driver, H. E. 1961 Indians of North America, Chicago: Chicago University Press.


                                         516




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Drower, M. 1954 'Water-supply, irrigation and agriculture', pp. 520-57 in
    C. Singer, J. Holmyard and A. R. Hall (eds) A History of Technology vol. I,
    Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Drower, M. 1969 'The domestication of the horse', pp. 471-8 in P. Ucko and
    G. Dimbleby (eds) The Domestication and Exploitation of Plants and Animals,
    London: Duckworth.
Druks, A. and Tsaferis, V. 1970 'Tel Azor', Revue Biblique 77, 578 and Plate XLb.
Ducos, P. 1969 'Methodology and results of the study of the earliest domesticated
    animals in the Near East (Palestine)', pp. 265-76 in P. J. Ucko and G. W.
    Dimbleby (eds) The Domestication and Exploitation of Plants and Animals,
    London: Duckworth.
Ducos, P. 1973 'Sur quelques problemes poses par l'etude des premiers elevages en
    Asie du sud-ouest', pp. 77-85 in J. Matolcsi (ed.) Domestikationsforschung und
    Geschichte der Haustiere, Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Dumezil, G. 1968 (4th edn) Mythe et epopee I: L'ideologie des trois fonctions dans
    les epopees des peuples indo-europeens, Paris: Gallimard.
Durham, W. 1991 Coevolution: genes, culture and human diversity, Stanford:
    Stanford University Press.
Durkheim, E. 1933 The Division of Labor in Society, New York: Collier-
    Macmillan.
Dyson-Hudson, R. and Dyson-Hudson, N. 1969 'Subsistence herding in Uganda',
    Scientific American 220, 76-89.
Dzis-Raiko, G. A. and Chernyakov, I. T. 1981 'Zolotaya chasha
    Vulchitrunovskogo tipa iz severo-zapadnogo prichernomoriya', Sovetskaya
    Arkheologiya 1981(1), 151-62.
Earle, T. K. 1977 'A reappraisal of redistribution: complex Hawaian chiefdoms',
    pp. 213-29 in T. K. Earle and J. Ericson (eds) Exchange Systems in Prehistory,
    New York: Academic Press.
East, G. 1968 The Geography Behind History, London: Nelson.
Ebbesen, K. and Brinch-Petersen, E. 1973 'Fuglebaeksbanken: en jaettestue pa
    Stevns', Aarboger for Nordisk Oldkyndighed og Historie, 73-106.
Ebert, M. 1925 Reallexikon der Vorgeschichte, Berlin: Verlag Walter de Gruyter.
Ecsedy, I. 1979 The people of the Pit-grave Kurgans in eastern Hungary, Budapest:
    Akademiai Kiado.
Ecsedy, I., Kovacs, L., Maraz, B. and Torma, I. 1982 Bekes Megye Regeszeti
    Topografiaja: A Szeghalmi Jaras IV/I (Magyarorszag Regeszeti Topografiaja, 6),
    Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Eggers, H. J. 1951 Der Romische Import im freien Germanien (Atlas der
    Urgeschichte 1), Museum fiir Volkerkunde und Vorgeschichte, Hamburg.
Ellis, L. 1984 The Cucuteni-Tripole Culture: a study in technology and the origins
    of complex society (BAR Int. Ser. 217), Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
Eluere, C. (ed.) 1989 Le premier Or de VHumanite en Bulgarie: 5e millenaire,
   Paris: Reunion des musees nationaux.
Emboden, W. 1979 Narcotic plants: hallucinations, stimulants, inebrients and
   hypnotics; their origins and uses, London: Studio Vista.
Engels, E 1985 [1st edn 1884] The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the
   State, in connection with Lewis H. Morgan's Researches, Harmondsworth:
   Penguin Books.
Englund, R. K. 1995 'Late Uruk period cattle and dairy products: evidence from
   protocuneiform sources', Bulletin on Sumerian Agriculture 8, 35-50.


                                        517




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY

Epstein, C. 1985 'Laden animal figurines from the Chalcolithic period in Palestine',
    Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research 258, 53-62.
Esse, D. 1991 Subsistence, Trade and Social Change in Early Bronze Age Palestine
    (Studies in Oriental Civilization 50), Chicago: Oriental Institute.
Evans, A. J. 1909 Scripta Minoa: the written documents of Minoan Crete, vol. 1,
    The Hieroglyphic and Primitive Linear Categories, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Evans, A. 1935 The Palace of Minos at Knossos, London: Macmillan.
Evans, J. 1943 Time and Chance, London: Longmans, Green and Co.
Evans, J. 1954 Prelude and Fugue, London: Museum Press Ltd.
Evans, J. D. 1987 'No. 1: the first half-century - and after', Bulletin of the Institute
    of Archaeology 24,1-25.
Evenari, M., Shanan, L. and Tadmor, N. 1971 The Negev: the challenge of the
    desert, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Falkenstein, A. 1936 Archaische Texte aus Uruk, Ausgrabungen der Deutschen
    Forschungsgemeinschaft in Uruk-Warka, Berlin: Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
    schaft.
Fell, C. I. 1964 'The Cumbrian type of polished stone axe and its distribution in
    Britain', Proceedings of the Prehistorical Society 30, 39-55.
Filipovski, J. and Civic, G. 1969 The Soils of Jugoslavia, Belgrade.
Firth, J. (ed.) 1967 Themes in Economic Anthropology (ASA Monographs No. 6),
    London: Tavistock.
Fischer, U. 1956 Die Graber der Steinzeit im Saalegebiet, Berlin: Vorgeschichtliche
    Forschungen 15.
Flannery, K. V. 1965 'The ecology of early food production in Mesopotamia',
    Science 147,1246-56.
Flannery, K. V. 1969 'Origins and ecological effects of early domestication in Iran
    and the Near East', pp. 73-100 in P. Ucko and G. Dimbleby (eds) The
    Domestication and Exploitation of Plants and Animals, London: Duckworth.
Flannery, K. V. (ed.) 1976 The Early Mesoamerican village, New York: Academic
    Press.
Flannery, K. 1994 'Childe the evolutionist: a perspective from North America', in
    Harris (1994), 101-20.
Flatz, G. and Rotthauwe, H. W. 1977 'The human lactase polymorphism',
    Progress in Medical Genetics 2, 203-44.
Forbes, R. J. 1954 'Chemical, culinary and cosmetic arts', pp. 238-98 in C. Singer,
    E. J. Holmyard and A. R. Hall (eds) The Oxford History of Technology, Vol. 1:
    From early times to the fall of ancient empires, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Forbes, R. J. 1955 'Food, alcoholic beverages, vinegar', and 'Fermented beverages
    500 B C - A D 1500', pp. 50-83 and 106-30 in R. J. Forbes, Studies in Ancient
    Technology 3, Leiden: Brill.
Forbes, R. J. 1957 'Sugar and its substitutes in antiquity', pp. 78-109 in R. J.
    Forbes, Studies in Ancient Technology 5, Leiden: Brill.
Fortes, M. and Evans-Pritchard, E. E. 1940 African Political Systems, London:
    International African Institute.
Fowler, P. and Evans, J. 1967 'Plough-marks, lynchets and early fields', Antiquity
    41, 289-94.
Frangipane, M. and Palmieri, A. 1983 (published 1988) 'Perspectives on proto-
    urbanisation in eastern Anatolia: Arslantepe (Malatya)', Origini 12/2, 287-668.
Frangipane, M., Hauptmann, H., Liverani, M., Matthiae, P. an Mellink, M. 1993
    Between the Rivers and over the Mountains: archaeologia            olica et


                                           518




                    This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                     All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


   mesopotamica Alba Palmieri dedicata, Rome: Universita di Roma 'La Sapienza'.
Frankenstein, S. and Rowlands, M. J. 1978 'The internal structure and regional
   context of early Iron-Age society in south-western Germany', Bulletin of the
   Institute of Archaeology 15, 73-112.
French, D. H. 1970 'Notes on site distribution in the Qumra area', Anatolian
   Studies 20, 139-48.
Fried, M. 1967 The Evolution of Political Society, New York: Random House.
Fried, M. 1978 The Concept of Tribe, Menlo Park California: Cummings
   Publishing Company.
Friedman, J. and Rowlands, M. J. 1977 'Notes towards an epigenetic model of the
   evolution of "civilisation"', pp. 201-76 in J. Friedman and M. J. Rowlands
   (eds) The Evolution of Social Systems, London: Duckworth.
Frierman, J. 1969 'The Balkan Graphite Ware' (Appendix II in Renfrew 1969),
   Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 35, 42-3.
Furst, P. 1976 Hallucinogens and Culture, San Francisco: Chandler and Sharp.
Fyfe, H. 1940 The Illusion of National Character, London: Watts and Co.
Gabalowna, L. 1970 'Wyniki analizy C-14 w^gli drzewnych z cmentarzyska
   kultury Pucharow Lejkowatych na Stanowisku 1 w Sarnowie - z Grobowca 8 i
   niektore problemy z nimi zwi^zane. (Informacja wst^pna)', Prace i Materialy
   Muzeum Archeologicznego i Etnograficznego w Lodzi (Ser. Arch.) 17, 77-91.
Galkin, L. L. 1975 'Odno iz drevneishikh prakticheskikh prisposoblenii
   skotovodov', Sovetskaya Arkheologiya 1975 (3), 186-92.
Gamkrelidze, T. V. and Ivanov, V. V. 1985a 'The Ancient Near East and the Indo-
   European question: temporal and territorial characteristics of proto-Indo-
   European based on linguistic and historico-cultural data', Journal of
   Indo-European Studies 13, 3-48.
Gamkrelidze, T. V. and Ivanov, V. V. 1985b 'The migrations of tribes speaking
   Indo-European dialects from their original homeland in the Near East to their
   historical habitations in Eurasia', Journal of Indo-European Studies 13, 49-91.
Gandert, O-F. 1964 'Zur Frage der Rinderanschirrung im Neolithikum', Jahrbuch
   des Romisch-Germanischen Zentralmuseums 11, 34-56.
Garner, B. 1967 'Models of urban geography and settlement location', pp. 303-60
   in R. J. Chorley and P. Haggett (eds) Models in Geography, London: Methuen.
Gathercole, P. 1971 '"Patterns in Prehistory": an examination of the later thinking
   of V. Gordon Childe', World Archaeology 3, 225-32.
Gathercole, P. 1982 'Gordon Childe: man or myth?', Antiquity 56,198.
Gathercole, P., Irving, T. H. and Melleuish, G. (eds) 1995 Childe and Australia,
   St Lucia: University of Queensland Press.
Gayre, G. R. 1948 Wassail! in Mazers of Mead, London: Phillimore and Co.
Geertz, C. 1963 Agricultural Involution, Berkeley: University of California Press.
Gejvall, N. G. 1946 'The Fauna of the Different Settlements of Troy: Part I: Dogs,
   Horses and Cattle', unpublished typescript in London University Institute of
   Archaeology.
Gejvall, N. G. 1969 Lerna: a Preclassical Site in the Argolid, vol. 1: The Fauna,
   Princeton: American School of Classical Studies.
Gening, V. F. 1979 'The cemetery at Sintashta and the early Indo-Iranian peoples',
   Journal of Indo-European Studies 7,1-29.
Gening, V. F., Zdanovich, G. B. and Gening, V. V. 1992 Sintashta:
   arkheologicheskie pamyatniki ariiskikh piemen Uralo-Kazakhstanskikh stepei,
   Chelyabinsk: Yuzhno-Ural'skoe Knizhnoe Izdatel'stvo.


                                         519




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Georgiev, G. I. 1961 'Kulturgruppen der Jungstein- und der Kupferzeit in der
   Ebene von Thrazien', pp. 45-100 in J. Bohm and S. de Laet (eds) L'Europe
   a la Fin de I'Age de la Pierre, Prague: Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences.
Gerloff, S. 1975 The Early Bronze Age Daggers of Great Britain, with a
   reconsideration of the Wessex culture (PBF VI, 2), Munich: Beck.
Gerloff, S. 1993 'Zu Fragen mittelmeerlandischer Kontakte und absoluter
   Chronologie der Friihbronzezeit in Mittel- und Westeuropa', Praehistorische
   Zeitschrift 68(1), 58-102.
Ghepe, B. and Mateescu, C. N. 1973 'Utilisation des bovins a la traction dans la
   phase plus recente de la civilisation Vadastra', Actes du VIHe Congres
   international des Sciences prehistoriques et protohistoriques, 454-60.
Gibson, M. 1974 'Violation of fallow and engineered disaster in Mesopotamian
   Civilization', pp. 7-20 in T. E. Downing and M. Gibson (eds) Irrigation's
   Impact on Society, Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Gilman, A. 1981 'The development of social stratification in Bronze Age Europe',
   Current Anthropology 22,1-24.
Gimbutas, M. 1956 The Prehistory of Eastern Europe: part 1, Cambridge, Mass.:
   Peabody Museum.
Gimbutas, M. 1961 'Notes on the chronology and expansion of the Pit-grave
   culture', pp. 193-200 in J. Bohm and S. J. De Laet (eds) L'Europe a la Fin de
   I'Age de la Pierre, Prague: Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences.
Gimbutas, M. 1965 Bronze Age cultures in central and eastern Europe, The
   Hague: Mouton.
Gimbutas, M. 1974 The Gods and Goddesses of Old Europe 7000-3500 BC,
   London: Thames and Hudson.
Gimbutas, M. 1977 'The first wave of Eurasian steppe pastoralists into Copper
   Age Europe', Journal of Indo-European Studies 5, 277-338.
Gimbutas, M. 1980 'The Kurgan wave #2 (c.3400-3200 BC) into Europe and the
   following transformation of culture', Journal of Indo-European Studies 8,
   273-315.
Gimbutas, M. 1989 The Language of the Goddess, London: Thames and Hudson.
Gimbutas, M. 1991 The Civilization of the Goddess: the world of Old Europe,
   San Francisco: Harper.
Giner, C. A. 1980 'Estudio de los materiales de cestria de la Cueva de los
   Murcielagos', Trabajos de prehistoria 37,109-62.
Giot, P-R., L'Helgouach, J. and Monnier, J-L. 1979 Prehistoire de la Bretagne,
   Rennes: Ouest-France.
Glass, M. 1991 Animal Production Systems in Neolithic Central Europe (BAR Int.
   Ser. 572), Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
Glob, P. V. 1951 Ard og Plov i Nor dens Oldtid, Arhus: Jysk Arkaeologisk Selskab.
Glob, P. V. 1970 The Mound People: Danish Bronze-Age man preserved, London:
   Faber and Faber.
Godelier, M. 1977 Perspectives in Marxist Anthropology, Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Gongora y Martinez, M. 1868 Antigiiedades prehistoricas de Andalucta, Madrid:
   Moro.
Goodman, J., Lovejoy, P. and Sherratt, A. (eds) 1995 Consuming Habits: drugs in
   history and anthropology, London: Routledge.
Goody, J. 1969a Technology, Tradition and the State in Africa, Oxford: Oxford
   University Press.


                                         520




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Goody, J. 1969b 'Inheritance, property and marriage in Africa and Eurasia',
  Sociology 3, 55-76.
Goody, J. 1976 Production and Reproduction, Cambridge: Cambridge University
  Press.
Goody, J. 1982 Cooking, Cuisine and Class, Cambridge: Cambridge University
  Press.
Gorman, C. 1977 'A reconsideration of the beginnings of agriculture in south east
  Asia', pp. 321-56 in C. Reed (ed.) Origins of Agriculture, Paris and The Hague:
  Mouton.
Gould, P. R. 1963 'Man against his environment: a game-theoretic framework',
  Annals of the Association of American Geographers 53, 290-7.
Green, M. W. 1980 'Animal husbandry at Uruk in the archaic period', Journal of
  Near Eastern Studies 39, 1-35.
Green, S. 1981 Prehistorian: a biography ofV. Gordon Childe, Bradford-on-Avon:
   Moonraker Press.
Greenfield, H. J. 1986 The Palaeoeconomy of the Central Balkans (Serbia): a
  zooarchaeological perspective on the Late Neolithic and Bronze Age (BAR Int.
   Ser. 304), Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
Greenfield, H. J. 1988 'The origins of milk and wool production in the Old World:
  a zooarchaeological perspective from the central Balkans', Current
  Anthropology 29, 573-93.
Greenfield, H. 1989 'Zooarchaeology and aspects of the secondary products
  revolution', Archaeozoologia 3,191-200.
Grigson, C. 1987 'Different herding strategies for sheep and goats in the
  chalcolithic of Beersheva', Archaeozoologia 1,115-26.
Griiss, J. 1933 'Uber Milchreste aus der Hallstattzeit und andere Funde',
  Forschungen und Fortschritte 9,105-6.
Guyan, W. U. 1971 Erforschte Vergangenheit (Band 1), Schaffhausen: Verlag Peter
  Meili.
Hansel, B. 1968 Beitrage zur Chronologie der mittleren Bronzezeit im
  Karpathenbecken, Bonn: Rudolf Habelt.
Hansel, B. and Zimmer, S. (eds) 1994 Die Indogermanen und das Pferd, Budapest:
  Archaeolingua.
Hausler, A. 1976 Die Graber der alteren Ockergrabkultur zwischen Dnepr und
  Karpathen, Berlin: Akademie-Verlag.
Hausler, A. 1984 'Neue Belege zur Geschichte von Rad und Wagen im
  nordpontischen Raum', Ethnographisch-Archaologische Zeitschrift 25, 629-82.
Haggett, P. 1965 Locational Analysis in Human Geography, London:
  Arnold.
Hahn, E. 1896 Die Haustiere und ihre Beziehungen zur Wirtschaft des Menschen,
  Berlin: Duncker and Humblot.
Hald, M. 1950 Olddanske Tekstiler (Nordiske Fortidsminder 5), Copenhagen:
  Kongelige Nordiske-Oldskriftselskab.
Halstead, P. 1981 'Counting sheep in Neolithic and Bronze Age Greece', pp. 307-
  39 in Hodder et al. (eds) Pattern of the Past: studies in honour of David L.
  Clarke, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Halstead, P. 1995 'Plough and power: the economic and social significance of
  cultivation with the ox-drawn ard in the Mediterranean', Bulletin on Sumerian
  Agriculture 8,11-22.
Hamilton, F. E. I. 1967 'Models of industrial location', pp. 361-424 in R. J.


                                        521




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


  Chorley and P. Haggett (eds) Models in Geography, London: Methuen.
Harding, A. 1984 The Mycenaeans and Europe, London: Academic Press.
Harlan, J. R. 1975 Crops and Man, Madison, Wisconsin: American Society of
  Agronomy.
Harner, M. 1970 'Population pressure and the social evolution of agriculturalists',
  Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 26, 67-86.
Harner, M. J. 1973 Hallucinogens and Shamanism, Oxford: Oxford University
  Press.
Harris, D. R. 1973 'The prehistory of tropical agriculture: an ethnoecological
  model', pp. 391-417 in A. C. Renfrew (ed.) The Explanation of Culture
  Change, London: Duckworth.
Harris, D. R. 1978 'The agricultural foundations of lowland Maya civilization: a
  critique', pp. 301-23 in P. D. Harrison and B. L. Turner (eds) Prehispanic Maya
  Agriculture, Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Harris, D. (ed.) 1994 The Archaeology ofV. Gordon Childe: contemporary
  perspectives, London: University College Press.
Harris, M. 1966 'The cultural ecology of India's sacred cattle', Current
  Anthropology 7, 51-9.
Harrison, R. 1980 The Beaker Folk, London: Thames and Hudson.
Harrison, R. 1985 'The "Polycultivo Ganadero" or Secondary Products
  Revolution in Spanish agriculture, 5000-1000 BC', Proceedings of the
  Prehistoric Society 33, 84-106.
Hartanyi, B. P. and Novaki, G. 1975 'Samen- und Fruchtfunde in Ungarn von
  der Neusteinzeit bis zum 18. Jahrhundert', Agrartdrteneti Szemle 17,1-65,
  1967.
Hartley, D. 1964 Water in England, London: Macdonald.
Hartmann, A. 1978 'Ergebnisse der spektralanalytischen Untersuchung
  aneolithischer Goldfunde aus Bulgarien', Studia Praehistorica (Sofia) 1/2,
  27-45.
Hartmann, A. 1982 Goldfunde aus Europa II (SAM 5), Berlin: Gebr. Mann.
Hartmann, F. 1923 L'Agriculture dans I'ancienne Egypte, Paris: Libraries-
  Imprimeries Reunies.
Harvey, D. 1967 'Models of the evolution of spatial patterns in human geography',
  pp. 549-608 in R. J. Chorley and P. Haggett (eds) Models in Geography,
  London: Methuen.
Hassan, F. and Robinson, S. 1987 'High precision radiocarbon chronometry of
  ancient Egypt and comparisons with Nubia, Palestine and Mesopotamia',
  Antiquity 61,119-35.
Hatt, G. 1953 'Farming of non-European peoples', pp. 115-234 in E. C. Curwen
  and G. Hatt Plough and Pasture: the early history of farming, New York:
  Collier Books.
Hawkes, C. F. C. and Smith, M. 1957 'On some buckets and cauldrons of the
  Bronze and Early Iron Ages', Antiquaries Journal 37,131-98.
Hawkes, J. J. 1982 Mortimer Wheeler: Adventurer in Archaeology, London:
  Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Hayen, H. 1983 'Handwerklich-technische Losungen im vor- und friihgeschicht-
  lichen Wagenbau', pp. 415-70 in H. Jankuhn, W. Jansen, R. Schmidt-Wiegand
  and H. Tiefenbach (eds) Das Handwerk in vor- und fruhgeschichtlicher Zeit,
  Teil 2 (Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Gottingen),
  Gottingen.


                                         522




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Herodotus of Halicarnassus [Penguin Classics edition] 1954 The Histories (trans.
   A.-de Selincourt, revised by A. R. Burn), Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Herre, W. and Rohrs, M. 1977 'Zoological considerations on the origins of
   farming and domestication', pp. 263-7 in C. Reed (ed.) Origins of Agriculture,
   The Hague/Paris: Mouton.
Hesse, B. 1982 'Slaughter patterns and domestication: the beginnings of
   pastoralism in western Iran', Man 17, 403-17.
Hesse, B. 1984 'These are our goats: the origins of herding in west-central Iran',
   pp. 243-64 in J. Clutton-Brock and C. Grigson (eds) Animals and Archaeology:
   3. Early Herders and their Flocks (BAR Int. Ser. 202), Oxford: British
   Archaeological Reports.
Hibbs, J. 1983 'The Neolithic of Brittany and Normandy', pp. 271-323 in C. Scarre
   (ed.) Ancient France 6000-2000 BC, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Higgins, R. 1979 The Aegina Treasure: an archaeological mystery, London: British
   Museum Publications.
Higgs, E. S. (ed.) 1972 Papers in Economic Prehistory, Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Higgs, E. S. and Jarman, M. R. 1969 'The origins of agriculture: a reconsider-
   ation', Antiquity 43, 31-41.
Higham, C. and Message, M. A. 1969 'An assessment of a prehistoric technique of
   bovine husbandry', pp. 315-30 in D. Brothwell and E. S. Higgs (eds) Science in
   Archaeology (2nd edn), London: Thames and Hudson.
Hill, C., Hilton, R. H. and Hobsbawm, E. J. 1983 'Past and Present: origins and
   early years', Past and Present 100, 3.
Hillebrand, J. 1937 'Der Stand der Erforschung der alteren Steinzeit in Ungarn',
   24/25 Bericht der Romisch-Germanischen Commission           1934/5,16-26.
Hobhouse, H. 1985 Five Plants that Transformed Mankind, London: Sidgwick
   and Jackson.
Hobsbawm, E. 1983 'Mass-Producing Traditions: Europe, 1870-1914', pp. 263-
   307 in E. J. Hobsbawm and T. O. Ranger (eds) The Invention of Tradition,
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hodder, I. 1982a (ed.) Symbolic and Structural Archaeology, Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
Hodder, I. A. 1982b Symbols in Action, Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press.
Hodder, I. A. 1982c 'Sequences of structural change in the Dutch Neolithic', pp.
   162-77 in I. A. Hodder (ed.) Symbolic and Structural Archaeology, Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
Hodder, I. 1984 'Burials, houses, women and men in the European Neolithic',
   pp. 51-68 in D. Miller and C. Tilley (eds) Ideology, Power and Prehistory,
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hodder, I. 1988 'Material culture texts and social change: a theoretical discussion
   and some archaeological examples', Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 54,
   67-75.
Hodder, I. 1990 The Domestication of Europe, Oxford: Blackwell.
Hoddinott, R. F. 1981 The Thracians, London: Thames and Hudson.
Hockmann, O. 1972 'Andeutungen zu Religion und Kultus in der
   Bandkeramischen Kultur', Alba Regia 12,187-209.
Honeisen, M. 1989 'Die jungsteinzeitlichen Rader der Schweiz: die altesten
   Europas', pp. 13-22 in P. A. Schiile, D. Studer and C. Oechslin (eds) Das Rad


                                        523




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY

    in der Schweiz vom 3. Jt. v. Chr. bis zum Jahr 1850 (Katalog Sonderausstellung
    Schweizerisches Landesmuseum Zurich, 1989).
Hogbin, H. I. 1951 Transformation Scene: The changing culture of a New Guinea
    village, London: Routledge.
Hole, E. and Flannery, K. 1967 The prehistory of southwestern Iran: a
    preliminary report', Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 33,147-206.
Hopf, M. 1982 Vor-und friihgeschichtliche Kulturpflanzen aus dem nordlichen
    Deutschland, Mainz: Verlag des Romisch-Germanischen Zentralmuseums.
Horton, R. 1976 'Stateless societies in the history of West Africa', pp. 72-113 in
    J. F. A. Ajayi and M. Crowder (eds) History of West Africa, New York:
    Columbia University Press.
Horwitz, L. K. and Tchernov, E. 1989 'Animal exploitation in the Early Bronze
    Age of the southern Levant: an overview', in P. de Miroschedji (ed.)
    LyUrbanisation de la Palestine a Vage du bronze ancien (BAR Int. Ser. 527ii),
    Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
Houlder, C. H. 1961 'The excavation of a Neolithic stone implement factory on
    Mynydd Rhiw, Caernarvonshire', Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 27,
    108-43.
Howell, J. M. 1982 'Neolithic Settlement and Economy in Northern France',
    Oxford Journal of Archaeology 1,115-18.
Howell, J. M. 1983 Settlement and Economy in Neolithic Northern France (BAR
    Int. Ser. 157), Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
Hiittel, H.-G. 1981 Bronzezeitliche Trensen in Mittel- und Osteuropa: Grundzuge
    ihrer Entwicklung (Prahistorische Bronzefunde XVI, 2), Munich: Beck.
Hughes, I. A. 1973 'Stone-age trade in the New Guinea inland', pp. 97-126 in
    H. C. Brookfield (ed.) The Pacific in Transition, London: E. Arnold.
Huxley, J. 1953 Evolution in Action, New York: Harper and Row.
Huysecom, E. 1986 'La question des bouteilles a collerette: identification et
    chronologie d'un groupe meridionale repandu de l'Ukraine a la Bretagne',
    Revue archeologique de YOuest, Supplement No. 1,195-215.
Ihrig, D., Karolyi, Z. S. and Vazsonyi, A. 1973 A Magyar Vizszabalyozas
    Tortenete, Budapest: Vizdok.
Illes, A. E. and Halasz, A. 1926 La Hongrie avant et apres la Guerre, Budapest:
    Societe Hongroise de Statistique.
Ingold, T. 1980 Hunters, Pastoralists and Ranchers, Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press.
Ingold, T. 1986 Evolution and Social Life, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Izbitzer, I. 1993 [in Russian] Wheeled-vehicle Burials of the Steppe Zone of
    Eastern Europe and the Northern Caucasus, 3rd [4th] to 2nd Millennium BC,
    Summary of Doctoral thesis, St Petersburg.
Jacob-Friesen, K. H. 1959 Einfuhrung in Niedersachsens Urgeschichtc,
    Hildesheim: August Lax, Verlagsbuchhandlung.
Jacobs, J. 1969 The Economy of Cities, Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Jankowska, D. 1980 Kultura Pucharow Lejkowatych na Pomorzu Srodkowym,
    Poznan: Adam Mickiewicz University.
Jankowska, D. (ed.) 1990 (vol. 1) and 1991 (vol. 2) Die Trichterbecherkultur: neue
    Forschungen und Hypothesen, Poznan: Adam Mickiewicz University.
Jankowska, D. and Wislanski, T. 1991 'Trichterbecherkultur im Polnischen
    Tiefland: die wichtigsten Forschungsprobleme', pp. 53-65 in Jankowska
    (1991).


                                        524




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Jankuhn, H. 1969 Deutsche Agrargeschichte: Vor- und Friihgeschichte, Stuttgart:
   Verlag Eugen Ulmer.
Jarman, M. R. 1971 'Culture and economy in the north Italian Neolithic', World
   Archaeology 2, 255-65.
Jazdzewski, K. 1984 Urgeschichte Mitteleuropas, Warsaw: Ossolineum.
Jensen, J. 1982 The Prehistory of Denmark, London: Methuen.
Jodlowski, A. 1971 Eksploatacja soli na terenie Malopolski w pradziejach i we
   wczesnym sredniowieczu, Krakow: Muzeum zup Krakowskich Wieliczka.
Jordanov, J. and Michailova, K. 1984 'Anthropologische Daten aus zwei
   Nekropolen der Ockergrabkultur in Nordostbulgarien', Studia Praehistorica
    (Sofia) 7,117-30.
Joussaume, R. 1985 Les dolmens pour les morts, Paris: Hachette; tr. (1988) as
   Dolmens for the Dead, London: Batsford.
Joussaume, R. 1986 'La neolithisation du Centre-Ouest', pp. 161-80 in Demoule
   and Guilaine 1986.
Jovanovic, B. 1971 Metalurgija Eneolitskog Perioda Jugoslavje, Belgrade:
   Archaeological Institute.
Jovanovic, B. 1982 Rudna Glava: najstarija rudarstvo bakra na centralnom
   Balkanu, Belgrade: Jugoslav Academy of Sciences.
Joy, L. 1967 'An economic homologue of Barth's presentation of economic spheres
   in Darfur', pp. 175-89 in J. Firth (ed.) Themes in Economic Anthropology (ASA
   Monographs No. 6), London: Tavistock.
Junghans, S., Sangmeister, E. and Schroder, M. 1960 Metallanalysen kupferzeit-
   licher und friihbronzezeitlicher Bodenfunde aus Europa, Berlin: Mann.
Junghans, S., Sangmeister, E. and Schroder, M. 1968 Kupfer und Bronze in der
   fruhen Metallzeit Europ as, Berlin: Mann.
Kaczanowska, M. 1980 'Uwagi o surowcach, technice i typologii przemyslu
   krzemiennego kultury Bodrogkereszturskiej i grupy Laznany', Acta
   Archaeologia Carpathica 20,19-56.
Kaczanowska, M. 1985 'Rohstoffe, Technik und Typologie der Neolithischen
   Feuersteinindustrien im Nordteil des Flufigebietes der Mitteldonau',
   Warszawa: Panstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe.
Kaczanowska, M., Kozlowski, J. and Makkay, J. 1981 'Flint hoard from Endrod
   Site 39, Hungary (Koros culture)', Acta Archaeologica Carpathica 21,105-17.
Kahlke, D. 1954 Die Bestattungssitten des Donaulandischen Kulturkreises der
   jungeren Steinzeit, Berlin: Riitten and Loening.
Kalicz, N. 1957 'Tiszazug Oskori Telepiilesei', Regeszeti Fiizetek 8,1-102.
Kalicz, N. 1963 Die Peceler (Badener) Kultur und Anatolien (Studia Archaeologica
   2), Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Kalicz, N. 1965 'Siedlungsgeschichtliche Probleme der Koros- und der Theiss-
   Kultur', Acta Antiqua et Archaeologica (Szeged) 8, 27-40.
Kalicz, N. 1968 Die Fruhbronzezeit in Nordost-Ungarn (Archaeologia Hungarica
   45), Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Kalicz, N. 1970 Clay Gods. The Neolithic Period and Copper Age in Hungary,
   Budapest: Corvina Press.
Kalicz, N. 1976 'Ein neues kupferzeitliches Wagenmodell aus der Umgebung von
   Budapest', Festschrift fur Richard Pittioni zum siebzigsten Geburtstag, Vienna:
   Deuticke.
Kalicz, N. 1980 'Neuere Forschungen iiber die Entstehung des Neolithikums in
   Ungarn', pp. 97-122 in J. K. Kozlowski and J. Machnik (eds) Problemes de la


                                         525




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY

   Neolithisation dans certaines Regions de l'Europe, Wt iw-Warsaw-Krakow-
   Gdansk: Ossolineum.
Kalicz, N. and Makkay, J. 1972 'Probleme des friihen Neoathikums der nordlichen
   Tiefebene', Alba Regia 12, 77-92 [also reprinted as Aktuelle Probleme der
   Bandkeramik, Szekesfehervar: County Fejer Museum].
Kalicz, N. and Makkay, J. 1977a 'Friihneolithische Siedlung in Mehtelek-Nadas',
   Mitteilungen des Archaeologischen Instituts der Ungarischen Akademie der
   Wissenschaften 6,13-34.
Kalicz, N. and Makkay, J. 1977b Die Linienbandkeramik in der Grossen
   Ungarischen Tiefebene (Studia Archaeologica 7), Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Kalis, A. J. 1988 'Zur Umwelt des friihneolithischen Menschen: ein Beitrag der
   Pollenanalyse', pp. 125-38 in H. J. Kiister (ed.) Der Prahistorische Mensch und
   seine Umwelt (Festschrift U. Korber-Grohne), Forschungen und Berichte zur
   Ur- und Friihgeschichte in Baden-Wiirttemberg 31.
Kaplan, J. 1969 'Ein el Jarba', Bulletin of the American School of Oriental
   Research 194, 2-39 and Plate VII.
Karageorghis, V. 1982 Cyprus from the Stone Age to the Romans, London:
   Thames and Hudson.
Keesing, R. M. 1975 Kin Groups and Social Structure, New York: Holt Reinhart
   Winston.
Khazanov, A. M. 1984 Nomads and the Outside World, Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Killen, J. T. 1964 'The wool industry of Crete in the late Bronze Age', Annual of
   the British School of Archaeology at Athens 59,1-15.
Kinnes, I. 1982 'Les Fouaillages and megalithic origins', Antiquity 6, 24-30.
Kirk, G. S. 1970 Myth: its meaning and functions in ancient and other cultures,
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kirkby, A. V. T. 1973 'The use of land and water-resources in the past and present
   Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico', Memoirs of the Museum of Anthropology at the
   University of Michigan 5.
Kirnbauer, F. 1958 'Das jungsteinzeitliche Hornsteinbergwerk Mauer bei Wien',
   Archaeologia Austriaca Beiheft 3,121-42.
Kisban, E. 1969 'Die historische Bedeutung des Joghurts in den Milchverarbeit-
   ungssystemen Siidosteuropas', pp. 517-30 in L. Foldes (ed.) Viehwirtschaft und
   Hirtenkultur; Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Kislev, M. E. and Bar-Yosef, O. 1988 'The legumes: earliest domesticated plants in
   the Near East?', Current Anthropology 29(1), 175-8.
Klages, E. 1949 Ecological Crop Geography, London and New York: Macmillan.
Klebs, L. 1915 Die Reliefs des alten Reiches, Heidelberg: Abhandlungen der
   Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Klejn, L. 1994 'Childe and Soviet archaeology: a romance', pp. 75-100 in Harris
    1994.
Knoll, H. 1976 'Friihneolithische Flaschengefasse des Nordens', Berichte der
   Romisch-Germanischen Kommission 57,1-48.
Knoll, H. 1981 'Kragenflaschen: ihre Verbreitung und ihre Zeitstellung im
   europaischen Neolithikum', Neumiinster: Wachholz.
Koebnei; L. 1966 'The settlement and colonization of Europe', pp. 1-90 in M. M.
   Postan (ed.) Cambridge Economic History of Europe, vol 1, The Agrarian Life
   of the Middle Ages, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Korber-Grohne, U. 1985 'Die biologischen Reste aus dem hallstattzeitlichen


                                          526




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY


  Fiirstengrab von Hochdorf, Gemeinde Eberdingen (Kreis Ludwigsburg)', pp.
   87-162 in Hochdorf 1 (Forschungen und Berichte zur Vor- und Friihgeschichte
  in Baden-Wiirttemberg 19).
Korner, G. and Laux, F. 1980 Ein Konigreich an der Luhe, Liineburg:
  Museumsverein fur das Fiirstentum Liineburg.
Kohl, P. 1987 The ancient economy, transferable technologies and the Bronze
  Age world-system: a view from the northeastern frontier of the Ancient Near
   East', pp. 13-24 in M. Rowlands, M. T. Larsen and K. Kristiansen (eds)
   Centre and Periphery in the Ancient World, Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press.
Kohl, P. 1989 The use and abuse of world systems theory: the case of the
   "pristine" West Asian state', pp. 218-40 in C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky (ed.)
   Archaeological Thought in America, Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press.
Korek, J. 1951 'Ein Graberfeld der Badener Kultur bei Alsonemedi', Acta
   Archaeologica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 1, 35-91.
Korek, J. and Patay, P. 1956 'A Herpalyi-halom kokorvegi es rezkori telepiilese',
   Folia Archaeologica 8, 23-42.
Kosko, A. 1980 'The position of funnel beaker culture in the lowland model of
   Neolithisation', pp. 144-77 in J. Kozlowski and J. Machnik (eds) Problemes de
   la Neolithisation dans certaines Regions de UEurope, Warsaw: Ossolineum.
Kossack, G. 1964 'Trinkgeschirr als Kultgerat der Hallstattzeit', pp. 96-105 in
   P. Grimm (ed.) Varia Archaeologica: Wilhelm Unverzagt zum 70. Geburtstag
   dargebracht, Berlin: Akademie Verlag.
Kosse, K. 1979 Settlement Ecology of the Koros and Linear Pottery Cultures in
   Hungary (BAR Int. Ser. 64), Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
Kossinna, G. 1941 (1st edn 1912) Die Deutsche Vorgeschichte, eine hervorragend
   nationale Wissenschaft, Wiirzburg: Johann Umbrosius Barth, Verlag.
Kothe, H. 1953 'Volkerkundliches zur Frage der Neolithischen Anbauformen',
   Archaeologisch-Ethnographische Forschungen 1, 28-73.
Kovacs, T. 1969 'A Szazhalombattai Bronzkori telep', Archaeologiai Ertesito 96,
   161-9.
Kowalczyk, J. 1970 'The Funnel Beaker culture', pp. 144-77 in T. Wislanski (ed.)
   The Neolithic in Poland, Warsaw: Ossolineum.
Kraus, F. R. 1966 Staatliche Viehhaltung im altbabylonischen Lande Larsa
   (Mededelingen der Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen),
   Amsterdam: N. V. Noord-Hollandsche.
Kretchmer, N. 1972 'Lactose and lactase', Scientific American 227, 70-9.
Kristiansen, K. 1981 'Economic models for Bronze Age Scandinavia: towards an
   integrated approach', pp. 239-303 in A. Sheridan and G. Bailey (eds) Economic
   Archaeology: towards an integration of ecological and social approaches (BAR
   Int. Ser. 96), Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
Kristiansen, K. 1982 'The formation of tribal systems in later European prehistory:
   Northern Europe 4000-500 BC', pp. 241-80 in C. Renfrew, M. J. Rowlands
   and B. A. Seagrave (eds) Theory and Explanation in Archaeology, New York:
   Academic Press.
Kristiansen, K. 1984 'Ideology and material culture: an archaeological perspective',
   pp. 72-100 in M. Spriggs (ed.) Marxist Perspectives in Archaeology,
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kristiansen, K. 1987 'From Stone to Bronze: the evolution of social complexity in


                                          527




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY

   northern Europe, 2300-1200 BC', in E. M. Brumfiel and T. K. Earle (eds)
   Specialisation, Exchange and Complex Societies, Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Kristiansen, K. 1989 'Ard marks under barrows: a response to Peter Rowly-
   Conwy', Antiquity 63, 322-7.
Kruk, J. 1973 Studia Oszadnicze nad Neolitem Wyzyn Lessowych, Warsaw:
   Ossolineum.
Kruk, J. 1980a Gospodarka w Polsce Poludniowo-wschodniej w V-III Tysiacleciu
   P. N. £., Warsaw: Ossolineum. (Translated as Kruk 1980b.)
Kruk, J. 1980b The Neolithic Settlement of southern Poland (edited by J. M.
   Howell and N. J. Starling) (BAR Int. Ser. 93), Oxford: British Archaeological
   Reports.
Kruk, J. and Milisauskas, S. 1981 'Chronology of Funnel Beaker, Baden-like and
   Lublin-Volynian settlements at Bronocice, Poland', Germania 59, 1-19.
Kiihn, H. 1976 Geschichte der Vorgeschichtsforschung, Berlin: Verlag Walter de
   Gruyter.
Kutzian, I. See also Bognar-Kutzian, I.
Kutzian, I. 1944 A Koros-Kultura/The Koros Culture (Dissertationes Pannonicae
   II, 23), Budapest: Peter Pazmany-Universitat.
Kuz'mina, E. E. 1974 'Kolesnii transport i problema etnicheskoi i sotsialnoi istorii
   drevnego naseleniya Yuzhnorusskikh Stepei', Vestnik Drevnei Istorii 4, 68-87.
Kyle, R. 1972 'Will the antelope recapture Africa?', New Scientist 23.
La Barre, W. 1972 'Hallucinogens and the shamanic origins of religion', pp. 261-
   79 in P. Furst (ed.) Flesh of the Gods, New York: Praeger.
La Niece, S. 1983 'Niello: an historical and technical survey', Antiquaries Journal
   63,279-97.
Lamberg-Karlovsky, C. and Lamberg-Karlovsky, M. 1971 'An early city in Iran',
   Scientific American (June 1971).
Lamberg-Karlovsky, C. C. and Beale, T. W. 1986 Excavations at Tepe Yahya, Iran,
   1967-1975: the early periods (American School of Prehistoric Research Bulletin
   38), Cambridge Mass.: Peabody Museum.
Lambrick, H. T. 1964 Sind: a General Introduction, Hyderabad: Sindhi Adabi
   Board.
Lanting, J. N., Mook, W. G. and van der Waals, J. D. 1973 'C14 Chronology and
   the Beaker problem', Helinium 13, 38-58.
Lathrap, D. 1968 'The "hunting" economies of the tropical zone of South
   America', pp. 23-9 in R. B. Lee and I. DeVore 1968.
Leach, E. R. 1959 'Hydraulic society in Ceylon', Past and Present 15, 2-25.
Leach, E. 1961 Rethinking Anthropology, London: Athlone Press.
Leach, E. 1976 Culture and Communication: the logic by which symbols are
   connected, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Leach, E. and Aycock, D. A. 1983 Structuralist Interpretations of Biblical Myth,
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lech, J. 1987 'Danubian raw material distribution patterns in eastern central
   Europe', pp. 241-8 in G. Sieveking and M. Newcomer (eds) The Human Uses
   of Flint and Chert, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lech, J. and Leligdowicz, A. 1980 'Die Methoden der Versorgung mit Feuerstein
   und die lokalen Beziehungen zwischen den Siedlungen und Berwerken im
   Weichselgebiet wahrend des 5. bis 2. Jt. v.u.Z.', pp. 151-84 in F. Schlette (ed.)
   Urgeschichtliche Besiedlung in ihrer Beziehung zur natiirlichen Umwelt, Halle:


                                         528




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


   Wissenschaftliche Beitrage der Martin-Luther Universitat Halle-Wittenberg.
Lee, R. B. and DeVore, I. (eds) 1968 Man the Hunter, Chicago: Aldine.
Leeds, A. 1969 'Ecological determinants of chieftainship among the Yaruro Indians
   of Venezuela', pp. 377-94 in A. P. Vayda (ed.) Environment and Cultural
   Behaviour, New York: Natural History Press.
Leeds, A. and Vayda, A. (eds) 1965 Man, Culture and Animals, Washington:
   American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Lees, S. H. and Bates, D. G. 1974 'The origins of specialised nomadic pastoralism;
    a systemic model', American Antiquity 39, 187-93.
Legge, A. J. 1981 'Aspects of cattle husbandry' in R. Mercer (ed.) Farming Practice
    in British Prehistory, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Le Roux, C-T. 1985 'New excavations at Gavrinis', Antiquity 49,183-7.
Leser, P. 1931 Entstehung und Verbreitung des Pfluges, Munster: Aschendorff.
Leshnik, L. S. 1973 'Land-use and ecological factors in prehistoric north-west
    India', pp. 62-84 in N. Hammond (ed.) South Asian Archaeology, London:
    Duckworth.
Levine, M. 1990 'Dereivka and the problem of horse domestication', Antiquity 64,
    727-40.
Levy, T. 1983 'The emergence of specialised pastoralism in the southern Levant',
    World Archaeology 15(1), 15-36.
Levy, T. 1992 'Transhumance, subsistence, and social evolution in the northern
    Negev desert', pp. 65-82 in O. Bar-Yosef and A. Khazanov (eds) Pastoralism in
    the Levant: archaeological materials in anthropological perspective, Madison,
   Wisconsin: Prehistory Press.
Lewicka, A. 1972 'Brandwirtschaft und Brandrodung in den Polnischen
    Karpathen', pp. 119-42 in I. Balassa (ed.) Getreidebau in Ost- und
    Mitteleuropa, Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Lewthwaite, J. 1981a 'Ambiguous first impressions: a survey of recent work on the
    early Neolithic of the West Mediterranean', Journal of Mediterranean
    Archaeology 1, 292-307.
Lewthwaite, J. 1981b 'Plains tails from the hills: transhumance in Mediterranean
    archaeology', pp. 57-66 in A. Sheridan and G. Bailey (eds) Economic
   Archaeology: towards an integration of ecological and social approaches (BAR
    Int. Ser. 96), Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
Lewthwaite, J. 1984 'The art of Corse herding: archaeological insights from recent
    pastoral practices on west Mediterranean islands', pp. 25-37 in J. Clutton-
    Brock and C. Grigson (eds) Animals and Archaeology: 3. Early Herders and
    their Flocks (BAR Int. Ser. 202), Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
L'Helgouach, J. and Le Roux, C-T. 1986 'Morphologie et chronologie des grandes
    architectures de l'Ouest de la France', pp. 181-91 in Demoule and Guilaine
    1986.
Lichardus, J. 1974 Studien zur Biikker Kultur, Bonn: Habelt.
Lichardus, J. 1980 'Zur Funktion der Geweihspitzen des Typus Ostorf:
   Ueberlegungen zu einer vorbronzezeitlichen Pferdeschirrung', Germania 58,
    1-24.
Lisitsina, G. N. 1969 'The earliest irrigation in Turkmenia', Antiquity 43, 279-87.
Littauer, M. A. and Crouwel, J. 1973 'Early metal models of wagons from the
    Levant', Levant 5,102-26.
Littauer, M. A. and Crouwel, J. 1979 Wheeled Vehicles and Ridden Animals in the
   Ancient Near East, Leiden: Brill.


                                         529




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Littauer, M. A. and Crouwel, J. 1986 'The earliest known three-dimensional
    evidence for spoked wheels', American Journal of Archaeology 90, 395-8.
Lomborg, E. 1973 Die Flintdolche Danemarks, Copenhagen: Lynge.
Lotka, A. J. 1956 Elements of Mathematical Biology, New York: Dover.
Lubbock, J. 1870 The Origin of Civilisation, London [6th edn 1902, New York:
    D. Appleton and Co.].
Liming, J. 1980 'Bandkeramische Pfluge?', Fundberichte aus Hessen 19/20
    (1979/80), 55-68.
Liming, J. 1989 'Westliche Nachbarn der bandkeramischen Kultur: La Hoguette
    und Limburg', Germania 67(2), 355-93.
Liming, J. and Meurers-Balke, J. 1980 'Experimenteller Getreideanbau im
    Hambacher Forst', Bonner Jahrbiicher 180, 305-44.
Liming, J. and Kalis, A. J. 1988 'Die Umwelt prahistorischer Siedlungen -
    Rekonstruktionen aus siedlungsarchaologischen und botanischen
    Untersuchungen im Neolithikum', Siedlungsforschung: Archaologie-Geschichte-
    Geographie 6, 39-55.
Lutz, H. F. 1922 Viticulture and Brewing in the Ancient Orient, Leipzig: J. C.
    Hinrichs'sche Buchhandlung.
McCormick, F. 1922 'Early faunal evidence for dairying', Oxford Journal of
    Archaeology 11(2), 201-10.
McCracken, R. D. 1971 'Lactase deficiency: an example of dietary evolution',
    Current Anthropology 12, 479-517.
McDonald, W. A. and Hope-Simpson, R. 1969 'Further explorations in the
    southwestern Peloponnese', American Journal of Archaeology 73, 132.
MacDougall, H. A. 1982 Racial Myth in English History, Montreal: Harvest
    House.
Machnik, J. 1970 'The Corded Ware culture', pp. 383-420 in T. Wislanski (ed.)
    The Neolithic in Poland, Warsaw: Ossolineum.
McNairn, B. 1980 The Method and Theory of V. Gordon Childe, Edinburgh:
    Edinburgh University Press.
Maczek, M., Preuschen, E. and Pittioni, R. 1953 'Beitrage zum Problem des
    Ursprunges der Kupfererzverwertung in der Alten Welt (II)', Archaeologia
    Austriaca 12, 67-82.
Madsen, T. 1979 'Earthen long barrows and timber structures: aspects of the early
    Neolithic practice in Denmark', Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 45,
    301-20.
Makkay, J. 1957 'A bihari Berettyovolgy oskori leletei', A Debreceni Deri Muzeum
    Evkonyve (1948-56), 21-40.
Makkay, J. 1982 A Magyarorszagi Neolitikum Kutatasdnak Uj Eredmenyei,
    Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Malcolm, A. I. 1971 The Pursuit of Intoxication, New York: Washington Square
    Press.
Malinowski, B. 1922 Argonauts of the Western Pacific, London: Routledge.
Mallory, J. P. 1976 'The chronology of early Kurgan tradition (part 1)', Journal of
    Indo-European Studies 4, 256-94.
Mallory, J. P. 1977 'The chronology of early Kurgan tradition (part 2)', Journal of
    Indo-European Studies 5, 339-68.
Mallory, J. P. 1989 In Search of the Indo-Europeans: language, archaeology and
    myth, London: Thames and Hudson.
Mallowan, M. 1977 Mallowan's Memoirs, London: Collins.


                                         530




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Maimer, M. P. 1962 'Jungneolithische Studien', Acta Archaeologica Lundensia 2,
  Lund, Sweden: CWK Gleerups Forlag.
Manzanilla, L. (ed.) 1987 Studies in the Neolithic and Urban Revolutions: the
  V. Gordon Childe Colloquium, Mexico 1986 (BAR Int. Ser. 349), Oxford:
  British Archaeological Reports.
Marfoe, L. 1981 'Cedar Forest to Silver Mountain: on Metaphors of Growth in
  Early Syrian Society', paper delivered to the Arhus International Conference.
Marfoe, L. 1987 'Cedar Forest to Silver Mountain: social change and the
  development of long-distance trade in early Near Eastern societies', in
  Rowlands, Larsen and Kristiansen 1987.
Marx, K. 1859 Contribution to a Critique of the Political Economy, London.
Masson, V. M. 1976 'The art of Altyn Depe: the artistic traditions of the urbanised
  cultures between Sumer and India', pp. 254-62 in J. V. S. Megaw (ed.) To
  Illustrate the Monuments, London: Thames and Hudson.
Masson, V. M. and Sarianidi, V. I. 1972 Central Asia, London: Thames and
  Hudson.
Mateescu, C. N. 1975 'Remarks on cattle breeding and agriculture in the Middle
  and Late Neolithic on the Lower Danube', Dacia 19,13-18.
Mathiassen, T. 1948 'Studier over Vestjyllands Oldtidsbebyggelse',
  Nationalmuseets Skrifter, Ark.-Hist. Ser: 2.
Mathiassen, T. 1957 'Nordvestsjaellands Oldtidsbebyggelse', Nationalmuseets
  Skrifter; Ark.-Hist. Ser. 7.
Matthaus, H. 1977/78 'Neues zur Bronzetasse aus Dohnsen, Kr. Celle', Die Kunde
  NF 28/29,51-69.
Matthaus, H. 1980 Die Bronzegefasse der Kretisch-Mykenischen Kultur
  (Prahistorische Bronzefunde II, 1), Munich: Beck.
Matthaus, H. 1985 Die Metallgefasse und Gefafluntersetze der Bronzezeit... auf
  Zypern (Prahistorische Bronzefunde II, 8), Munich: Beck.
Maurizio, A. 1932 Histoire de VAlimentation vegetale depuis la Prehistoire jusqu'a
  nos jours, Paris: Payot [also German translation Die Geschichte unserer
  Pflanzenernahrung von der Urzeit bis zur Gegenu/art].
Maurizio, A. 1933 Geschichte der gegorenen Getranke, Berlin: Parey.
Mauss, M. 1954 The Gift, London: Cohen.
Maxwell-Hyslop, R. 1971 Western Asiatic Jewellery c.3000-612 BC, London:
  Methuen.
Maxwell-Hyslop, R. 1977 'Sources of Sumerian gold', Iraq 39, 83-6.
Maxwell-Hyslop, R. 1982 'The Khosh Tapa-Fullol hoard', Afghan Studies 3/4,
  25-37.
Maxwell-Hyslop, M. 1994 'Discussion' following Mulvaney in Harris 1994, 73.
Meadow, R. H. and Zeder, M. A. (eds) 1978 Approaches to Faunal Analysis in the
  Middle East, Cambridge, Mass.: Peabody Museum, Bulletin 2.
Meadow, R. H. and Uerpmann, H.-P. (eds) Equids in the Ancient World, vol. 2,
  Wiesbaden: Reichert.
Mellaart, J. 1967 Qatal Hiiyiik, a Neolithic Town in Anatolia, London: Thames
  and Hudson.
Mellaart, J. 1975 The Neolithic of the Near East, London: Thames and
  Hudson.
Menghin, W. and Schauer, P. 1977 Magisches Gold: Kultgerat der spaten
  Bronzezeit (Ausstellung des Germanischen Nationalmuseums Nurnberg, 1977,
  Katalog).


                                        531




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY

Merhart, G. von 1969 Hallstatt und Italien: gesammelte Aufsatze zur friihen
  Eisenzeit in Ipalien und Mitteleuropa, Mainz: RGZM.
Merlin, M. D. 1972 Man and Marijuana, Rutherford, New Jersey: Fairleigh
  Dickinson University Press.
Merlin, M. D. 1984 On the Trail of the Ancient Opium Poppy, Rutherford, New
  Jersey: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press.
Merpert, N. I. 1974 Drevneishie Skotovody Volzhsko-Uralskogo Mezhdurech'ya,
  Moscow: Akademia Nauk.
Merrillees, R. S. 1962 'Opium trade in the Bronze Age Levant', Antiquity 36,
  287-92.
Mezzena, F. 1981 'La Valle d'Aosta nella preistoria e nella protostoria', pp. 15-50
  in Archaeologia in Valle d'Aosta dal Neolitico alia Caduta dell'Impero Romano
  3500 a.p.-V sec.d.c., Regione Valle d'Aosta: Assessorato del Turismo
  Urbanistica e Beni Culturali.
Midgley, M. 1985 The Origin and Function of the Earthen Long Barrows of
  Northern Europe (BAR Int. Ser. 259), Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
Midgley, M. 1992 TRB Culture: the first farmers of the North European Plain,
  Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Mikov, V. 1958 Zlatnoto Sukrovishte ot Vulchitrun, Sofia: Bulgarian Academy of
  Sciences.
Milisauskas, S. and Kruk, J. 1978 'Bronocice: a Neolithic settlement in
  southeastern Poland', Archaeology 31, 44-52.
Milisauskas, S. and Kruk, J. 1982 'Die Wagendarstellung auf einem Trichterbecher
  aus Bronocice in Polen', Archaologisches Korrespondenzblatt 12(2), 141-4.
Milisauskas, S. and Kruk, J. 1991 'Utilisation of cattle for traction during the later
  Neolithic in southeastern Poland', Antiquity 65, 562-6.
Milojcic, V. 1943 'Das vorgeschichtliche Bergwerk "Suplja Stena" am Avalaberg
   bei Belgrad (Serbien)', Wiener Prahistorische Zeitschrift 30, 41-54.
Milojcic, V. 1949 Chronologie der jiingeren Steinzeit Mittel- und Sudosteuropas,
  Berlin: DAI.
Milojcic, V. 1953 'Ein Goldfund der Kupferzeit aus Ungarn', Germania 31, 7-11.
Modderman, P. J. R. 1970 'Linearbandkeramik aus Elsloo und Stein', Analecta
  Praehistorica Leidensia 3.
Montelius, O. 1899 Der Orient und Europa, Stockholm: Herausgegeben von der
  Konigl. Akademie der Schonen Wissenschaften, Geschichte und
  Alterthumskunde.
Montelius, O. 1903 Die Typologische Methode (Die alteren Kulturperioden im
   Orient und in Europa, 1), Stockholm: Kungl. Boktryckeriet, P. A. Norstedt and
   Soner.
Montelius, O. 1910 'Handel in der Vorzeit', Praehistorische Zeitschrift vol. II,
  249-91.
Montesquieu, C. de S. 1941 [1748] De I'esprit des lois, Paris: Gamier.
Moorey, P. R. S. 1968 'The earliest Near Eastern spoked wheels and their
  chronology', Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 34, 430-2.
Moorey, P. R. S. 1970 'Pictorial evidence for the history of horse-riding in Iraq
   before the Kassite period', Iraq 32, 36-50.
Moorey, P. R. S. 1986 'The emergence of the light, horse-drawn chariot in the
  Near East, c.2000-1500 BC', World Archaeology 18(2), 196-215.
Morgan, L. H. 1985 [1877] Ancient Society; or Researches in the Lines of Human
   Progress from Savagery, through Barbarism to Civilisation, Tucson, Arizona:


                                          532




                    This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                     All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY


  University of Arizona Press.
Morton-Williams, P. 1969 The influence of habitat and trade on the policies of
  Oyo and Ashanti', pp. 79-95 in M. Douglas and P. M. Kaberry (eds) Man in
  Africa, London: Methuen.
Moseley, M. 1974 'Organisational preadaptation to irrigation and the evolution of
  early water management systems in coastal Peru', pp. 77-82 in T. E. Downing
   and M. Gibson (eds) Irrigation's Impact on Society, Tucson: University of
  Arizona Press.
Mozsolics, A. 1967 Bronzefunde des Karpathenbeckens, Budapest: Akademiai
   Kiado.
Mozsolics, A. 1968 'Goldfunde des Depotfundhorizontes von Hadjusamson',
   BRGK 46/7 (1965/6), 1-76.
Mozsolics, A. 1973 Bronze- und Goldfunde des Karpathenbeckens, Budapest:
   Akademiai Kiado.
Miiller, H.-H. 1978 'Tierreste aus einer Siedlung der Bernburger Gruppe bei Halle
   (Saale)', Jahresschrift fur mitteldeutsche Vorgeschichte 62, 203-20.
Miiller, H.-H. 1985 'Tierreste aus Siedlungsgruben der Bernburger Kultur von der
   Schalkenburg bei Quenstedt, Kr Hettstedt', Jahresschrift fur mitteldeutsche
   Vorgeschichte 68,179-220.
Miiller, H.-H. 1994 'Das domestizierte Pferd in Mitteleuropa', pp. 179-84 in
   B. Hansel and S. Zimmer (eds) Die Indogermanen und das Pferd, Budapest:
   Archaeolingua.
Miiller-Beck, H. 1965 Burgaschisee-Siid Teil 5, Holzgerate und Holzbearbeitung,
   Berne: Acta Bernesia.
Miiller-Karpe, H. 1968 Handbuch der Vorgeschichte, II (Jungsteinzeit), Frankfurt:
   Beck.
Miiller-Wille, M. 1965 Eisenzeitliche Fluren in den festlandischen Nordseege-
   bieten, Miinster (Westfalen): Landeskundliche Karten und Hefte der
   Geographischen Kommission fur Westfalen.
Mulvaney, J. 1994 ' "Another university man gone wrong": V. Gordon Childe
   1892-1922' in Harris 1994, 55-74.
Murdock, G. P. 1967 Ethnographic Atlas, Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh University Press.
Murray, J. 1970 The First European Agriculture, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
   Press.
Murray, O. 1982 'Symposion and Mannerbund', Concilium Eirene 16, 47-52.
Murray, O. 1983 'The Symposion as social organisation', pp. 195-200 in Robin
   Hagg (ed.) The Greek Renaissance of the Eighth century BC: Tradition and
   innovation (Proceedings of the Second International Symposium at the Swedish
   Institute in Athens) Skrifta udgivna av Svenska Institutet i Athen, Quarto series
   30.
Myres, J. L. 1906 (ed.) The Evolution of Culture and other Essays by the late
   Lt. Gen. A. Lane-Fox Pitt-Rivers, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Myres, J. L. 1911 The Dawn of History, London: Thornton Butterworth.
Myres, J. L. 1935a 'The ethnology, habitat, linguistic and common culture of Indo-
   Europeans up to the time of the migrations', pp. 179-244 in E. Eyre (ed.)
   European Civilisation: its Origin and Development, Oxford: Oxford University
   Press.
Myres, J. L. 1935b 'The ethnology and primitive culture of the Nearer East and
   the Mediterranean world', pp. 83-177 in E. Eyre (ed.) European Civilisation:
   its Origin and Development, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


                                         533




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Myres, J. N. L. 1980 Commander J. L. Myres, R.N.V.R.: the Blackbeard of the
   Mediterranean, 10th Myres Memorial Lecture, London: Leopard's Head Press.
Nagel, E. 1985 Die Erscheinung der Kugelamforenkultur im Norden der DDR,
   Berlin: VEB Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften.
Nandris, J. 1973 'Some light on prehistoric Europe', pp. 151-61 in D. Strong (ed.)
   Archaeological Theory and Practice, London: Academic Press.
Narr, K. J. 1962 Triihe Pfliige', Mitteilungen der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft
   in Wien 92, 221.
Nash, D. M. 1978 Territory and state formation in central Gaul', pp. 455-76 in
   D. Green, C. Haselgrove and M. Spriggs (eds) Social Organisation and
   Settlement (BAR Int. Ser. 47), Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
Needham, J. 1970 Clerks and Craftsmen in China and the West, Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
Nekhaev, A. A. 1986 'Pogrebenie Maikopskoi kul'tury iz kurgana u sela
   Krasnogvardeiskoe', Sovetskaya Arkhaeologiya 1986(1), 244-8.
Nelson, C. M. 1973 'Prehistoric culture change in the intermontane plateau of
   western North America', pp. 371-90 in A. C. Renfrew (ed.) The explanation of
   culture change: models in prehistory, London: Duckworth.
Nemejcova-Pavukova, V. 1973 'Zu Ursprung und Chronologie der Boleraz-
   Gruppe', pp. 297-316 in B. Chrpovsky (ed.) Symposium uber die Entstehung
   der Badener Kultur, Bratislava: Slovak Academy of Sciences Press.
Nepper, I. 1970 'Megjegyzesek a Koros csoport eszkozkeszletenek vizsgalatahoz',
   A Debreceni Deri Muzeum £vkdnyve 1968, 79-109.
Neuninger, H. and Pittioni, R. 1963 'Friihmetallzeitlicher Kupferhandel im
   Voralpenland', Archaeologia Austriaca Beiheft 6,1-39.
Neustupny, E. and Neustupny, J. 1961 Czechoslovakia before the Slavs, London:
   Thames and Hudson.
Newell, R. 1972 'The Mesolithic affinities and typological relations of the Dutch
   Bandkeramik flint industry', Alba Regia 12, 9-38.
Nissen, H.-J. 1987 'The chronology of the Proto- and Early Historic periods in
   Mesopotamia and Susiana', pp. 607-13 in Aurenche et al. 1987.
Nissen, H.-J., Damerow, P. and Englund, R. K. 1990 Friihe Schrift und Techniken
   der Wirtschaftsverwaltung im alten Vorderen Orient: Informationsspeicherung
   und -verarbeitung vor 5000 Jahren, Berlin: Verlag Franzbecker.
Nobis, G. 1971 Vom Wildpferd zum Hauspferd (Fundamenta, Reine B, 6),
   Cologne: Bohlau.
O'Shea, J. M. 1978 Mortuary Variability: an Archaeological Investigation with
   Case Studies from the Nineteenth Century Central Plains of North America and
   the Early Bronze Age of Southern Hungary (unpublished Ph.D. thesis,
   University of Cambridge).
O'Shea, J. M. 1984 Mortuary Variability: an archaeological investigation, New
   York: Academic Press.
Oates, D. and Oates, J. 1976 'Early irrigation agriculture in Mesopotamia', pp.
   109-36 in G. Sieveking, I. Longworth and K. Wilson (eds) Problems in
   Economic and Social Archaeology, London: Duckworth.
Oates, J. 1980 'Land use and population in prehistoric Mesopotamia', pp. 303-14
   in M.-T. Barrelet (ed.) UArcheologie de ITraq du Debut de VEpoque
   Neolithique a 333 avant notre ere, Paris: CNRS.
Oates, J. 1987 'Ubaid chronology', pp. 473-81 in Aurenche et al. 1987.
0rsnes, M. 1956 'Om en Jaettestues konstruktion og bruk', Aarboger for Nor disk


                                        534




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY


   Oldkyndighed og Historie 1952, 221-34.
Otto, H. and Witter, W. 1952 Handbuch der altesten vorgeschichtlichen
   Metallurgie in Mitteleuropa, Leipzig: Barth Verlag.
Ovadia, E. 1992 'The domestication of the ass and pack animals: a case of
   technological change', pp. 19-28 in O. Bar-Yosef and A. Khazanov (eds)
   Pastoralism in the Levant: archaeological materials in anthropological
   perspective, Madison, Wisconsin: Prehistory Press.
Patzold, J. 1960 'Rituelles Pflugen bei dem vorgeschichtlichen Totenkult',
   Prahistorische Zeitschrift 37,189-239.
Panayotov, I. 1980 'Bronze rapiers, swords, and double axes from Bulgaria',
   Thracia 5, 173-98.
Panayotov, I. and Dergachov, V. 1984 'Die Ockergrabkultur in Bulgarien
   (Darstellung des Problems)', Studia Praehistorica (Sofia), 7, 99-116.
Papp, A. 1969 'Korosvidek: a felszin kialakulasa es mai kepe', pp. 270-4 in
   M. Pecsi A tiszai Alfold, Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Park, C. E and Macdiarmid, R. A. 1970 Ore Deposits, San Francisco: Freeman.
Patay, P. 1974 'Die hochkupferzeitliche Bodrogkeresztur-Kultur', Bericht der
   Romisch-Germanischen Kommission 55, 1-72.
Patay, P., Zimmer, K., Szabo, Z. and Sinay, G. 1963 'Spektrographische und
   metallographische Untersuchung kupfer- und friihbronzezeitlicher Funde', Acta
   Archaeologica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 15, 37-64.
Paunescu, A. 1970 Evolufia Uneltelor fi Armelor de Piatrd Cioplita descoperite
   pe teritoriul Romaniei, Bucharest: Romanian Academy of Sciences.
Pavuk, J. 1972 'Neolithisches Graberfeld in Nitra', Slovenska Archaeologia 20,
   5-105.
Payne, S. 1973 'Kill-off patterns in sheep and goats: the mandibles from A§van
   Kale', Anatolian Studies 23, 281-303.
Pecsi, M. 1970 Geomorphological Regions of Hungary, Budapest: Akademiai
   Kiado.
Pecsi, M. and Sarfalvi, B. 1964 The Geography of Hungary, Budapest: Corvina
   Press.
Perkins, D. 1969 'Fauna of Qatal Hiiyiik: evidence for early cattle domestication in
   Anatolia', Science 164, 177-9.
Perry, W. J. 1937 (1st edn 1924) The Growth of Civilisation, Harmondsworth:
   Penguin Books.
Petrequin, P. and Petrequin, M. 1988 Le Neolithique des lacs: prehistoire des lacs
   de Chalains et de Clairvaux, Paris: Errance.
Piazza, A., Menozzi, P. and Cavaili-Sforza 1981 'Synthetic gene frequency maps of
   men and the selective effects of climate', Proceedings of the National Academy
   of Sciences of the USA 78,2648-52.
Piddocke, S. 1969 'The potlatch system of the southern Kwakiutl: a new
   perspective', pp. 130-58 in A. P. Vayda (ed.) Environment and Cultural
   Behaviour, New York: Natural History Press.
Pieczyriski, Z. 1985 'Uwagi o skarbie miedzianym z Bytynia, woj. Posnanskie',
   Pontes Archaeologici Posnanienses 34, 1-7.
Piggott, S. 1954 The Neolithic Cultures of the British Isles, Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Piggott, S. 1958a 'Vere Gordon Childe, 1892-1957', Proceedings of the British
   Academy 44, 305-12.
Piggott, S. 1958b 'The Dawn: and an epilogue', Antiquity 32, 75-9.


                                         535




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY

Piggott, S. 1959 'A Late Bronze Age wine trade?', Antiquity 33, 22-3.
Piggott, S. (ed.) 1961 The Dawn of Civilisation: the first world survey of human
   cultures in early times, London: Thames and Hudson.
Piggott, S. 1965 Ancient Europe, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Piggott, S. 1968 'The earliest wheeled vehicles and the Caucasian evidence',
   Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 34, 266-318.
Piggott, S. 1979 '"The first wagons and carts": twenty five years later', Bulletin of
   the Institute of Archaeology 16, 3-17.
Piggott, S. 1983 The Earliest Wheeled Transport, from the Atlantic coast to the
    Caspian sea, London: Thames and Hudson.
Piggott, S. 1992 Waggon, Chariot and Carriage: symbol and status in the history
   of transport, London: Thames and Hudson.
Pingel, V. 1982 'Zum Schatzfund von Valcitran in Nordbulgarien', pp. 171-86 in
   Hansel (ed.) Sudosteuropa zwischen 1600 und 1000 v. Chr. vol. 1, Berlin.
Piotrovskii, B. 1959 Vanskoe Tsarstvo, Urartu, Moscow: Izdatel'stvo vostochnoj
   literatury.
Pittioni, R. 1954 Urgeschichte des Osterreichischen Raumes, Vienna: Deuticke.
Pittioni, R. 1957 'Urzeitlicher Bergbau auf Kupfererz und Spurenanalyse',
   Archaeologia Austriaca Beiheft 1,1-76.
Pittioni, R. 1973 'Almwirtschaft', Reallexikon der Germanischen Altertumskunde
    1,181-3, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Pleinerova, I. 1980 'Kultovnf objekty z Pozdni Doby Kammene v Brezne u Loun',
   Pamatky Archeologicke 71(1), 10-56.
Pleinerova, I. 1981 'Problem stop orby v casne Eneolitickem nalezu z Brezna',
   Archaeologicke Rozhledy 33,133-41.
Polanyi, K., Arensberg, K. and Pearson, H. 1957 Trade and Market in the Early
   Empires, New York: The Free Press.
Postan, M. M. and Titow, J. Z. 1959 'Heriots and prices on the Winchester
   manors', Economic History Review 2nd ser. 11.
Potratz, J. A. H. 1966 Die Pferdetrensen des alten Orient (Analecta Orientalia,
   41), Rome: Analecta Orientalia.
Pownall, T. 1773 'A description of the sepulchral monument at New Grange, near
    Drogheda, in the County of Meath, Ireland', Archaeologia 2, 241.
Prag, K. 1978 'Silver in the Levant in the fourth millennium BC', pp. 36-45 in
    P. R. S. Moorey and P. Parr (eds) Archaeology in the Levant, Warminster: Aris
    and Philips.
Preuss, J. 1966. Die Baalberger Gruppe in Mitteldeutschland, Berlin: VEB Verlag
    der Wissenschaften.
Price, B. J. 1971 'Prehispanic irrigation agriculture in Nuclear America', Latin
    American Research Review 6, 3-30.
Price, R. 1993 'The west Pontic Maritime Interaction Sphere: a long-term structure
    in Balkan prehistory?', Oxford Journal of Archaeology 12(2), 175-96.
Pullen, D. J. 1992 'Ox and plow in the Early Bronze Age Aegean', American
   Journal of Archaeology 96, 45-54.
Pustovalov, S. Z. 1994 'Economy and social organisation of northern Pontic
    steppe/forest-steppe pastoral populations: 2700-2350 BC (Catacomb culture)',
    Baltic-Pontic Studies 2, 86-134.
Qviller, B. 1981 'The dynamics of Homeric society', Symbolae Osloenses 56,109.
Qviller, B. [unpublished typescript] 'The king in Dark Age Greece and in Medieval
    Norway; the evolutionary significance of sympotic kingship'.


                                         536




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY


Raczky, R 1987 The Late Neolithic of the Tisza Region, Szolnok: County
   Museum.
Radulescu, D. and Dimitrescu, R. 1966 Mineralogia Topographica a Romaniei,
   Bucharest: Editura §tiin$ifica.
Raetzel-Fabian, D. 1986 Phasenkartierung des mitteleuropaischen Neolithikums:
   Chronologie und Chorologie (BAR Int. Ser. 316), Oxford: British Archaeological
   Reports.
Raikes, R. 1965 The ancient gabarbands of Baluchistan', East and West 15,
   26-35.
Randsborg, K. 1970 'Eine kupferne Schmuckscheibe aus einem Dolmen in
  Jutland', Acta Archaeologica 41,181-90.
Randsborg, K. 1979a 'Social Dimensions in Neolithic Denmark', Proceedings of
   the Prehistoric Society 41,105-18.
Randsborg, K. 1979b 'Resource distribution and the function of copper in early
   Neolithic Denmark', pp. 303-18 in M. Ryan (ed.) The Origins of Metallurgy in
   Atlantic Europe (Proceedings of the 5th Atlantic Colloquium, Dublin 1978),
   Dublin: Government Stationery Office.
Randsborg, K. and Nybo, C. 1986 'The coffin and the sun: demography and
   ideology in Scandinavian prehistory', Acta Archaeologica 55, 161-85.
Rappaport, R. A. 1968 Pigs for the Ancestors, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Ratnagar, S. 1981 Encounters: the Westerly Trade of the Harappa Civilisation,
   Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Rausing, G. 1988 'More on the ard marks', Antiquity 61, 263-6.
Reichel-Dolmatoff, G. 1975 Shaman and Jaguar: a study of narcotic drugs among
   the Indians of Colombia, Philadelphia.
Reinach, S. 1893 'Le mirage oriental', I3Anthropologic 4, 539-78, 699-732.
Renfrew, A. C. 1967a 'Colonialism and megalithismus', Antiquity 41, 276.
Renfrew, A. C. 1967b 'Cycladic metallurgy and the Aegean Early Bronze Age',
  American Journal of Archaeology 71,1-20.
Renfrew, A. C. 1968 'Wessex without Mycenae', Annual of the British School of
  Archaeology at Athens 63, 277.
Renfrew, A. C. 1969 'The autonomy of the south-east European Copper Age',
  Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 35, 12-47.
Renfrew, A. C. 1972 The Emergence of Civilisation: the Cyclades and the Aegean
   in the third millennium BC, London: Methuen.
Renfrew, A. C. 1973a 'Monuments, mobilisation and social organisation in
  Neolithic Wessex', pp. 539-58 in A. C. Renfrew (ed.) The Explanation of
   Culture Change, London: Duckworth.
Renfrew, A. C. 1973b Before Civilisation: the radiocarbon revolution and
  European Prehistory, London: Jonathan Cape.
Renfrew, A. C. 1976 'Megaliths, territories and populations' in S. J. de Laet (ed.)
  Acculturation and Continuity in Atlantic Europe, Brugge: de Tempel.
Renfrew, A. C. 1987 Archaeology and Language: the puzzle of Indo-European
  origins, London: Cape.
Renfrew, A. C. 1994 'The identity of Europe in prehistoric archaeology', Journal of
  European Archaeology 2(2), 153-73.
Renfrew, A. C., Gimbutas, M. and Elster, E. (eds) 1986 Excavations at Sitagroi,
  a prehistoric village in northeast Greece vol. 1 (Monumenta Archaeologia 13),
  Los Angeles: UCLA.
Reynolds, P. 1981 'Deadstock and livestock', pp. 85-96 in R. Mercer (ed.)


                                         537




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY


   Farming Practice in British ehistory, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
   Press.
Ripinki-Naxon, M. 1993 The i\ature of Shamanism: substance and function of a
   religious metaphor, Albany: State University of New York Press.
Ripinski, M. 1975 The camel in ancient Arabia', Antiquity 49, 295-8.
Roberts, N. 1977 'Water conservation in ancient Arabia', Seminar for Arabian
   Studies 7, 134-46.
Roberts, N. 1989 The Holocene: an environmental history, Oxford: Blackwell.
Roberts, N. 1991 'Late Quaternary geomorphological change and the origins of
   agriculture in south central Turkey', Geoarchaeology 6(1), 1-26.
Robins, R. H. 1964 General Linguistics: an introductory survey, London:
   Longmans.
Roe, E G. 1955 The Indian and the Horse, Norman: University of Oklahoma
   Press.
Roglic, J. 1961 'The geographical setting of medieval Dubrovnik', in N. J. G.
   Pounds (ed.) Geographical Essays on Southeast Europe, Bloomington:
   University of Indiana Press.
Roman, P. 1971 'Strukturanderungen des Endaneolithikums im Donau-Karpathen-
   Raum', Dacia 15, 31-170.
Roman, P. 1974 'Das Problem der "schnurverzierten" Keramik in Siidosteuropa',
  Jahresschrift fiir mitteldeutsche Vorgeschichte 58,157-74.
Roman, P. and Nemeti, I. 1978 Cultura Baden in Romania, Bucharest: Institute of
   Archaeology.
Romer, E 1878 Compte-Rendu de la huitieme Session: Congres International
   d'Anthropologic et d'Archeologie Prehistoriques, 1876, Budapest: National
   Museum of Hungary.
Rosetti, D. V. 1959 'Movilele funerare de la Gurbanefti', Materiale §i Cercetari
   Arheologice 6, 791-816.
Rostholm, H. 1977 'Neolitiske Skivehjul fra Kideris og Bjerregard i Midtjylland',
   Kuml 1977,185-222.
Rostovtzeff, M. I. 1920 'L'Age du cuivre dans le Caucase et civilisations de Soumer
   et de l'Egypte protodynastique', Revue archeologique, 5th ser., 12,1-37.
Rothenberg, B.1970 'An archaeological survey in southern Sinai', Palestine
   Excavation Quarterly 1970-1, 4-29.
Rottlander, R. C. A. 1995 'Bemerkungen zu einer Abhandlung iiber Feuerstiilpen',
   Archaologisches Korrespondenzblatt 25, 169.
Rowlands, M. J. 1971 'The archaeological interpretation of prehistoric
   metalworking', World Archaeology 3, 210-24.
Rowlands, M. J. 1980 'Kinship, alliance and exchange in the European Bronze
   Age', pp. 15-55 in J. Barrett and R. Bradley (eds) Settlement and Society in the
   British later Bronze Age (BAR Brit. Ser. 83), Oxford: British Archaeological
   Reports.
Rowlands, M. 1984 'Conceptualising the European Bronze and Early Iron Ages',
   pp. 147-56 in J. Bintliff (ed.) European Social Evolution: archaeological
   perspectives, Bradford: Bradford University Press.
Rowlands, M. 1994 'Childe and the archaeology of freedom', pp. 35-54 in Harris
   1994.
Rowlands, M. J., Kristiansen, K. and Larsen, M. T. 1987 Centre and Periphery in
   the Ancient World, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rowley-Conwy, P. 1981 'Slash and burn in the temperate European Neolithic', pp.


                                         538




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY


    85-96 in R. Mercer (ed.) Farming Practice in British Prehistory, Edinburgh:
   Edinburgh University Press.
Rowley-Conwy, P. 1984 'The laziness of the short-distance hunter: the origins of
   agriculture in western Denmark', Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 3,
   300-24.
Rowley-Conwy, P. 1987 'The interpretation of ard marks', Antiquity 61, 263-6.
Rowton, M. B. 1974 'Enclosed nomadism', Journal of the Economic and Social
   History of the Orient, 17,1-30.
Rowton, M. B. 1980 'Pastoralism and the periphery', pp. 291-301 in T. Barrelet
    (ed.) UArcheologie de ITraq du Debut de VEpoque Neolithique a 333 avant
    notre ere, Paris: CNRS.
Rudenko, S. I. 1970 Frozen Tombs of Siberia: the Pazyryk burials of Iron Age
   horsemen, London: Dent.
Runnels, C. and van Andel, Tj. H. 1988 'Trade and the origins of agriculture in the
   eastern Mediterranean', Journal of Mediterranean Archaeology 1(1), 83-109.
Ruoff, E. 1981 'Stein- und Bronzezeitliche Textilfunde aus dem Kanton Zurich',
   Helvetia Archaeologica 45/48, 252-64.
Ruoff, U. 1978 'Die Schnurkeramischen Rader von Zurich "Pressehaus"',
   Archaologisches Korrespondenzblatt 8, 275-83.
Russell, K. W. 1988 After Eden: the behavioural ecology of early food production
   in the Near East and North Africa (BAR Int. Ser. 391), Oxford: British
   Archaeological Reports.
Ryder, M. L. 1969 'Changes in the fleece of sheep following domestication', pp.
   495-523 in P. J. Ucko and G. W. Dimbleby (eds) The Domestication and
   Exploitation of Plants and Animals, London: Duckworth.
Ryder, M. L. 1983 Sheep and Man, London: Duckworth.
Siska, S. 1964 'Graberfeld der Tiszapolgar Kultur in Tibava', Slovenska
   Archaeologia 12, 352.
Sramko, B. A. 1971 'Der Hakenpflug der Bronzezeit in der Ukraine', Tools and
   Tillage 14, 223-4.
Sahlins, M. 1961 'The segmentary lineage: an organisation of predatory
   expansion', American Anthropologist 63, 322-45.
Sahlins, M. D. 1963 'Poor man, rich man, big man, chief: political types in
   Melanesia and Polynesia', Comparative Studies in Society and History 5,
   285-303.
Sahlins, M. D. 1965 'On the sociology of primitive exchange', in M. Bantock (ed.)
   The Relevance of Models for Social Anthropology, London: Tavistock.
Sahlins, M. D. 1972 Stone Age Economics, Chicago and New York: Aldine.
Said, E. 1978 Orientalism, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Sakellaridis, M. 1979 The Mesolithic and Neolithic of the Swiss Area (BAR Int. Ser.
   67), Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
Salisbury, R. F. 1962 From Stone to Steel: Economic Consequences of a Techno-
   logical Change in New Guinea, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Salonen, A. 1968 'Agricultura Mesopotamica', Annates Academiae Scientiarum
   Fennicae, Series B, vol. 149.
Samuelson, J. 1878 A History of Drink, London: Truebner and Co.
Sandars, N. 1983 'North and south at the end of the Mycenaean age: aspects of an
   old problem', Oxford Journal of Archaeology 2,43-68.
Sanders, W. T. and Price, B. J. 1968 Mesoamerica: the Evolution of a Civilization,
   New York: Random House.


                                         539




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY

Sauvy, A. 1969 The General Theory of Population, London: Weidenfeld and
   Nicolson.
Scarre, C. (ed.) 1983 Ancient France, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Scarre, C. 1992 The Early Neolithic of western France and megalithic origins in
   Atlantic Europe', Oxford Journal of Archaeology 11(2), 121-54.
Schaaf, U. and Taylor, A. K. 1975 'Siidimporte im Raum nordlich der Alpen (6-4.
   Jahrhundert v. Chr.)', Ausgrabungen in Deutschland 1950-75, vol. 3, 312-16,
   Mainz: RGZM.
Schaeffer, C. F. A. 1948 Stratigraphie Comparee et Chronologie de I'Asie
   Occidental IIP et IIs millenaires, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Scheil, J. V. 1923 Textes de comptabilite proto-filamites', Memoires de la mission
   archeologique de Perse 17.
Schietzel, K. 1965 Miiddersheim, Cologne and Graz: Herausgegeben von Hermann
   Schwabedissen.
Schild, R. 1987 The exploitation of flint in central Poland', pp. 137-50 in
   G. Sieveking and M. Newcomer (eds) The Human Uses of Flint and Chert,
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schindler, K. 1993 The Man in the Ice, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Schlabow, K. 1959 'Beitrage zur Erforschung der jungsteinzeitlichen und
   bronzezeitlichen Gewebetechnik Mitteldeutschlands', Jahresschrift fur
   Mitteldeutsche Vorgeschichte 43,101-20 and Plates.
Schmid, E. 1952 'Vom Jaspisbergbau an der Kachelfluh bei Kleinkems (Baden)',
   Germania 30, 153-8.
Schmidt, H. 1902 Heinrich Schliemanns Sammlung trojanischer Altertiimer,
   Berlin: Konigliche Museen zu Berlin.
Schnapp, A. 1993 La Conquete du Passe: aux origines de Yarcheologit, Paris:
   Carre.
Schneider, J. 1977 'Was there a pre-capitalist world-system?', Peasant Studies 6(1),
   20-9.
Schnurkeramik-Symposium, Halle 1979, Jahresschrift fur mitteldeutsche
   Vorgeschichte 64.
Schon, D. 1971 Beyond the Stable State, London: Temple Smith.
Schovsbo, P. O. 1983 'A Neolithic vehicle from Klosterlund, central Jutland',
   Journal of Danish Archaeology 2, 60-70.
Schubert, F. 1965 'Zu den siidosteuropaischen Kupferaxten', Germania 43,274-95.
Schubert, F. 1966 'Zur Friihbronzezeit an der mittleren Donau', Germania 44,
   264-86.
Schubert, F. and Schubert, E. 1967 'Spektralanalytische Untersuchungen von Hort-
   und Einzelfunden der Periode B III', pp. 185-203 (appendix) in A. Mozsolics
   (ed.) Bronzefunde des Karpathenbeckens, Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Schuchhardt, C. 1944 (1st edn 1919) Alteuropa in seiner Kultur- und
   Stilentwicklung, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Schiile, W. 1967 'Feldbewasserung in Alt-Europa', Madrider Mitteilungen 8,
   79-99.
Schiile, W. 1969 'Glockenbecher und Hauspferde', pp. 88-93 in J. Boessneck (ed.)
   Archaologisch-Biologische Zusammenarbeit in der Vor- und
   Friihgeschichtsforschung (Miinchener Kolloquium 1967), Deutsche
   Forschungsgemeinschaft (Forschungsberichte 15), Wiesbaden: Steiner Verlag.
Schultz-Klinken, H.-R. 1976 'Ackerbausysteme des Saatfurchen- und
   Saatbettbaues in urgeschichtlicher und geschichtlicher Zeit sowie ihr Einfluss


                                         540




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY


   auf die Bodenentwicklung', Die Kunde (1975/6) 26/7, 5-68.
Schwabedissen, H. 1966 (1967) 'Ein horizontierter "Breitkeil" aus Satrup',
   Palaeohistoria 12, 409-68.
Seeberg, P. and Kristensen, M. 1964 'Mange striber pa kryds og tvaers', Kuml,
   7-14.
Semple, E. C. 1932 The Geography of the Mediterranean Region: its relation to
   ancient history, London: Constable.
Sereni, E. 1981 'Per la storia delle piu antiche tecniche e della nomenclatura della
   vite e del vino in Italia', pp. 101-48 in E. Sereni Terra Nuova e Buoi Rossi e
   altri saggi per una storia delVagricoltura europea, Torino: Einaudi.
Service, E. R. 1962 Primitive Social Organization: An Evolutionary Perspective,
   New York: Random House.
Service, E. R. 1968 'War and our contemporary ancestors', pp. 160-7 in M. Fried,
   M. Harris and R. Murphy (eds) War: the Anthropology of Armed Conflict and
   Aggression, New York: Doubleday.
Shanks, M. and Tilley, C. 1987 Social Theory and Archaeology, Cambridge: Polity
   Press.
Sharpies, N. 1985 'Individual and community: the changing role of megaliths in
   the Orcadian Neolithic', Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 51, 59-74.
Sherman, S. J. 1977 'The appearance of the Bell Beaker assemblage in central
   Europe', pp. 51-70 in R. J. Mercer (ed.) Beakers in Britain and Europe (BAR
   Int. Ser. 26), Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
Shennan, S. J. 1982 'Ideology, change and the European Early Bronze Age', pp.
   155-61 in I. A. Hodder (ed.) Symbolic and Structural Archaeology, Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
Shennan, S. J. 1986 'Central Europe in the third millennium BC: an evolutionary
   trajectory for the beginning of the European Bronze Age', Journal of
   Anthropological Archaeology 5,115-46.
Shennan, S. J. 1993a 'Settlement and social change in central Europe', Journal of
   World Prehistory 7(2), 121-61.
Shennan, S. J. 1993b 'Commodities, transactions and growth in the central
   European early Bronze A g J o u r n a l of European Archaeology 1(2), 59-72.
Sherratt, A. G. 1972 'Socioeconomic and demographic models for the Neolithic
   and Bronze Ages of Europe', pp. 477-542 in D. L. Clarke (ed.) Models in
   Archaeology, London: Methuen. (Partly reprinted here as Chapter 2.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1973 'The interpretation of change in European prehistory', pp.
   419-28 in A. C. Renfrew (ed.) The Explanation of Culture Change, London:
   Duckworth.
Sherratt, A. G. 1976a The Beginning of the Bronze Age in the area between the
   middle Danube and the north Aegean (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
   University of Cambridge).
Sherratt, A. G. 1976b 'Resources, technology and trade: an essay in early
   European copper metallurgy', pp. 557-81 in G. Sieveking, I. Longworth and
   K. Wilson (eds) Problems in Economic and Social Archaeology, London:
   Duckworth. (Reprinted here as Chapter 4.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1979 'Problems in European Prehistory', pp. 193-206 in D. L.
   Clarke, Analytical Archaeologist, London: Academic Press.
Sherratt, A. G. (ed.) 1980a The Cambridge Encyclopaedia of Archaeology,
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sherratt, A. G. 1980b 'Water, soil and seasonality in early cereal cultivation',


                                         541




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY

   World Archaeology 11, 313-30. (Reprinted here as Chapter 3.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1981 'Plough and pastoralism: aspects of the Secondary Products
   Revolution', pp. 261-305 in I. Hodder, G. Isaac and N. Hammond (eds)
   Pattern of the Past: Studies in Honour of David Clark, Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press. (Reprinted here as Chapter 6.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1982a The first European sailing ships', The Ashmolean 1, 12-14.
Sherratt, A. G. 1982b 'Mobile resources: settlement and exchange in early
   agricultural Europe', pp. 13-26 in A. C. Renfrew and S. J. Shennan (eds)
   Ranking Resources and Exchange, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
   (Partly reprinted here as Chapter 10.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1983a 'The Secondary Exploitation of Animals in the Old World',
   World Archaeology 15, 90-104. (Partly reprinted here as Chapter 7.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1983b 'The development of Neolithic and Copper Age settlement
   in the Great Hungarian Plain, Part I: The regional setting', Oxford Journal of
   Archaeology 1(1), 287-316. (Partly reprinted here as Chapter 11.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1984a 'The development of Neolithic and Copper Age settlement
   in the Great Hungarian Plain, Part II: Site survey and settlement dynamics',
   Oxford Journal of Archaeology 2(1), 13-41. (Partly reprinted here as Chapter
   H.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1984b 'Social evolution: Europe in the later Neolithic and Copper
   Ages', pp. 123-34 in J. Bintliff (ed.) European Social Evolution: archaeological
   perspectives, Bradford: University of Bradford. (Partly reprinted here as
   Chapter 5.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1984c 'Early agrarian settlement in the Koros region of the Great
   Hungarian Plain', Acta Archaeologica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 35,
   155-69.
Sherratt, A. G. 1985 'Cups that cheer: alcohol in European culture', The
   Ashmolean 8, 6-9 (reprinted in Brewing Review, January 1986).
Sherratt, A. G. (unpublished typescript, 1985) Driving and Drinking: Aspects of
   Bronze Age Elites in Europe, two Munro lectures delivered in the University of
   Edinburgh, November 1985.
Sherratt, A. G. 1986a 'The pottery of the Early Bronze Age at Sitagroi', pp. 429-
   76 in A. C. Renfrew, M. Gimbutas and E. Elster (eds) Excavations at Sitagroi,
   Los Angeles: UCLA.
Sherratt, A. G. 1986b 'Two new finds of wooden wheels from later Neolithic and
   Early Bronze Age Europe', Oxford Journal of Archaeology 5,243-8.
   (Reproduced here as Chapter 9.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1986c 'The Radley "ear-rings" revised', Oxford Journal of
   Archaeology 5, 61-6.
Sherratt, A. G. 1987a 'Neolithic exchange systems in central Europe, 5000-3000
   b.c.', pp. 193-204 in G. Sieveking and M. Newcomer (eds) The Human Uses of
   Flint and Chert, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (Partly reprinted here
   as Chapter 12.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1987b 'Wool, wheels and ploughmarks: local developments or
   outside introductions in Neolithic Europe?', Bulletin of the London University
   Institute of Archaeology 23,1-15. (Reprinted here as Chapter 8.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1987c 'Cups that cheered', pp. 81-114 in W. Waldren and R. C.
   Kennard (eds) Bell Beakers of the Western Mediterranean (BAR Int. Ser. 287),
   Oxford: British Archaeological Reports. (Reprinted here as Chapter 15.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1987d 'The Early Bronze Age Pottery' in C. Renfrew, M. Gimbutas


                                        542




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


   and E. Elster (eds) Excavations at Sitagroi, a prehistoric village in northeast
   Greece vol. 1, pp. 429-76 (Monumenta Archaeologia 13), Los Angeles: UCLA.
Sherratt, A. G. 1987e 'Warriors and traders: Bronze Age chiefdoms in central
   Europe', pp. 54-66 in B. W. Cunliffe (ed.) Origins: the roots of European
   Civilisation, BBC Publications.
Sherratt, A. G. 1987f [Review article] 'Two new books on early European
   agriculture', Scottish Archaeological Review 4, 134-7.
Sherratt, A. G. 1989 'V. Gordon Childe: archaeology and intellectual history', Past
   and Present 125, 151-85. (Reprinted here as Chapter 1.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1990a 'The genesis of megaliths: monumentality, ethnicity and
   social complexity in Neolithic north-west Europe', World Archaeology 22(2),
   147-67. (Reprinted here as Chapter 13.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1990b 'Gordon Childe: patterns and paradigms in prehistory',
   Australian Archaeology 30, 3-13.
Sherratt, A. G. 1991a 'Sacred and profane substances: the ritual use of narcotics in
   later Neolithic Europe', pp. 50-64 in P. Garwood, D. Jennings, R. Skeates and
   J. Toms (eds) Sacred and Profane: proceedings of a conference on archaeology,
   ritual and religion, Oxford: Oxford University Committee for Archaeology.
   (Reprinted here as Chapter 16.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1991b 'Palaeoethnobotany: from crops to cuisine', pp. 221-36 in
   F. Queiroga and A. Dinis (eds) Paleoecologia e Arqueologia II, Vila Nova de
   Famalicao: Centro de Estudos Famalicenses.
Sherratt, A. G. 1991c 'Troy, Maikop, Altyn Depe: Early Bronze Age urbanism and
   its periphery'; Conference paper, Novorossiysk: to appear (in Russian) in V. M.
   Masson (ed.) Majkopskaya Kultura-fenomen Drevnej Istorii Kavkaza i
   Vostochnoj Evropy, Petersburg. (Reproduced here as Chapter 18.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1992a 'What can archaeologists learn from Annalistes?', pp. 135-
   42 in A. B. Knapp (ed.) Archaeology, Annales and Ethnohistory, Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
Sherratt, A. G. 1992b 'The relativity of theory', pp. 119-30 in N. Yoffee and A. G.
   Sherratt 1992 Archaeological Theory - Who Sets The Agenda f, Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
Sherratt, A. G. 1993a, 'Who are you calling peripheral? Dependence and
   independence in European prehistory', in C. Scarre and F. Healy (eds) Trade
   and Exchange in Prehistoric Europe, Oxford: Oxbow Books.
Sherratt, A. G. 1993b, 'What would a Bronze Age world system look like?
   Relations between temperate Europe and the Mediterranean in later prehistory',
   Journal of European Archaeology 1(2), 1-57.
Sherratt, A. G. 1994a 'Core, periphery and margin: perspectives on the Bronze
   Age', pp. 335-45 in C. Mathers and S. Stoddart (eds) Development and Decline
   in the Mediterranean Bronze Age, Sheffield: J. R. Collis Publications.
Sherratt, A. G. 1994b 'The transformation of early agrarian Europe: the later
   Neolithic and Copper Ages 4500-2500 BC', pp. 167-201; and 'The emergence
   of elites: earlier Bronze Age Europe 2500-1300 BC', pp. 244-76 in B. Cunliffe
   (ed.) The Oxford Illustrated Prehistory of Europe.
Sherratt, A. G. 1995a 'Introduction: Peculiar Substances', pp. 1-10; and 'Alcohol
   and its alternatives: symbol and substance in early Old World cultures', pp. 11-
   46 in J. Goodman, P. Lovejoy and A. Sherratt (eds) Consuming Habits: drugs in
   history and anthropology, London: Routledge.
Sherratt, A. G. 1995b 'Reviving the grand narrative: archaeology and long-term


                                         543




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


   change', Journal of European Archaeology 3(1), 1-32.
Sherratt, A. G. 1995c 'Instruments of conversion: the role of megaliths in the
   Mesolithic-Neolithic transition in north-west Europe', Oxford Journal of
   Archaeology 14(3), 245-60. (Partly reproduced here as Chapter 14.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1996a 'Plate tectonics and imaginary prehistories; structure and
   contingency in agricultural origins', pp. 130-40 in D. Harris (ed.) Origins and
   Spread of Agriculture, London: UCL Press.
Sherratt, A. G. 1996b 'Why Wessex? The Avon route and river transport in later
   prehistoric Britain', Oxford Journal of Archaeology 15(2), 211-34.
Sherratt, A. G. 1996c 'Sedentary agricultural and nomadic pastoral populations
    (3000-700 BC)', pp. 37-43 in A. H. Dani and J.-P. Mohen (eds) History of
   Humanity: Scientific and Cultural Development (vol. II, From the Third Mil-
   lennium to the Seventh Century BC), Paris and London: U N E S C O and Routledge.
Sherratt, A. G. 1996 (in press, a) (in Polish) 'Gordon Childe: right or wrong?' in
   J. Lech (ed.) Conference volume on Gordon Childe, Warsaw. (Reproduced here
   as Chapter 20.)
Sherratt, A. G. 1996 (in press, b) 'The human geography of Europe: a prehistoric
   perspective', in R. Butler and R. Dodgshon (eds) An Historical Geography of
   Europe, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Sherratt, A. G. (typescript, 1996) '"With baleful weeds and precious-juiced
   flowers": Grooved Ware, grape-cups and prehistoric pharmacognosy'.
Sherratt, A. G. and Sherratt, E. S. 1988 'The archaeology of Indo-European: an
   alternative view', Antiquity 62 (no. 236), 584-95. (Reproduced here as Chapter
    19.)
Sherratt, A. G. and Sherratt E. S. 1991a 'From luxuries to commodities: the nature
   of Mediterranean Bronze Age trading systems', pp. 351-86 in N. Gale (ed.)
   Bronze Age Trade in the Mediterranean (Studies in Mediterranean Archaeology
    90), Jonsered: P. Astroms For lag.
Sherratt, A. G. and Sherratt, E. S. 1991b 'Urnfield Reflections' [Review article on
   James et al. Centuries of Darkness], Cambridge Archaeological Journal 1(2),
   247-53.
Sherratt, A. G. and Taylor, T. 1989 'Metal vessels in Bronze Age Europe and the
   context of Vulchetrun', pp. 106-34 in J. Best and N. de Vries (eds) Thracians
   and Mycenaeans, Leiden: Brill. (Partly reprinted here as Chapter 17.)
Sherratt, E. S. and Sherratt, A. G. (unpublished typescript) The Aegean Bronze Age
   and the East Mediterranean: political structures and external trade (partly
    incorporated in Sherratt and Sherratt 1990).
Sherratt, E. S. and Sherratt, A. G. 1993 'The growth of the Mediterranean
    economy in the early first millennium BC', World Archaeology 24(3), 361-78.
Shklar, J. N. 1987 Montesquieu, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sielmann, B. 1971 'Die friihneolitische Besiedlung Mitteleuropas', pp. 1-65 in
    H. Schwabedissen (ed.) Die Anfange des Neolithikums Va, Cologne: Bohlau
    Verlag.
Sigaut, F. 1975 UAgriculture et le Feu, Paris and The Hague: Mouton.
Silberman, N. A. 1982 Digging for God and Country: Exploration, Archaeology
   and the Secret Struggle for the Holy Land, 1799-1917, New York: Knopf.
Simoons, F. J. 1969 'Primary adult lactose intolerance and the milking habit: a
    problem in biological and cultural interrelations (1)', American Journal of
    Digestive Diseases 14, 819-36.
Simoons, F. J. 1970 'Primary adult lactose intolerance and the milking habit: a


                                         544




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY


    problem in biological and cultural relations (2)', American Journal of Digestive
    Diseases 15, 695-710.
Simoons, F. J. 1971 The antiquity of dairying in Asia and Africa', Geographical
    Review 61, 431-9.
Simpson, W. K. 1959 The vessels with engraved designs and the repousse bowl
    from the Tell Basta treasure', American Journal of Archaeology 63, 29-45.
Skarup, J. 1975 Stengade: ein langelandischer Wohnplatz mit Hausresten aus der
    fruhneolithischen Zeit, Copenhagen: Meddelelser fra Langelands Museum.
Sklenar, K. 1983 Archaeology in Central Europe: the First 500 Years, Leicester:
    Leicester University Press.
Slicher van Bath, B. H. 1963 The Agrarian History of Western Europe AD 500-
    1850, London: Arnold.
Smith, A. 1893 (1st edn 1776) An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of The
    Wealth of Nations, London: Routledge.
Smith, C. T. 1967 An Historical Geography of Western Europe before 1800,
    London: Longmans.
Smith, P. E. L. and Young, T. C. 1972 The evolution of early agriculture and
    culture in Greater Mesopotamia: a trial model', in B. Spooner (ed.) Population
    Growth: Anthropological Implications, Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press.
Smith, P. and Horwitz, L. K. 1984 'Radiographic evidence for changing patterns of
    animal exploitation in the southern Levant\ Journal of Archaeological Science
    11,467-75.
Somogyi, S. 1964 'Geographical factors in the formation of alkali soils (Szik-soils)
    in Hungary', pp. 36-57 in M. Pecsi (ed.) Applied Geography in Hungary,
    Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Spencer, H. 1937 [1st edn 1862] First Principles (Thinker's Library 62), London:
    Watts and Co.
Spooner, B. (ed.) 1972 Population Growth: Anthropological Implications,
    Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press.
Sprockhoff, E. 1930 Zur Handelsgeschichte der germanischen Bronzezeit
    (Vorgeschichtliche Forschungen 7), Berlin: Verlag Walter de Gruyter.
Sprockhoff, E. 1938 Die Nordische Megalithkultur, Berlin and Leipzig: de
    Gruyter.
Sprockhoff, E. 1952 'Ein Grabfund der nordischen Megalithkultur von Oldendorf,
    Kr Liineburg', Germania 30,164-74.
Sprockhoff, E. 1961 'Eine mykenische Bronzetasse von Dohnsen, Kr. Celle',
    Germania 39,11-22.
Starling, N. J. 1983a 'Neolithic settlement patterns in central Germany', Oxford
   Journal of Archaeology 1,1-11.
Starling, N. J. 1983b Studies in the Neolithic Settlement of Central Germany
    (unpublished D.Phil, thesis, University of Oxford).
Starling, N. J. 1985a 'Colonisation and succession: the earlier Neolithic of central
    Europe', Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 51, 41-57.
Starling, N. J. 1985b 'Social change in the Later Neolithic of Central Europe',
    Antiquity 59, 30-8.
Steensberg, A. 1971 'Drill-sowing and threshing in southern India', Tools and
    Tillage 11, 241-56.
Steensberg, A. 1973 'A 6000-year old ploughing implement from Satrup Moor',
    Tools and Tillage 12, 105-18.
Stevens, E. S. 1966 'Agriculture and rural life in the later Roman Empire', pp.


                                         545




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY


   89-117 in M. M. Postan (ed.) Cambridge Economic History of Europe vol 1:
   the agrarian life of the Middle Ages, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stevenson, R. F. 1968 Population and Political Systems in Tropical Africa, New
   York: Columbia University Press.
Steward, J. H. 1929 'Irrigation without agriculture', Papers of the Michigan
   Academy of Science, Arts and Letters 12,149-56.
Stjernquist, B. 1967 Ciste a Cordoni (Rippenkisten): Produktion-Funktion-
   Diffusion, Acta Arch. Lundensia, Ser. 1(40) 6, Bonn and Lund: Rudolf Habelt
   Verlag and CWK Gleerups Forlag.
Stol, M. 1993 'Milk, butter and cheese', Bulletin on Sumerian Agriculture 7,
   99-113.
Strahm, C. 1972 'Das Beil von Thun-Renzenbiihl', Helvetia Archaeologica 3,
   99-112.
Strommenger, E. 1976 'Habuba Kabir-Sud: Erforschung einer Stadt am Syrischen
   Euphrat', Archaeologisches Korrespondenzblatt 6, 97-102.
Strommenger, E. 1980 Habuba Kabira: eine Stadt vor 5000 Jahren, Mainz: von
   Zabern.
Stronach, D. 1980 'Achaemenian and Seleucid Iran', pp. 206-11 in A. G. Sherratt
   (ed.) Cambridge Encyclopedia of Archaeology, Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Stuiver, M. and Reimer, P. J. 1993 'Extended 14C data base and revised CALIB 3.0
   14
      C age calibration', Radiocarbon 35, 215-30.
Sulimirski, T. 1960 'Remarks concerning the distribution of some varieties of flint
   in Poland', Swiatowit 22, 281-307.
Swadesh, M. 1968 'Glottochronology', pp. 384-403 in M. Fried (ed.) Readings in
   Anthropology, New York: Crowell.
Szabolcs, I. (ed.) 1971 European Solonetz Soils and their Reclamation, Budapest:
   Akademiai Kiado.
Szabolcs, I. (ed.) 1974 Salt-affected Soils in Europe, The Hague: Nijhoff.
Tabaczynski, S. 1972 'Gesellschaftsordnung und Giiteraustausch im Neolithikum
   Mitteleuropas', Neolithische Studien vol. 1, 31-78, Berlin: Akademie-Verlag.
Taylor, C. 1972 The Study of Settlement Patterns in pre-Saxon Britain, pp. 109-13
   in P. Ucko, G. W. Dimbleby and R. Tringham (eds) Man, Settlement and
    Urbanism, London: Duckworth.
Taylor, F. B. 1865 Reseat       into the Early History of Mankind and the
   Development of Civ         ion, London.
Taylor, J. J. 1980 Bronzt . e goldwork in the British Isles, Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Taylor, T. F. 1985 'Bronze Age Thrace reviewed', Antiquity 59,129-32.
Taylor, T. F. 1986 'Thracian Bronze Age and International relations', pp. 187-201
   in Proceedings of the 4th International Thracian Conference, Milan: Dragan
   European Foundation.
Tegtmeier, U. 1993 Neolithische und bronzezeitliche Pflugspuren in Norddeutsch-
    land und den Niederlanden (Archaologische Berichte 3), Bonn: Holos.
Telegin, D. Ya. 1971 'Uber einen der altesten Pferdezuchtherde in Europa',
    Rapports et Communications de I'URSS, VIIF Congres International des
    Sciences Pre- et Protohistoriques, Moscow.
Telegin, D. Ya. 1973 Seredno-Stogivska kuVtura epokhi midi, Kiev: Naukova
    Dumka.
Telegin, D. Ya. 1986 Dereivka: a settlement and cemetery of Copper Age horse-


                                         546




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


    keepers on the Middle Dniepr (BAR Int. Ser. 287), Oxford: British
    Archaeological Reports.
Teuber, M. 1995 'How can modern food technology help to identify dairy
    products mentioned in Sumerian texts?', Bulletin on Sumerian Agriculture 8,
    23-31.
Thapar, R. 1975 The Past and Prejudice, New Delhi: Publications division,
    Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India.
Thomas, J. 1988 'Neolithic explanations revisited: the Mesolithic-Neolithic
    transition in Britain and south Scandinavia', Proceedings of the Prehistoric
    Society 54, 59-66.
Thrane, H. 1962 'The earliest bronze vessels in Denmark's Bronze Age', Acta
    Archaeologica (Copenhagen) 33, 109-63.
Thrane, H. 1982 'Dyrkningsspor fra yngre stenalder i Danmark', pp. 20-8 in
    H. Thrane (ed.) Om yngre stenalders bebyggelseshistorie (Skrifte fra Historisk
    Institut 30), Odense: Odense Universitet.
Thrane, H. 1989 'Danish plough-marks from the Neolithic and Bronze Age',
   Journal of Danish Archaeology 8,111-25.
Tihelka, K. 1954 'Nejstarsf hlinene napodobeniny ctyrramennych kol na uzemi
   CSR', Pamdtky Archeologicke 45, 219-24.
Tilley, C. 1984 'Ideology and legitimation of power in the middle Neolithic of
    southern Sweden', pp. 111-46 in D. Miller and C. Tilley (eds) Ideology, Power
    and Prehistory, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tocfk, A. 1981 Nitriansky Hradok-Zamecek: bronzezeitliche befestigte Ansiedlung
    der Mad'arovce Kultur, Nitra: Archaeological Institute of the Slovak Academy
    of Sciences.
Tocfk, A. and Vladar, J. 1971 'Prehl'ad badania v problematike vyvoja Slovenska v
    dobe bronzovej', Slovenska Archaeologia 19, 365-416.
Todd, I. A. 1978 Qatal Hiiyiik in Perspective, Menlo Park: Cummings.
Todorova, H. 1978a 'Die Nekropole bei Varna', Zeitschrift fur Archaologie 12,
    87-97.
Todorova, H. 1978b The Eneolithic Period in Bulgaria (BAR Int. Ser. 49), Oxford:
    British Archaeological Reports.
Todorova, H. 1982 Kupferzeitliche Siedlungen in Bulgarien, Munich: Beck.
Tompa, F. 1929 Die Bandkeramik in Ungarn, Budapest: Franklin.
Tompa, F. 1937 '25 Jahre Urgeschichtsforschung in Ungarn 1912-1936', 24/25
   Bericht der Romisch-Germanischen Kommission 1934/5, 27-127.
Tosi, M. 1974a 'Some data for the study of prehistoric cultural areas on the
   Persian Gulf', Seminar for Arabian Studies 4,145-74.
Tosi, M. 1974b 'The problem of turquoise in protohistoric trade on the Iranian
   Plateau', Studi di Paletnologia, Paleantroplogia e Geologia del Quaternario
   NS 2,147-62.
Treue, W. (ed.) 1986 Achse, Rad und Wagen: fiinftausend Jahre Kultur- und
   Technikgeschichte, Gottingen: Vandenhoek and Ruprecht.
Trevor-Roper, H. 1983 'The invention of tradition: the Highland tradition of
   Scotland', pp. 15-41 in E. J. Hobsbawm and T. O. Ranger (eds) The Invention
   of Tradition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Trigger, B. G. 1980 Gordon Childe: revolutions in archaeology, London: Thames
   and Hudson.
Trigger, B. G. 1982 'If Childe were alive today', Bulletin of the Institute of
   Archaeology [University of London] 19,1-20.


                                        547




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Trigger, B. G. 1989 A History of Archaeological Thought, Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Tringham, R. 1971 Hunters, Fishers and Farmers of Eastern Europe 6000-3000
   BC, London: Hutchinson.
Troels-Smith, J. 1953 'Ertebollekultur bondekultur: Resultater af de sidste 10 ars
   undersegelser i Amosen , Vestsjaelland', Aarboger for nordisk Oldkyndighed og
   Historie (1953), 5-62.
Trump, D. 1960 'Pottery anchors', Antiquity 34, 295.
Uenze, O. 1958 'Neue Zeichensteine aus dem Kammergrab von Ziischen', pp.
   99-106 in W. Kramer (ed.) Neue Ausgrabungen in Deutschland (Romisch-
   Germanische Kommission des Deutschen Archaeologischen Instituts), Berlin:
   Verlag Gebr. Mann.
Uerpmann, H.-P. 1990 'Die Domestikation des Pferdes im Chalkolithikum West-
   und Mitteleuropas', Madrider Mitteilungen 31, 109-53.
Ungei; H. J. and Schiitz, E. 1982 'Pangaion - ein Gebirge und sein Bergbau', pp.
   145-72 in B. Hansel (ed.) Sudosteuropa zwischen 1600 und 1000 v. Chr. vol. 1,
   Berlin/Bad Braunstedt: Moreland.
Uslar, R. von 1955 'Der Goldbecher von Fritzdorf bei Bonn', Germania 33,
   319-23.
Ussishikin, D. 1980 'The Ghassulian shrine at En-gedi', Tel Aviv 7,1-44.
Vajda, S. 1960 Introduction to Linear Programming and the Theory of Games,
   London: Methuen.
van Andel, Tj. H. and Runnels, C. 1995 'The earliest farmers in Europe', Antiquity
   69, 481-500.
van Andel, Tj. H., Gallis, K. and Toufexis, G. 1994 'Early Neolithic farming in a
   Thessalian river landscape', pp. 131-43 in J. Lewin (ed.) Mediterranean
   Quaternary River Environments, Rotterdam: Balkema.
van Wijngaarden-Bakker, L. 1974 'The animal remains from the Beaker settlement
   at Newgrange, Co. Meath: first report', Proceedings of the Royal Irish
   Academy (Section C), 74, 313-83.
van Wijngaarden-Bakker, L. H. 1975 'Horses in the Dutch Neolithic', pp 341-4 in
   A. T. Clason (ed.) Archaeozoological Studies, North-Holland: Elsevier.
van der Waals, J. D. 1964 Prehistoric Disc-Wheels in the Netherlands, Groningen:
   Wolters.
Vayda, A. P. 1966 'Pomo trade feasts', Humanites: Cahiers de I'lnstitut de Science
   Economique Appliquee.
Vayda, A. P. (ed.) 1969 Environment and Cultural Behaviour, New York: Natural
   History Press.
Veit, U. 1984 'Gustaf Kossina und V. Gordon Childe: Ansatze zu einer
   theoretischen Grundlegung der Vorgeschichte', Saeculum 35(4), 326-64.
Venedikov, I. 1975 'Vulchitrunskoto Sukrovishte', Izkustvo 2-3, 2-9.
Vertes, L. 1964 'Eine prahistorische Silexgrube am Mogyorosdomb bei Siimeg',
   Acta Archaeologica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 16,187-215.
Vertesalji, P. P. 1987 'The chronology of the Chalcolithic in Mesopotamia', pp.
   483-507 in Aurenche et al. (eds) 1987.
Vertesalji, P. P. 1988 'Das Ende der Uruk-Zeit im Lichte der Grabungsergebnisse
   der sogenannten "archaischen" Siedlung bei Uruk-Warka', Acta Praehistorica
   et Archaeologica 20, 9-26.
Vickers, M. 1985-6 'Imaginary Etruscans: changing perceptions of Etruria since
   the fifteenth century', Hephaistos 7-8, 153-68.


                                         548




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY


Vickers, M. and Gill, D. 1994 Artful Crafts: ancient Greek silverware and pottery,
   Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Vintners, Worshipful Company of, 1933 Wine Trade Exhibition of Drinking
   Vessels (Catalogue of exhibition held at Vintners' Hall), London, privately
   printed.
Viragh, D. 1979 'Cartographical data on the Kurgans of the Tisza Region', pp.
   119-41 in I. Ecsedy 1979 The people of the Pit-grave Kurgans in eastern
   Hungary, Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
Vita-Finzi, C. 1969a 'Fluvial geology', pp. 135-50 in D. Brothwell and E. S. Higgs
   (eds) Science in Archaeology (2nd edn), London: Thames and Hudson.
Vita-Finzi, C. 1969b 'Geological opportunism', pp. 31-4 in P. Ucko and
   G. Dimbleby (eds) The Domestication and Exploitation of Plants and Animals,
   London: Duckworth.
Vita-Finzi, C. and Higgs, E. S. 1970 'Prehistoric economy in the Mount Carmel
   area of Palestine: site catchment analysis', Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society
   36,1-37.
Vizdal, I. 1972 'Erste bildliche Darstellung eines zweiradigen Wagens vom Ende
   der mittleren Bronzezeit in der Slowakei', Slovenska Archaeologia 20, 223-31.
Vladar, J. 1973 'Osteuropaische und mediterrane Einflusse im Gebiet der Slovakei
   wahrend der Bronzezeit', Slovenska Archaeologia 21, 253-357.
Vogt, E. 1937 Geflechte und Gewebe der Steinzeit (Monographien zur Ur- und
   Friihgeschichte der Schweiz), Basel: Verlag E. Birkhauser.
Vulpe, A. 1973 'Inceputurile metalurgiei aramei in spapul Carpato-Dunarean',
   Studii §i Cercetari di Istorie Veche 24, 217-37.
Vulpe, A. and Mihailescu-Birliba, V. 1985 'Der Goldschatz von Radeni, jud.
   Neamt in der Westmoldau, Rumanien', Prahistorische Zeitschrift 60, 47-69.
Walker, M. J. 1985 '5000 anos de viticultura en Espana', Revista de Arqueologia
   6, 44-7.
Wallerstein, I. 1974 The Modern World-System: capitalist agriculture and the
   origins of the world-economy in the 16th century, New York: Academic
   Press.
Warriner, D. 1939 Economics of Peasant Farming, Oxford: Oxford University
   Press.
Waterbolk, H. T. and Butler, J. J. 1965 'Comments on the use of metallurgical
   analysis in prehistoric studies', Helinium 5, 227-51.
Weiss, H. 1986 The Origins of Cities in Dry-farming Syria and Mesopotamia in
   the Third Millennium BC, Guildford, Connecticut: Four Quarters Publishing.
Werner, J. 1954 'Die Bronzekanne von Kelheim', Bayerische Vorgeschichtsblatter
   20, 43-73.
Werth, E. 1954 Grabstock, Hacke und Pflug, Ludwigsburg: Verlag Eugen Ulmer.
White, L. A. 1959 The Evolution of Culture: the development of civilization to the
   fall of Rome, New York: McGraw-Hill.
White, L. 1962 Medieval Technology and Social Change, Oxford: Oxford
   University Press.
Whittle, A. 1985 Neolithic Europe: a survey, Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press.
Whittlesey, D. 1944 The Earth and the State, New York: Holt.
Wiklak, H. 1980 'Wyniki badan wykopaliskowych w obr^bie Grobowca 8 w
   Sarnowie w woj. Wloclawskim', Prace i Materialy Muzeum Archeologicznego
   i Etnograficznego w Lodzi (Ser. Arch.) 27, 33-73.


                                         549




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Wilke, G. 1929 'V'lci-Tr'n', pp. 227-8 in M. Ebert (ed.) Reallexikon c<
   Vorgeschicbte vol. 14, Berlin: Verlag Walter de Gruyter and Co.
Willerding, U. 1970 'Vor- und friihgeschichtliche Kulturpflanzenfunde in
  Mitteleuropa', Neue Ausgrabungen in Niedersachsen 5, 287-375.
Williams-Thorpe, O. 1978 The Distribution and Provenance of Archaeological
   Obsidian in Central and Eastern Europe (unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University
  of Bradford).
Williams-Thorpe, O., Warren, S. E. and Nandris, J. G. 1984 The distribution and
  provenance of archaeological obsidian in central and eastern Europe', Journal
  of Archaeological Science 11, 183-212.
Willms, C. 1982 Zwei Fundplatze der Michelsberger Kultur aus dem westlichen
  Munsterland, gleichzeitig ein Beitrag zum Neolithischen Silexhandel in
  Mitteleuropa, Hildesheim: August Lax.
Wilson, C. A. 1976 Food and Drink in Britain, Harmondsworth: Penguin
  Books.
Winckler, H. 1939 Rock Drawings of Southern Upper Egypt, 2 vols, London:
  Egypt Exploration Society.
Winiger, J. 1987 'Das Spatneolithikum der Westschweiz auf Radern', Helvetia
  Archaeologica 18, 78-109.
Winiger, J. 1995 'Die Bekleidung des Eismannes und die Anfange der Weberei
   nordlich der Alpen' in K. Spindler, E. Rastbichler-Zissernig, H. Wilfing, D. zur
  Nedden and H. Nothdurfter (eds) Der Mann im Eis: neue Funde und
  Ergebnisse (The Man in the Ice, 2), Vienna: Springer-Verlag.
Wislanski, T. (ed.) 1970a The Neolithic in Poland, Warsaw: Ossolineum.
Wislanski, T. 1970b 'The Globular Amphora culture', pp. 178-231 in T. Wislanski
   (ed.) The Neolithic in Poland, Warsaw: Ossolineum.
Wittfogel, K. A. 1957 Oriental Despotism: a Comparative Study of Total Power,
  New Haven: Yale University Press.
Wolf, E. R. 1966 Peasants, Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall.
Wolf, E. R. 1982 Europe and the People without History, Berkeley: University of
   California Press.
Woytowitsch, E. 1985 'Die ersten Wagen der Schweiz: die altesten Europas',
   Helvetia Archaeologica 61, 2-45.
Wright, H. T., Miller, N. and Redding, R. 1980 'Time and process in an Uruk local
   centre', pp. 265-84 in M.-T. Barrelet (ed.) L'Archeologie de ITraq du Debut de
   l'£poque Neolithique a 333 avant notre ere, Paris: CNRS.
Wrigley, E. A. 1962 'The supply of raw materials in the Industrial Revolution',
   Economic History Review 2nd ser. 15,1-16.
Wrigley, E. A. 1969 Population and History, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Wynne-Edwards, V. C. 1962 Animal Dispersion in Relation to Social Behaviour,
   Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd.
Yoffee, N. 1979 'The decline and rise of Mesopotamian civilisation; an ethno-
   archaeological perspective on the evolution of social complexity', American
   Antiquity 44, 5-35.
Yoffee, N. 1981 'Explaining trade in ancient western Asia', Monographs on the
   Ancient Near East 2.
Yoffee, N. and Sherratt, A. 1993 Archaeological theory: who sets the agenda
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Young, T. Cuyler 1986 'Godin Pepe Period VI/V and Central Western Iran at the
   end of the Fourth Millennium', pp. 212ff in U. Finkbeiner and W. Rollig (eds)


                                         550




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY


   Gamdat Nasr: Period or Regional Style, Reichert Verlag, Wiesbaden (= Beihefte
   zum Tubinger Adas des Vorderen Orients, Ser. B, Nr. 62).
Zafiropulo, J. 1966 Mead and Wine: a history of the Bronze Age in Greece,
   London: Sidgwick and Jackson.
Zaharia, E. 1959 'Die Lockenringe von Sarata-Monteoru und ihre typologischen
   und chronologischen Beziehungen', Dacia NS 3, 103-34.
Zaibert, V. F. 1993 Eneolit uralo-irtyshskogo mezhdurech'ya, Petropavlovsk:
   Nauka.
Zarins, J. 1976 The Domestication of Equidae in Third Millennium Mesopotamia
   (unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago).
Zarins, J. 1978 The camel in ancient Arabia: a further note', Antiquity 52, 44-6.
Zarins, J. 1989 'Pastoralism in southwest Asia: the second millennium BC', pp.
   127-55 in J. Clutton-Brock (ed.) The Walking Larder: patterns of
   domestication, pastoralism and predation, London: Unwin-Hyman.
Zdanivich, G. B. 1988 Bronzovyi vek uralo-kazakhstanskikh stepei, Sverdlovsk:
   Izdatel'stvo Uralskogo Universiteta.
Zeuner, F. 1955 The identity of the camel on the Khurab Pick', Iraq 17,162-3.
Zeuner, F. E. 1963 History of Domesticated Animals, London: Hutchinson.
Zich, B. 1992 'Friihneolithische Karrenspuren in Flintbek: Aktuelles aus der
   Landesarchaologie', Archaologie in Deutschland 1, 58.
Zindel, C. and Defuns, A. 1980 'Spuren von Pflugackerbau aus der Jungsteinzeit in
   Graubiinden', Helvetia Archaeologica 11(42), 42-5.
Zohary, D. 1969 'The progenitors of wheat and barley', pp. 47-66 in P. Ucko and
   G. Dimbleby (eds) The Domestication and Exploitation of Plants and Animals,
   London: Duckworth.
Zohary, D. and Hopf, M. 1993 (2nd edn) Domestication of Plants in the Old
   World: the origin and spread of cultivated plants in West Asia, Europe and the
   Nile Valley, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Zohary, D. and Spiegel-Roy, P. 1975 'Beginnings of fruit-growing in the Old
   World', Science 187, 319-27.
Zvelebil, M. 1986 (ed.) Hunters in Transition: Mesolithic societies of temperate
   Eurasia and their transition to farming, Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press.




                                         551




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:37:49 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                        INDEX

Aalborg (Denmark), flint source (mine), 116      Assur (Iraq), Bronze Age settlement, 192
Acemhiiyiik (Turkey), Bronze Age                 astronomical knowledge, prehistoric, 149
      settlement, 223                            astronomical orientation, of Neolithic
Aegeo-Anatolian culture (3500-3000 BC),                settlements, 355, 358
      380-2, 386                                 Aunjetitz see Unetice culture
Africa, west, cultivation systems in, 101        autonomism, cultural, 11-13
aggregation/dispersal of population, 311         Avebury (England), henge monument, 148-9
agriculture                                      AVK (Alfoldi Vonaldtszes Keramia, Alfold
   beginnings of, 6-7                                  linear pottery) culture, 258,279, 286,
   surplus, 81-2                                       305-6
Aibunar (Bulgaria), prehistoric copper mine,     axle, rotating and fixed, 244(fig.), 246-8
      126                                        Azor tomb (Israel), 207(fig.), 209
Akkadian Empire, 459
Alaca Huyiik (Turkey), 220, 226                  Baalberge culture, 346, 380(fig.)
Albunol, Granada (Spain), 408                    Baden culture, 218, 246, 259, 281, 291,
alcoholic drinks, 29, 231-3, 376-402, 417;             309, 380, 386, 437(fig.), 499
      see also beer; wine                        Baden-Cernavoda-Ezero complex, 17; see
Aldenhovener Platte (Germany), pollen                  also Baden culture
      diagram, 235                               Bahrein, 211
Alfold Linear Pottery culture see AVK culture    Baia Mare (Romania), copper source, 121
alignments (megalithic), 357, 367-8              Balfarg Riding School, Glenrothes, Fife
Alps, settlement of, 124(fig.)                         (Scotland), Neolithic ceremonial centre,
Alsonemedi (Hungary), Baden culture                    426
      cemetery, 161, 180, 233, 381(fig.), 386,   Balkans, stone resources of, 109
      418-19                                     banded flint, 112
Altyn Depe (Turkmenistan), Bronze Age            Bandkeramik culture, 339-40, 344, 346,
      settlement, 211(fig.), 225, 458                  361, 362, 366, 474
Andel, Tjeerd van, 21                              cemetery analysis, 117(fig.)
Andronovo culture, 173, 222, 475                   stone resources, 109
animal traction, economics of, 182               barley as crop, 92, 394
Annales (school of historiography), 68           Bat-Yam (Israel), 207(fig.)
anti-Semitism, 49                                bee-keeping see honey
Archaeological Topography of Hungary             beei; 9, 388, 390(fig.), 392-4
      programme, 271, 285, 293, 299                barley, 394
ard (light plough), 95(fig.), 200-1; see also      Celtic, 394
      plough                                       Egyptian, 394
Argaric culture, 148                               emmei; 394
Arkaim (Kazakhstan), Bronze Age                    see also alcoholic drinks
      settlement, 222                            beer-flavouring plants, 402n
arsenic, as alloying element in copper, 129-30   Begleitkeramik see Bell-Beaker culture
Arslantepe (Turkey), Bronze Age settlement,      Bell-Beaker culture, 26,147,149, 267, 370,
      216                                              376, 384-5, 386, 422,499
Ashgrove Farm, Methilhill, Fife (Scotland),      Bernburg (Germany), 203-4; see also
      Bell-Beaker grave, 396                           Latdorf
Asiatic mode of production, 48                   Bernburg culture, 218, 382; see also
Aspergillus oryzae (fungus inducing                    Walternienburg culture
      fermentation), 393                         Beycesultan (Turkey), Bronze Age settlement,
ass see donkey                                         382


                                             552




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:38:43 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                           INDEX


'big man* social system, 108, 196                     cattle, domestication of, 254
bit (for horse) see bridle-bit                        Caucasian metallurgy, 130
Black Sea                                             causewayed (interrupted-ditch) enclosures,
   history of, 21                                            Neolithic, 145
   linguistic koine, in Early Bronze Age, 478         Celtic language groups, 474, 483
Bodrogkeresztur culture, 259, 281, 290,               Celts, 50, 394
      295, 308, 331, 379, 380-2                          enthusiasm for ancient, 50, 54
   cemetery analysis, 117(fig.), 131                  cemeteries
   copper daggers, 131                                   Baden culture see Budakalasz;
   flint daggers, 118                                        Alsonemedi; Szigetszentmaton
Boleraz culture, 309                                     Copper Age, 141,265,289-90,308,359-61
Boserup, Esters 74-5, 86, 100, 188                       see also Tibava; Tiszapolgar-Basatanya;
Botai (Kazakhstan), Copper Age settlement,                   Varna
      214-15                                          cemetery analysis, 117(fig.), 131, 233(fig.)
Bougon, Deux Sevres (France), megalithic              Central/Northern Europe
      tombs, 343                                         5000-3000 BC, 142-6
Brezno (Czech Republic), Eneolithic                      3000-2500 BC, 146-7
       monument, 231                                  centre/periphery diffusion, 83; see also
bride-wealth, 105, 266                                       core/periphery system
bridle-bit, 172, 213, 217-18, 221                     cereal cultivation, demographic effects of,
Britain, Neolithic, 352                                      72-3
Bronocice (Poland), Neolithic settlement,             cereals
       163, 202                                          domestication of, 90
bronze see copper alloy metallurgy                       wild, 89
Brzesc Kujawski (Poland), Neolithic                   ceremonial exchange, 105
       settlement and burials, 141                    Cernavoda I culture, 24
Budakalasz (Hungary), Baden culture                   Cernavoda III culture, 382; see also Baden-
      cemetery, pottery wagon model, 161,                    Cernavoda-Ezero complex
       162                                            Cerny, 341-3
Biikk culture/group, 280, 286-8, 326                  Cham culture, 218
Biikk mountains, 260-2                                Chapman, J. C., 229
Bygholm Norremark, Jutland (Denmark),                 chariot and chariotry, 28, 218, 219-23
      megalithic tomb, 349                            Chasseen culture, 351
Bytyn (Poland), copper hoard, 201, 226n               cheek-piece (for horse) see bridle-bit
                                                      cheese, 208; see also milk products
Calanca valley (Switzerland), plough marks,           chiefdom, 135
      201                                             Childe, Vere Gordon, 37-66, 70, 334, 337,
calcium absorption, 208, 232                                 361-2, 370, 377, 490-505
Cambridge, University of, 68                             syntheses of European prehistory, 57-62
camels, 211-12                                        China, domestic animals in, 29,198
   domestication of, 11, 173                          chocolate flint, 112
cannabis, 389, 398-9, 407-8, 411,416, 425             Choga Mami (Iraq), early irrigation traces,
capitalism, 503                                              7, 96
Cardial (Impressed ware) culture, 22,                 Chorley, Richard, 68
      339-40, 474                                     chronology, prehistoric Europe, 20(fig.),
Carnac, Brittany (France), megalithic                        27(fig.), 61
      monuments, 350-1, 367                           Chur-Welschdorfli (Switzerland), plough
Carpathian Basin, 255-332, 271-3                             marks, 201
   as regional system, 260-3                          cinnabarite (red mercuric sulphide), as paint,
   stone resources of, 109                                   115
  see also Hungary                                    civilisations see individual civilisations
carrying capacity, 71                                 Clairvaux-les-lacs Station III, Jura (France),
cart, 161-5                                                  Neolithic settlement, 205
cash crops, 6                                         Clark, Sir Grahame, 39-40,102, 490, 496
Castaneda, Graubiinden (Switzerland),                 Clarke, David L., 68, 158n, 198, 496
      plough marks, 201                               clothing, languages of, 405
Catacomb-Grave culture, 193, 219                      coastal trading, 106-8
£atal Hiiyiik (old spelling) (Turkey) see             cocoa (beverage), 388
      (Jatalhoyiik                                    coffee (beverage), 388
Catalhoyuk (Turkey), 7, 19, 21, 79, 87, 180,          collared flask (Kragenflasche), TRB vessel,
      189, 254, 358                                          350, 415


                                                553




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:38:43 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                            INDEX

colonialisation, internal see settlement area,    de Mortillet, Gabriel, 55
      expansion of                                Dead Sea rift, 78
colonialism, nineteenth century see               depas amphikypellon (two-handed cup),
      imperialism                                       391
community                                         Dereivka (Ukraine), Copper Age settlement,
   as basis of social organisation, 152                 170, 213-15, 227n
   symbolic construction of, 337                  descent groups, 194-5
compass-drawn ornament, 221-2, 452                Despotism, Oriental, 48
consumer durables, circulation of, 152            Devavanya (Hungary)
consumption                                          excavations in, 300-2
   cultural, 15-17                                   see also Sarto; Rehelyi Diilo
   elite, 17                                      differential preservation, 203
conversion (Mesolithic to Neolithic), 361-3       diffusionism, 56
Copais, Lake (Greece), 90                         Dilmun see Bahrein
Copper Age, 330                                   disease, 21
   north-west European, 146                       dispersal, of population, 311
   social systems, 151,152                        distribution zones, for prehistoric traded
   south-east European, 23,141                          commodities, 104
copper alloy metallurgy, 129-33, 240              dolmens see dysser; megaliths
copper axes, distribution in south-east           domestic animals, 29
      Europe, 127-9                                  trade in, 253-4, 262
copper discs, ornamental, 348                     donkey (Equus asinus), 17-18(fig.), 209-11,
copper metallurgy, 119-29,259                           216-17
copper mining, earliest European, 126-8              domestication of, 11,172-3
copper ores                                       drinking see alcohol
   in south-east and central Europe, 121-5        drinking-straws, 390(fig.), 393
   mineralogy of, 119-20                          driving see chariot and chariotry
copper shafthole axes (south-east Europe),        drugs see psychotropic substances
      chronology of, 125-6                        drum, Neolithic, 421
cord decoration (impressed on pottery), 383,      dry-farming, 91
      411; see also Corded Ware culture           dysser (Danish dolmens), 349, 364
cord ornament see cord decoration
Corded Ware culture, 24,146, 245, 267,            Early Bronze Age (Hungary), 310-11
       349, 370, 383-4, 386, 397, 416, 421,       Edinburgh, University of, 38, 42
      422-4, 499; see also TRB/Corded Ware        Egtved (Denmark), Bronze Age burial, 396
      transition                                  Egypt
core/periphery system, 10-11,17-18, 84n,             irrigation, 98
      466-7, 501-2                                   predynastic, 209-10, 459
Cretan hieroglyphic script, 165                   El 'Ubeid (Iraq), 177(fig.)
Cri§ culture see Koros culture                    'elites', 404
crook-ard (type of scratch-plough), 95(fig.),     En-Gedi (Israel), Chalcolithic site, 207(fig.),
       166(fig.)                                         209
crop rotation, 94                                 enclosures (earthwork), Neolithic, 145,148,
Csepel Haros (Hungary), Bell-Beaker                      265-6, 358
      settlement, 171,219                         Enlightenment, 3, 47-8
Csoszhalom culture/group, 288-9                   epi-Bandkeramik cultures/groups, 340
Cucuteni-Tripole culture, 23-4, 369               equids, domestication of, 170
Cueva de los Murcielagos, Albunol (Spain),        Ertebolle culture, 345, 349, 356
      late Neolithic burial-cave, 408             Eschen-Lutzengiietle (Switzerland), Neolithic
cuisine, language of, 405,412                            settlement, 205
cultivation systems, 85                           Esztar culture/group, 280, 286-8
   Neolithic, 237-8                               Eucharist, Christian, 404
   see also soil types; hoe cultivation; plough   Euphrates river
      cultivation; permanent cultivation;            and irrigation, 97-8
      slash-and-burn; tropical cultivation           as transport link, 10
cylinder-seal, 165(fig.), 176(fig.)               Evans, Sir Arthur; 41, 56
                                                  evolution, as idea, 36
dairying see milking                              exchange
Danube (river), history of, 274                      ceremonial, 105
Darwin, Charles, 36, 45, 53                          distances, Neolithic, 110-16
date palm, 391                                       systems, Neolithic, 104, 320-2


                                              554




                      This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:38:43 UTC
                                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                          INDEX

  transfer in, 105                              Haggett, Peter, 68
  see also settlement patterns                  Hahn, Eduard, 53, 155, 197
Ezero (Bulgaria), Bronze Age settlement, 382    Halaf culture, 230
  see also Baden-Cernavoda-Ezero complex        hallucinogens see psychotropic substances
                                                Hamito-Semitic language groups see Semito-
Fahlerz, grey (enriched) ore of copper; 119,          Hamitic language groups
       130                                      Harappan (Indus Valley), civilisation in, 98,
farming, spread of, 137-8                             164
farming systems, 76                                use of plough in, 166
   Mediterranean, 80                            Hassuna culture, 224, 230
feasting, 392, 406                              Hatvan culture, 282-3, 291
fermentation, discovery of, 9-10                hay, 94
Fertile Crescent, 13, 197                       hemp see cannabis
fish-trap basketry, 366(fig.)                   henbane, Hyoscyamus niger, 427
Fisher; H. A. L., 496                           henge monuments, 148-9
flint (Polish), Neolithic exploitation of,         Neolithic, 357
       lll(fig.), 111-13                           see also stone circles
flint sources and mines, Neolithic, 190,235-6   Herder, Johann Gottfried, 48
   France, 113-15                               Hermann the Liberator; statue of, 50-1,
   Neolithic Europe, 112-16                           51 (fig.)
   Poland, 111-13                               Herpaly-Csoszhalom culture/group, 280,
flood regimes, 93(fig.)                               288-9
floodwater-farming, 95-6,189                    hierarchy, social, 135
forest clearance, 190                           Hippocrene spring (Boeotia), 400n
Frazer, Sir James, 500                          history, as idea, 36
Freeman, E. A., 53                              Hittite language, 476
funnel-beaker culture see TRB culture           Hlinsko (Slovakia), Copper Age settlement,
funnel-necked beaker, 380; see also TRB               16
       culture                                  hoards, of bronze objects, 132
Furchenstock (hand-ard), 168                    Hochdorf, near Stuttgart (Germany), Iron
                                                      Age burial, 395
gallery grave, megalithic monument, 356         Hodder; Ian, 63, 158n, 337, 357, 367
Gavrinis, Morbihan, Brittany (France),          hoe cultivation, 160
      megalithic tomb, 351, 365                 honey, 395-6; see also mead
gender roles, 196                               hop (Humulus lupulus), 402n
Geoffrey of Monmouth, 46                        Horgen culture, 246
geology, nineteenth-century, 52                 horse bit see bridle-bit
Germans, enthusiasm for ancient, 50, 54, 55     horse, 17-18(fig.), 212-23, 386
Gerzean see Egypt, predynastic                     as draught animal, 172
Ghassulian culture (Palestine), 184, 207, 209      domestication of, 11,170-1, 216-17
Gilat (Israel), 207(fig.), 209                     in North America, 193
Giv'atoyim (Israel), Bronze Age site, 209          on Pontic steppes, 213-15, 222-3
Globular Amphora culture, 24,162, 235-6,           riding, 217-18
      382, 397                                     wild, 212-15
gold, 433                                       horticulture, 67, 85, 91,100
Grand Pressigny (France), flint source,            fixed-plot, 238(fig.)
      113-15                                    Horton, Robin, 150-1
grape                                           hospitality see feasting
  cultivated, 391                               houses, Neolithic see longhouse; roundhouse
  wild, 389                                     Hov (Denmark), flint mines in, 115
  see also tree crops                           human traction, 188
Graubiinden (Switzerland), 201                  Hungary, 252-332
Great Hungarian Plain, 255-332; see also        Hungary, eastern
      Hungary                                      cultural succession, 277-83
Greeks, enthusiasm for ancient see                 history of research, 283
      Philhellenism                                intensity of research, 283-5
grey-white-speckled flint, 112-14                  landscape and geomorphology of, 274-5,
Grooved Ware culture, 366, 413                        295-9
                                                   prehistoric settlement distribution,
Habuba el-Kabireh (Syria), Bronze Age                 283-93
    settlement, 192                                soils and vegetation, 276-7


                                            555




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:38:43 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                           INDEX

hybrid equids see mule                           Kossinna, Gustav, 54-5, 55, 65
hydroquartzite, 114, 323-7, 324, 327, 330        Kothingeichendorf (Germany), Neolithic
                                                       enclosure, 139
Iceman (Alpine), 204, 234                        koumish, 398
   location of, 124(fig.)                        Kreisgrabenanlagen, 358
identity, cultural, 45                           Kr^znica Jara (Poland), Neolithic settlement,
imperialism, nineteenth-century, 52, 54                162
Impressed Ware culture see Cardial culture       Kruk, Janusz, 88
incense, 406                                     Kryzhovlin (Ukraine), Bronze Age gold
India, domestic animals in, 188                        vessel from, 448
indigenism see autonomism                        Krzemionki (Poland), flint mines in,
Indo-European language groups, 49, 54, 66,             113(fig.), 116, 235-6
       193-4, 474-84                             Kuffarn (Austria), situla from, 390(fig.)
Indo-European languages, and culture, 58-9       Kujavian graves (Neolithic long-mounds), 347
Indo-European mythology, 483                     kula-ring, exchange system (Melanesia),
Indo-Iranian language group, 475, 481-3                106-7
Indus civilisation see Harappan civilisation     Kiiltepe Bronze Age settlement (Turkey), 223
Indus (river), and irrigation, 97-8              Kura-Arax culture, 468-70
ingot torques see Osenhalsringe                  kurilnitsa see polypod bowl
insufflator (milking aid), 177                   Kyjovice Tesetice Neolithic settlement
intensification, agricultural, 74-5, 86                (Czech Republic), 139
inter-regional pottery types, 379; see also
      Corded Ware culture; Bell-Beaker           La Hoguette ware, 366
      culture                                    lactase see lactose tolerance
intoxication, anthropology of, 405-7             Lactobacillus (yoghurt bacterium), 9
irrigation, 7, 67, 70, 94-9, 224                 lactose tolerance, 174-5, 207-8,232
   and flood regimes, 93(fig.)                   Lagunda (Italy), 163
   canal, 99                                     lake-villages, circum-Alpine, 335
   channel, 96                                   lakes, and early farming, 78-9, 87
   gabarband, 97                                 language groups see individual groups
   qanat, 97                                     lapis lazuli, 459,461
   river-basin, 97-9                                trade in, 11, 468
   see also individual rivers                    Laslett, Peter, 68
Italic language groups, 483                      Latdorf, near Bernburg (Germany),
                                                       Neolithic tomb, 203-4
Jawa (Jordan), early irrigation system, 97       Late Chalcolithic (Anatolia) cultures, 400n
Jebel Aruda (Syria), Bronze Age settlement,      LBK (Linienbandkeramik) see Bandkeramik
      17                                               culture
Jericho (Palestine), Neolithic and later         Lebous (France), Neolithic settlement, 148
      settlement, 7, 87, 95, 189, 358            Lengyel culture, 112, 123, 268n, 345, 346,
Jones, Sir William, 49                                 380
Juellinge Iron Age burial (Denmark), 396         Lepenski Vir (Serbia), Mesolithic settlement,
                                                       21
Kalahari (west Africa), 151                      levees, and early settlement, 98
kammerlose Hiinenbetten, 347                     Limbrey, Susan, 94
Karanovo (Bulgaria), Neolithic and Bronze        Limburg Ware, 366
      Age settlement, 122-3                      limnoquartzite see hydroquartzite
Karimojong (Uganda), 182                         lineage-aggregates, 151
Kartvelian language group, 476                   lineages, 194
kava (intoxicating drink), 393                   linear programming models, 84n
Kel'teminar culture, 467                         linen preservation, 203
Kermanshah region (Iran), 224                    linguistic change, 192-3
kill-off patterns, for secondary products, 183   linguistic reconstruction, 472
kinship, as basis of social organisation, 152    Linkup phase (3800-3600 BC), 378
Kish (Iraq), Bronze Age settlement, 178(fig.)    lithicisation (of earth-and-timber
Knossos (Crete), Bronze Age settlement,                monuments), 364
      178 (fig.)                                 Littauei; Mrs M. A., 248n
Koros culture, 256, 278, 285-6, 302-19,          Little Poland, Neolithic settlement in, 88
      321                                        livestock see domestic animals
Koros-Berettyo region, georr       ology of,     location of settlements see settlement
      295-9                                            location


                                               556




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:38:43 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                           INDEX

Locmariaquer, Morbihan, Brittany (France),         Mesolithic way of life, in contrast to
      megalithic monuments, 351                          Neolithic, 136
Lodagaa (west Africa), 151                         metal vessels, Bronze Age, 431-56
loess soils, and Neolithic settlements, 78         metallogenesis, 119-20
Lohne see Ziischen                                 metallurgy
long barrows, 145                                    origins of, 102-3
longhouse, Neolithic, as model for                   prehistoric, 60, 102-33
      monumental long-mound, 337-8                 Mexico, ancient civilisation of, 101
long-mounds, 360, 363                              Michelsberg culture, 346
   in France, 338-44                               migration, 151
   in northern Europe, 347-9                       milk, 174-80
Los Millares (Spain), Copper Age settlement          ejection reflex, 177
      and tombs, 147                                 exploitation of animals foi; 205-8
Luther, Martin, 47                                   products, 9, 175, 178-9, 208, 232, 398
luxuries, 106, 501-2                               milk-churn, 207
   in pre-history, 494                             milking, 198, 205-9, 231-3
                                                     economics of, 182
McNeill, William H., 44                              techniques, 175-7
Maes Howe (Scotland), megalithic tomb, 148         millet, 92
Magan see Oman                                     mines, 190
Maikop (northern Caucasus), Bronze Age               copper, see copper mining, earliest
     burial, and Maikop culture, 173, 215,               European
     225, 458,461-6,469                              flint see flint mines, Neolithic
Mako culture, 282, 310                             Minho (Portugal), cart for sale, 247(fig.)
malaria, 21, 79                                    mobility, of hunters and pastoralists, 29
Malta, Neolithic temples in, 148                   Modernism, 3
Malthusian trap, 6                                 money, 267
Manrterbund (body of male companions),             Montelius, Oscar, 56
     392                                           Monteoru culture, 221, 440, 451
margin, 17, 501-2                                  Montesquieu, C. L. de Secondat, Baron de,
marginal infilling see settlement area,                  47-8
     expansion of                                  monumentality
maritime activities                                  domestic, 356
  Mediterranean, 11                                  see also tell settlements
  Persian Gulf, 9                                    funerary see megaliths
Maritime phase (2500-2000 BC), 384-5               Morgan, Lewis Henry, 53, 67, 140
Marx, Karl, 53                                     mould, bivalve (two-piece), 130, 240
Marxism, 43, 492, 494, 495, 503                    mule, 210, 216; see also donkey; horse
  in archaeology, 39, 57, 59, 62, 140              Miiller, Max, 53
'mature* Neolithic communities, 140,144            Munpi Metalici (Romania), copper source,
Mauern (Austria),flint-mine,115                          121
Maya, ancient civilisation of, 101                 Myres, Professor Sir John, 41, 56, 58
mead, 394-6; see also honey
meadowsweet (Filipendula ulmaria), 396           Nagyrev culture, 282-3, 291, 385
Mecsek mountains, flint from, 323-7, 331         Nahal Mishmar (Israel), arsenical copper
Mediterranean (Central/West), 5000-3000               hoard, 9, 210, 241n
     BC, 147-8                                   narcotics see psychotropic substances
megalithic architecture, as propaganda, 362      Narmer ('King Scorpion', Egyptian
megalithic art, representation of axes in, 116        Pharaoh), 209
megaliths (megalithic tombs and ceremonial       nationalism, 3, 50
     monuments), 22, 143-5, 333-71               Near East, 197
  alignments, 357, 367-8                           geography of, 157, 197
Melanesia, 106-8, 265                              prehistory of, 59, 63
mercuric sulphide, 115                             see also Fertile Crescent
Mesoamerica, cultivation systems in, 101         neo-megalithic period, 334-5
Mesolithic groups in north-west Europe, 23,      Neolithic, primary and secondary, 365
     88, 337-9, 344-5, 361-2                     Neolithic Revolution (beginning of farming),
Mesolithic populations, 348                           59, 72, 78, 158, 503
Mesolithic settlements, 364                      Neolithic way of life, in contrast to
Mesolithic survival, in Neolithic Europe,             Mesolithic, 136
     145, 365-7                                  New Archaeology, 2, 12, 62-3, 68


                                             557




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:38:43 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                             INDEX

New Guinea, stone axes in, 105, 116              Piggott, Stuart, 156, 248n, 337, 498
New World, cultures of, 19                       Pit-Grave culture, 24, 171, 193, 214-15,
Newgrange (Ireland), megalithic tomb, 148,             218, 242-5, 246, 370, 383,408, 464,
     219, 365                                          470, 475, 481
Nietleben (central Germany), megalithic          Pitt Rivers, Sir Augustus Henry (Lane Fox),
     tomb, 420-1                                       53
Nile valley see Egypt                            Plachidol, near Tolbukhin (Bulgaria), Bronze
Nitra (Slovakia), Bandkeramik culture                  Age burials, 242-5
     cemetery, 117, 264                          plough, 197, 230
Nitriansky Hradok-Zamecek (Slovakia),               and seeder-funnel, 165(fig.)
     Baden-culture burial pit and Early             cultivation, 74-5,160, 238(fig.)
     Bronze Age fortified settlement, 418-19        development of, 7, 92, 93(fig.), 95(fig.),
     Novosvobodnaya group (late Maikop                 100,196
     culture), 470                                  distribution of, 239(fig.), 240
nuclear/margin process, 11 \see also core/          early evidence for, 15-18,165-70, 200-1,
     periphery system; centre/periphery                224
     diffusion                                      effects of, 143,185
Nyfrseg culture, 282, 310                           Near Eastern, 165
                                                    pictographic signs foi; 164(fig.)
obsidian (black volcanic glass), 109-10,139,     plough marks, 13,167-9
      147, 257, 258, 280, 288, 321, 326,         pollen diagrams, 235
      327-30, 331                                pollution, 403
   trade in, 254                                 Polyanitsa (Bulgaria), 358
ochre-grave see Pit-Grave culture                polypod bowl (brazier), 411,412(fig.),
Oil Crisis (1970s), 2                                  425
Oldenburg (Germany), megalithic tomb, 201        Pomo Indians (California), 118
Oman, 211                                        Pontic steppes, as contact corridor 130
onager (Equus hemtonus), 216                     poppy, opium see opium poppy
   and hybrids, 210-11                           population, dispersal and aggregation of,
   possible domestication of, 171                      311
opium poppy, 389-90,407-8, 411, 415-16           porotic hyperostosis (bone pathology), 79
ores, copper see copper ores                     positivism, nineteenth-century, 3, 52
oriental despotism, 48                           Postmodernism, 3
orientation, of Neolithic monuments, 355         post-processualism, 3
Qsenhalsring metal (copper type), 131            pottery, 411
Osenhalsringe (neck-rings, used as ingots),         assemblages of, 412-17
      131-2                                      pottery assemblages and diet, 178-9
Otomani (Ottomany) culture, 221, 282-3,          pottery types, inter-regional, 379-85
      310, 439-41, 451, 452, 454                 PPIE see pre-proto-Indo-European
Oxford, University of, 41                        PPN see pre-pottery Neolithic
Oxie (or A) group, 349                           prehistory
oxytocin, and milk ejection, 177                    as science, 52
                                                    European, 11-14, 19-27
pack-transport, 197, 207(fig.), 209-10              near Eastern, 6-11
package transmission, 237                        pre-pottery Neolithic (PPN), 6-7
passage-graves 343, 364                          pre-proto-Indo-European (PPIE), postulated
Past and Present (historical journal), 43              language family, 477
pastoralism, 29, 71,160,184,187,192-3            preservation, of textile fibres, 203
Payne, Sebastian, 183                            primary horticultural community, breakup
Pazyryk tumuli, Altai Mountains (Siberia),             of, 359-61
     Iron Age burials, 398(fig.)                 'primitive money', 267
periphery see core/periphery system              profanity, 403-5
Perjamos culture, 282-3                          property transmission, 195-6
permanent cultivation, 75                        proto-Indo-European (PIE), reconstructed
Peru, ancient civilisation of, 101                     language, 477
Petropavlovsk (Kazakhstan), 214-15               psychoactive substances see psychotropic
Peyote Cult, 401n                                      substances
Philhellenism, 49-50                             psychotropic substances, 6, 30, 351, 356,
Phrygian language groups, 483                          364, 406; see also intoxication,
pidginisation, 472                                     anthropology of
PIE see proto-Indo-European                      purification ritual, 409


                                              5 58




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:38:43 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                              INDEX

qanat, 97; see also irrigation                       Schivelbusch, Wolfgang, 15
quarries, 190                                        Schliemann, Heinrich, 53
                                                     Schneider, Jane, 17, 501
Radeni (Romania), Bronze Age gold vessels,           Schuchhardt, Carl, 55
      448-50                                         Scirpus (sedge), as evidence of wet
Radosina (Slovakia), pottery wagon model,                  environments in Neolithic, 78, 90
      162                                            scratch-plough (ard), 200-1
ranking, social, 134                                 seafaring see maritime activities
reconstruction, linguistic see linguistic            secondary exploitation see secondary
      reconstruction                                       products complex
recruitment, social, 363                             secondary products complex, 150, 155-98,
Rehelyi Gat, Devavanya parish (Hungary),                   199-241
      Neolithic settlement, 306                         and kill-off patterns, 183
Rehelyi Diild, Devavanya parish (Hungary),              chronology of, 169(fig.)
      Neolithic settlement, 321                         definition of, 3In
Reinach, Salomon, 54-5                                  economics of, 181-3
reindeer; milking of, 198                               interactions, 12(fig.), 185(fig.), 185-6,
religion, in prehistory, 494                                186(fig.)
Renfrew, Colin (Lord Renfrew of                      secondary products revolution, 6, 9, 3 In,
      Kaimsthorn), 62, 156                                  158-98, 497
residence systems, 194-5                             secular; the, 403-4
rice, 99,100-1                                       segmentary lineages, 151
rickets see vitamin D deficiency                     Seima-Turbino-Samussk culture complex,
ritual formalisation, 137                                  222
river, and irrigation, 97-9                          self-sufficiency, hypothesis of, 106
Roberts, J. M., 44                                   Semitic language group, 476
Roberts, Neil, 19                                    Semito-Hamitic (Afroasiatic) language
Roessen (Rossen) culture, 341-3, 345, 346                  groups, 193
Romantic Movement, 3-4, 48-52                        sesame, as crop, 99
rotation of crops see crop rotation                  settlement areas
roundhouse tradition, 367                               expansion of, 80-1,151
Rudna Glava (Serbia), prehistoric copper                location, 76
      mine, 126                                         Neolithic, 191(fig.)
Rligen (Germany), flint source, 112-14               settlement patterns
rye, as crop, 94                                        and exchange, 104
                                                        prehistoric, 87-9
Saccharomyces (yeast), 9, 389                        shaduf (pole and bucket lever), 98
sacrament, 404                                       shamanism, 19, 30, 406
sacred, the, 403-4                                   Shari-i Sokhta (Iran), Bronze Age settlement,
sacred places, 404, 422                                    211
sacred time, 404                                     Sheng-wen (corded-ware) pottery, China,
Sahlins, Marshall D., 102,152                              397,402n
sail, 9                                              shifting cultivation see slash-and-burn
Saint-Martin-de-Corleans, Valle d'Aosta              shrines, 404
      (Italy), plough marks, 200-1                   Siassi (Melanesian tribe), 107
saiination (salinisation) of soil, 98                sieves, ceramic (strainers), 13, 206
salt, as item of Neolithic exchange, 112             Sintashta (Kazakhstan), Bronze Age
Salzburg (Austria), copper sources, 124                    settlement and burials, 222
Samarra culture, 224, 230                            Sitagroi (Greece), Neolithic and Bronze Age
Sarnowo (Poland), Neolithic tomb and                       settlement, 382-3
      cultivation traces, 14, 230                    situla (decorated bronze bucket), 390(fig.)
Sarto, Devavanya parish (Hungary),                   skeuomorphism, 431-56
      Neolithic settlement, 301, 302(fig.),             basketry, 366(fig.), 443
      306, 307, 322, 326                                sheet-metalwork, 381-2
Satrupholmer Moor, Angeln (Germany),                 slash-and-burn, 74, 75, 86, 100, 150, 188,
      Neolithic finds, 231                                 23 8 (fig.)
sauceboat (drinking vessel), 391                     Slavs, enthusiasm for ancient, 50, 54
Schalkenburg (Germany), neolithic                    Smith, Adam, 48
      enclosure, 139, 202                            smoking/smoke inhalation, 409-11, 414
Scheibenhenkeln (disc-terminal handles),             Snave, near Dreslette (Denmark), megalithic
      379                                                  tomb, 200, 230


                                               559




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:38:43 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                          INDEX

social recruitment, 363                         Szigetszentmarton (Hungary), 161
soil types                                        cart model, 180
   and cultivation system, 75                   Szilmeg culture/group, 280, 286-8
   and prehistoric settlements, 84n, 91,
      190-1                                     taro, as crop, 100
south-east Europe                               tea (beverage), 388
   5500-4500 BC, 139-40                         teapot (Bronze Age pouring vessel), 391
   4500-3500 BC, 140-1                          Tekeris (Serbia), copper sources, 123-4
   3500-3000 BC, 141-2                          tell settlements, 22
Spania Dolina (Bulgaria), prehistoric copper    Tepe Yahya (Iran), Bronze Age site, 192
      mine, 126                                 textiles
spelt wheat, 92                                    economic significance of, 10, 81, 181,187
Spencer Herbert, 35, 36, 53                        production of, 467
Spitzes Hoch tumulus (Germany), 203-4           Three Age system (Stone, Bronze, Iron
Spondylus-shell ornaments                              Ages), 52, 56, 102,133
   Melanesia, 107(fig.)                         Thun-Renzenbiihl (Switzerland), Bronze Age
   Neolithic European, 117-18                          burial, 131-2
spring crops, 92, 93(fig.)                      Tibava (Slovakia), Copper Age cemetery, 141
spring wheat, 90, 92, 94                        Tigris (river), and irrigation, 97-8
   definition of, lOln                          Timber-Grave culture, 173, 193, 222
   see also wheat                               Tisza (river), history of, 274-5
Sredni Stog culture, 213-14                     Tisza culture/group, 258, 280,288-9, 307,
stadial model, 12-13, 52, 70,135, 157                  322
stake-frame basketry, 366(fig.)                 Tiszadob culture/group, 280, 286-8
Stara Zagora (Bulgaria), copper sources,        Tiszapolgar culture/group, 259, 281, 289,
      122-3                                            294, 308, 330, 360
Steppe phase (3000-2500 BC), 282, 387           Tiszapolgar-Basatanya (Hungary), Copper
stone axes, as symbols, 116                            Age cemetery, 117(fig.), 290
stone circles (circular megalithic monuments;   tobacco, 388
      see also henges), 357                     traction complex, 18(fig.), 161-70, 197, 386
stone distribution, Neolithic Europe, 110-16       animal, 201-2
stone resources, Neolithic, 108-18                 distribution of, 240
Stonehenge (megalithic enclosure), 367-8           human, 188
Stufentheorie see stadial model                 trade systems, prehistoric see exchange
sub-Neolithic cultures, 335, 362                transfer, as aspect of exchange, 105
'subsistence', as misleading term, 5            transhumance, 29, 77,187, 234
successional social change, 139                 transport animals, 8, 11, 170-4, 208-23; see
Sumeg (Hungary), flint source (mine), 115              also camel; chariot; donkey; horse;
supersite (large, wealthy, aggregated                  wheel
      Neolithic settlement), 258                TRB (Trichterbecher, funnel-beaker) culture,
surplus, agricultural, 81-2                            24,143-4, 346, 414-16, 417, 436
Susa (Iran), Bronze Age and later settlement,   TRB/Corded Ware transition, 422-4
      164                                       tree-crops, 9, 17-18(fig.), 185, 234, 391
swidden cultivation see slash-and-burn          Trevor-Roper, Hugh (Lord Dacre of
Swieciechow (Poland), flint from, 112                  Glanton), 44
Swi^tokrzyskie (Holy Cross), mountains          Tripole culture see Cucuteni-Tripole culture
      (Poland), flint from, 112                 tropical cultivation systems, 75, 100
symbolic values, of artefacts, 105              Troy (Turkey), Bronze Age and later
symposium, Greek, 388-92, 399,407,431,                 settlement, 26, 55, 225, 382,458,498
      432                                       Tsoungiza, near Nemea (Greece), Neolithic
Szakalhat culture/group, 258, 280, 306, 322            settlement, 202
Szatmar culture/group, 279, 285-6, 321          tumuli (Pit-Grave culture burial mounds),
Szeghalom survey, 294-5                                242-5, 281, 303(fig.), 309
   AVK culture, 305-6                           turquoise, trade in, 467
   Baden culture, 309                           Tybrind Vig (Denmark), mesolithic
   Bodrogkeresztui; 308                                settlement, 231
   Boleraz culture, 309
   Early Bronze Age, 310                        Ubaid period (Mesopotamia), 184
   Koros culture, 302                           Unetice culture, 130
   Szakalhat culture, 306                       Urban Revolution (beginning of towns), 59,
   Tisza culture, 307, 308                           70, 498, 503


                                            560




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:38:43 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                             INDEX


urbanisation, 81-3                                    winter wheat, 90, 92
Uruk period (Mesopotamia), 11, 17-18,                 see also spring wheat
     155(fig.), 160(fig.), 161,164, 176 (fig.),     wheel
     177,180,192, 207, 215, 216, 230,                 cross-bar, 172, 220
    459, 461, 464, 496                                models, 221, 229-30
                                                      spoked, 172, 220-1
Vadastra (Romania), 231                             wheeled vehicles, 15-18, 160-5, 229, 242-8
valuables, 267                                        distribution of, 239(fig.), 240
   primitive, 139                                   Wheeler, Sir Mortimer, 42
Varna (Bulgaria), Copper Age cemetery, 22,          Wiepenkathen (Germany), 204
      141, 360                                      wine, 388-9, 434; see also alcohol
vase supports (braziers), 351, 410(fig.)            winter crops, 92, 93(fig.); see also wheat,
Vickers, Michael, 47                                     winter
vine see grapes                                     Wittfogel, Karl, 99
vitamin D deficiency, 208, 232                      Wolhynia (Ukraine), flint source, 112-14,
Volling group, 348                                       331
Vulchetrun (Bulgaria), Bronze Age gold              Woodland period (North America), 136
      vessels, 373, 431-56, 440, 444-8,             wool, 17,17-18(fig.), 180-1, 203, 233-4,
      451-5                                              24In, 387
                                                      preservation of, 203
waggons see wheeled vehicles                        wool-sheep, 203-5, 224
Wallerstein, Immanuel, 501                          world system, 136
Walternienburg culture, 382; see also               Wrigley, Sir Anthony, 68
     Bernburg culture
warfare, in pre-history, 494                        yeast see Saccharomyces
water buffalo, 100                                  yoghurt, 208; see also milk products
water-spreading see floodwater farming;             yokes, prehistoric, 164
     irrigation
Wellenbandmuster see compass-drawn                  Zambujal (Portugal), Copper Age
     ornament                                            settlement, 148
wheat                                               Zurich (Switzerland)
  bread-wheat, 92                                      'Akad.', Neolithic settlement, 245-7
  emmer, 394                                           Mozartstrafie, Bronze Age settlement, 205
  spelt, 92                                         Ziischen (Germany), 162,163




                                              561




                      This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:38:43 UTC
                                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
