      The Secondary Exploitation of
        Animals in the Old World
                            (1983,            Revised)

In the historical and ethnographic record, western Eurasia appears as a
mosaic of pastoral and mixed-farming groups in which livestock has played
a major role. Specialised forms of animal husbandry have been adapted
to a wide range of geographical and economic conditions, from steppe
nomadism to large-scale commercial livestock rearing. In the perspective of
prehistory, however, this picture is a relatively recent one. Many of the
features which now appear basic to Old World farming only became wide-
spread three or four millennia after the beginning of farming. In Chapter 6,
I drew together archaeological and archaeo-zoological evidence for the early
use of secondary products and applications of domestic animals in the Old
World. The purpose of this chapter is to present some additional infor-
mation which confirms and modifies these conclusions, and also to sketch
the outlines of a general model of the development of animal husbandry
from c.6000 to 2000 BC. Many of the innovations considered here seem
to have emerged in restricted parts of the Near East, and to have been
exchanged and disseminated as part of the process leading to urbanisation.
Important interactions also occurred with the steppe belt, where new ways
of life appeared at this time, and the new features which were introduced to

This chapter was intended to update the information given in the previous chapter,
and I have taken the opportunity to allow it to continue this role by adding new
material up to 1995, and entirely rewriting the section on the horse. As well as
citing new information, this paper (originally written by invitation for a World
Archaeology volume on pastoralism) modifies it in two respects: in recognising
that milk-drinking, while secondary, may have emerged during the first spread
of farming (thus satisfying Bogucki 1984); and in emphasising the importance of
the Urban Revolution in Mesopotamia as the context in which the features of
secondary farming were integrated and dispersed. The new picture of horse
domestication fits very well with that point of view. As so often, Roger Moorey
provided invaluable guidance on Near Eastern matters.

                                        199




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     THE   SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION


7.1 Ard marks of the
Early Neolithic
c/Middle Neolithic I
period under a long
barrow at Snave, near
Dreslette, Denmark.
Drawn by Claus
Madsen (Fyns Stifts-
museum): published
in C. Madsen and
H. Thrane,
(
  Sydvestfynske dysser
og yngre stenalders
bebyggelse9 Fynske
Minder 1982, 17-42:
Odense 1983 [from
Sherratt 1987b],

temperate Europe caused a revolutionary change in the character of agri-
culture and social systems there. Despite the fragmentary nature of present
evidence, therefore, it is useful to consider this phenomenon as a whole,
since its elements are clearly inter-connected. The dating of these features
will first be discussed in a European context, and then considered as part
of the pattern of development in the Near East. [The sections on horse-
domestication, riding and chariotry have been amalgamated and sub-
stantially rewritten.]


U S E OF THE SCRATCH-PLOUGH (ARD)
The best evidence so far for the regular use of the plough in agriculture
comes from the discovery of actual plough-marks on old land surfaces, and
the recent multiplication of such discoveries offers the hope that this will
lead to a more precise definition of the date at which animal traction was
first applied to cultivation. The most impressive corpus of early plough-
marks comes from Denmark, where they have recently been comprehen-
sively reviewed by Henrik Thrane (1982; [1989: see Introduction]). Among
those dated to the end of the EN and the beginning of the MN (C.3500 BC)
is the splendid example from Snave near Dreslette, where 175 square metres
of criss-cross furrows have been exposed under a long dolmen-mound
(Figure 7.1). These examples can be dated by a series of radiocarbon de-
terminations on material of these phases to c.3700-3300 BC (see e.g. Bakker
1979, 141-5; [Midgley 1992, 205-20]). These fit well with the date of
c.3500 BC for furrows in the surface below the South Street longbarrow1
(Avebury) and the other evidence considered in the previous chapter.
    Further welcome evidence comes from the circum-Alpine region. In the
Valle d'Aosta, from phase II of the site of Saint-Martin-de-Corleans in the


                                        200




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD   WORLD




suburbs of Aosta in northern Italy, an area of plough-marks has been
exposed on a ritual site beneath Neolithic cist-graves (Mezzena 1981). The
furrows are bracketed by radiocarbon dates calibrating to 3600-3000 BC.
These show an impressive congruence with the Scandinavian dates. Slightly
later, with a calibrated radiocarbon date of c.3000 BC, is the site of
Castaneda at the mouth of the Calanca valley in Graubunden, Switzerland,
where another large area of criss-cross furrows has been exposed beneath
an Iron Age cemetery (Zindel and Deluns 1980). Another Swiss site, Chur-
Welschdorfli, yielded furrows sandwiched between Lutzengiietle (late Neo-
lithic) and Early Bronze Age layers, and so dating to the later fourth or third
millennium BC. Although the occurrence of such finds is naturally dependent
on the preservation of old land-surfaces, the existence of such conditions
under monuments dating to before 3500 BC (e.g. earthen longbarrows)
offers some control on this kind of evidence;2 and the emerging pattern
of dates both for plough-marks, stelai and figurines from several parts of
Europe seems to be a convincing one.
    As well as the contemporary iconographic evidence for paired draught in
the form of the pottery models discussed in the preceding chapter, the
copper models of yoked oxen from Bytyri near Poznan in Poland (Piggott
1968; Figure 7.2) also date to around 3500 BC on the evidence of the associ-
ated flat copper axes. Since the figures were made by a more sophisticated
method of casting (probably lost-wax) than was practised in Europe at that
time, it is possible that they were imports from a more advanced area such
as Anatolia [and recent evidence confirms this].3 The possibility of such
contacts is suggested by a series of remarkable pottery vessels from Olden-
burg, north-west Germany (Figure 7.3), which was clearly based on a metal
prototype (Bakker 1979, 123; [Korner and Laux 1980, Abb. 33-8]). This
evidence of long-distance contacts is important for the apparently rapid


                                          201




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    THE   SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION




7.2 Copper models of yoked oxen from Bytyn, central Poland, reportedly found
(in the 19th century) with flat copper axes of Copper Age type (Poznan
Archaeological Museum) [new photo, courtesy Lech Krzyzaniak].


spread of yoked traction at this time. [Two further finds have filled out the
pattern of evidence for traction in the later fourth millennium BC. The first
is a painted pottery figurine of a yoked ox (not dissimilar to the Bytyri
representation) found in a transitional EH I—II context (c.3000 BC) at
Tsoungiza near Nemea in the northern Peloponnese, Greece (Pullen 1992).
The second is from Bronocice, southern Poland, in the Baden-influenced
phase V (c.3000-2700 BC, some centuries after phase III with its pot bearing
the drawing of a wagon that was noted in the previous chapter: Figure 6.3).
It is a bovid horn-core with marks of rope-compression, suggesting that the
draught-pole of ploughs and wheeled vehicles was attached to a horn-yoke
(Milisauskas and Kruk 1991). It is contemporary with the assemblage
of cattle bones from a Bernburg context at Schalkenburg, central Germany,
half of which belonged to animals over five years old, and many of which
showed pathologies of the hip joints suggesting their use as traction animals
(Miiller 1985).] There is thus good agreement among the various lines of
evidence for paired draught (plough-marks, models, drawings of yoked
oxen, carts and ploughs, paired-bovid burials and osteological evidence) to
date its introduction to c.3500 BC, coinciding with a major horizon of
change in European settlement patterns.


                                       202




                This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD   WORLD




                                 OLDENDORFII
7.3 Handled pottery vessels copying metal original (note skeuomorphic rivet)
from rectangular dolmens near Oldenburg, Lower Saxony, Germany: Middle
Neolithic, c.3200 BC, after Korner and Laux 1980 [new drawing].


T H E SPREAD OF WOOL-SHEEP IN EUROPE 4
The basic problem in assessing the change from textiles based on plant fibres
(linen and bast) to those made of wool is one of differential preservation.
Vegetable fibres survive only in alkaline contexts such as the calcareous
muds of Neolithic Switzerland, while woollen fibres survive only in acid
contexts such as the oligotrophic peat-bogs of northern Europe (although
carbonisation may preserve exceptional examples of both). The great
abundance of textile finds from Switzerland in the period from 4000 to
3000 BC (Vogt 1937) shows that linen was widely used in the Neolithic.
After this time, in the Corded Ware and Early Bronze Age periods, the sharp
decline in textile remains suggests that linen had been largely replaced by
wool, which would not be preserved in such environments. On the other
hand, there is abundant evidence from northern Europe (especially in
Denmark and adjacent areas: Hald 1950) that woollen cloth was the major
textile in use during the Bronze Age, from c.2000 BC onwards. The problem
is thus to identify the point in the third millennium at which the change-over
occurred.
    An important find in this context is the 'Spitzes Hoch' tumulus at Latdorf
near Bernburg in central Germany, excavated by Klopfleisch in 1880. It

                                          203




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    THE    SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION




7.4 Drawing by the excavator; Klopfleisch, of a fragment of patterned (linen)
cloth - now destroyed - from the Spitzes Hoch tumulus, Latdorf (Kr. Bernburg),
central Germany. The accuracy of this drawing was doubted by Schlabow (1959),
who knew of no Neolithic analogy for the technique; but this seems no reason to
dismiss it.
contained a collective burial with Bernburg (later TRB, C.3000 BC) pots and
copper beads, within a circular stone setting covered by oak planks. The
burning of this wooden covering had carbonised nearly sixty textile
fragments, many decorated (Figure 7.4), which - though not all preserved -
have been examined by Schlabow (1959). These he described as being of
'erstaunlicher Feinheit', and consisting of 'feine, langhaarige Schafwolle' -
finer than wool from the Bronze Age. However, Dr M. L. Ryder (in litt.,
April 1981) informs me that he examined some of this supposedly Neolithic
'wool' in 1964, and is of the opinion that it is flax; and carbonised flax-seeds
occurred in the grave (Vogt 1937,43). It seems most likely, therefore, that this
late-fourth-millennium sample is linen, like contemporary Swiss textiles.
   The earliest European find of woollen fibres is the wrapping from the
handle of a flint dagger, found in its leather sheath in a peat-bog at
Wiepenkathen in northern Germany (Cassau 1935). This fabric is particu-
larly interesting, since it consisted of woollen threads that had originally
been interwoven with others, presumably linen, that had not survived the
acid conditions. This is neatly paralleled by a contemporary Swiss find
(Ruoff 1981), in which the converse obtained: linen fibres interwoven with
now vanished ones, presumably of wool. The Wiepenkathen dagger can
be dated typologically (Lomborg 1973) to the earliest phase of the Late
Neolithic 'Dagger Period', beginning around 2400 BC. Moreover, a find of


                                        204




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD   WORLD


carbonised wool from Clairvaux-les-lacs Station III, French Jura ('plusieurs
poils de laine de mouton': Hundt and Korber-Grohne in Petrequin 1986,
240f and fig. 7 no. 4) dates to c.2900 BC. [Winiger (1995, 172) notes that
the sudden paucity of linen remains in the Corded-Ware levels at Ziirich-
Mozartstrafie may indicate the introduction of wool.] It seems reasonable,
therefore, to suggest that wool was introduced [on a small scale] to north-
central Europe some time in the early to middle third millennium (probably
in a Corded-Ware context), and was used in conjunction with linen until it
became the dominant textile fibre in the second millennium [or even later, in
the far west of Europe]. [These conclusions are in agreement with recent
expert discussions of the subject (Barber 1991; Bender-Jorgensen 1986;
1992) which describe an extended transition from textiles based almost
entirely on plant-based fibres to wool-textiles during the third and early
second millennia. The recent find of the Alpine Iceman, dating to the final
centuries of the fourth millennium, shows that even an individual wealthy
enough to carry a copper axe was dressed at this time entirely in skin
clothing and a woven straw cape; indeed Winiger (1995) questions whether
linen was used for large items of clothing at all, and suggests that most
Bronze Age clothing was essentially a direct translation of skin garments
into textile. If so, then the introduction of wool marked a fundamental
transformation of this aspect of material culture.]


T H E ANTIQUITY OF DAIRYING
One of the most important questions about prehistoric economies is the
origins of milking. It cannot be assumed that this was practised from the
beginning of domestication; although it was probably considerably older
than the first iconological evidence for the practice, which appears only in
Uruk contexts in the fourth millennium BC. The answer can come only from
a large number of studies using age- and sex-specific mortality estimates
[and probably only unambiguously from residue-analysis: for comments on
faunal studies see Introduction, esp. Note 15]; and although many more
such studies are required, some initial results relevant to the early use of milk
in Europe will be noted here [see also Hesse 1982; 1984; Davis 1984 for the
Near East].
   Sakellaridis (1979) has provided detailed data on faunal assemblages
from Neolithic Switzerland, and although sample sizes are small, some
interesting patterns emerge. In the Pfyn and Cortaillod cultures (4000-3500
BC), 40 to 80 per cent of the cattle survived to maturity, of which the
majority were female. The lack of adult males confirms that they were not
kept as draught animals, but the high proportion of adult females implies
the possibility of milking as well as breeding stock. This pattern occurs as
early as the Roessen levels at Eschen-Lutzengiietle (fifth millennium), where
over 80 per cent of cattle were more than two to three years old. A similar

                                           205




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     THE   SECONDARY         EXPLOITATION


pattern was also noted for ovicaprids: Cortaillod populations also contain
20-60 per cent of adult animals, mostly female. This argues against their use
for wool, as predicted, but leaves open the possibility that goats in particular
were used for milking. (Incidentally, sheep were regularly used as milk
animals in northern Europe until the Industrial Revolution, as in southern
Europe today.) It is thus not impossible that milking was being practised
in Europe by 4000 BC, or even earlier^ though the use of milk in Neolithic
Europe seems to be a local rather than a general feature.
   [One piece of evidence that has been drawn into the discussion is the
occurrence of perforated pottery vessels or 'sieves', interpreted as cheese-
presses, which occur from Bandkeramik times onwards (Bogucki 1984;
1986). This is but one amongst many possible interpretations of their
function; and though it is not unthinkable that the cattle or sheep of the first
farming groups in central and northern Europe were being milked by this
time - some two or three thousand years after the initial domestication of
these species - the quantities produced must have been rather small, given
the essentially horticultural nature of the farming system and the very small
areas of forest which had been cleared. It would also be surprising in view
of the fact that Bandkeramik domestic animals were principally cattle rather
than sheep (see below), perhaps because of the necessity of reliance on leaf-
fodder. It must of course be admitted that milking, being neither a specific
technology (like the traction complex) nor dependent on highly specific
strains of livestock (like wool-bearing sheep), could well have emerged in-
dependently over large areas of Eurasia, and been practised already in
Neolithic Europe. Possible though this is, however, 'milking' is now too
easily attributed to early farming cultures in Europe, and care should be
taken not to retroject too far the large-scale image of 'temperate dairying'
as it has been practised in north-west Europe in historical times (e.g. Legge
1981). McCormick (1992) has pointed out that age-profiles for prehistoric
cattle indicating the slaughter of very young calves, often taken as diagnostic
for a concentration on milk production, are in fact the very reverse: for in
primitive breeds (in Ireland lasting down to recent times, and in England
down to the medieval period) the presence of the calf is essential for the
mother to let down her milk (Chapter 6), so that the high incidence of young
calves in bone assemblages would not imply dairying but meat production.
On this interpretation of the kill-off patterns from early Ireland, a true
'dairying' economy of the kind known historically only appeared in Early
Christian times, in the mid-first millennium AD. AS with many archae-
ological problems, recent images are misleading: prehistoric practices were
very different from modern ones and hard to imagine from recent models.
   Milk (and especially cow's milk) was not in prehistory the universal
commodity it has now become, and milk products - which were mostly
from sheep or goats - would always have had a special place in prehistoric
economies and diets - in many respects a (pre-monetary) 'cash-crop', like

                                       206




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD   WORLD




7.5 Upper row, Chalcolithic (early fourth millennium) figurines from sanctuaries
in the southern Levant: (a) ram or bull with churns (En-Gedi); (b) woman with
churn (Gilat); (c) ram with cornets (Gilat); lower row, Early Bronze Age (later
fourth millennium) figurines from the southern Levant; (d) donkey with vessels
(Bat-Yam); (e) donkey with vessels (Giv'atoyim); ( f ) donkey with large vessels
(Tel Azor tomb 10) [new drawing].

olive oil, wine and wool.5 This is certainly the impression given by the
Ghassulian and EB I figurines from the southern Levant, showing rams and
donkeys with pots (i.e. containers for liquid) and a woman with a churn (see
below, and Figure 7.5). The later fourth-millennium pictographic tablets
from Uruk (Green 1980) deal mainly with sheep and goats, and it is evident
that goats were the principal providers of milk, and that sheep were of
interest principally for their wool. Cattle seem to have been kept in very
small numbers.6 The search for the beginning of milk utilisation should
probably therefore concentrate on the ovicaprids, and the first extensive
milk production may indeed turn out to coincide with the introduction of
wool-sheep and the major shift to secondary products in the later fourth
millennium. The cattle-raising cultures of the Neolithic and Copper Age
were probably largely meat-oriented, though milking may have played a
more important part in temperate Europe than elsewhere.]
   How does this fit with other indications of the antiquity of dairying?
In Chapter 6, I discussed the relevance of the restricted adult tolerance of
lactose in human populations. The ability to digest milk, made possible by
persistence of the production of the enzyme lactase into adulthood, is very
low or absent in Mongoloid, New World, Melanesian, Australoid and
Khoisan populations. In the Near East it is generally low, with the exception

                                         207




                This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     THE   SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION


of the Bedouin of Saudi Arabia. Likewise in Africa, most Negroid popu-
lations except pastoralists like the Fulani, Hima and Tussi are intolerant to
lactose. Roughly half of the inhabitants of Mediterranean countries are
intolerant, and the only populations in which the majority of adults can
digest milk are those of north-west Europe. Although the practice of milking
has some correspondence with the distribution of lactose-tolerant indi-
viduals, it does not depend on the existence of high levels of lactose
tolerance in the population. The use of milk products such as yoghurt and
cheese (in which the lactose is broken down into simpler sugars) is thus
likely to have preceded the ability to drink milk directly.
   Two selective factors are thus likely to have been responsible for the
present distribution of lactose tolerance. One is the advantage, under ex-
treme conditions on desert margins with few alternative food sources, of
being able to consume large amounts of fresh milk. [Such niches may have
only been occupied fairly recently.] This does not explain the high levels of
tolerance in northern Europe, however, and an ingenious hypothesis to
account for this has been put forward by Flatz and Rotthauwe (1977). This
relates lactose to the promotion of calcium absorption where there is a
deficiency of vitamin D, when it is beneficial in preventing rickets. The
development of lactose tolerance would thus parallel the selective advantage
for de-pigmentation in areas of low sunlight (since vitamin D is produced in
the body by uv radiation). With a cereal-based diet, and little vitamin D
from fish and liver, agricultural populations in Europe would have been
prone to calcium deficiency and consequent bone deformations. If milk was
available, there would be a selective advantage for the prolongation of
lactase activity into adult life, which would allow milk to be consumed
directly, thus helping to prevent rickets.7
    We may therefore suggest that milking may have been practised in
Europe on a small scale by Neolithic populations, and that selective pressure
in favour of milk-drinking became increasingly important with the north-
wards spread of agriculture. The limited opportunities for grazing in the
primary forest would have inhibited the development of large herds, but the
ability to keep small quantities of domestic livestock for milk would have
been valuable in small scattered communities. Enlargement of the pastoral
sector, and the development of larger-scale dairying, would have depended
on the progress of forest clearance and in particular the change from small-
scale horticulture to a larger scale of agriculture (Figure 8.4). It is in this
context that the arrival of the plough and wool-sheep were important and
mutually reinforcing.

TRANSPORT AND TRADE IN THE FOURTH AND THIRD
MILLENNIA BC: THE N E A R EAST
Having surveyed the European evidence for secondary exploitation, we may
now turn to the Near East, and in particular to transport animals which

                                        208




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    OF   ANIMALS      IN   THE   OLD    WORLD


spread only marginally into prehistoric Europe. [We shall then look at
evidence for the horse, a transport animal which spread from the steppe belt
both into Temperate Europe arid to the Near East.]

Non-caballine      equids
As with the use of paired draught, the use of pack animals can be illumi-
nated from the evidence of figurines (Figure 7.5). A group of terracottas
from southern Palestine is the first known indication of the use of pack
animals, and particularly the ass or donkey, Equus asinus [Epstein 1985;
Ovadia 1992]. The earliest of them [which show rams rather than donkeys]
are from the Ghassulian (Late Chalcolithic) period, of the late fifth or earlier
fourth millennium BC, while others [including donkeys] come from EB I
contexts, equivalent to the Egyptian late Pre- and Protodynastic periods of
the later fourth millennium. From Ghassulian contexts, and especially ritual
centres, come a bovid carrying 'churns' from En-gedi (Ussishkin 1980, 35),
a ram with conical vessels on its back, and a woman with a 'churn' on her
head, from Gilat (Alon 1976). [A small donkey figure from Giv'atoyim, with
two globular containers (pots? leather bottles? baskets?) high on its back
(Kaplan 1969), originally thought to be Chalcolithic is now considered to
be EB I (Ovadia 1992,20).] The best representation of a pack donkey comes
from an EB I tomb at Tel Azor (not far from Tel Aviv), along with a copper
dagger and a predynastic Egyptian palette (Druks and Tsaferis 1970). It
carries two tall containers. A somewhat similar figure of a donkey, broken
from the rim of a vessel, comes from Cyprus and belongs to the EB III period
at the end of the third millennium (Figure 6.11).
   The context of these early figurines from Palestine is interesting: the Late
Chalcolithic Ghassulian culture saw a major expansion in the Negev and
Sinai, associated with an expansion of trade and metallurgical activity
(Rothenberg 1970), and the formation of links across the arid part of
southern Palestine with the cultures of Predynastic Egypt, where metal
objects appear in the Gerzean (Naqada II). These routes became increasingly
important during the period of formation of the Egyptian state. Loaded
donkeys appear on the rock drawings of Upper Egypt (Winckler 1939), and
in Protodynastic representations of trade or tribute scenes. Egyptian interest
in the Levant is indicated by the occurrence of traded objects (and even the
serekh of Narmer on a sherd from Tel 'Erany), and this sphere of influence
in southern Palestine parallels the interaction zone around the early
Mesopotamian states, indicated for example by the occurrence of proto-
Elamite tablets on the Iranian plateau. These Egyptian land routes based on
pack transport were superseded from the fifth dynasty onwards by the
development of effective maritime transport and bulk trade by sea (Marfoe
1987; [Esse 1991]). The scope of these earlier contacts was clearly depend-
ent on the existence of domestic donkeys used as pack animals.
   Faunal evidence shows that the donkey was present in both Palestine and

                                        209




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     THE   SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION


Upper Egypt from the four h millennium onwards, and the evidence of the
figurines suggests that it came to be important locally among transhumant
groups in southern Palestine, perhaps first in transporting milk and milk-
products, and in carrying rare materials from distant extraction sites. The
growing demand from expanding populations in the Nile valley, however,
gave it a broader significance within the expanding network of trade routes.
[Since the first real evidence for use of the donkey (Ovadia 1993), whether
in the form of figurines or an increase in the numbers of bones on sites, dates
to EB I (later fourth millennium), it seems that it was this larger geopolitical
context which was responsible for promoting it as a transport animal, and
for spreading it all around the Fertile Crescent - though the domestication
process could well have begun in the preceding Chalcolithic, and both rams
and bovids were perhaps then being used as pack animals (Figure 7.5). The
Chalcolithic way of life is hard to describe by ethnographic analogy: an
intensive floodwater horticulture (apparently not yet using the plough: Levy
1992, 74), and in places also arboriculture (olive) with extensive trans-
humance, keeping sheep both for milk and wool - fragments of woollen
textile, as well as the remains of a loom, accompanied the spectacular Nahal
Mishmar hoard of Chalcolithic metalwork, which also had olive, date and
pomegranate remains (Bar-Adon 1980). It is a good example of an 'extinct'
way of life with no recent analogies. Both ploughing and a more intensive
pastoralism seem to have accompanied the urbanisation of EB I, sparked off
by Egyptian intervention (Horwitz and Tchernov 1989; Smith and Horwitz
1984; Esse 1991), and it was in this context that the domestic donkey spread
rapidly all round the Fertile Crescent: primarily as a beast of burden but
soon, too, as a ridden animal - whose style of riding was transferred to the
horse when it arrived from further north. It must have been especially useful
on overland routes which articulated with the Euphrates supply routes from
the Uruk colonies. Perhaps crossed with other equids (horse or onager), it
was also an important traction animal in the warfare of third-millennium
Sumer.] This spread of innovations in transport (for example the use of the
sail, which also came into wider use during this time) took features formerly
important in local niches and gave them an international role in the
expanding relations between early complex societies and their peripheries.
    The donkey was introduced to the Aegean during the third millennium,
occurring both at Lerna V and in Troy IV (Gejvall 1969; 1946), and is thus
likely to have spread widely through the Near East during this period.
Tracing this spread is complicated, however, by the difficulty of distinguish-
ing donkey from the remains of other equids which were present in this
region. A further complicating element is the probability of hybridisation
between the various equids. These complexities have been comprehensively
assessed by Juris Zarins (1976) in a work which is a fundamental source of
information on this question. Central to his thesis is his contention that the
onager (Equus hemionus), although hunted, was unlikely to have been


                                        210




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD   WORLD




on a clay model from Altyn Depe, Namazga IV period (after Masson); [new
drawing].
domesticated in the same sense as the donkey (cf. Littauer and Crouwel
1979). However, onager-like equids such as those shown in teams of four
pulling battle-cars on the 'Standard of Ur' might well represent hybrids,
either with donkeys or perhaps with horses (see below). The use of the
onager, therefore, seems to be secondary to the use of other equids, and may
represent local attempts to extend the stock of a rare and valuable imported
species by the developing techniques of hybridisation with a locally
abundant equid.

Camels
Returning briefly to the early stages of urbanisation in the fourth
millennium, it is possible to suggest that the domestication of the camel
closely paralleled that of the donkey, but in a complementary area. Two
species are involved, the Bactrian (Camelus bactrianus) and the Arabian
camel or dromedary (C. dromedarius). Although there is no unambiguous
evidence for the domestic status of either animal before the second millen-
nium, indications of the presence of the camel on settlements, together with
the long overland routes which came into use in the later fourth and third
millennia on the Iranian plateau, suggest that it was already in use as a
transport animal. Tosi (1974) has suggested an early focus of use at sites like
Shar-i Sokhta in Seistan, where its bones, dung and hair have been identified;
and this area shows close cultural links with Turkmenia, where figurines
suggest that it may have been used initially as a traction animal (Figure 7.6;
Masson and Sarianidi 1972, plate 36; Bulliet 1975). Seistan is linked south-
wards to the area of Kerman and the Makran, where there are now further
indications of the Bactrian camel (Compagnoni and Tosi 1978) [and as far
as the Indus valley by the third millennium: Zarins 1979].
   On the other side of the Gulf, the Oman peninsula was part of the same
interaction-sphere (probably the historical Magan); and there are fourth-
millennium camel bones at Hili and Umm an-Nar, while representations
on grave-stones show that the species present was the dromedary (Ripinski
1975; Zarins 1978). The camel also occurs at Bahrein (Dilmun). It is thus

                                          211




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    THE    SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION


possible that domestication of the two species occurred in the developing
zone of long-distance trade contacts on opposite sides of the Gulf, linked to
the growing urban areas of Mesopotamia and the Indus. While the initial
focus of camel domestication may have been in some localised area of Iran,
it achieved a major significance within the expanding network of fourth-
and third-millennium trade-routes. These routes did not extend at this time
to western Arabia, and the relatively slow spread of the dromedary may
reflect the undeveloped nature of this hinterland until the end of the second
and first millennia BC, with the development of the Arabian incense trade
[Artzy 1994].
   The Bactrian camel, however, seems to have undergone a major dispersal
as a transport animal in the third millennium: camel bones occur on
Harappan sites (Ratnagar 1981, 173), and by the second millennium on
Andronovo sites in central Asia, where they may be linked to drawings of
camels pulling carts in the Minusinsk depression (Bulliet 1975; Figure 7.6).
They may even have penetrated by way of the steppes into eastern Europe
in the late fourth and third millennia: fabrics identified as camel-hair have
been noted at Maikop in the northern Caucasus (see Chapter 18), and camel
bones have been found in barrows on the Pontic steppes and at Gurbane§ti
east of Bucharest in Romania (Rosetti 1959, 802). It is clear that the steppes
acted as an important secondary axis of dispersal, as with other secondary
forms of animal exploitation. The fourth and third millennia thus saw the
emergence and dispersal of three major means of animal transport: wheeled
vehicles, pack transport and riding; and these techniques, and the domestic
species on which they were based, spread and interacted both within the
Near East and on its steppe hinterland.


T H E DOMESTICATION AND SPREAD OF THE HORSE [New]
[Information on the early history of the horse is now much more abundant
than when Chapter 6, or even the present chapter, was first written; and this
new account, replacing the original sections on the horse, may serve as
a guide to these subsequent developments - for although they modify the
detail, in many ways they relate horse domestication more closely to the
other elements of the secondary products complex.8

Domestication
Horses survived into the Holocene even in forested parts of Europe, and
were apparently hunted in Neolithic France (e.g. Carnac, Roucadour -
Chasseen) and Germany (e.g. Diimmersee - early TRB), though apparently
not in Britain after the Late Glacial, as recent radiocarbon dates have
shown.9 These local populations, which would have benefited to some ex-
tent from human opening of the woodlands by early farmers, seem to have
made a discernible contribution to European early domestic populations in

                                        212




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    OF   ANIMALS     IN   THE   OLD    WORLD


the third millennium, and the horse (like cattle and pigs, but unlike sheep)
seems to have undergone several geographically distinct domestication
episodes, within a finite period in the fourth and third millennia. These
cannot be considered 'independent', however, but are better seen within the
context of the large-scale cultural interactions at this time.
   It was on the steppes (Figure 7.7) that human populations had known
and made use of the horse for longest; while few sites in forested Europe
before 3000 BC have yielded more than a few per cent of horse bones, the
Copper Age cultures of the Ukraine include sites where they form the largest
proportion of animal bones. Of these, the site of Dereivka near Kiev (now
published in English: Telegin 1986) has tended to dominate discussion as
further techniques have been applied to its study, and their conclusions
are generalised to other contemporary sites. Dereivka is a small habitation
site dating to c.4000 BC, with the remains of two houses, overlooking a
tributary of the Dnepr. The pottery included vessels with cord-impressions,
typical of the later phase of the Sredni Stog culture. Three-quarters of the
faunal remains are horse, which would have provided a high proportion of
the food; the other domestic animals were cattle, sheep and pig. Horses from
this site had been claimed as domestic by Bibikova (e.g. 1975), and this view
was accepted by Nobis (1971) and by Bokonyi (1978), principally on
account of the contrast with earlier horses from the region - in fact mainly
Pleistocene ones, since Mesolithic examples were not available. A further
line of argument was cultural: on the eastern part of the site there were ritual
animal burials, including the skull and legbones of a horse (a seven to eight
year-old stallion) and foreparts of two dogs - all, perhaps, originally stuffed,
as the Iron Age Scythians are known to have done, in the manner of 'head
and hooves' burials (Piggott 1983, 91-2). A nearby pit contained a boar
figurine, long blade, and perforated antler fragments of a type thought to
represent bridle-bit cheek-pieces (Piggott 1983, fig. 44: but see below), of
which the site has yielded six single examples. It is, of course, crucial that
the stallion burial is contemporary with the rest of the site, and doubts have
been widely expressed about this possibility: direct radiocarbon measure-
ments on it would decide.10
   Two recent analyses of the faunal remains, by different methods, have
given what appear to be contradictory results. The first was a detailed study
of the mortality statistics, carried out by Marsha Levine (1990), and
compared with other assemblages which she has personally studied. Her
conclusion was that the age-profile of the Dereivka horses was characteristic
of a population exploited by hunting. An alternative approach was
attempted by David Anthony and Dorcas Brown: an SEM examination of the
wear surfaces on the second premolar teeth of the ritually buried horse has
demonstrated a pattern of attrition consistent with use of a bit - which did
not, however, occur on other specimens (Anthony and Brown 1991). If this
specimen is indeed contemporary with the site as a whole, rather than being


                                       213




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    THE    SECONDARY         EXPLOITATION




                                                                  c. 4000 BC




7.7 The principal cultural groups of the Pontic steppes and northern Kazakhstan
at millennial intervals, 4000-2000 BC [new drawing].




                                       214




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD    WORLD


a later intrusion, it would suggest that at least one horse at this time was a
domesticated (or at least tamed) animal used for riding. In this case it might
be hypothesised that ridden horses were used in hunting, on the principle 'it
takes one to catch one'. Alternatively, the stallion is intrusive and Sredni
Stog-period Dereivka is simply a horse-hunting site. Similar considerations
would apply to contemporary sites of the Khvalynsk culture on the Volga,
such as Sezzhee.
   Another candidate which has attracted recent attention as an early centre
of horse domestication has been the site of Botai near Petropavlovsk in
northern Kazakhstan (Zaibert 1993), for this large village of circular, semi-
subterranean huts also has a faunal assemblage consisting very largely of
horse, and would be a plausible candidate for the eastern origin favoured by
Marija Gimbutas. The relative chronology is now becoming clearer, how-
ever, thanks to a dating programme undertaken by the Oxford Radiocarbon
Accelerator Unit, and Botai now appears to post-date Sredni Stog, and to
be largely contemporary with the Pit-Grave culture in the later fourth
millennium. Although some horses have been claimed to show bit-wear, the
great majority are wild; so this might exemplify a mode of 'horse-catching'
which has no recent analogue in its combination of domestication and hunt-
ing of a single species. Where domestic animals are not used for secondary
products, the hunting of horses can make use of pasture which is beyond the
range of cattle, because of their water requirements, slow movement and
inability to graze under snow. In a wider context, however, this seems to be
a fairly marginal phenomenon, rather than an evolutionary step towards
horse-rearing and pastoralism.
   The long experience of steppe tribes with the hunting of horses, even if
it shows no inbuilt tendency to domestication, would have provided an
opportunity when new motives impinged on this area. This took place after
3500 BC, when the Maikop culture of the northern Caucasus was formed
under influence from the Uruk colonial expansion (Chapter 18), and in turn
created the conditions for the formation of the Pit-Grave culture.11 This
included the use of wheeled vehicles (apparently four-wheelers, rather than
a mixture of wagons and carts: Izbitzer 1993), and probably wool-bearing
breeds of sheep whose wool may have been used for felt.12 As well as the use
of cattle as draught animals, new species of transport animal such as the
camel (see above) and donkey may have been encountered. These would
have provided new models of animal utilisation, which may have been the
stimulus for the domestication of animals used for riding (see below). This
would have provided the mobility needed to make effective use of the
extensive interfluvial pastures. Domestication of the horse would initially
have been the outcome of culture-contact, but soon became integral to a
new way of life. The expansionist character of this cultural grouping, whose
tumuli dot the steppe interfluves eastward to the Urals and also penetrated
westwards in enclaves as far as the Hungarian Plain (Chapter 11), is well

                                          215




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     THE    SECONDARY         EXPLOITATION


known; but unfortunately its often insubstantial settlement sites have not
yielded large animal-bone assemblages which have attracted detailed
analysis. Only Mikhailovka has provided an assemblage, so far subjected
only to species identification, in which horses form 10 to 15 per cent of a
spectrum of predominantly domestic animals (mostly cattle and sheep).
There is thus no direct osteological evidence to demonstrate that the horse
was domesticated at this point, though it remains an outstanding prob-
ability that it was so, as is indicated by the spread of domestic horses to
adjacent areas, both within and beyond its natural distribution.

Spread of the horse in the Near East
The onager was widely distributed in western Asia and had long been
hunted, and the donkey spread rapidly in the late fourth millennium as
a pack animal. The potential presence of three different species of equid
(and six possible hybrids) thus makes osteological (and even iconological)
identification of horses difficult; but there is sufficient evidence to be reason-
ably confident of the presence of the horse in the third millennium, and
perhaps the late fourth (Littauer and Crouwel 1979, 23-30). Since the
survival of relict Pleistocene populations is not everywhere excluded (e.g. for
Anatolia), simple presence is insufficient to demonstrate domestication.
There is unambiguous evidence of the presence of horses and the use of
equids for riding from the later third millennium (Moorey 1970), and the
accumulation of indications suggests an earlier third-millennium spread of
domesticated stock, though in very small numbers. An equid humerus from
Late Chalcolithic Shiqmim (identified metrically as horse) with an associ-
ated date of 3240 BC has a claim to be the earliest (Grigson 1993), as would
contemporary horse bones claimed from Tal-i Iblis in south-central Iran.
Their cases are respectively strengthened by EB horse-bones from Arad
and Aphek, and by a bone inlay portraying a horse from Susa; but some
ambiguity remains because of the small numbers of specimens and
alternative species of equid. The clearest indications of the presence of
horses are in eastern Anatolia (Bokonyi 1991). It is possible that the con-
sistent representation of horse in late-fourth- and third-millennium sites
in the upper Euphrates valley in Turkey - like Arslantepe, fundamentally
affected by the Uruk expansion13 - is a reflection of the importance of a
route along which these animals were imported. The early Near Eastern
horses seem to have been ridden only incidentally (Moorey 1970), since this
activity is not the focus of elite iconography, which rather concentrates
on the military uses of equids as draught animals. Current opinion is that
the equids shown pulling battle-cars are not the notoriously untamable
onager, nor just an ass, but rather a hybrid - either mule/hinny or a donkey-
onager cross. (Such hybrids were occasionally used as draught animals in
ploughing, according to textual evidence.) If that is so, then the principal
reason for importing horses from a northern breeding pool (via the


                                        216




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    OF   ANIMALS      IN   THE   OLD    WORLD


Caucasus and eastern Anatolia?) may well have been to provide hybrid
pack-animals, and increasingly also draught-animals for military use, in the
context of the growing conflicts between early states (see below, in con-
nection with the chariot). In this perspective, the beginning of horse
domestication in the area immediately north of the Caucasus could have
been intimately connected with the northward penetration of the secondary
products complex, and the use of the donkey - initially as a pack animal but
used experimentally both for riding and draught. Horse-domestication and
riding may therefore be less independent of the main secondary products
complex than it is currently presented in archaeo-zoological discussions
(e.g. papers in Hansel and Zimmer 1994).

Riding and horse-control
Horses only became draught animals in their own right when a light,
wheeled vehicle had been invented (see below). The representational evi-
dence provides the answer to the old question as to whether early domestic
horses were ridden: yes, they were. With such small horses, however, the seat
may have been unusual to modern eyes - perhaps more like the 'back seat'
(over the pelvic girdle) that is appropriate on a donkey, or a very forward
seat like that of American Indians on their mustangs. The former method of
riding was used in the Near East in the third and second millennia, at first
using a nose-ring instead of a bit (Littauer and Crouwel 1979, fig. 37); the
latter may have been usual further north. These two styles would have been
the manner of riding until the first millennium BC, when horses were first
ridden for military purposes. In the meantime, however, over the course of
the second millennium, chariotry had been developed, and with it an array
of control techniques using bridle-bits and other harness attachments. The
combination of this developed type of bridle, together with larger breeds of
horse, made possible the military use of the ridden horse as it was employed
by the nomads of the steppes, and the use of cavalry as it developed amongst
the Iron Age civilisations of the east Mediterranean. Earlier riding styles
should not be confused with these more advanced forms of control.
   The question then arises as to how early ridden horses were controlled,
outside the Near East where the use of a nose-ring was transferred from
cattle. Here another shift in perception has taken place, in connection with
the interpretation of various pieces of perforated antler taken to represent
elements of harness. Antler objects interpreted as the cheek-pieces to bridle-
bits (and in some cases found in position in burials) are known from the
steppe area and eastern Europe in the early second millennium onwards;
bronze bits are known from the Near East after 1600, and in temperate
Europe after 1300 (Potratz 1966; Hiittel 1981). Both of these sets of bits
fall into two broad types: the vertical bar (Stangenknebel) or the disk
(Plattenknebel), the latter sometimes with spikes (and in Near Eastern metal
forms sometimes explicitly imitating a wheel). Temperate European

                                       217




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     THE   SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION


(Urnfield) ones are largely of the bar type, and were preceded during the
earlier second millennium by an often highly decorated series of antler
examples, known both from temperate Europe and the western steppes
(see below, Figure 7.8). It is these objects which have encouraged the in-
terpretation of the perforated antler pieces from Dereivka and elsewhere as
primitive bridle-bits. But the second-millennium examples were used in
connection with the chariot, i.e. most probably for driving, when the horse
must be controlled without other physical contact; so they are not really
necessary for controlling a ridden horse, except in the kind of disciplined
cavalry movement which took over from chariotry at the end of the second
millennium, and for which increasingly elaborate bits were designed. The
horse could thus have been initially controlled in a rather simple way by a
rope noseband; and decorative impressions on pottery indicate an extensive
knowledge of cordage and presumably ropes, probably made from hemp
(cf. also Chapters 15 and 16).

The spread of horse-riding in Europe
Horses seem to have come into use in Europe at approximately the same
time as they spread into the Near East: the first half of the third millennium.
Since horse populations survived in temperate Europe, including the
Carpathian Basin, the sporadic occurrence of horse bones in early Copper
Age (Tiszapolgar) contexts in Hungary need not be explained by the import
of exotic animals in exchange for copper. Instead, their first regular
occurrence in assemblages of the Baden culture may be taken as a token of
a new interest in horses of local origin. Since the latter part of this culture
coincides with the arrival of small enclaves of Pit-Grave burial within its east
Hungarian distribution at the end of the fourth millennium and the
beginning of the third (Chapter 11), these facts may well be related; and this
event can plausibly be seen as the stimulus for local domestication.
   In a recent survey of the European evidence, Norbert Benecke (1994) has
pointed to the appearance of horses in greater numbers, and with more
morphological variability, in the late TRB Bernburg culture in central
Germany, and in the contemporary Cham culture in Bavaria - both situated
on the main westward contact-routes from the Carpathian Basin, and dated
to c.3000 BC. In the Bernburg culture, this coincides with the introduction
of a larger (probably wool-bearing) breed of sheep, which also occurs in
Poland and Hungary (Miiller 1994). The central European horses show a
degree of continuity with earlier populations there, and are therefore
plausibly interpreted as a local intake from indigenous wild stock (either
here or in the Carpathian Basin), under the influence of new practices in
adjacent regions. Scandinavian horses seem to be of central European rather
than local type (Benecke 1994,135), and were apparently introduced from
there. The first plentiful occurrence in Denmark is in pits at the late TRB (MN
III-V, i.e. parallel to Corded Ware) site of Lindskov in central Jutland


                                        218




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    OF   ANIMALS     IN   THE   OLD    WORLD


(Davidsen 1978,142). The first burial with a horse-skull occurs in a Corded
Ware context at Borgstedt in north-west Germany (Bauch 1988).14 There is
also a similar Bell-Beaker burial from Moravia, while the well-known
Hungarian Bell-Beaker site of Csepel Haros (Bokonyi 1978) seems to have
been a specialised breeding centre, potentially supplying the adjacent Bell-
Beaker network with the central-European type of horses (see Chapter 15).
   These occurrences suggest successive westward extensions of the dom-
esticated horse, presumably as a riding-animal, reaching western Europe
(the British Isles, France, Iberia) in the Bell-Beaker period of the later third
millennium (van Wijngaarden-Bakker 1974, 345-7 for horses at New-
grange). Uerpmann (1990) has emphasised that Spanish populations were
derived from local wild stock; indeed, he views the domestication process as
having begun not in east Europe but in the far west of Europe in the third
millennium. Underlying this are the twin ideas of direct Near Eastern
influence in the Spanish Chalcolithic fortified sites ('colonies') like Los
Millares, in contact with the area where donkeys were already domesti-
cated, and of a Bell-Beaker expansion from the Iberian peninsula. Whilst the
model of a knock-on effect from donkey domestication is attractive, this
particular reconstruction does not seem to me to be tenable on archae-
ological grounds (cf. Renfrew 1967a); and he does, in any case, note as an
exception the striking increase in stature in Bavarian horses of the Cham
culture (later fourth millennium BC), which he attributes to eastern immi-
gration from the lower Danube (1990, 139-42), postulated as an alterna-
tive centre of local domestication. This multi-centric model of several
unrelated domestication-episodes of small relict populations seems to me
implausible; the reconstruction of a single, large-scale episode of horse
domestication on the Pontic steppes in the later fourth millennium, whose
effects were felt in eastern and central Europe in the later fourth millennium
and in western Europe in the third millennium, seems more persuasive than
any postulated alternative. (And my suggestion that Pontic horse domesti-
cation might indirectly reflect earlier experience with the donkey would
preserve the structural coherence of Uerpmann's proposal.) Whatever the
spatial logic, however, the chronological pattern is clear: domesticated
horses and local domestication only began to spread into forested temperate
Europe as the plough came into general use in these areas, and more
extensive patterns of cultivation began, making it possible to keep larger
quantities of livestock (cf. Fig. 8.4).15

The origin of the chariot
During the third millennium, solid-wheeled wooden wagons continued to
be placed in some elite graves under tumuli on the Pontic steppes. The more
elaborate design of these sunken chambers, with a side-chamber for the
burial, gives them the name 'Catacomb-Graves', and they are especially
numerous along the lower reaches of the Ingul and Dnepr.16 This focus of

                                       219




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      THE   SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION


elaboration suggests the possibility of coastal links with the Caucasus and
perhaps northern Anatolia. (Links from north-west Anatolia to the lower
and middle Danube, bringing amongst other things knowledge of faience
and tin-bronze, were established at this time: Sherratt 1993, 22-4.) On the
Anatolian plateau, ox-carts decorated with a variety of bronze openwork
mountings were in use by eminent personages at sites such as Alaca Hiiyiik.
Over the same period, Mesopotamian city-states came into conflict both
with each other and with the secondary states springing up in their
immediate periphery. (Some of the latter, like Ebla, may already have estab-
lished merchant colonies in central Anatolia.) As well as the four-wheeled
'battle-car' pulled by four equids (controlled by a nose-ring), several experi-
ments had been made in northern Mesopotamia and Syria with military
vehicles having two solid wheels - one type used as a moving platform, the
other straddled as if riding an animal (Littauer and Crouwel 1979, 37).
There was clearly a military incentive to develop a fast two-wheeler; but the
solutions involved solid, heavy carpentry. Attempts were made to lighten
them, by use of the cross-bar wheel (evolved from a tripartite disc-wheel
with lunate openings and strengthening-bars); and some solid two-wheeled
vehicles - with rather implausible reconstructions - have been claimed from
Catacomb-Grave contexts (e.g. Marievka mound 11, Zaporozhye region:
Pustovalov 1994, fig. 11). From this background a completely new, light,
horse-drawn vehicle emerged and set a new standard in fast personal
transport: the chariot (Moorey 1986).
    The first evidence of spoke-wheeled vehicles occurs in the early second
millennium. Establishing claims of priority is an unprofitable exercise since the
evidence takes such different forms: what is more striking is the simultaneity
(with current levels of resolution) of their appearance over a triangle from
central Anatolia to Hungary to the southern Urals. Two different interpreta-
tive emphases are possible. Looking at Anatolian seal-impressions from the
late third and early second millennia, with their images of deities or royal
personages on vehicles with cross-bar or spoked wheels, drawn by four and
then two equids, Littauer and Crouwel (1979,68-71) have seen an evolution-
ary sequence. Piggott (1983,103), following Childe, has stressed the funda-
mental contrast between the light, bentwood 'tension structure' of the chariot,
by comparison with the heavy 'compression structure' of the cart, and looks for
its origin in non-urban communities with experience of horses: the steppes.
Which origin is more plausible? It may be possible to compromise, and suggest
a relationship between the two; but first, chronology.
    In the Carpathian Basin the first part of the third millennium saw the
absorption of the enclaves of intrusive steppe population in the east, and
new links with the Adriatic through Bosnia and Slovenia; while the second
part saw the effects of a wider linkage along the Danube, and up into central
Germany. The radical change of pace, including the rapid development of
the Transylvanian bronze industry, nevertheless took place at the beginning

                                         220




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD   WORLD




                                                                    7.8 Evidence for
                                                                    the chariot in the
                                                                    Carpathian Basin,
                                                                    early second
                                                                    millennium BC:
                                                                    left, antler cheek-
                                                                    piece of bridle-bit
                                                                    (Szazhalombatta),
                                                                    length 9cm,
                                                                    diameter 1.3 (top)
                                                                    to 2cm (base);
                                                                    right, models of
                                                                    spoked wheels
                                                                    (various sites);
                                                                    (from Sherratt
                                                                    1987e, after
                                                                    Kovacs and
                                                                    Tihelka).




of the second millennium, with the appearance of fortified centres along the
key Carpathian passes, and plentiful evidence for horse-driving in the shape
of models of spoked wheels and items of antler horse-gear, pre-eminently
bar-shaped cheek-pieces, often elaborately decorated with a compass-drawn
ornament that was soon transferred to gold- and bronzework (Figure 7.8).
In Hungary this is principally associated with a group of cultures con-
veniently designated as Otomani; in Moldavia it is equally typical of
Monteoru: both of them, on a major trade route from the Black Sea, are
characterised by fortifications and chariotry (Sherratt 1993, fig. 7).
   It is now clear from new radiocarbon dates that the series of steppe

                                          221




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     THE   SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION


cultures which succeeded the Catacomb-Graves and their contempor-
aries also came into existence right at the beginning of the second
millennium: west to east, from the Pontic steppes to beyond the Urals, the
Mnogovalikovaya, Timber-Grave (Potapovo phase), and Andronovo
cultures (Figure 7.7). These bordered in the west on the Monteoru and
Otomani cultures of Romania and Hungary, and in the east were in process
of eastward expansion across the steppes - south of a line of forest cultures
(Seima-Turbino-Samussk) which had their own sophisticated socketed
bronze metallurgy, probably of east Asian origin. The originality of these
steppe communities has been emphasised by the recognition of a series of
circular ditched fortifications along the border of the steppe and forest (e.g.
Arkaim and Sintashta: Zdanovich 1988; Gening, Zdanovich and Gening
1992) between the upper Ural and Tobol rivers east of Magnitogorsk. These
amazing structures, with concentric rings of c.60 trapezoidal houses in a
(consciously?) wheel-like array, 150m in diameter, are now known from
some fifteen examples in this area, and may well be much more common in
the steppe zone than has hitherto been recognised. They are associated with
a flourishing metallurgy. This cultural florescence argues for new structures
of trade and contact at this time, and such sites recall contemporary fortified
sites in Slovakia like Barca. Associated with the Sintashta settlement is a
series of cemeteries, including a large 'temple-mound' and its associated
shafts with timber-lined chambers, five of which contained the remains of
two-wheeled vehicles, circular antler cheek-pieces of bridle-bits, and head-
and-hooves burials of horses. In one of these, the impression of the lower
part of the wheel was preserved where it had been sunk beneath the floor-
level, and indicated a ten- or twelve-spoked wheel. It should be emphasised
that little is known of the vehicle-type of steppe chariots apart from the
wheels (i.e. the impression of a multiple-spoke wheel at the eastern end of
the distribution, clay models of four-spoke wheels at the western end). Two
enigmatic representations on pots, of the early and mid-second millennium
respectively (Piggott 1983, 93-4), suggest light, minimal (and thus probably
bentwood) structures. It seems likely that the light vehicle we recognise as
the chariot had its critical development in the steppe zone, in association
with the development of the bridle and bit (and perhaps also a yoke
specifically adapted to equine needs by the development of yoke-saddles). It
is in this context that the distinctive style of compass-drawn ornament is
likely to have spread, over the area from the Pontic steppes to Alalakh (and
later to Mycenae). Did the typical compass-drawn Wellenbandmuster, so
often found on harness-related equipment (Figure 7.8), represent the
spinning, bouncing wheels of the light chariot?17
  This is not, however, to argue for an 'independent invention', carried
south by Aryan hordes. It can reasonably be argued that such a vehicle only
emerged under southern influence. The impetus to develop a fast two-
wheeler for personal transport was an urban rather than a rural necessity,

                                        222




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD   WORLD


and has no obvious precursors in the large four-wheel wagons of the Pit-
Grave tradition. The use of equids for traction, too, was a southern practice.
Its appearance on the northern shore of the Black Sea can only be under-
stood in terms of the growing links with Anatolia, which was itself in-
creasingly linked to Syria and northern Mesopotamia. The establishment of
merchant settlements at cities on the Anatolian plateau, as far north as the
Black Sea, has been established from documentary sources; and it is likely
that links established from north-west Anatolia to the Danube were now
supplemented by coastal connections around the whole of the western
perimeter of the Black Sea. One of the commodities in demand, as well as
metals, is likely to have been horses; and whereas earlier supplies may have
been obtained via the Caucasus, this western route now offered an
alternative. If later second-millennium evidence is anything to go by, this no
doubt also included experienced trainers.18 It was in this connection that
horse and fighting-vehicle might have come together, and a new means of
transport invented on the steppes: a combination of spoked wheels (perhaps
already developed in Anatolia), bentwood construction, and most especially
horse-training and new methods of control. Shortly after 2000 BC, in the
Old Assyrian karum towns of central Anatolia, representations of vehicles
with pairs of four-spoked wheels appear on cylinder-seals from Kiiltepe
(Kanis) near Kayseri; while from Acemhiiyiik (south of Tuzgolii, the great
Salt Lake) comes a set of bronze model wheels with four spokes (Littauer
and Crouwel 1979; 1986). In representations, the Anatolian early second-
millennium two-wheelers look cumbersome and rectangular, pulled by pairs
of badly-drawn equids with nose-rings and bearing heavy yokes probably
without yoke-saddles. More sophisticated machines only appeared a cen-
tury or so later. The earlier examples look like the first attempts to use horse
(rather than hybrid) traction, in a tradition not pre-adapted for such use, by
imitation of an outside model. It is significant, therefore, that these central
Anatolian developments are effectively contemporary with the first evidence
of spoke-wheel vehicles and antler bit-elements on the Pontic and trans-Ural
steppes, and in the Carpathian Basin.19 It seems best to regard this area as
a huge interaction-sphere, in which Anatolia provided the need, and the
western steppe zone the solution. Its genesis must go back to the closing
centuries of the third millennium.
    The creation of the chariot thus exemplifies a theme which has run
throughout this discussion of early uses of the horse - the intimate
relationship between the two sides of the Black Sea: Anatolia and the
Caucasus on the one hand (linked since the Uruk expansion to the Near
Eastern heartland), and on the other the broad belt of open country running
unhindered eastward to the Altai, where mastery of the horse is the key to
success. It also exemplifies a model which seems very widely applicable: an
interactionist interpretation, based on a particular conjunction of circum-
stances, rather than a gradualist one of local, evolutionary change.]


                                          223




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     THE    SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION



CONCLUSION: THE ORIGINS AND SPREAD OF
SECONDARY ANIMAL EXPLOITATION
Previous sections have reviewed evidence for the widespread appearance of
secondary uses and products in the fourth millennium BC. HOW far back
may these innovations be traced, and what were their areas of origin?
    The earliest forms of cereal cultivation in the Near East were closely tied
to restricted areas of seasonally moist soil (Chapter 3), requiring minimum
soil preparation. Neolithic sites first proliferated in the scattered environ-
ments where such cultivation could take place. Expansion beyond those
limits took place in the Early Chalcolithic (later seventh and sixth millennia
BC), particularly in two sorts of location. Samarran cultivators on the fans
of eastern Iraq (on or beyond the 200mm isohyet) pioneered the use of
water-spreading by constructing channels across braided streams (Oates
and Oates 1976). At the same time, Hassuna farmers expanded on the
brown steppe soils of northern Iraq (within the 200mm isohyet). The latter
area offered few opportunities for irrigation; and while precipitation at that
time may have been higher, it is likely that greater soil preparation would
have been necessary for cereal-growing. Since cattle were at that time
becoming widespread on lowland sites, the preconditions for traction
cultivation were present. Although the first representations of ploughs occur
in southern Mesopotamia only in the fourth millennium (Chapter 6), it is
likely that (as with irrigation) ploughs were first developed within Greater
Mesopotamia in the preceding millennia. These considerations would point
to an origin in northern Iraq in the period from the late seventh, sixth or fifth
millennia.
    Although this innovation was probably a basic element in the spread of
irrigation-cultivation on the alluvial plain of Mesopotamia, it may not
have been widely used outside the lowland area. At this stage it is likely
to have been a localised feature of cultivation systems where sufficient num-
bers of cattle were available; and there were still sharp contrasts in the type
of animal husbandry practised in different regions. For instance, faunal
assemblages from the Kermanshah region of western Iran show that down
to the fifth millennium BC the animal economy there was based on meat,
primarily juvenile goat and gazelle (Davis 1982). During the Late Chalco-
lithic (fifth millennium BC), at the same time as major agricultural expansion
was taking place in the Ubaid period, there was a further development of
animal economies on the fringes of Mesopotamia. In Kermanshah the
economy diversified, with the appearance of cattle and an increase in sheep,
which now became more important than goats (Davis 1982). Moreover, the
sheep were now kept to a greater age, and it is likely that wool was being
extensively used for the first time. Wool-sheep may have been present in this
area from an earlier date, since the Sarab figurine (Bokonyi 1974, fig. 44)
seems to indicate the V-shaped staples of hairy medium wool (M. L. Ryder,


                                         224




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    OF   ANIMALS     IN    THE   OLD   WORLD


pers. comm.). Wool-bearing sheep probably spread from the Zagros to the
lowland steppe and semi-desert margins where significant changes were
taking place in the fifth millennium. In southern Palestine and Sinai the
colonisation of new areas in the Ghassulian was associated with a similar
increase in the importance of sheep, and the infilling of the area between
Palestine and Egypt was important in linking the Nile valley with develop-
ments in western Asia.
    The spread of new features within the Fertile Crescent created some of the
conditions for the urbanisation which took place in the fourth millennium.
The conjunction of expanding populations on the alluvium using irrigation
and plough agriculture, with the opportunities for long-distance trade,
resulted in attempts to secure direct supplies of metal, stone and wood. The
growing influence of Mesopotamia and Egypt affected a wide hinterland,
as trading partners and colonies were established in resource-rich areas of
Palestine, Syria, Anatolia and Iran, using both river-transport on the Nile
and Euphrates and land routes with donkeys (Palestine) and camels (Iran).
The sledge, probably used since the invention of the plough, was trans-
formed by the Sumerians into the wagon or cart by the addition of wheels,
as shown in the Uruk pictograms (Piggott 1968); and equids were used as
traction animals for the first time to pull battle-cars in the Early Dynastic
period. In the larger-scale economies of lowland Mesopotamia it became
possible to support a specialised pastoral sector in the interstices of the
irrigated land. Herds of dairy-cattle were kept in marshy areas (as shown by
dairying scenes in reed huts), while wool-flocks were maintained partly by
stubble-grazing. Animal-keeping thus began to move (like the cultivation of
tree-crops) from the sphere of subsistence to that of commodity production,
and manufacturing industry based on wool provided textiles for export.
Secondary products had become an essential part of the urban economy.
    The development of economies based on secondary animal exploitation
thus began as a mosaic of individual innovations, mostly in the semi-arid
areas of the Near East, initially as a response to the problem of adapting
early forms of farming to new types of environment, especially to the oppor-
tunities of open landscapes where it was possible to maintain larger
quantities of livestock. These innovations came together during the period
of rapid economic change leading to the rise of urban communities, and
were disseminated by the expansion of trade-routes linking the early states
with their resource-rich hinterlands. The process opened up a wider
hinterland, from Anatolia through the Caucasus to Iran, in which local
communities - Troy, Maikop, Altyn Depe - were developed by wider
contacts. The introduction of these new elements to the Pontic steppes
created a major area of secondary development and dispersal, carrying new
elements both into central Asia and into eastern Europe. In the forested
conditions of temperate Europe, livestock-keeping had been restricted in
scale by lack of grazing; but the introduction of the plough initiated a more

                                          225




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         THE    SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION


extensive type of agriculture that could support a larger pastoral com-
ponent. The Carpathian Basin acted as an important centre of dispersal
within Europe, and its links to the North European Plain had carried
advanced forms of stock-raising to the Atlantic seaboard by the third
millennium BC.

NOTES

 1. [Note that this type of 'short* longbarrow is a later fourth-millennium type, and not an
    example of the earliest unchambered longbarrows discussed in Chapters 13 and 14.]
 2. [Thrane (1989, 118) makes the same point: 'In view of the number of unchambered long-
    barrow excavations during the last decades it is worth noting that none of these have
    produced ard-marks.' It is noteworthy that the other set of ploughmarks from Poland
    besides those from Sarnowo, the set from fcupawa 15 in Pomerania (Jankowska 1980),
    belong to a group contemporary with Wiorek or Danish EN C/MN I.]
 3. [The two ox-figures and six flat axes were found last century, in 1873, and though the
    findspot is fairly precisely known there is no record of their archaeological context. The
    question of their association thus arises: could the ox-figures be much later, as Klavs
    Randsborg (pers. comm.) has suggested? As part of a recent study (Pieczynski 1985) the
    objects were analysed in Warsaw (and two of the axes also in Heidelberg). The axes show
    a number of impurities typical of the Fahlerz ores used in the northern Carpathians in the
    later fourth millennium (see Chapter 4): 0.5-1.0% of arsenic, 0.02-0.04% of antimony,
    smaller amounts (0.01-0.03%) of silver and nickel. The oxen show 4.0% and 2.3% of
    arsenic respectively (amongst other impurities, representing 0.3% and 0.7% respectively,
    not reported), which would suggest deliberate arsenical alloying. Since this composition
    was not used after the third millennium, this confirms the date of the oxen as pre-Bronze
    Age; and by comparison with the axes the higher arsenic values of the ox-figures suggest
    a different but broadly contemporary origin. (This is supported by their technology: lost-
    wax casting was not introduced to this area before the Bronze Age, or used for animal
    figures before the Hallstatt period.) Where did the ox-figures originate? The lost-wax
    casting method would suggest EBA Anatolia or the Levant at this date, and the examples
    illustrated by Littauer and Crouwel (1973), such as the one from Alaca Hiiyiik near
    Ankara (their No. 4, pi. xxxvii) now in the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, illustrate the
    genre to which the Bytyri figures might belong - specifically, paired cattle pulling wagons.
    The most likely interpretation still seems to me that they are imports from Anatolia (and
    perhaps specifically from the lower Kizil Irmak region, famous for its EBA metal figures),
    at the time of the introduction of ox-traction for wheeled vehicles and ploughs. Such a
    phenomenon would suggest something of the impact and scale of connections implied
    by the new traction usage and technology.]
 4. [The evidence for prehistoric textiles has now been magnificently summarised in a classic
    work by E. J. W. Barber (1991).]
 5. [All crops are cash crops, but some more so than others: the ones mentioned here are
    those in which value is added by secondary production (oil-pressing, cheese-making)
    before distribution and consumption, rather than in the home (cooking).]
 6. [The pictographs distinguish between the different containers used for goats', sheep's, and
    cows' milk (Green 1980, fig. 3).]
 7. [The most sophisticated discusssion of the inter-related processes of natural and cultural
    selection is by Durham (1991, chapter 5). He discusses (1991, 242 and 252) my original
    suggestion, following Simoons, and integrates it with the vitamin D hypothesis: 'the genes
    responsible for adult lactose absorption have evolved to high frequencies in populations
    that (1) have a long-standing tradition of dairying and fresh milk consumption, and (2)
    live in environments of low ultraviolet radiation where vitamin D and metabolic calcium
    are chronically deficient' (279); 'I submit that the memes of dairying and the genes of
    adult lactose absorption coevolved as a function of latitude' (282).]


                                             226




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         OF   ANIMALS      IN   THE   OLD     WORLD

 8. [Historians of the subject may wish to compare the two versions! The accounts differ
    in the following respects: (1) in being more sceptical about early-fourth-millennium
    domestication on the steppes, and preferring a mid-fourth-millennium date; (2) ceasing
    to rely on the evidence of antler 'cheek-pieces' before the undoubted second-millennium
    examples; (3) acknowledging the survival and contribution of local horse populations in
    forested Europe; (4) seeing the chariot as the outcome of steppe technology and Near
    Eastern military needs; and thus, in general, seeing horse-usage on the steppes as being
    more intimately related to Near Eastern developments. In revising this section, I greatly
    benefited from participating in the conference Die Indogermanen und das Pferd in Berlin
    in 1992, now published as Hansel and Zimmer (1994); and also from discussions with
    Viktor Trifonov and Marsha Levine.]
 9. [They are distinguished by size and robusticity: the eastern (open-country) populations
    were larger; and this distinction between 'eastern' and 'western' horses was still evident
    in European domestic populations into the early medieval period. Uerpmann (1990) has
    divided European wild horses into geographical subspecies: Equus ferns ferus for the
    steppe population, E. ferus sylvestris for the north-west European forest population,
    E. ferus lusitanicus for the Iberian population, and E. ferus scythicus for a postulated
    Balkan-Anatolian population. These would all represent 'tarpan' populations, rather than
    Przewalski horses (E. ferus przewalskii), typical for central Asia. (There is, of course, no
    justification for a separate species, E. caballus, for domestic populations.) It also appears
    that there was some geographical overlap between the distribution of wild horses and
    that of other equids, e.g. Equus hydruntinus (a now extinct ass, surviving into the
    Holocene in the Carpathian Basin), and also with Equus hemionus, the onager; further
    east.]
10. Date now released: (KI-5488) 2380 ±120 bc = 3300-2650 cal BC, i.e. post-Sredni Stog.
11. [On this model, the area of genesis of the Pit-Grave culture would be in the Pre-Kuban
    area, north of Krasnodar; in the late Maikop period (parallel to the formation of
    Novotitarovka); that would be my prediction for the area of initial horse domestication,
    too.]
12. [Traces of coloured cloths with geometrical patterns have been observed in a number of
    Pit-Grave burials, e.g. Tri Brata (see discussion in Ecsedy 1979, 38-9).]
13. [And also serving as way-stations to the Caucasus, whose metallurgical repertoire shows
    the influence of precisely the forms discovered at Arslantepe (see Chapter 18).]
14. [The interesting grave at Grofihoflein-Follik in the Austrian Burgenland (Pittioni 1954,
    247), within a stone setting, contained the burial of an adult woman and child, together
    with a 20-year-old mare and foal, cow and a calf, nanny-goat and a kid, ewe and a lamb,
    and also another 4-year-old mare and the skull of another 20-year-old. It was formerly
    thought to belong to the late-third-millennium Guntramsdorf-Drafiburg group (loosely
    described as 'Corded Ware' by Pittioni), but is now considered to belong to the early
    second-millennium Mad'arovce culture, chariot-using and closely related to its east-
    Hungarian neighbour Otomani.]
15. [The arguments set out in the preceding section now throw doubt on the interpretation of
    a set of antler objects which were interpreted by Lichardus (1980) as the cheek-pieces of
    bits. The whole subject of pre-Bronze Age bridle-bits has been recently reviewed by Dietz
    (1992), who comprehensively and critically reviews the evidence for perforated antler
    tines and concludes that all of them are better interpreted as toggles or in ways
    unconnected with horse harnessing, and not essentially different from the perforated
    antler tines common in Neolithic lake-villages. As described above, however, this does
    not invalidate the reconstruction of horse domestication; it merely removes a potentially
    convenient (but actually misleading) artefactual marker for its spread.]
16. [These tombs are especially interesting for the numbers of graves with specialist metal-
    casting equipment, probably making use of local ores. Some fortified sites are known
    (the upper levels of Mikhailovka, the Bayda fortress on an island in the Dnepr); and
    a remarkable circular temple-mound has been excavated at Molochansk on the Ingul
    (Pustovalov 1994).]


                                             227




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         THE    SECONDARY          EXPLOITATION

17. [Following this line of thought: may that also be the origin of that archetypal Aryan
    symbol, the swastika (four spokes, felloe omitted, with trailing lines suggesting move-
    ment)? The layout of the Arkaim settlement, with its outer circle of houses arranged in
    four circumcurrent 'wings', offers a plausible origin.]
18. [No doubt speaking Indo-Aryan (eastern Indo-European) languages: see Chapter 19.]
19. [Within the steppe region, the outlines of two regional schools of chariotry may perhaps
    be discerned: a western one (extending into the Carpathian Basin) using four-spoked
    wheels and bar-bits; and a more easterly one, represented for instance at Sintashta, with
    multiple-spoked wheels and circular bits. There was considerable mixing and hybrid-
    isation between them. Both contributed to the development of Near Eastern chariotry
    (Moorey 1986), via both the central Anatolian and Caucasian routes, with the latter
    tradition extending eastwards and eventually reaching China.]




                                             228




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:28:56 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                              8



   Wool, Wheels and Ploughmarks:
    Local Developments or Outside
  Introductions in Neolithic Europe?
             (Submitted             1985,         published               1987)

In the 1982 issue of the Bulletin of the Institute of Archaeology, Dr J. C.
Chapman devoted an article entitled The Secondary Products Revolution
and the Limitations of the Neolithic' (Chapman 1983) to a critical dis-
cussion of ideas which I had put forward in two papers, in 1980 and 1981.1
This short note is intended to remove some of the misconceptions in
Chapman's review. The following observations refer to points raised by
Chapman: page references are to his article.
   The cart (p. 111). The appearance of the wagon and cart in Europe is one
of the clearest examples of an introduced technology (Childe 1951; Piggott
1979). There is no evidence for wheeled vehicles in Europe before the mid-
fourth millennium BC2 (the beginning of the Baden and Ezero cultures).
Claims of an earlier origin in the Balkans are based solely on finds of clay
discs taken to represent model wheels. Since it is often hard to distinguish
the clay wheels of model vehicles from clay spindle whorls, perforated clay
discs can only be taken as evidence for use of the wheel when models of the
vehicles themselves are present. This is the case in the Early Dynastic period
in southern Mesopotamia, but such models are completely absent from the
Balkan Neolithic and Copper Age, though they do appear with the Baden

This was published in the Bulletin of the Institute of Archaeology (University of
London), and was a reply to a review-article there by John Chapman, in which
he offered an autonomist view of European development in the later Neolithic -
which dated the appearance of the light plough to what I have called (Chapter 5)
the mature Neolithic - and sought an origin for transhumance in continuity from
Palaeolithic hunting practices. (Publication of this reply was delayed by the
appearance of a special edition of the Bulletin, celebrating the opening of the
Institute in Regent's Park in 1937.) John and I still disagree on this, but usually
over a drink. Indeed, the principal interpretative change signalled in this paper is
to attribute the dietary change which is reflected in jugs, cups, etc. to the arrival
in Europe, not of milk, but alcohol (see Chapter 15).

                                            229




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   WOOL,       WHEELS       AND      PLOUGHMARKS:


culture. There is no reason         consider the 'model wheels' claimed for
Gumelnitsa as other than s p . d e whorls, and quite irrelevant to the prob-
lem of wheeled vehicles (Piggott 1983, 17).
    The plough (p. 112). The earliest representations of ploughs are those in
the Uruk IV pictographs. I speculated (Chapter 3) that the light plough may
have come into use some two millennia earlier in the Hassuna-Halaf period
in the moist steppe areas on the edges of the Mesopotamian Plain, in parallel
with the development of simple irrigation in Samarran contexts on valley-
edge fans. The recent find of ploughmarks in a Susa A context (c.5000 BC)
in Khuzestan (Wright et al. 1980) fits very happily with this suggestion.
This firm evidence from the Near East contrasts with the absence of com-
parable indications in Europe before the fourth millennium BC. The 'terri-
torial evidence supported by certain technological data' is hardly enough to
persuade one otherwise.
    The evidence from buried soil-surfaces preserved under settlement-
remains, earthworks or peat is, of course, crucial and is by no means con-
fined to the period after 3500 BC which is when plentiful traces of ploughing
appear. These contexts can provide evidence for a variety of soil-preparation
practices besides the use of the traction-plough, and need to be scrutinised
carefully for such traces. Convincing ploughmarks made with the light
plough (ard) in temperate Europe take the form of the criss-cross furrows
that result from cross-ploughing. The earliest and best example is the
175 square metres preserved under a long barrow with three megalithic
chambers of EN C/MN I date (c.3500 BC) at Snave near Dreslette on Fyn
(Figure 7.1; Thrane 1982). These criss-cross furrows are the earliest un-
ambiguous ard-marks in Europe. Other possible traces of cultivation may
be earlier, and one candidate for such an interpretation is the parallel traces
of cultivation beneath Barrow 8 of the longbarrow cemetery at Sarnowo
in Kujavia. The Sarnowo furrows are wide, unidirectional3 channels about
20cm apart (D^browski 1971). Their chronological position is bracketed by
an underlying pit with a radiocarbon date calibrating to c.4500 BC and the
overlying barrow, which dates to the mid-fourth millennium BC. It has
usually been assumed that these are ard-marks made by animal traction: but
it is also possible that Neolithic gardening techniques included features such
as 'lazy beds' (cultivation ridges) which would also leave parallel traces.
Such ridged cultivation is characteristic of intensive horticultural systems
without animal traction in many parts of the world, and it seems highly
likely that various intensive forms of cultivation would have appeared by
this stage in the European Neolithic. One might guess at the possibility of
hoe-based cultivation in the Mediterranean and central Europe, with a zone
of spade-based cultivation in the north. Some hint of this is present in the
design of European ards of the second millennium: the sole- and crook-ard
in the south and the bow- or spade-ard in the north, loosely based on the
design of the hoe and spade respectively.4 Spade-based cultivation may have


                                            230




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        LOCAL    DEVELOPMENTS             OR   OUTSIDE        INTRODUCTIONS?


continued in widespread use in parallel with traction cultivation, and may
have been prevalent in areas such as Ireland (Caulfield 1978).
   The example of 'ploughmarks' quoted by Chapman from a time before
my postulated introduction of the ard, however, raises problems as to
whether they have anything to do with agriculture at all. A rectangular
enclosure some 150m long by 5m wide at Brezno in north-west Bohemia is
dated to the Early Eneolithic (i.e. late TRB, C.3600 BC - and only briefly ante-
dating my ard horizon) and is distantly related to the Kujavian longbarrow
(Pleinerova 1980; 1981). It was probably originally covered by a low
mound. Within this, and parallel to its long axis, are short, discontinuous
shallow ditches or furrows. These are not the accidentally preserved remains
of an old land surface beneath the barrow, but - as their orientation shows
- part of its construction. Whether they are traces of internal divisions or
some more regular preparation of the surface is not clear, but they are in no
way comparable to the convincing series of Bronze Age and later Neolithic
criss-cross ploughmarks such as those from Denmark. They may have some
connection with the Sarnowo furrows, but they do not prove ploughing.
   Also quite irrelevant to this problem is the so-called 'rope-traction ard'
from Satrupholmer Moor, Angeln (Steensberg 1973), which is actually a
common form of Erteb0lle canoe-paddle, closely comparable to the recent
find of an elaborately decorated example from the underwater site of
Tybrind Vig off Zealand (Andersen 1983; conveniently illustrated in Jensen
1982, fig. 18). The two holes in the Satrup one are probably for repair
(S0ren Andersen, pers. comm.). The unlikely scenario of precocious plough-
ing around a lake in Schleswig Holstein can thus be replaced by the more
plausible idea of canoeing across it.s
   One more type of evidence should be noted, since it has sometimes been
used to argue for an earlier use of ox-traction for ploughing. This is the
morphology of cattle bones from the early fifth-millennium BC site of
Vadastra on the lower Danube in Romania (Ghejie and Mateesco 1973;
Mateesco 1975). On the basis of deformation in the epiphyses of the
humerus and femur, it was suggested that the forelimbs of subadult animals
had been subjected to vertical compression as the result of carrying loads.
While this phenomenon deserves further study, it cannot by itself be taken
as evidence of the use of bovines for traction.
   In short: all the evidence confirms the antiquity of ploughing in the Near
East, and its much later appearance in Europe - most probably in the mid-
fourth millennium BC.
   Milking and alcohol (pp. 112, 116). My views on this subject have
progressed considerably since 1981, and are summarised in Chapter 7. I
would no longer directly associate the emergence of lactose tolerance with
the horizon of drinking-vessels which characterises later-fourth- and early-
third-millennium pottery assemblages in Europe, on which more below.
Further data on lactose tolerance show that it is present only in relatively


                                            231




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   WOOL,       WHEELS       AND      PLOUGHMARKS:


low frequencies in Mediterranean and Near Eastern populations, though
much higher in northern Europe (Piazza et al. 1981). For this reason it
is very unlikely to have been associated with the initial spread of farming
populations (contra Chapman, p. 116). Flatz and Rotthauwe (1977), how-
ever, have provided a plausible evolutionary mechanism for its appearance
in temperate European populations some time after the spread of agriculture
to northern Europe. They point to a selective advantage given by the ability
to drink unprocessed milk in the prevention of rickets. This calcium-
deficiency disease is characteristic of areas of low sunlight and thus low
levels of vitamin D production. Although rickets must have been an endemic
problem in northern latitudes,6 a cereal-based diet, deficient in vitamin D,
would create a particular problem in this respect. Since milking was an
advantageous way of using the rich pasture grasses that would have colon-
ised abandoned fields in temperate Europe, lactose tolerance had a selective
advantage among north European farming populations and could indeed
have emerged during Neolithic times [cf. Bogucki 1984], although it prob-
ably reached present frequencies only much later. The implication of all this
is that milk was probably not drunk directly in early times in any case, but
only used in the form of yoghurt, koumish and cheese. This added com-
plication was no doubt one factor in the relatively late emergence of milk-
based pastoralism in the Near East (Davis 1984).
    The interpretation of European fourth- and third-millennium pottery
assemblages with an emphasis on drinking equipment is an interesting
question on which I have done further work (Sherratt 1987). These new
forms contrast with the wide, shallow vessels that dominate Balkan Neo-
lithic and Copper Age assemblages, and which in view of the above dis-
cussion may well have held milk products, as Chapman quite rightly notes.
The horizon of drinking vessels from Troy II via Baden and Globular
Amphorae to Corded Ware and Bell-beakers, however, continues to demand
explanation. Professor Renfrew (1972) originally asserted the importance of
the introduction of wine (see below on tree crops) in explaining the appear-
ance of this assemblage in the Aegean. This is most probably the case in that
area, but would not explain the very similar vessels in the Baden culture,
since the wild grape Vitis sylvestris - although present in temperate Europe
- does not contain enough sugar to ferment, and cultivated vines were not
grown in central Europe before the Roman period. Chapman is almost
certainly right, however, in pointing to the range of alcoholic beverages
potentially available by this time: mead, beer and (as I originally suggested)
koumish. This wider range of sugars and carbohydrates was itself partly due
to the complex of economic changes which I have described,7 while the male
ethos of social drinking was closely related to the social effects of an en-
larged pastoral sector. What thus seems to appear in common over large
areas of Europe is a social practice (itself arguably Anatolian and Near
Eastern in origin) rather than a particular beverage: though the sophisti-


                                            232




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

          LOCAL    DEVELOPMENTS            OR   OUTSIDE          INTRODUCTIONS?



                                                            <J         9
                                                                                  60
            bipartite bowl

     a      ju9                                                                   50
            cup
      D     copper tube                                                           40
      )     f l i n t blade
            copper awl                                                            30
            bone awl
            Dentalium beads                                                       20
     Cu     copper traces                                                         15
      A     f l i n t arrowhead                                                   10
            Cardium shell                                        II nil II 9 H
                                                          oo «»» hi""             5
            pierced -tooth
                                                                                  0
                                                           children
            double-ox burial                              (unsexcd)


                                                 ALS6N£MEDI
                                           Baden Culture
8.1 Grave goods with burials in the Baden culture cemetery of Alsonemedi,
Hungary, arranged according to age and sex. From Sherratt (1976); data from
J. Korek, 'Ein Griiberfeld der Badener Kultur bei AlsonemediActa Archaeologica
Acad. Sci. Hung. I, 35-91 (1951). [Note the association of drinking sets with
paired cattle burials (cow and calf): see also Figs 8.2 and 15.4.]

cated, sunshine-rich areas of the east Mediterranean, with their wine and
silver drinking-vessels, seem to have exercised a powerful stylistic influence
over neighbouring parts of Europe. Both drinking vessels and wheeled
vehicles rapidly became symbols of the elite. The combination of equipment
for drinking and driving in the rich Baden culture graves of the Alsonemedi
cemetery c.3500 BC is the precursor of a tradition of ostentatious burial that
was to last throughout prehistory (Figures 8.1 and 8.2; also 15.4).
    Wool (p. 113). It is hard to understand Chapman's comments on this
subject. Textile experts (Ryder 1983; Barber 1991) are agreed that wool was
a late introduction to Europe - as, incidentally, to Egypt: it first became
widespread in the Near East c.4000 BC8 and appeared in Europe c.3000 BC
(Chapter 7). Of course there were loom-made textiles before this time, but
these were of plant fibres - linen, nettle or lime bast. The absence of flax
seeds in botanical samples from particular sites is scarcely surprising, and
in no way contradicts this point. There is no reason to suppose that Balkan
Neolithic loom-weights, spindle whorls and textile-like designs on pottery
reflect anything other than the production of linen textiles, of the kind
plentifully preserved in Swiss lake-villages. [The absence, not only of wool

                                             233




                                This content downloaded from
              128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   WOOL,          WHEELS    AND     PLOUGHMARKS:

         ALS6N£MEDI



                                                                              4
                     r
                              ?


                                                                          %
                                                     o

                                                                                  /



8.2 Plan of the cemetery of Alsonemedi (schematic: after Banner 1956, redrawn).
The paired-cattle burials, accompanying graves 3&5 and 28, are represented
conventionally [new drawing].

but even of other textiles known at the time, was a striking feature of the
complete set of clothing preserved with the late fourth-millennium 'Iceman'
of the Hauslabjoch, who was dressed entirely in leather and fur, underneath
a grass cloak: Spindler 1994, 132-47.]
   Tree crops (p. 113). The economically important tree crops of southern
Europe and western Asia were dates, figs, grapes and olives. Their domesti-
cation is a feature of the fourth millennium BC, or perhaps a little earlier in
Mesopotamia (dates) and its surrounding hilly flanks (grapes). Vine and
olive were particularly significant as sources of liquid commodities that
could be grown as 'cash crops' and widely traded. The various members of
the Prunus family mentioned by Chapman, which flourish in the forest-
steppe margins and light woodland, are hardly comparable in importance.
   Transhumance (p. 114). Chapman's position is summed up in his sen-
tence: 'The importance of upland grazing had been recognised and exploited
since the Palaeolithic; there was no reason for this long-term adaptation to
cease before the Bronze Age.' This Higgsian view of the world can surely no
longer be maintained. Late Pleistocene hunting groups undoubtedly moved
between upland and lowland grazing areas; but postglacial afforestation
intervened between this and the transhumant grazing system linked to
Roman and later urban markets for animal products. These two phenomena
reflect different historical situations, not two ends of a continuous process.
Upland pastures had to be created from the woodland, and this was a slow
process. Some small-scale flock movements in marginal areas no doubt took
place in the Neolithic: but the rationale for large-scale sheep rearing only
became available with wool - and only assumed any importance in the late
Bronze and Iron Ages (cf. Figure 2.2). Lewthwaite (e.g. 1981) has con-

                                            234




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        LOCAL    DEVELOPMENTS             OR    OUTSIDE        INTRODUCTIONS?


vincingly demonstrated the subtleties of this process in the west Medi-
terranean.
   Mining and quarrying (p. 114). There is more justification here for
Chapman's strictures, in that the single sentence at issue (Chapter 6) con-
flated a number of points. Mining began, in an area from western Russia to
Britain and from Poland to the Balkans, around 4000 BC. The context in
which this took place was the shift from a Bandkeramik type of wedge
technology exemplified by stone 'shoelast adzes' to a true axe technology in
flint, classically represented by north European thin- and thick-butted forms
but also characteristic of later Gumelnitsa (e.g. Berciu 1961, 419, fig. 197;
Paunescu 1970,297, fig. 33). In the North European Plain this clearly reflects
the need to clear forests in newly-colonised areas, and this may be true on a
smaller scale even in Bulgaria (cf. the analysis of Detev's Plovdiv site maps
in Sherratt 1976, fig. S10). Its coincidence with the beginning of copper-
mining, however, reminds us that it may equally be related to the signifi-
cance of stone axes as a medium of exchange, and it occurred at the same
time as the movements of Wolhynian flint blades and early domestic horses
noted above. All this preceded my postulated arrival of the plough.
   This new axe technology, however, provided the means for the greatly
increased scale of forest clearance in the mid-fourth millennium which was
associated with the beginnings of plough cultivation and the expanded role
of livestock which went with it. This is most eloquently shown in pollen
diagrams from long-occupied areas such as the Aldenhovener Platte, where
a pollen diagram prepared by A. J. Kalis (Kalis 1988; Liming and Kalis
1988) shows a dramatic increase in open country during the fourth millen-
nium BC, by contrast with the tiny impact of earlier farming. The same effect
is apparent in Denmark in the so-called B-Landnam (Troels-Smith 1953) of
the Danish Middle Neolithic, with its permanent clearances and plentiful
occurrence of Plantago lanceolata. The massive increase in the scale of flint
mining which accompanied this major assault on the forests is well demon-
strated in the area supplied by the largest of the Polish flint-mining com-
plexes, Krzemionki (Lech and Leligdowicz 1980, fig. 23). In the TRB period,
the overwhelming preponderance of its distinctive axes occur within 100km
of the source (Figure 8.3, above). In Globular Amphora contexts, after 3400
BC, the volume of production had undergone a massive expansion, reflected
in a fivefold increase in its distribution radius, with large numbers occurring
up to 400km away, in Kujavia (Figure 8.3, below).
   Once again, it is the largely forested nature of Neolithic Europe which
has to be borne in mind when discussing changes in subsistence economy.
The first farming systems were very small in scale and occupied only a tiny
fraction of the landscape, as a glance at any of Sielmann's (1971) maps will
reveal. The importance of the plough in temperate Europe was that it first
made larger areas of cleared land an advantage, so creating the necessary
preconditions for any form of specialised animal husbandry [cf. Figure 2.1].


                                            235




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   WOOL,       WHEELS       AND      PLOUGHMARKS:




8.3 Distribution of axes of banded flint in Poland, around the mining centre
(starred) of Krzemionki Opatowskie: above, in the TRB period (4000-3400 BC);
below, in the Globular Amphora period (3400-2800 BC). Redrawn after Lech and
Leligdowicz (1980). A massive increase in the scale of forest clearance is indicated.
   This completes a review of the substantive points offered by Chapman,
and his other opinions are perhaps best discussed in a more general context.
A main aim of my 1981 article was to demonstrate that the European
evidence cannot be considered in isolation; the Near East and its temperate
European hinterland must be discussed from the fourth millennium on-
wards as a potentially interacting system in which innovations appeared

                                            236




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        LOCAL    DEVELOPMENTS             OR    OUTSIDE        INTRODUCTIONS?


in Europe in 'package' form, having had a longer developmental history
further east (Figure 0.4). This conception is not novel: indeed it precisely
characterises our present view of the origins and spread of farming itself.
What I am in effect postulating is a second generation of pastoral and agri-
cultural techniques, originating in the dry areas which make up a large part
of western Asia and the adjacent steppes, and appearing in different parts
of an area stretching from the Pontus to Arabia. Since these individual
innovations were widely applicable within this zone, they rapidly spread9
and interacted to produce a more differentiated pattern of agriculture than
the relatively archaic, small-scale systems which continued to characterise
forested Europe where pasture had to be won step by step from the forest.
    It is not surprising, therefore, that experiments in animal-keeping began
earlier in the east than in Europe, whose relative isolation ('the autonomy of
the south-east European Copper Age' in Colin Renfrew's expressive phrase)
meant that even in fairly open areas such as eastern Hungary, many of these
innovations remained unknown. For this reason, European horticulture -
like European metallurgy - pursued its own course, no doubt developing
more intensive hoe or spade cultivation in some areas, slash and burn
systems in others. Lacking a complementary package of new livestock and
pastoral techniques, however, Europe in the Copper Age did not undergo
the cumulative and sustained pattern of interactive growth that character-
ised this period in the Near East. The isolated elements that did spread to
the more open areas of Europe - like horses in Hungary - made no further
headway. Only when the full package was assembled could fundamental,
systemic changes occur. Basic to all the others in temperate Europe was the
use of the plough, with its logic of extending the area under cultivation, even
at the cost of lower yields per hectare, and sustaining a larger pastoral sector
on the fallow. This pastoral sector then provided the traction animals for
cultivation. It was this linkage that built in a cumulative advantage to forest
clearance, and made possible the expansion of livestock rearing and the in-
tegration of new practices.it is no accident, therefore, that both wool-sheep
and horses seem to have spread across Europe in the wake of the plough and
the accelerated rate of forest clearance.10 The complementary nature of the
various elements makes it a classic case of what Dr Joseph Needham (1970)
has called 'package transmission'.
   The incentive to adopt new techniques was no doubt building up in Euro-
pean farming communities, as a result of the filling-up of optimal zones for
simple cultivation, the deleterious effects on many of these landscapes of
two thousand years of previous cultivation, and the continuing growth of
population (Figure 8.4). But the historical process which brought about the
transfer of these innovations had no necessary relation to the long-term
ecological dynamic which made them desirable. Innovations do not always
magically appear when they are needed: there is an element of contingency
which is essential to a true understanding of any historical situation.


                                            237




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                   J
                    WOOL,              EELS   AND   PLOUGHMARKS:

  SMALL-SCALE       CULTI^             )N




 LARGE-SCALE       CULTIVATION




8.4 The contrasting logics of intensive and extensive farming with a pre-industrial
technology: above, small-area, intensive cultivation ('horticulture'); below,
extensive farming, which may be either swidden or plough-based (cf. Fig. 2.1).
A long-term trend from horticulture to a greater reliance on swidden may have
made the plough such an attractive innovation in fourth-millennium Europe
ISherratt, 1980, unpublished].




                                              238




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

       LOCAL    DEVELOPMENTS          OR   OUTSIDE       INTRODUCTIONS?




expansion of western technology C.AD 1600: adapted from maps in E. Werth,
Grabstock, Hacke und Pflug, Ludwigsburg 1954. This congruence suggests that
both should be considered as aspects of a 'traction complexwhich spread out
from a single nuclear area, rather than as parallel developments in several places,
like irrigation.




                                        239




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 2fff on Thu, 01 Jan 1976 12:34:56 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   WOOL,       WHEELS       AND     PLOUGHMARKS:


Whereas the basic options of labour intensification (irrigation, terracing,
land reclamation) are widely available, those involving a specific technology
or gene-pool (plough cultivation, woolly sheep) are not. How else to explain
the limited distribution of plough and cart in a narrow belt of the Old
World before AD 1500? (Werth 1954; Figure 8.5). These features can only
be modelled by a process of contagious spread, to explain the coherent
distribution area of plough cultivation on a global scale. [This spatial
association between plough and cart, echoing the chronological association
of their introduction to Europe, strengthens the idea of a traction complex,
with its own technology, ideology, and attitude to domestic livestock.]
   The factors which controlled the spread of these features in Europe were
no different in principle from those governing other innovations. In so far
as some of these leave less ambiguous traces than does prehistoric farming,
they may help us to reconstruct the processes at work. Copper metallurgy
provides an obvious example. The tradition of copper-working which de-
veloped in south-east Europe during the Copper Age was quite idiosyncratic
and unrelated to contemporary Near Eastern industries (Renfrew 1969): its
pure copper and simple casting techniques allied to an extensive use of forg-
ing distinguish it from the more efficient and sophisticated systems based on
alloying and the bivalve mould. These latter innovations appeared in Europe
in the third millennium BC, as a result of new contacts with the Caucasus
and Anatolia (Chernykh 1978; Chapter 4) - a set of events ultimately linked
to the expansion of long-distance trading networks around the rapidly
urbanising areas of Mesopotamia. An isolated and independent tradition of
copper-working, with an archaic technology, was brought into contact
with a wider pool of experience. If this model is acceptable for metallurgical
development, then why not for agriculture and pastoralism?
   The contrast between this conception and Chapman's view of plough
cultivation and woolly sheep appearing spontaneously among the in-
habitants of Neolithic Europe is one that is probably not resolvable by refer-
ence to the ambiguous evidence for these features which survives in the
archaeological record. It relates to more abstract expectations about the
way the world works, and how it has done in the past. Neolithic Europe was
an altogether more curious and interesting place than a homogenised image
of 'prehistoric farming' would suggest; and not to see the contrasts is to
blur the picture. What I have tried to show is that a piecemeal approach
is inadequate to understand the nature of the problem, and unhelpful in
making the most of the evidence available. Which conception prevails in the
light of future evidence and debate I am content to leave to the test of time.




                                            240




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

           LOCAL     DEVELOPMENTS            OR   OUTSIDE         INTRODUCTIONS?

NOTES

 1.1 have dealt only with the main points raised by Chapman, and have not attempted to
    correct errors of transcription or to question his somewhat curious phraseology. I hope
    that this brief statement will clarify some of the issues involved.
 2. Since I do not quote individual radiocarbon dates in this article, I have used calibrated
    dates and date-ranges throughout in order to avoid confusion. Terms such as 'Neolithic'
    and 'Copper Age' are used in a general sense, since local usages are inconsistent. My use
    of 'Copper Age' would not include Baden.
 3. Dr Magdalena Midgely points out to me that recent excavation of a further area of the
    old land surface has revealed criss-cross marks as well as unidirectional furrows
    (Gabalowna 1970; Wiklak 1980). They would thus seem to represent genuine plough-
    marks. By analogy with other areas, they would date to the later part of the possible
    time-bracket. [The often-quoted radiocarbon date of 3620 ± 60 bc (Bakker et al. 1969,
    7), it must be emphasised, is a single determination from a pit preceding the barrow (and
    most probably also the furrows).]
 4. Though hypothetical in Europe, this relationship between hoe and plough design can be
    documented for Egypt both from tomb-paintings and actual objects. Neolithic soil-
    preparation practices are illuminatingly discussed in Schultz-Klinken (1976), partly
    summarised in Liming (1980).
 5. The idea of a rope-traction ard as a precursor of the true plough but pulled by human
    muscle-power is a pervasive one. Recent ploughs drawn by human traction are confined
    to the rather special circumstances of south-east Asian paddy-farming or irrigation
    horticulture. The basic advantage of the plough is to apply a new source of energy; and
    students are no substitute for draught oxen (pace Liming and Meurers-Balke 1980, fig.
   22!).
 6. It is not without significance that this condition occurred already among Neanderthal
    populations, the first permanent occupants of the tundra zone; indeed, it was this con-
    dition, in one of the classic early finds of a Neanderthal skeleton, that gave rise to his
    persistent portrayal as a shambling idiot.
 7. Alcohol may not have been widely known in Neolithic Europe - though no doubt their
    knowledge of hallucinogenic mushrooms was considerable, as was that of their
    Mesolithic predecessors.
 8. Textile remains are more frequently preserved in the dry conditions of the Near East; a
    good example are the pieces of cloth from the Nahal Mishmar caves (Bar-Adon 1980),
    dated to the fourth millennium BC. Of the 45 samples tested, 37 were of linen, eight of
    wool. Remains of a loom were also found.
 9. The scale of long-distance connections which existed in the Near East at least from the
    beginning of the Holocene is well demonstrated by the length of the obsidian exchange
    networks in Neolithic times. Obsidian distribution in forested Europe never achieved
    such distances.
10. There were, of course, already great contrasts in the extent of deforestation, especially
    from east to west. While the plough seems to have been rapidly accepted in most areas,
    wool-sheep may be much later in areas such as the British Isles.




                                               241




                                  This content downloaded from
                128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:33:56 UTC
                          All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                        10
  Two New Finds of Wooden Wheels
   from Later Neolithic and Early
        Bronze Age Europe
                                    (1986)

T h e purpose of this note is to draw attention to two recent finds of wooden
wheels, one of which extends the area of Pontic vehicle burials into Balkan
Europe and the other takes examples of Neolithic wheels in Europe back to
a still earlier period. While the former find suggests the importance of the
Pit-Grave culture in transmitting innovations from the Caucasus around
the northern shore of the Black Sea c.3000 BC, the latter suggests the possi-
bility of an earlier derivation for European wheeled vehicles, possibly via
Anatolia.1


PLACHIDOL, NEAR TOLBUKHIN, NORTH-EAST BULGARIA
(PANAYOTOV       AND   DERGACHOV          1984,         107-9)

The site is a cemetery of six tumuli belonging to the intrusive 'ochre grave'
group, and was excavated in 1979. Tumulus I was 7.30m high and 50-5m
in diameter. Seven metres south of the centre of the mound, at a depth of
4.90m, was a rectangular pit (Figure 9.1) orientated east-west; apparently
not the original central burial of the tumulus but dug into a subsequent
extension. The pit (Grave 1) contained the crouched inhumation burial of
an adult female (c.25 years) facing north. The skeleton lay on a mass of

Stuart Figgott's magisterial book on wheeled vehicles (1983) provided (as Gordon
Childe foresaw it would) the best demonstration of the transmission of advanced
technology from the Near East to Europe, which no one has seriously questioned.
Since the wheel appears in Europe at the same time as the first evidence for
ploughing, it strengthens the idea of a 'traction complex' as being an introduction
there. This brief note added two pieces of new material to Figgott's corpus; and
I have included some photographs which I took of a simple cart still in use in
Portugal in 1990. Figgott's book has been a lasting influence, not just as a source-
book but as a model for the way in which technology must be seen in a cultural
and social context.

                                       242




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:26:35 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

     FROM    LATER    NEOLITHIC       AND   EARLY     BRONZE      AGE    EUROPE



 PLACHIDOL Tumulus I Grave 1




 a Wooden wheels (actually found)   c Planks covering pit

 b Wooden wheels (conjectured)      d Remains of organic (felt?) covering under skeleton

9.1 The Plachidol wheel-burial, as excavated (drawn by Keith Bennett after the
plan and section by Panayotov and Dergachev).

plant material covering the bottom of the pit, and had red ochre sprinkled
on its head and feet. There were no grave goods.
    The pit was surrounded by a ledge, 50-90cm wide and 10-15cm deep,
on which wooden beams were placed lengthwise over the pit to roof it. The
eastern end of this ledge was partly destroyed, but in the two corners of
the western end of this ledge lay a pair of solid wooden disc-wheels. They
appear to be made of single pieces of wood, and have a diameter of 75cm.
Each wheel has an integral nave projecting on both sides with a circular hole
for the axle: no other details are given. The circular hole indicates that the
wheels rotated about a fixed axle and were held in place by a linchpin: the
normal type for this period (Figure 9.2, bottom).
    Tumulus I was the largest of the group, and had originally been crowned
by a stone anthropomorphic sculpture. Although the excavation report men-
tions no other burial in this tumulus, the anthropological report (Jordanov
and Michailova 1984) lists four more (two adult males and an adult female).
Tumulus II contained nine burials (four of children), all with red ochre,
but rare grave goods; two adults each had a copper ring and flint flake. It
had also originally been marked by an anthropomorphic sculpture. Tumuli
III, IV and V each contained only a single burial of an adult male with

                                        243




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:26:35 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                 Two     NEW   FINDS    OF    WOODEN      WHEELS


                     \     ^      X     \     \




                                                      Rotating axle




to a rotating axle; below, removable wheels held on a fixed axle by linchpins. The
cart shown at the top can be lifted bodily off its axle (cf. Fig. 9.3); the one below
can be jacked up for the removal of individual wheels. With a fixed axle, the
wheels can rotate independently of one another.
artificially deformed skull, with ochre but no grave-goods. Tumulus VI was
not excavated.
   The Plachidol ochre-grave Tumulus cemetery is one of ten known from
Bulgaria, preponderantly in the north-east. Approximately twice this num-
ber are known from Romania (mostly in Moldavia and the Dobrudja); and
many hundreds are known from eastern Hungary (Ecsedy 1979). While
excavations of some dozen tumuli in Hungary have repeatedly revealed
square, plank-roofed chambers with ochre burials and few grave goods,
none has so far revealed traces of a wheeled vehicle. All these tumuli are
outliers - in areas which are themselves steppe enclaves - of the great mass
of Pit-Grave tumuli on the Pontic steppes (Hausler 1971). They are most
reasonably interpreted as culturally autonomous groups penetrating from
the Pontic steppes into open areas within the territories of their western
neighbours. Intruders and indigenes maintained their own traditions of
burial side by side. The burials in the Plachidol tumuli closely resemble those
known from the Pontic steppes; the arrangement in Tumulus I Grave 1 is
precisely paralleled by burials such as that in the famous Tri Brata and

                                        244




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:26:35 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

     FROM   LATER    NEOLITHIC       AND   EARLY     BRONZE      AGE    EUROPE


neighbouring Arkhara tumuli near Elista on the Kalmyk Steppe (Piggott
1983, figs 23-5). This was the most elaborate form of interment in the Pit-
Grave culture, and no doubt indicates elite status. The fact that the
Plachidol I wheel-burial was that of a woman is thus particularly interesting.
   Some forty radiocarbon dates are available from Pit-Grave tumuli in the
southern Ukraine, covering the later fourth and earlier third millennia BC.
Dates for tumuli in Romania and Hungary all fall in the later part of this
period. These dates are parallel to those of the Baden and Ezero cultures, in
Hungary and Bulgaria respectively, confirming the contemporary existence
of these groups side by side. A date of c.3000 BC would thus be appropriate
for the Plachidol cemetery.


ZURICH, SWITZERLAND; 'AKAD.' SITE, NEAR TO
TRESSEHAUS' (RUOFF 1978; WOYTOWITSCH   1985)

Investigations by U. Ruoff on urban rescue sites at the edge of Lake Zurich
have revealed a series of waterlogged occupations belonging to the later
third millennium BC. At the 'Pressehaus' site (Ruoff 1978; Piggott 1983, 51)
excavated in 1976 a pair of wheels and their connecting axle were
discovered stuck in the mud with a third nearby, near to the palisaded
perimeter of a Corded Ware settlement. These wheels were of a more com-
plex construction, and on a different principle of attachment to the axle,
fromjthe other solid, tripartite or single-piece disc wheels known from third-
millennium contexts in Europe (van der Waals 1964). The two (or perhaps
three, since the upper parts were truncated) planks of which the wheel was
composed were held together by three battens with a trapezoid section let
into the outer face of the wheel. Moreover, the wheels, which lacked naves,
had a square hole which acted as a mortice for the axle to which they were
thus firmly fixed. The whole element of wheels plus axle thus turned as a
unit - the axle had a circular section (apart from its morticed ends) and the
body of the vehicle sat directly on top of it (Figure 9.2, top).
    After this find, fragments of a similar wheel (along with a wooden yoke)
were then noticed among old finds from Vinelz on the Bielersee, also prob-
ably of Corded Ware date. Radiocarbon estimates on Corded Ware contexts
in Switzerland fall into the range of 2800-2600 BC. (They are thus broadly
contemporary with, or slightly later than, the Plachidol find.) Wheels with
this square mortice-hole are characteristic of the circum-Alpine area in the
Bronze Age; a solid, single-piece example of Late Bronze Age date came
from Castione dei Merchesi in northern Italy, and it is also a feature of
contemporary crossbar wheels from this area (Woytowitsch 1985, figs 7,
36).
    The form, however, goes back earlier than the Corded Ware period.
Another small but identifiable fragment has been recognised from a Chalco-
lithic context at Egolzwyl 2 (Lucerne), and from the type-site of Auvernier

                                        245




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:26:35 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                 Two   NEW     FINDS    OF   WOODEN       WHEELS


(Ruy-Chatru) on Lake Neuchatel. Now another find from Zurich makes this
the oldest surviving example of a wooden wheel from Europe, contem-
porary with the classic Baden culture cart-models of Budakalasz and
Alsonemedi in western Hungary. Excavations by U. Ruoff on an early
Horgen site 'Akad.', near to the 'Pressehaus' site, brought to light a single-
piece solid disc wheel, which nevertheless still had the characteristics of
being naveless and having a square hole for an axle rotating with the wheel.
The wheel itself is 55cm in maximum diameter - it has suffered some lateral
compression - and just over 5cm thick at the centre. Like the others from
this area it is of Acer (probably field maple) wood. Radiocarbon estimates
for the Horgen culture range from 3400-3000 BC, while those for the earlier
part of the closely related SOM culture in northern France suggest a begin-
ning around 3500 BC (Howell 1983, 52).
    This date thus takes finds of wooden wheels back to the widespread
horizon of indications of the use of paired draught indicated in central
Europe by paired-ox burials, figures of yoked oxen and wagon-models, and
in northern Europe by plough-marks.2 Although no wooden wheels are yet
known from northern Europe before the Corded Ware period, this find
suggests that earlier examples may be found, taking the innovation back
into TRB (Middle Neolithic) times. This strengthens the suggestion that the
'traction complex' of plough and wheeled vehicle appeared as a unity in
fourth-millennium Europe (Sherratt 1981; 1983; 1986).
    Although the occurrence of wheel-finds at this date was thus predictable,
these examples (with their contrasting typology) raise afresh the question of
the route of their transmission to Europe. Links via the Pontic steppes to the
Caucasus are evident not only from the distribution of the burials of the Pit-
Grave culture but also from the introduction of Caucasian types of bronze
axes and chisels using arsenical copper and the two-piece mould (Chernykh
1978). But these appear in Central Europe and the Balkans only after 3000
BC; and while wheeled vehicles were clearly an integral part of the Pit-Grave
complex, they were apparently already in use in both Baden and Horgen
contexts at the time of its arrival. Since all the analogies for Baden pottery -
mostly skeuomorphic echoes of metal vessels - point to Anatolia (Kalicz
1963), this would provide a plausible source for wheeled vehicles of the
mid-fourth millennium.
    One point of typology remains: were the square-hole, naveless wheels, fixed
to a rotating axle, characteristic of the 'first wave' of possibly Anatolian-
derived wheeled vehicles, continuing to be used through into the Bronze Age
in the relative backwater of Switzerland; or were they a specific adaptation
to circum-Alpine conditions? Examples of fixed wheels in the Near East
are sporadic, and belong to the second millennium or later: all the third-
millennium finds have round-hole, freely rotating wheels with or without
naves (Littauer and Crouwel 1979,13-14). But we have no idea of the nature
of fourth-millennium Near Eastern wheels, since the only evidence is from


                                       246




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:26:35 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

     FROM   LATER   NEOLITHIC       AND    EARLY    BRONZE       AGE    EUROPE




93 below and right, simple cart with rotating axle and fixed wheels (in this
example made of iron, though traditionally of wood), on sale in a village market,
Minho, northern Portugal; top, similar cart drawn by two cows, with elaborately
carved wooden yoke, Minho, northern Portugal. (Photos: author, 1990, fieldwork
with F. Queiroga.)

Uruk pictographs rather than finds or detailed representations. It is thus
possible that the earliest wheels were generally fixed to the axle.
    However, functional differences between two types should not be for-
gotten. With a fixed axle and freely rotating wheels, a damaged wheel can
easily be removed. When the vehicle is stuck in mud, however, this pro-
cedure is difficult. With a rotating axle, the body of the cart can simply be
lifted off the bogged-down wheels and axle. Since this is arguably what
actually happened in the case of the Zurich Pressehaus example, it may be
the explanation for its preferred use in circum-Alpine lakeside settlements.
The alternative design would have been preferable on the steppes, and on
the dry plains of lowland Europe.3

                                        247




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:26:35 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    Two     NEW    FINDS     OF   WOODEN       WHEELS

NOTES

1. Both finds form interesting footnotes to the comprehensive survey of European wheeled
   vehicles published by Professor Stuart Piggott (1983). Since 1985 was Professor Piggott's
   75th year; this note is affectionately dedicated in celebration of it.
2. This horizon includes, of course, the wagon-models of Budakalasz, Szigetszentmarton
   (both in Hungary) and Radosina (Slovakia), as well as the drawing on a pot from
   Bronocice (Little Poland). Professor Piggott's dating of this horizon (1983, 44-5) needs to
   be corrected; or rather; returned to the date which he originally suggested fifteen years
   before (1968, 304). Since Lengyel and Tiszapolgar run parallel in western and eastern
   Hungary respectively, there is no need to compress Bodrogkeresztur (itself parallel to late
   Lengyel) into the third millennium bc. He was thus originally correct in dating the onset of
   Baden to c.2700 bc. Bronocice IV and V correspond to late Baden; Bronocice III with its
   cart-drawing parallels classic Baden (like Budakalasz), and has four associated radiocarbon
   dates of 2740-2570 (Kruk and Milisauskas 1981). The Radosina model, in a Boleraz
   (proto-Baden) context, is the earliest example and would just precede them at c.28/2700
   bc.
3. With characteristic perception, Mrs M. A. Littauer (in litt. Jan 1986) provides a further
   dimension to this argument. If wheeled vehicles developed from sledges with captive rollers
   (as the pictographs hint), then a fixed wheel/revolving axle would be a logical design for
   the earliest carts. It would require less sophisticated carpentry and would be less
   vulnerable to wear than a wheel whose nave was carefully cut to rotate on a fixed axle.
   The fixed axle, allowing the wheels to revolve differentially, was particularly advantageous
   for four-wheeled vehicles, especially where used in battle (as in Mesopotamia). The bias
   towards prestige vehicles (usually four-wheelers with fixed axles) in graves and artistic
   representations may mask the widespread contemporary use of a less sophisticated design,
   the two-wheeler with rotating axle. Such a primitive but robust design has survived down
   to recent times in areas less sophisticated technologically or with a more abrasive environ-
   ment (Portugal, Fig. 9.3, Anatolia, Mongolia). I am very grateful to Mrs Littauer for these
   and many other helpful observations. [For more recent surveys of early wheel finds, and
   technical discussion, see Hayen 1983; Schovsbo 1983; Hausler 1984; various articles in
   Treue 1986; Winiger 1987 (with a convenient illustration of the Vinelz yoke shortly after
   discovery, fig. 20 on p. 107); Honeisen 1989. What appear to be 15-20m of cart-rut occur
   under the extension to a long mound covering multiple cists of probable mid-fourth-
   millennium date at Flintbek in NW Germany (Zich 1992; information from J. Hoika); some
   mid-third-millennium trackways in the same region seem to be associated with the use of
   wheeled vehicles, to judge by the growing numbers of broken wheels and axles associated
   with them. Winiger (1987, 100), quoting a conversation with the excavator Ulrich Ruoff,
   notes that the chronological attribution of the Ziirich-'Akad.' wheel, stratified between
   early Horgen and Corded-Ware deposits, is uncertain; Winiger himself would prefer a
   Corded-Ware date for the introduction of the wheel to Switzerland. His interpretation
   of the rotating axle as a technological advance, however; is less compelling than Mrs
   Littauer's suggestion above.]




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:26:35 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         Section          IV

  PATTERNS ON THE
      GROUND




 The relationship between a central monument, occupation areas, and
 outlying standing stones, near to the Late Neolithic dolerite quarries
   at Plussulien, central Brittany, c3200 BC (after C.-T. Le Roux,
              based on fieldwork by M. F. Le Provost).




The wider area of archaeological theory ... treats processes with
 space- and time-scales for which there is no social terminology,
 or patterns which nowhere survive within the sample of recent
human behaviour. Archaeology in essence, then, is the discipline
  with the theory and practice for the recovery of unobservable
hominid behaviour patterns from indirect traces in bad samples.
                                                    D A V I D L. C L A R K E   (1973)




              This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:28:11 UTC
                               All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       PATTERNS       ON   THE    GROUND


 i h e ideas discussed above are only of use if they help to make sense of
patterns on the ground. For my doctoral thesis, I had travelled widely in
Turkey and south-east Europe, and in setting up a fieldwork programme I
wanted to create a trade-off between the robustness of the prehistoric record
in the south-east (Balkan tells) and the sophistication of data-recovery
(museum coverage, survey work) in the north-west. The optimum solution
was Hungary, which had the additional advantages of being axially placed
in relation both to the Danube route from Anatolia and the steppe zone
stretching eastwards beyond the Pontic region and the Caucasus to the Urals
and beyond.
    The Archaeological Topography of Hungary programme provided pre-
cisely the opportunity I sought: although conceived as a project to register
sites rather than to reconstruct settlement patterns, its collaborative team
combined vast experience with uniquely long periods of time engaged in
survey. In eastern Hungary, in particular, the combination of durable and
typologically distinctive ceramics, and a heavily-tilled landscape of open,
collectively farmed fields, provided an unparalleled opportunity to re-
construct prehistoric settlement patterns with a resolution never before
achieved. It was Nandor Kalicz who made this work possible, though sadly
his health prevented an active collaboration in the field (and also the late
Sandor Bokonyi who gave continuous support). Nevertheless, the experience
of working with Istvan Torma and Gyorgy and Julia Goldman, and getting
to know Istvan Ecsedy and Pal Raczky, remains a great pleasure; and among
the British team were Sue and Steve Shennan, John O'Shea, John Howell,
Nick Starling, Brendan Grimley, Basil and Mary Turton, Mark and Jenny
Robinson, and Sue Sherratt, following earlier visits with Paul Halstead,
Colin Ridler, Neil Roberts and Fred Hamond. The Archaeological
Topography, and the survey and sondage work undertaken to calibrate it,
permitted a detailed set of observations on the spatial and distributional
characteristics of settlement (pottery + house-building materials) within
something like 200-500 year intervals. These demonstrated gradual drift,
sharp shifts and a fluctuating pattern of concentration and dispersal, that
can be linked to changes in the internal organisation of settlements and their
cemeteries, as well as to changing patterns of supply and flow in materials
and artefacts. Equally importantly, they demonstrated both the validity of
the proposed model of early farming, and the magnitude of the shift which
coincided with the first evidence of animal traction. Such patterns stimu-
lated the construction of more detailed models of regional development and
environmental change, and confirmed suggestions of a co-existence between
two populations - one indigenous and one intrusive from the steppes - at
the beginning of the third millennium.
   My conditions of employment at Oxford do not permit fieldwork other
than in periods of annual leave. When my growing family began to demand
a holiday rather than forced labour, some compromise was required; and I

                                        250




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:28:11 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                        PATTERNS      ON   THE    GROUND


began instead to investigate spatial and morphological patterning within the
500 known megalithic monuments of the Morbihan, on the southern coast
of Brittany, of which nineteenth-century plans and drawings in Oxford and
elsewhere provide an invaluable record. The parallelism with Hungary was
remarkable: over a precisely comparable period of time (though beginning
somewhat later), an exceptionally well-preserved and recorded series of
Neolithic sites revealed a remarkable density of occupation, and permitted
a diachronic study. The only difference was that these were not settlements,
but tombs. Such a contrast, and the more general exclusiveness between
substantial sites and substantial burial-monuments in Neolithic Europe,
points to the arbitrariness of our ethnocentric distinction between rational,
secular domesticity and religious, ritualistic disposal of the dead. Both types
of site provide permanent inscriptions on the landscape - one emphasising
the presence of the living, the other of the departed. For their Neolithic con-
structors, houses were as 'ritual' as tombs - and tombs sometimes as dom-
estic as houses. This fundamental realisation, together with Ian Hodder's
illuminating writings on the subject, led to the reconsiderations of European
megalithism which complete this section.




                                        251




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:28:11 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                       10
