     Social Evolution: Europe in the
    Later Neolithic and Copper Ages
                                     (1984)

Although archaeological information about the later Neolithic and Copper
Ages1 has increased enormously since the later part of the last century, its
interpretation in social terms has remained at a relatively primitive level.
While the need to deal with underlying social processes has been in-
creasingly stressed in recent years, many of the concepts employed have
been no more than revivals of nineteenth-century schemes. Technological
change and the unilinear development of increasingly hierarchical forms of
society still lie at the base of many current interpretations.
   One symptom of this is the frequent appearance of the term 'chiefdom',
covering a wide range of social forms from the groups encountered by the
Romans in the later Iron Age to the Copper Age inhabitants of Bulgaria or
the megalith-building Neolithic farmers of western Europe. Looking for 'the
indian behind the artefact' (in Robert Braidwood's phrase) has become in-
creasingly difficult when there is nothing to be seen but chiefs.
   This uncertainty as to when social ranking actually arose is symptomatic
of the problems of describing European prehistory by comparison, say,
with that of the Near East. While we have a fairly refined vocabulary for
dealing with the various stages in the emergence of complex urban societies,
Europe's stubborn failure to organise itself until just before the arrival of the

This paper was prepared for a conference on social evolution organised by John
Bintliff. It was thefirstsketch of a pan-European picture, with attention to social
process; and it was stimulated especially by the work of Richard Bradley, Ian
Hodder, Kristian Kristiansen, Michael Rowlands and Stephen Shennan - an
astonishing concentration of talent on a set of related problems. (The article by
Mike Rowlands in the same conference volume is now a classic, and has pro-
foundly influenced my own perceptions ever since.) It tried to go beyond the
ecological and functionalist views which had dominated my earlier work, and
pointed the way to some of the themes which would emerge in the following
decade.

                                         134




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER   NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER      AGES


Romans leaves us with some 6000 years of social development for which
a simple division into 'tribal' or 'chiefly' seems hopelessly inadequate. It is
especially primitive by comparison with the sophistication of our typo-
logical and chronological analyses, which allow us to divide this same
period into nearly twenty major cultural divisions, many themselves sub-
divided into three or four phases.
   The temptation in interpreting the archaeological record of the later
Neolithic and Copper Ages is thus to see some sort of cumulative growth of
social complexity, with evidence such as monument-building or minority
burial reflecting emerging hierarchies. Terms such as 'chiefdom' have
become stretched to include earlier and earlier examples of prehistoric
societies. The account presented here takes a different point of view: it tries
to explore the variety in early agricultural societies in terms of non-
hierarchical forms of social organisation. Although social change did not
benefit all sections of the population equally, it is misleading to see pre-
history simply in terms of the increasing domination of an elite. We need to
look more closely at the problems faced by communities in different circum-
stances and the sorts of power relations that emerged in each case.2 While
such societies may demonstrate a considerable degree of cultural com-
plexity, this does not necessarily take the form of centralisation, ranking and
stratification.

STAGES AND ZONES
A problem common to many discussions of 'social evolution' is the use of
categories derived from contemporary ethnography and their application to
long-term archaeological sequences. From Lewis Henry Morgan (1877)
onwards evolutionary writers have put forward schemes defining successive
'stages of culture': savagery-barbarism-civilisation (Clark 1946); band-
tribe-chiefdom-state (Service 1962); egalitarian-ranked-state (Fried 1967);
and so forth. While differing in detail, they share the same logic: they
attempt to convert static snapshots into a dynamic sequence. Such schemes
are now increasingly under attack. The band to state sequence - that most
used by archaeologists - has now been trenchantly criticised by its own
author (Service 1968,169). Recent bands, he noted, were often the smashed
remnants of more complex systems dislocated by western colonial impact.
Tribes, in the sense of discrete political units, were often created by inter-
action with more organised units (Fried 1978); chiefdoms and simple states
frequently arose in reaction to slave-raiding and the trading opportunities
offered by contact with the west (Stevenson 1968). Even if we do not treat
the whole band-tribe-chiefdom-state continuum simply as a reflection of the
differential impact of colonial contact, these arguments at least point to
differing degrees of social complexity in the ethnographic record as being
largely related to positions within the 'macro von Thiinen rings' of a recent

                                        135




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                             SOCIAL      EVOLUTION:


world system - a geographical zonation as a result of historical interaction
around a few major centres.
   The difficulty of interpreting archaeological sequences in social terms
is thus that of mapping an observed spatial variability onto an inferred
chronological sequence of social forms reconstructed from artefactual
remains. Not only do the two bodies of evidence - ethnographic and archae-
ological observations - differ in their raw material, but they also reflect
different parts of the process of global development. Many of the 'chief-
doms' of the ethnographic record reflect secondary consequences of the
existence of states that cannot be projected back into periods before the
emergence of the state. The time has now come to reassert the independent
validity of archaeological data, which offer too multivariate a pattern to be
constrained within arbitrary partitions of a homogenised universal suc-
cession. For this reason the following discussion takes a more inductive view
of the archaeological evidence, in searching for internal contrasts before
seeking external comparisons in world ethnography.
   Many apparently stadial phenomena need to be considered from a spatial
point of view, as they result from the rapid imposition of systems developed
in nuclear areas on less fast-moving peripheries. For instance, the contrast
between 'Mesolithic' and 'Neolithic' ways of life is in fact as much geo-
graphical as chronological, as economies based on cereals increasingly
intruded into neighbouring areas whose subsistence was based on the
increasingly intensive cropping of local resources. In other parts of the
world, this process was less abrupt and indigenous sequences were able to
develop further before being radically restructured by outside contact.
Temperate North America offers a relevant example, where the florescence
of monument-building and trading in exotica that characterises phenomena
such as Hopewell, for instance, preceded rather than resulted from the
spread of cereal cultivation from further south. Indeed, it is now suggested
that the apparent 'cultural decline' of the later Woodland period in fact
represents a period of increased stability and security in food supplies, with
cereal cultivation requiring a less complex and certainly less spectacular
socio-cultural system.
   There are two points to note here. One is the way in which a 'Mesolithic'
system, if preserved from outside interference, may manifest far more com-
plex properties than would be inferred from the truncated sequence of early
postglacial Europe. The other is the way in which new subsistence elements
that may actually raise population levels and energyflowscan at the same time
cause a simplification or decentralisation of social structures. It is this kind of
variability which characterises semi-isolated regions such as the woodlands
of Europe and North America. Structural principles which were rapidly super-
seded in nuclear areas may have continued to be important in the more drawn-
out sequences of social change where urbanisation was a relatively late feature.
Rather than trying to see in the European prehistoric sequence an increasingly


                                        136




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER    NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER      AGES


ranked series of societies in which successively more powerful chiefdoms suc-
ceeded one another at each opportunity, it may be more profitable to explore
alternative descriptions of social organisation.
    One of the striking features of the west European archaeological record
is the abundant evidence of ritual monuments which are not accompanied
by elaborate individual burials or residences. Instead of always looking for
hierarchisation, it may become appropriate in such contexts to look for a
different principle, that of ritual formalisation as the basis of social order.
To equate certain artefacts - monumental tombs, rare or craft-made items
(Renfrew 1973) in the later Neolithic of western Europe - with 'chieftain-
ship' may be to miss the essential character of such societies, and to obscure
both their essential similarity to earlier Neolithic societies and their contrast
with contemporary groups further east.
    It is clear that this approach requires European prehistory to be treated
as a whole, and that it is necessary to go beyond the artefactual mani-
festations to postulate underlying similarities in social organisation which
may cross-cut conventional divisions. Such social forms may have no direct
correspondence to that of any particular group within the ethnographic
record; but while this makes the task of such reconstruction more difficult,
it also makes the attempt more worthwhile as a contribution to the general
study of pre-literate societies.


EVOLUTIONARY PATHWAYS
The basic regional structure of Neolithic and Copper Age societies was
established by the arrival of agricultural groups and their interaction with
native communities.3 Along the main axis of agricultural spread, in the
Balkans and the central European loesslands, the dominant process was
one of colonisation. By 5000 BC the unity of 'Danubian' cultures across
the loess, from western Hungary in the south to the Low Countries and the
western Ukraine in the north, was already established. Cultures of the
Balkan group with a core area of tell settlements in Bulgaria and southern
Jugoslavia extended northwards into Romania and eastern Hungary. In the
central and west Mediterranean (Lewthwaite 1982), the successive adoption
of sheep and pottery by native littoral groups was increasingly sup-
plemented by cultivation as the complex expanded from its coastal base.
The main surviving zone of hunting and collecting groups lay in a broad arc
from the British Isles, across Scandinavia and the North European Plain,
to the marshes of eastern Europe which drain into the Black Sea. As the
Atlantic forests thickened and the climax trees of the mixed oak forest
shaded out pioneer species such as hazel, the nuts and game resources of
forest areas declined in productivity and concentrated the attention of native
groups on coasts, lakes and rivers where fish and molluscs provided a
substantial part of the diet.

                                         137




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                            SOCIAL      EVOLUTION:




5.1 The chronological dine between SE and NW Europe in the spread of farming,
metal use and features of the secondary products complex [from Sherratt 1995,
fig-4]-
   Two processes, therefore, dominated the development of European
societies in the period following this initial establishment of agriculture: one
was the differentiation and linkage of the increasingly copper-using groups
of south-east and south-central Europe; the other was the expansion of
agricultural groups and their interaction with native populations in the
outer arc. As a result of these processes, the relative regional homogeneity
of the first agricultural communities gave way to a diversity both within and
between regions that reached its climax during the fourth millennium BC
before giving way to a degree of uniformity within the new corridors of con-
tact which were opened up - the Mediterranean, the North European Plain,
the Steppes and the Atlantic Seaboard.


                                        138




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER      AGES


South-east Europe, 5500-4500 BC
The first question, therefore, is the nature of the changes that were taking
place in south-east Europe during the fifth millennium BC. This period
encompasses the climax of the pattern established in the Balkans during the
seventh and sixth millennia, and illustrates a relatively pure 'successionaP
change in that these societies then underwent an important transformation
without interference from adjacent zones. The climax of the tell cultures is
represented by a variety of groups whose ceramic distinctiveness is a hall-
mark of the period. There is a profusion of substantial settlement sites, rich
in the imported materials of everyday life: obsidian, greenstone axes, shell
beads. Female figurines, often in elaborate settings of painted clay altars and
shrines, are a characteristic feature; though burials (often still in household
clusters within settlements rather than in formal cemeteries) are not marked
by large accumulations of grave goods. I have tried elsewhere (Chapter 10)
to sketch how these systems may have operated. There is no reason to sup-
pose that these groups were composed of anything other than autonomous
communities and lineages. What is evident is an elaboration of material
culture, particularly the decorative elements, at the same time as an increase
in regional trade: an intensive production of locally specific pottery types,
the production of local specialities like salt and perhaps linen textiles, and
a massive transfer of materials like obsidian and flint between adjacent
highland and lowland zones. There is also a special emphasis on ritual
elements - figurines and house decoration, in south-east Europe, and also
some of the first ritual monuments like Kyjovice Tesetice (Moravia),
Schalkenburg (central Germany) or Kothingeichendorf (Bavaria) in the
related area of the central European loess belt (Hockmann 1972).
    These two elements, regional trade and ritual, give a clue to the social
mechanisms that organised and linked such communities. The wealth of
everyday objects, manufactured to high standards of craftsmanship, repre-
sent more than satisfaction of material needs. The flow of such items was
clearly vital to social reproduction as much as material survival. This would
explain the large quantities of items at the top end of the range of utilitarian
goods - well-finished axes, fine pottery, good flint or obsidian tools - that
occur in such profusion. Such quantities of valuables were generated by
social rather than economic needs (cf. Douglas and Isherwood 1978).
Anyone who has a small child is familiar with this principle: every visitor
or relative sends another toy digger, fire engine or teddy bear on social
occasions, quite beyond the propensity of the child to consume such wealth
(he has boxes full upstairs). Similarly with these Neolithic settlements: every
site is a bonanza to the archaeologist, who finds great quantities of museum-
worthy objects (stored in boxes downstairs) that originally circulated to
cement alliances, to purchase wives, or to compensate for offences.
   If relations between communities rested on alliances and the flow of


                                        139




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                             SOCIAL     EVOLUTION:


material valuables, the proliferation of items with ritual associations suggests
that this was important in regulating social life within the community. The
common forms of figurines suggest that these ritual codes were widely shared
between groups. Indeed, the contrasts between archaeological cultures in this
context (e.g. Vine a and Tisza, to take two classic Childean examples), which are
evident in their figurine designs and decorative styles but not in their more
mundane objects, are likely to reflect not breaks in social interaction (Hodder
1982a) but the limits of particular, consciously held, ideological systems. The
general form of these ideologies was probably very similar in the different
areas in which they were expressed, since the typical female figurines are all
variations on a theme. The basic features of this cult may even be reproduced
in very different cultural contexts, though similar social circumstances, in
other parts of Europe for which the shadowy presence of a mother goddess
has been inferred. We shall return later to the megalithic temples of Malta, but
it is perhaps worth noting the association of such Neolithic societies with
the worship of female deities or earth spirits. It is this kind of association that
lies behind older views - going back to Lewis Henry Morgan and surviving in
the canon of Marxist orthodoxy - which describe Neolithic society as 'matri-
archal' (e.g. Neustupny and Neustupny 1961). In settlement terms, this phase
was characterised by big sites - large communities of several lineage groups
with their own burial areas - aggregating for co-operation and defence. In such
acephalous groups, intensification of warfare is the other side of the coin from
the intensification of trading and ritual activity, and competition between com-
munities for the acquisition of material goods involved both alliance and
hostility (Chapter 10).
    This, then, is what I mean by ritual formalisation in an east European
context. The actual structures that underlay these archaeological mani-
festations remain to be defined, but we may bear in mind the elaboration of
cross-cutting ties - clans and sub-clans, moieties and ceremonial associ-
ations - that ethnography suggests may be relevant, and that do not involve
hierarchy. Their material evidence, in the form of ceremonial houses,
dancing grounds, symbolic oppositions or totemic signs, should not be
beyond the perception of archaeology. The hallmark of this type of system
- which archaeologically we may term the 'mature' Neolithic, to respect its
time-transgressive character and avoid regional terminologies - is the
presence of an abundance of material items, mostly of an unspectacular
kind, that are imported but not rare, moved by active regional trading
networks and circulating as small valuables. Allied to this is the pervasive
ritual and symbolic character of material culture in general, which never-
theless lacks the marks of individual rank and achievement.

4500-3500 BC
Some time around the middle of the fifth millennium BC this system was
radically changed, marking the beginning of what is locally termed the

                                         140




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER   NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER      AGES


'Copper Age' (Chapter 10). The tight regional groupings disappeared; settle-
ments dispersed or became less continuously occupied; burials received
greater emphasis (often being easier to find than the settlements); the bulk
of regionally traded products was replaced by smaller quantities of exotic
items (notably copper and gold); objects symbolising individual status
appeared (shafthole axes); the figurines became more schematic and less
overtly female; and there are greater contrasts in these new forms of wealth
both within regions and in individual cemeteries. The use of ritual within
established and long-lived communities was thus replaced by an apparently
more fluid system in which more explicit statements about rank were neces-
sary, and a wider range of competition was possible. Even so, there is little
indication of hierarchy: the rich burials are the end of a continuum, and
occur within the same cemeteries as the others - there was no mobilisation
of labour for a Fiirstengrab like Helmsdorf or L^ki Male. Nor are there
hoards in the same way as in the Bronze Age.
   This pattern continued into the fourth millennium when agricultural
settlement was expanding onto the Steppes and the North European Plain.
These movements of expansion on the periphery did not take place in
isolation: for the increasing scale of inter-regional trade from the Carpathian
Basin and the Balkans reached even the outer margins, in Denmark and the
Ukraine. These long-distance links were associated with shifts in the centres
of prosperity within south-east Europe. Instead of the central agricultural
areas, in Thrace or the Koros depression for instance, the areas which rose
to prominence were on the edges, at nodal positions between regional
systems: in east Slovakia, at Tibava by the critical passes through to the
Ukraine (modern frontier crossing-point at Uzgorod); on the Black Sea
coast at Varna, with its spectacular, gold-filled graves perhaps indicating
access to the Anatolian gold; in Kujavia (Brzesc Kujawski) on the interface
with the North European Plain. Access to metal sources and control of the
trade routes was the key to economic and social success, as the rich graves
in these areas testify, and the products which crossed regional boundaries
included Wolhynian flint in eastern Hungary (Kaczanowska 1980) -
especially the long flint dagger blades - and also the first horses (Bokonyi
1978), in return for the Balkan/Carpathian copper objects which appeared
at this time as far afield as Ukraine and in Early Neolithic contexts in
Denmark.

3500-3000 BC
Although this theme is clearly relevant to the developing picture in northern
Europe, we will follow through the sequence in south-east Europe down to
the end of the fourth millennium BC; for there follows a classic example of
a discontinuity caused by the incorporation of new features from a neigh-
bouring region. That region was the Steppes, where major developments
were now occurring. The expansion of population into the dry interfluves

                                        141




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                             SOCIAL      EVOLUTION:


altered the economic role of this region in a fundamental way. It now came
to act as a bridge between the peripheral Near Eastern cultures of the
Caucasus and those of south-east Europe: and many of the features involved
in adaptation to the steppe landscape were also relevant to the increasingly
open parts of temperate Europe. The early transfer of horses has already
been mentioned, though these early specimens - doubtless objects of wonder
and curiosity - did not survive as a local breeding stock. Equally important
(though contacts with Anatolia may have been equally relevant here) were
new breeds of sheep that are evident from the increased size of European
stocks at this time (Bokonyi 1974).
   In any case, a radical change in the settlement structure of south-east
Europe took place at this time, which accelerated the divergence of truly
Mediterranean areas (where tree crops now became important) from inland
areas. In the Carpathian Basin, the change is manifested in a major shift of
population to previously marginal areas both on the edges of the Basin and
the surrounding valleys penetrating into the uplands, and on the sandy inter-
fluves within it like the area between the Danube and Tisza (Chapter 10).
Within the interstices created by this shift, some actual penetration of Steppe
tribes seems to have occurred (Ecsedy 1979), for example on the Tisza and
lower Danube. As with the Late Woodland phenomenon mentioned above,
the effect of a more secure subsistence base was to render some of the
spectacular efforts of the previous period largely unnecessary: there is no
later-fourth-millennium equivalent to the Varna cemetery, and indeed
a relative recession in the copper industry. Social differences were now
perhaps evident in more basic ways - between village headmen buried with
their draught oxen and their local followers in the Alsonemedi cemetery
(Figure 8.1) for instance - than between generally wealthy communities in
nodal regions and poorer populations in the hinterlands. Such a foundation
had the potential for a taller edifice of social structure, in which hierarchical
divisions could cut deeper than ever before - the beginning of the Bronze
Age pattern - though it was another millennium before these divisions were
to become evident in the rich, fortified centres of Early Bronze Age Hungary,
Romania and Slovakia.

Central and northern Europe, 5 0 0 0 - 3 0 0 0 BC
While the south-east had a protracted early agrarian sequence unaffected by
neighbouring developments, north-west Europe was from the beginning in
contact with a wider network. It was also an area of greater diversity, from
the relatively dense coastal native populations to the pioneer farmers of the
loess bridgehead. Inevitably, therefore, it did not simply replicate the stages
defined for Balkan and Carpathian Europe; though at a deeper level there
are some significant resemblances. The sequence on the loess corridor of
central Europe has something of a transitional character: it reflected some
of the developments of the south-east, but its limited area rather reduced its

                                         142




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER    NEOLITHIC       AND   COPPER      AGES


importance in the fourth and third millennia when the surrounding regions
were opened up. This change in role makes it difficult to treat as an inde-
pendent entity and it will therefore be considered in conjunction with its
northern and western hinterlands. The increasing aggregation of settlement
that was characteristic of the early fifth millennium in the Carpathian Basin
(Chapter 10) was repeated during the later fifth and early fourth millennia
in the central European zone. The clusters of hamlets that were character-
istic of the pioneer phase, for example in the Rhineland, were replaced by
nucleated, enclosed villages of long-houses. Already, however, small groups
were penetrating northwards into the interstices of established Mesolithic
groups around the lakes of the North European Plain, and a complex
pattern of interaction was beginning.
    The origins of the northern Neolithic cultures (TRB) have conventionally
been sought either in continuity from local Mesolithic groups or in some
fresh wave of agricultural population from further south (e.g. Troels-Smith
1952; contra, Becker 1954). The present picture suggests that the new
pattern of farming cultures that united both the North European Plain and
the northern loesslands, actually originated from interaction on the interface
between the two. In some areas, such as Scandinavia, the expansion of farm-
ing seems to have followed a relative collapse of local resources (Rowley-
Conway 1984); in others, such as Brittany, some kind of fusion seems to
have occurred; in the south-east of the British Isles, some colonisation into
empty niches seems more likely. Despite these diverse origins, a strongly
convergent pattern came about, in which scattered hamlets were focused on
small burial-monuments and enclosures that provided continuing points of
integration between a diversity of exploited zones. Already, however, there
were significant regional exchange systems, which at certain points articu-
lated with long-distance chains reaching back to central and south-east
Europe; though these imported objects did not serve to mark an elite in the
same way as in Hungary or Bulgaria (Randsborg 1979).
    These relatively small-scale systems, limited in territorial extent, were
greatly enlarged at the same time as the radical shift which transformed
Balkan and Carpathian Copper Age groups. The appearance of plough-
marks in northern Europe suggests that these phenomena had a common
cause, and that in both areas the use of plough cultivation greatly enlarged
the area which could be exploited for agriculture. The effect of this techno-
logical innovation, on two contrasting socio-economic systems, was very
different: rather than changing the direction of development, as in the south-
east, this more extensive form of agriculture actually intensified propensities
already present in north-western Europe.
    One effect was greatly to extend the area under cultivation, absorbing in
the process many of the remnant communities of hunters and fishers. This
was accomplished, however, within the existing framework: the megalithic
tombs became larger and more elaborate, taking the form of passage-graves

                                        143




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                            SOCIAL      EVOLUTION:


rather than simple burial-chambers; the enclosures which seem to represent
a level of local integration above that of the monumental tombs reached
a peak and then declined; and existing methods of exploiting raw materials
either for tools (e.g. flint) or ornaments (e.g. amber) were greatly enlarged.
In the loess area this progress was manifested in a shift from the riverine
strip to the edge of the interfluvial zone (Kruk 1973; 1980); though since
this area lacked the local diversity of the north-western landscape, the foci
of this process were nucleated (and now often defended) villages (Bronocice,
Dolauer Heide) rather than burial monuments. The common basis of all
these societies, however, was an attachment to place and the rituals which
were performed there, rather than to individuals of a particular rank.
   How were these societies integrated, and in particular how do they
compare in this respect with the various stages defined for south-east
Europe? My impression is that despite their contemporaneity with the
Copper Age and Early Bronze Age groups of that area, they were funda-
mentally more similar to those of the late Neolithic tell climax, in which
ritual (manifested both in the monuments and the artefacts), rather than
rank, was the organising principle. As with these earlier 'mature' Neolithic
communities, the artefactual repertoire does not distinguish symbols of
individual rank, but rather offers a broad range of often finely-made
domestic items - such as decorated pottery, stone axes and amber beads -
which did not themselves act as sumptuary markers of a particular rank, but
served to structure social relations through their use as valuables. Burials
were not accompanied by impressive quantities of wealth objects associated
with particular individuals, although burial itself was a focus of ritual which
involved both monumental construction and the disposal of wealth. The
tombs are usually communal, and convey meaning by the arrangement of
the bones, rather than by varying quantities of personal grave-goods, which
often take the form of offerings at the monument as a whole. Emphasis was
on the community rather than the individual, and effort was expended not
to commemorate powerful leaders but to enhance corporate prestige and
territorial integrity. Moreover, burials in monumental tombs probably
represent only a part of the total population; though this in itself does not
imply a system of social stratification. The tombs should not be considered
as a means of disposing of the dead, but rather of giving significance to
selected people whose death was of importance to the groups involved.
There was often a considerable interval between death (and exposure of the
corpse, which was perhaps the usual means of disposal) and interment in a
tomb. The remains selected for such treatment were probably not those of
people who occupied a particular rank in their own lifetime, but venerated
ancestors who stood in critical genealogical positions in relation to group
fissioning.
  The main contrast between 'mature Neolithic' groups in south-east and
north-west Europe, then, is the elaboration of mortuary ritual which charac-

                                       144




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER    NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER      AGES


terises the latter. It can be argued that this is more an expression of local
ecology than of fundamental differences in social organisation. Funerary
monuments are typical of areas of early agricultural settlement beyond the
loess, and are associated with the particular conditions of the North Euro-
pean Plain and the Atlantic coastlands - unlike the defended centres, which
also occur on the loess. Monumental tombs are characteristic of areas where
settlement was still constrained - note their occurrence in clusters and linear
arrangements in relation to river-valleys - but where large aggregated
communities were not possible. They represent foci and territorial markers
for an expanded (though not dispersed) pattern of settlement, particularly
in core areas like the Danish islands where settlement was relatively dense.
Other types of non-monumental 'earth-graves' occur in less densely settled
zones like western Jutland (Randsborg 1975), where a seasonally mobile
way of life may have persisted, that was perhaps also characteristic of the
earliest phase of settlement in the core area. The monuments thus mark
a phase of saturation and the crystallisation of defined territorial units.
    Such monumental tombs served not only to legitimate rights to particular
territories, but were also agents of social control within the groups. One
striking feature, both of long barrows and 'causewayed' enclosures, is the
composite nature of their construction - reflected in discontinuous quarry
ditches as well as constructional compartments 4 that seem to relate to
corporate work-groups involved in their construction. Rather than simply
representing the tombs of different lineages, therefore, the tombs may be the
products of cross-cutting local associations which provided a focus of
political allegiance. This would be particularly important if surviving
Mesolithic groups retained a corporate existence within the agrarian terri-
torial structure, and such monuments would thus be particularly developed
in areas where native populations were integrated into Neolithic societies
at a local level.
   This interpretation of the social basis of the megalith-building groups
of north-west Europe does not imply that such groups were essentially
egalitarian - in the sense that there was no conflict of interests between
different status- and kinship-groups - for it is basic to the idea of such ritual-
centred organisations that competition took place between (probably ex-
ogamous) local units, and that certain sections of the population (notably
senior men) exercise dominance within them. But authority was localised,
and there was no hierarchy in the sense of successive tiers of authority:
rather, dominant groups promoted a common ideology which supported
their own interests within the unit, and left them free to engage in
competition for prestige between units. This probably took the form of
competitive feasting - 'fighting with wealth' - involving both consumption
of subsistence goods and the ritual destruction of material items, e.g. pot-
smashing. Differences in wealth between units (whether communities or
lineages) are therefore to be expected and are indeed manifested in the

                                         145




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                             SOCIAL      EVOLUTION:


different quantities of offerings associated with communal tombs, just as
there are notably 'wealthy' settlements among the Neolithic villages of
south-east Europe. Such differences in wealth, however, do not add up to
a conical pattern of ranking between communities and these must still be
considered as largely autonomous.

3000-2500 BC
This parallelism with the 'mature Neolithic' phase of the south-eastern
sequence is even more striking in its transition to a pattern which reversed
many of these elements - the disappearance of large, central sites and the
dispersal of population; the decline in ritual elements and the appearance of
status-symbolic artefacts; the development of long-distance trade (especially
in metal) rather than in common regional items. These new features charac-
terise the Corded Ware cultures that succeeded the variety of megalith-
building groups throughout the North European Plain and initiated the
pattern that was to characterise the second millennium BC; and in this
sense, it may still be useful to describe the Corded Ware and Beaker periods
as 'Copper Age'.
   One evident feature of this period was a major phase of internal
colonisation penetrating more deeply into the interfluvial areas of the loess
and cover sands, and extending agrarian occupation to the outwash sands
of the North European Plain. Settlement had a greater fluidity, with less
substantial and long-lived sites, and a shorter-term investment in burial
monuments: single graves under round barrows5 rather than long megalithic
or earth-built structures. Material culture had a more segmentary character;
a consistently replicated series of status-kits comprising a personal drinking
vessel and weapon (battle-axe) which accompanied a large number of males
to the grave. These symbols became internationalised to a much larger ex-
tent, even integrating neighbouring hunting and fishing groups within a single
framework of status codes, as in central Scandinavia and the Baltic regions.
   This pattern did not emerge in a uniform way over the whole of the
North European Plain. It seems to have crystallised earlier in the east,
perhaps in central Germany and eastern Poland, and to have spread like a
domino effect westwards into the megalithic heartlands, as far as the North
Sea. This complex seems to have penetrated within and around the estab-
lished TRB communities of the Low Countries and Scandinavia, before
absorbing them into the new pattern. It opened up a new east-west corridor
that articulated at its eastern end with the expanding Steppe groups, trans-
mitting horses and woolly sheep (as well as artefacts such as hammer-
headed bone pins) directly across the open landscape of northern Europe,
and restructuring the communities of the adjacent loess belt. It did not, how-
ever, penetrate westwards as far as the British Isles or large parts of northern
France (Seine-Oise-Marne culture), where the earlier pattern of territorially
focused communities persisted (Howell 1982).

                                         146




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER      AGES


   This linkage, from the forest Steppe to the Atlantic sea-board, was a
manifestation of the speed of forest clearance on the lighter soils of the
North European Plain. The increased size of cultivated area followed a
greater development of the pastoral sector of a mixed farming economy
based on light plough agriculture, with an emphasis on the male role
in warfare and protection of an acquired territory. It produced a similar,
segmentary social structure over a large interconnected area, with the ability
to penetrate and corrode the more static structures of surrounding groups.
In the following centuries, this pattern was to spread, and be further en-
riched, by contact along the Atlantic coast, the Rhone, and across the
western Alps: the Bell Beaker network.

The central and west Mediterranean, 5000-3000 BC
It is now time to consider the third major geographical division, the central
and western Mediterranean. During the earlier fourth millennium there was
no major opening-up of new areas for settlement as in northern Europe, and
a relatively stable pattern of large villages with stone or rock-cut tombs
occupied the more fertile zones within it, at a relatively low overall density.
Exchange networks carrying material such as obsidian linked islands such
as Sardinia with the adjacent mainland, but these had a limited, regional
scope. Some signs of the elaboration of territorial foci were in evidence, in
the beginning of megalithic construction in Iberia and in the prototypes of
the trefoil-shaped temples in Malta.
    As in north-west Europe, the mid-fourth millennium saw an increase
in the scale of these activities, without a discontinuity of developmental
trajectory. Tomb and temple construction became more elaborate, with a
concomitant appearance of small cult objects such as female figurines. Craft
production developed, with copper axes supplementing stone ones and
pottery bearing a profusion of ornamental and symbolic signs including the
'oculus' motif.
    These features bear a general resemblance to those of the megalithic
cultures of north-west Europe and they probably shared a similar form of
social organisation. Increasingly, however, a further process of spatial
expansion and inter-regional linkage introduced new elements, both from
northern Europe and from the east Mediterranean. This expansion can
plausibly be attributed to the use of the light plough, which assisted in the
opening-up of the interfluves in the same way as in other areas of Europe at
this time, and to specific features of the drier Mediterranean environment:
the cultivation of tree crops along with an expansion of sheep rearing, and
also fishing. An important outcome was the colonisation of new areas,
particularly highlands like the limestone plateaux of Languedoc and islands
like Lipari, which acted as nodal points in inter-regional contacts. Forti-
fication was a notable feature of Mediterranean settlement patterns, both
at large villages such as Los Millares (Almeria)6 and smaller fortified

                                        147




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                             SOCIAL     EVOLUTION:


enclosures like Zambujal (Portugal) and Lebous (southern France). The new
external links promoted the rapid spread of particular features such as
bastion fortification which can be traced throughout the length of the
Mediterranean. These contacts can also be seen in portable artefacts, like
the distribution of Castelluccio bone plaques.
   This growing network of regional links within the Mediterranean began
to be articulated with the long-distance routes reaching down from northern
Europe. The characteristic combination of drinking vessel (sometimes a
beaker but often a local form of handled cup) and personal weapons (now
a dagger and arrows rather than a battle-axe) began to appear in male
graves, though normally these were rock-cut tombs more appropriate to a
Mediterranean environment than the earthen barrows of the north. This
emphasis on the male warrior began to replace that on the female figure in
representations, stelae and rock engraving.7 The transition was most rapid
in Italy and southern France, with their more direct northward connections,
but also penetrated to the islands (e.g. Corsica). In Iberia the change was less
clear-cut, and was only fully complete in the second millennium with the
appearance of the Argaric culture with its male warrior burials. The pattern
of settlement in the Mediterranean, however, continued to be based on
defended centres now often positioned on spectacular heights.
   As with the British Isles in relation to the North European Plain, there
were spatial limits to this penetration, and in peripheral areas an older
stratum survived and continued to develop along its own lines. In Malta the
temples serving a female divinity reached a peak of elaboration in the earlier
third millennium, culminating in the massive structures of Tarxien and the
nearby Hypogeum. The stability of these temple-centres, of which over a
dozen are known, is indicated by their cumulative rebuilding and ex-
tension, and this territorial stability must be related to the finite size and
relative isolation of the island; these laboratory conditions allowed the
undisturbed growth of perhaps the most complex of these ritual-centred
organisations.

The British Isles
Britain itself must also be considered as part of the archaic fringe to which
continental innovations were introduced at a relatively late stage, and which
continued to develop along its existing trajectory to take an older pattern to
new heights of elaboration. While large enclosures and other monuments to
territorial stability largely disappeared in adjacent areas of the continent
during the third millennium BC, many parts of the British Isles saw a re-
newed phase of monumental construction, either of large passage graves like
Maes Howe or Newgrange in northern and western Britain in the later
fourth millennium, or of henges like Avebury or Durrington Walls - the
latter being significantly close to earlier territorial foci - in the south in the
third millennium BC. The scale of such construction, however, was entirely

                                         148




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER    NEOLITHIC       AND   COPPER      AGES


new; and the ritual landscapes of the British chalklands - for instance the
triangle of Avebury and its avenues, the 'Sanctuary' and Silbury Hill -
represent a concentration of effort unparalleled before. In this case, the
relative isolation from the Corded Ware 'domino effect' was reinforced by
the local setting of continued territorial expansion, which was internally
focused within the chalklands and adjacent gravel terraces, rather than
externally directed to the large areas of outwash sands as it was in the North
European Plain. This elaboration of ritual and territorial foci seems to have
been an alternative to the segmentary organisation reflected in Beaker
'status-kits', which began to be represented in parts of Britain, outside the
main henge areas. This 'Beaker' pattern led to the formation of rich indi-
vidual burials in Wessex itself shortly before 2000 BC, associated with the
erection of stone settings in the earlier earth and timber henges, e.g. at
Avebury and Stonehenge. The 'Beaker' pottery lost its role as a status item
and merged with the rest of the domestic pottery assemblage to form the
basis of the Bronze Age wares of the second millennium. These were associ-
ated with a major spatial expansion into more marginal areas outside the
earlier chalkland foci, in the manner of Corded Ware and Early Bronze Age
expansion on the Continent.
    This third-millennium phase of ritual monuments represented by henges,
like the Maltese temples discussed above, clearly went beyond the simple,
relatively autonomous character of earlier ritual-centred forms of social
organisation. They may well have been associated with a specialised ritual
caste with access to esoteric (e.g. astronomical) knowledge, rather than
simply being run by lineage heads or village elders in the way that may be
imagined for earlier Neolithic ritual monuments. But although they were
able to mobilise impressive quantities of labour, this apparently did not ex-
tend to the accumulation of surplus produce or the extensive patronage of
manufacturing operations based upon it. These properties, and the 'conical'
patterns of ranking that underlay them, only emerged from the more ex-
plicitly individualising warrior-centred form of organisation associated with
Corded Ware and Beakers.

CONCLUSION: SPACE, TIME AND SOCIAL STRUCTURE
This brief review of the contrasts between successive and contemporary
groups in different parts of Europe demonstrates the difficulty of applying
any simple scheme of social evolution to this phase of maximum diversi-
fication. Nevertheless, some common elements have been identified, as well
as trends which were to result in a much greater degree of convergence
during the Bronze Age.
   A basic theme of discussion has been the contrast between east and west.
Many of the most conspicuous artefacts of this phase - the megalithic and
earthen monuments of western Europe - have no direct parallels in the east.

                                        149




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                             SOCIAL      EVOLUTION:


Yet the types of society which they represent may, at a deeper level, have
a fundamental resemblance to already superseded stages of social develop-
ment in those parts of Europe which had been settled by agricultural
communities at an earlier date (Figure 5.1). The evident contrasts stem from
the historical and environmental setting of their respective developments,
and the relative isolation of the western periphery which allowed a further
elaboration of social forms which in other areas had been rapidly
extinguished.
   These contrasting trajectories determined the different reactions of the
various areas to the major technological and economic innovations of the
period, the secondary products complex (Chapter 6). The rapid spread of
features like the plough and woolly sheep cross-cut local successions of
social development, and they were integrated into local systems in different
ways. In the east, they caused something of a recession in the production
of spectacular elite items such as the goldwork of Varna; in the west they
accelerated and increased the scale of monument construction and terri-
torial demarcation, giving a further twist to the elaboration of ritual inte-
gration. In this way the effect of these innovations was to increase regional
contrasts, even though in the longer term it was to provide a more uniform
basis for convergent development.
   Although elites of different kinds were produced by the various processes
which have been defined, with a measure of ranking both within and be-
tween communities, there are no signs of substantial contrasts between
different levels of society that would deserve the term 'stratification'; nor of
the cumulative addition of levels of executive authority that could be
described as a hierarchy. The basic building block of Neolithic and Copper
Age societies was the community or lineage, and the bonds between them
were the fragile ones of exogamy and alliance.
   Within this framework, however, there was a variety of ways in which
social relations might be organised. An important variable was the layout of
settlement on the ground. Although Europe went through a protracted pro-
cess of 'filling up', this did not produce a simple linear increase in population
pressure and stress on land: instead, we can observe small cycles of infilling
within particular zones, followed by the unlocking of further zones either
within or beyond the region. The plough in particular opened up extensive
areas for cultivation (incidentally increasing the pastoral component of
agricultural economies) which allowed a more rapid process of spatial ex-
pansion than was characteristic of the often river-based patterns of initial
land-taking. Paradoxically, therefore, analogies with slash-and-burn
farmers in the tropics may be more relevant to the later Neolithic than to
the early Neolithic, whose constrained commitment to zones of primary
productivity is perhaps more analogous to that of the lowland rice farmers.
    The implication of these patterns of expansion can be taken further. In an
illuminating article on stateless societies in West Africa, Horton (1976) has

                                         150




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        EUROPE    IN   THE   LATER    NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER      AGES


discussed the circumstances under which lineages and corporations based
on principles other than descent become important media of social organ-
isation. He contrasts the conditions of unconstrained expansion, in which
dispersed settlement is the norm and spatial and genealogical distance main-
tain an approximate equivalence, with constrained expansion where 'leap-
frogging' and disjunctive migration become necessary. In the former case,
segmentary lineages can occur in which a single genealogical scheme can
embrace many thousands of people; in the latter, aggregates composed of
several lineages are formed, which must be integrated by cross-cutting ties
and a genealogical definition of landholding rights is replaced by a territorial
one. Co-residence, rather than common descent, becomes the focus of
political allegiance.
   Such territorially-based societies may be of two kinds: those where the
political community coincides with a large, nucleated village, and those
where its members are scattered in a number of smaller settlements. In the
former case, the role of lineages is subordinated to cross-cutting institutions
based on age grades, secret societies, and especially ritual groupings - 'a
cluster of adaptations to the problem posed by the presence in the com-
munity of strong and rivalrous lineages' (ibid., 96). In the latter, the lineages
maintain their importance as social groupings within the territorial unit,
whose role in this potentially fissiparous situation is stressed by the cult of
an earth spirit that unites the constituent descent groups. In this case, the
head of the leading lineage usually acts as cult priest and presides over
internal affairs.
   Now these distinctions correspond in a rough way to some of the
contrasts which have emerged in discussing the societies of later Neolithic
and Copper Age Europe. While there are no equivalents here to the pioneer
societies of the earlier Neolithic, there are striking resemblances between the
institutions that have been inferred for the large Neolithic villages of south-
east Europe and the loess area, for instance, and those of stateless groups in
West Africa such as the Kalahari. The problems of scattered, but territorially
defined, groups like the Lodagaa are paralleled by the megalith-building
communities of north-west Europe, and were apparently solved in a similar
way, through a focus in territorial ritual.
   Can the properties inferred for 'Copper Age' societies (both the fourth-
millennium examples from south-east Europe and third-millennium
examples from the North European Plain) be related to a pattern of seg-
mentary lineages (Kristiansen 1982)? Settlement was both dispersed and
expanding in space, producing the (temporary) conditions under which
genealogical reckoning was an effective way of maintaining an expanding
series of relationships, and reducing the emphasis on territorial definition.
In such a system there is no permanent political community, but rather
adventitious combinations for particular threats, drawing on as large a
kinship range as necessary. This equivalence of segments and relativity of


                                         151




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                            SOCIAL      EVOLUTION:


political grouping - overlapping egocentred units - leads to a predominance
of leadership over authority: political position is a matter of external
negotiation rather than internal control. In such circumstances, the role of
individual lineage heads becomes crucial, both as a widespread status
position (marked by an appropriate set of sumptuary artefacts?) and as a
potential focus for wider allegiances in a shifting configuration of political
structures (with the possibility of achieving individual prominence in the
process). In this context, we can understand the emergence both of inter-
regional symbols of rank, such as stone or copper battleaxes or decorated
drinking vessels. The deposition of these items in graves (as Shennan, 1982,
remarks) was important in the process of defining succession to these ranks
and their acquired prestige. Moreover, this type of organisation has the
property of being able to spread at the expense of surrounding groups -
Marshall Sahlins (1961) has called it an 'organisation of predatory ex-
pansion'. This seems a particularly appropriate description of the spread of
Corded Ware and its impact on the ritually focused megalith-builders.
   The main contrast in the European succession is thus between two
sorts of societies. The first was characterised by stable flows of regionally-
acquired goods, and was organised on an established territorial basis, with
public rituals and symbolic analogies based on female images. The societies
which superseded them were characterised by a greater emphasis on exotic
goods and longer-distance trading contacts often of a less stable and more
adventitious kind, in which information-carrying items took precedence
over more basic commodities. Their territorial basis was less stable, their
ethos was a competitive and self-aggrandising one, with sumptuary codes of
artefact use and symbolic analogies based on the image of the warrior male.
More generally, we can perhaps discern in these European sequences an
underlying shift from societies organised primarily on the basis of com-
munity (whether a single settlement or several sites with a common focus)
to an increased emphasis on the potential of kinship for forming wider
networks of alliance than had hitherto been realised.8 This is perhaps the
clue to the new properties which emerged in Copper Age systems in tem-
perate Europe.
   This latter type of social structure provided the basis for Bronze Age
development, in which the scale of inter-regional exchange was expanded
from a primary concern with symbolic items to include a greater volume of
'consumer durables' like textiles and bronze tools. This involved a greater
organisation of local production for inter-regional exchange, with regional
specialisation in commodities and manufactured products which were more
widely available but still supplied through an elite. With the gradual filling-
up of the continent during the second millennium, differential access to
productive land became more significant and provided preconditions for the
emergence of true stratification. At the same time the expansion of urban
trading networks from the east Mediterranean started a process of inter-


                                        152




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

          EUROPE       IN   THE   LATER      NEOLITHIC        AND    COPPER       AGES


action with indigenous European communities, to produce the core-
periphery pattern of the first-millennium Iron Age (Frankenstein and
Rowlands 1978).
   The societies of later prehistoric Europe thus provide an extended series
of examples of the processes operating in the early stages of social differ-
entiation. Such societies are arguably poorly represented both in the ethno-
graphic record, and in the archaeological evidence from nuclear regions
where these types of society were rapidly superseded. European Neolithic
and Bronze Age archaeology thus represents a prime source for the study of
such phenomena. It may be complemented by the study of other areas - for
instance Polynesia - whose relative remoteness from expanding core areas
of states and empires allowed indigenous sequences to achieve a measure of
social complexity. An understanding of social change requires a continuing
dialogue between the evidence of ethnography and archaeology. By a better
definition of their own material, archaeologists will be in a better position
to understand the relevance of other branches of anthropology to it.

NOTES

1. The terminology of period divisions in European prehistory has been elaborated over more
   than a century and is still inconsistent. 'Neolithic' was first defined as the later part of the
   Stone Age in opposition to 'Palaeolithic'; the idea of a 'Copper Age' before the beginning
   of the Bronze Age grew up as a local concept both in Ireland and Hungary in the 1870s.
   National terminologies have incorporated this usage (often in the form 'Chalcolithic' or
   'Eneolithic'), but these usages are often mutually inconsistent and in any case do not
   precisely conform to the beginning of copper use in any particular area. This article uses
   calibrated radiocarbon dates to give absolute ages. The terms 'mature Neolithic' and
   'Copper Age' are used in a descriptive sense to denote particular types of social systems
   that are defined in the text. 'Copper Age' thus denotes a system in which copper objects
   are used in a particular way, rather than a period defined by the first use of metal.
2. Recent social theories (Giddens, A. 1979, Central Problems in Social Theory, London,
   Macmillan; Harre, R. 1979, Social Being, Oxford, Blackwell) have attempted to overcome
   the essentially static nature of conceptions of social structure based on fixed roles and
   functions, determined by efficient adaptation to external (usually economic) circumstances.
   Instead they have proposed a more dynamic view in which individuals and groups manipu-
   late their shifting advantages in a continuous process of negotiation (called 'structuration'
   by Giddens) which itself creates and defines the patterns of social life. While this over-
   comes some of the problems associated with the endless search for a 'prime mover' of
   social change, it has yet to be formulated in a way which is relevant to changes on an
   archaeological ('evolutionary') timescale.
3. For a more systematic general account of European prehistory and that of adjacent areas
   (with references), see Sherratt (1980).
4. Such compartments are seen both in earthen long barrows, where they are defined by
   hurdling, and cairns like the Severn-Cotswold barrows, where the mound was constructed
   of dry-stone cells filled with material from the quarry-ditches, themselves dug in a series of
   intersecting pits. This suggests an organisation of several co-operating groups, perhaps on
   the scale postulated by W. Startin (PPS 1978, vol. 44, pp. 143-59), for construction of a
   Bandkeramik longhouse. Such a co-operating unit, itself segmentary in character, would
   represent a political community but not necessarily a co-resident group. This may be the
   logic behind the settlement clusters definable in Neolithic settlement patterns in several
   areas.


                                               153




                      This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                 SOCIAL      EVOLUTION:

5. Such tombs still had a 'monumental' aspect in that they were covered with earth mounds,
   which might form small cemeteries through the accumulation of satellite and secondary
   burials. A role as territorial markers is evident from their occurrence on interfluves and on
   sight-lines, but not all such burials were marked by mounds. In some areas where spatial
   expansion was not occurring, flat graves are found - sometimes in large cemeteries - e.g.
   Vikletice, Bohemia.
6. The Almerian collective burials in tholoi (nearly ninety at Los Millares) differ from other
   European megalithic tombs in their direct associations with a large adjacent settlement: in
   this case the tombs may directly reflect lineages within the community. These appear to be
   ranked in wealth and this pattern is probably associated with the continuing importance
   of limited areas of wet bottomlands in this arid environment.
7. This occurs on menhirs in the west Mediterranean, and also on Cycladic figurines.
8. This is not to deny the existence of extensive kinship networks in earlier times, especially
   among Upper Palaeolithic hunters in open environments; but it suggests that an initial
   effect of the introduction of agriculture (or other forms of existence involving large,
   sedentary communities) was to place the emphasis of social organisation foremost on
   community. This would be the case both in the large settlements of the Neolithic of central
   and south-east Europe, and in the Neolithic of western Europe where 'big monuments'
   replaced 'big sites'. The formation of more extensive kinship networks would then repre-
   sent a shift to forms of social organisation that were less tied to patterns of residence and
   the existence of large, stable settlements.




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:24:40 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                           Section           III

  D I S C O V E R I N G THE
SECONDARY PRODUCTS
          COMPLEX




Impression of a cylinder-seal of the Uruk period, c.3500 BC, showing two men
       harnessing an ox (British Museum: drawing by Ann Searight).



 Als man Milch trank, und den Ochsen an den Pflug spannte, waren
    wesentlich alle Bedingungen fur unsere asiatisch-europaische
                         Kultur vorhanden.
        (When milk was drunk, and the ox yoked to the plough,
  all the conditions for our Asiatic-European culture were present.)
                                                          EDUARD HAHN (1896)




              This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:26:25 UTC
                               All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

         DISCOVERING      THE    SECONDARY       PRODUCTS        COMPLEX


 u ur understanding of Old World animal management after the initial
provision of a captive meat supply was put on a new footing by Andrew
Sherratt's now classic study of 1981', wrote Stuart Piggott (1992, 13),
having earlier (1983, 34) called it 'important and stimulating' but the
phenomenon in question 'unhappily named'. Alas, quite true - but de-
liberately so. I have tendentiously titled this section 'Discovering ...', but
it would be more in tune with contemporary terminology if I had written
'Inventing the Secondary Products Complex' - or Secondary Products Revo-
lution, as I even more tendentiously termed it at the time. The rhetorical
flourish of an admittedly ugly title was a necessary strategy to ensure the
visibility of the concept.
   That strategy apparently succeeded; for not only is the concept enshrined
in the new Oxford Companion to Archaeology (with which I have no
editorial links), but the term is used in several British universities to struc-
ture their teaching of later European prehistory. There is obviously a need
to find punctuation points within the long sequence of agrarian communi-
ties before the arrival of bronze - a period which has successively increased
in length with every advance in absolute dating since the invention (or
discovery?) of radiocarbon dating. It clearly, therefore, fulfils a need in
current expository schemes: but did it ever really happen?
   That depends, of course, on how it is conceived. 'This was a time of
considerable intensification of farming production, using a whole range
of devices and inventions in agriculture and in animal husbandry. Some of
these are well encapsulated in Sherratt's term the "secondary products
revolution"', writes Colin Renfrew (1994,159-60), presenting a minimalist
interpretation - for he goes on to qualify his acceptance of the idea: 'but
unfortunately his exposition involves the diffusionist assumption that the
innovations in question had an eastern origin, a point that has been
effectively countered (Chapman 1982; see Bogucki 1988). As noted above,
these diffusionist arguments rest as much on faith as on material evidence,
and the positive features of his model are just as well described under the
rubric of the intensification of farming systems.'
    In this minimalist form, it still fulfils one of the intentions which I had
in (well, yes, frankly) inventing the concept: to emphasise the otherness of
early farming. Terms such as 'hunting' or 'farming' carry a heavy baggage
of contemporary images and assumptions, which it is anachronistic to retro-
ject deep into the past. On the one hand, it is necessary to choose some term
from contemporary language; on the other, any term cannot quite fit earlier
circumstances - for instance the combination of cereal cultivation and
gazelle-hunting practised by the early inhabitants of Jericho. Bundling
together all the features now characteristic of Old World farming - but not
present at the beginning, nor represented, for instance, in native North
American farming - was a convenient way of summarising the very different
character of early Old World cultivation systems. Use of the term 'revo-


                                        156




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:26:25 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

         DISCOVERING       THE   SECONDARY        PRODUCTS       COMPLEX


lution', however, suggested a stadial, evolutionary model underlying it,
which it was not part of my intention to convey; and this would be the core
of my disagreement with Colin Renfrew, for I do not believe that these
changes could have happened if Europe had remained in complete isolation.
   Fundamental to my conception of why the SPR did happen, and why its
successive impacts in mid- and late-fourth-millennium BC Europe were so
concentrated, was its intimate connection to Gordon Childe's Urban
Revolution in Mesopotamia. This, as I suggest in the final chapter in this
volume, is the 'revolution' to which its European impact is due - just as the
fundamental impact which farming itself had on Europe some three
millennia earlier was due to the Neolithic Revolution in the same area. It
was the unique characteristics of that intimate intermixture of the desert, the
steppe and the sown which made the area between the Mediterranean and
the Persian Gulf into such a power-house of innovations (Sherratt 1996).




                                        157




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:26:25 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

  Plough and Pastoralism: Aspects of
  the Secondary Products Revolution
                                        (1981)

 1 he contrast between the development of agriculture in the Old and New
Worlds is an instructive one. In both, the domestication of a cereal crop
allowed a massive increase in population, first in village communities and
later in towns and cities. The major difference lay in the role of animal
domesticates. In the New World there were few counterparts to the range
of domesticated animals which were an integral part of Old World systems;
in North America only the turkey, and in South America the guinea-pig
and the Andean camelids, played a comparable role to the sheep, cattle and
equids of Eurasia.
    The first implication of this contrast is the primary role in the 'Neolithic
Revolution' which was played in both hemispheres by the domestication of
plants, and especially cereals. Cultivation alone, without the extensive use
of domestic animals, was able to sustain even complex urban societies. But
it is not without significance that the next threshold, that of industrial-
isation, was attained only in the Old World; for the employment of animal-
power as the first stage in the successive harnessing of increasingly powerful
sources of energy beyond that of human muscle was only possible where
these animals were domestic, not wild. The critical differences between the

David Clarke's death in 1976, at the age of 38, was a devastating blow. Ian
Hodder and I discussed compiling a volume of papers. I wanted to write the best
paper of which I was capable, and this was it. (Even Glyn Daniel - no admirer
of New Archaeology - liked it, as I discovered from an unfinished review tucked
inside his copy, sold after his death.) It builds on comments that David made on
my Ph.D. thesis, about the fundamental nature of the transition from the Balkan
Copper Age to the Early Bronze Age, and continued in the comparative (and
interactionist) way which he encouraged. The paper would not have been possible
without the pervasive influence of David Clarke. Many of its ideas had their roots
in his suggestions and remarks. His enthusiasm and criticism were sadly missed in
writing it.

                                            158




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        ASPECTS     OF   THE     SECONDARY         PRODUCTS          REVOLUTION


utilisation of animals in the Old and New World lay less in their uses as a
source of meat than in their emergent properties when other applications
were explored - their 'secondary products'.
    The distinguishing feature of agrarian development in the Old World,
therefore, is the interaction between plant and animal domesticates. Of
major importance in this process is the plough - the first application of
animal-power to the mechanisation of agriculture. Closely connected with
this is the use of the cart, with its contribution not only to more intensive
farming but to the transportation of its products. These two innovations
resulted from a new application of domesticated cattle. Comparable
advances in transport resulted from the domestication of the equids and
their use as draught- and pack-animals. Also, secondary features of domesti-
cated ovicaprids - notably the development of wool in sheep - allowed a
new range of uses for these animals in providing fibres suitable for textiles.
Finally, the regular milking of domesticated animals provided a variety of
storable products and made possible a continuous flow of food without
slaughtering the stock.
    These features were not part of the original complex of plant and animal
domestication in the Old World. Archaeological evidence for this range of
secondary uses and products of domesticated animals is naturally very
varied and of uneven value. Nevertheless, where these features can be dated,
it is apparent that they only appear five millennia or so after the beginnings
of agriculture in the Near East, and some three or four millennia after its
introduction to Europe. There was thus a long primary phase of agricultural
development before the secondary uses of domesticated animals were dis-
covered and applied. Moreover, many of these features appeared within a
similar span of time, some four to five thousand years ago. While they are
by no means exactly contemporary, their appearance together at approxi-
mately the halfway point in the development of agriculture in the Old
World, marking the beginnings of a phase of interaction between the plant
and animal components and the earliest non-human sources of energy,
perhaps deserves some explicit recognition: and it is in this spirit that I
venture to burden an already over-taxed archaeological vocabulary with yet
another revolution - the Secondary Products Revolution of the Old World.
    These secondary products had important applications both in the intensi-
fication of agricultural production and in the sphere of transport, trade and
personal mobility. The plough increased production and made economic the
cultivation of a range of poorer-quality soils; it thus resulted in the colon-
isation of a wider area than had been possible under previous systems of
cultivation. Both the ox-cart and the horse, as well as the pack-donkey,
opened up new possibilities for bulk transport and reduced the friction of
distance. They made economic a range of locations and settlement types,
including systems with cities, which would otherwise have involved huge
amounts of effort. The development of textiles made from animal fibres


                                            159




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:




6.1 Clay tablets from Uruk with symbols in pictographic script, including the sign
for 'cart\ Uruk period, late fourth millennium BC (after Falkenstein 1936).

gave for the first time a commodity which could be produced for exchange
in areas where arable production was not the optimal form of land use. The
use of milk made much larger herds economical, making use of exhausted
and otherwise marginal land and encouraging the development of the
pastoral sector with transhumance or even nomadism.
   This bundle of innovations produced two types of society and subsistence
systems which were unknown in pre-contact aboriginal America: plough-
using agriculturalists, and pastoralists. The two were frequently in geo-
graphical proximity and interaction and their relations, both of conflict and
symbiosis, are a recurring theme in the history of the Old World. Anthro-
pologists have long recognised (and are increasingly emphasising; Goody
1976) the importance of plough agriculture as a predictor of social systems
involving new mechanisms of inheritance as a result of the importance
which the transmission of land acquires in such economies. Groups with
a major pastoral component, too, have characteristic social features, such
as strongly patrilineal descent groups, which are unlikely to have been
associated with earlier hoe cultivators. The revolution was thus not simply
a matter of subsistence and economics: it was a threshold of social develop-
ment as well.
   It would be surprising if so radical a set of changes were without evident
traces in the archaeological record. While the secondary utilisation of
animals can be shown from representations, or occasionally glimpsed
directly where the evidence is favourably preserved, the striking changes in
the distribution and character of settlement in Europe in the third millen-
nium BC are eloquent testimony to a major alteration in the condition of life.
Coming at a time when settlement in many of the older-settled areas had
expanded to its limits, and long-term soil deterioration had begun to set in,
these changes define a 'second generation' of agrarian economies in Europe,
and the beginnings of a new cycle of expansion in the Bronze Age.
   The 'secondary products revolution' thus separates two stages in the
development of Old World agriculture: an initial stage of hoe cultivation,
whose technology and transportation systems were based upon human
muscle-power, and in which animals were kept purely for meat; and a


                                             160




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        ASPECTS     OF   THE     SECONDARY          PRODUCTS         REVOLUTION


second stage in which both plough agriculture and pastoralism can be recog-
nised, with a technology using animal sources of energy. The former mode
of life is now extinct in the temperate and sub-tropical parts of the Old
World, though it may have important analogies with agriculture or semi-
agriculture as practised in aboriginal temperate North America. The
secondary products revolution marked the birth of the kinds of society
characteristic of modern Eurasia.


DATING EVIDENCE
The use of animal traction
Although cattle were fully domesticated at least by the sixth millennium BC,
they were not systematically used as traction animals until the later fourth
millennium, when a specific technology was developed to make use of this.
The most important applications were to the plough and the cart. The
evidence will be reviewed separately here, but it is clear that the two spread
as a closely related complex.

The cart. Earliest unambiguous indications of the use of the cart (Figure 6.1)
come from archaic Sumerian pictograms from Uruk in southern Meso-
potamia (Falkenstein 1936, signs 742-5). These date to the first half of the
fourth millennium BC. From the succeeding Early Dynastic period there
is a wealth of evidence from representations and actual cart burials. Clay
models of vehicles with two or four solid wheels occur at this time over a
wide area including northern Syria, northern Iraq, eastern Turkey, northern
Iran and Transcaucasia. Mesopotamian examples are mostly vehicles for use
in war, but the ones from further north include 'covered wagon' forms well
suited for use in regions at the junction of steppe and forest (Piggott 1968
[and now 1983 for the early history of wheeled vehicles in general]).
   Comparable vehicles are known to have been used at least during the
third millennium BC on the steppe-lands north of the Caucasus and the
Black Sea. Several groups of barrows near Elista on the Kalmuk steppe
between the Caucasus and the Volga have produced evidence of carts. The
most famous example, Tri Brata, contained both wooden wheels and a
model of a two-wheeled cart. A somewhat later example from Kudinov on
the lower Don contained a complete four-wheeled wagon. Similar finds
occur on the lower Dnepr.
   In Eastern Europe the most striking evidence is the handled drinking-cup
in the form of a four-wheeled wagon from Budakalasz near Budapest in
Hungary, now with another example (Figure 6.2a) from Szigetszentmarton
(Kalicz 1976). These belong to the Baden culture, as does the cemetery of
Alsonemedi with its double bovid burial [cow and calf in Alsonemedi graves
3 and 28, two calves in the comparable grave 3 at Budakalasz - presumably


                                            161




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                          PLOUGH       AND     PASTORALISM:




(a)                                                (b)




 (c)   ^ ^   ^       ^ ^ ^                         (d)

6.2 Early evidence of ox-traction in Europe: (a) cup in the form of a wagon from
a Baden culture grave at Szigetszentmarton, Hungary; (b) handle in the form of
two yoked oxen, TRB culture Krgznica Jara, Poland; (c) pottery *cart' with two
protomes, Baden culture, Radosina, Slovakia; (d) pecked scene of oxen drawing a
cart, from a megalithic cist at Zuschen, Germany; after Kalicz (1976), Nbnejcova-
Pavukovd (1973) and Uenze (1958).
to avoid killing valuable draught-oxen] indicative of paired draught (see
below Korek, Behrens 1964). [It is notable that there are several pedestalled
cups whose bowl is a wheel-less wagon body (Banner 1956, plate 114 nos
1-7); and also that the Budakalasz wagon-cup had its own grave (no. 177) -
a cenotaph without a body.] A somewhat larger vessel in the form of a
wagon, without wheels but with two animal (ox?) protomes protruding
from the front, comes from Radosina in Slovakia (Figure 6.2c), from an
early Baden (Boleraz) context (Nemejcova-Pavukova 1973, fig. 3). Radio-
carbon dates for this culture indicate a date of 3400-3100 BC. Double ox
burials appear at the same time in over a dozen examples in the Globular
Amphora culture in Poland and central Germany (and may be present in
Middle Neolithic Denmark, though bone is less well preserved). Evidence
from representations is also available in the form of a pottery handle show-
ing a pair of yoked oxen from Kr^znica Jara, Lublin (Figure 6.2b), in the
context of the south-east TRB group, datable to the later fourth millennium
BC, and also from a stone with a pecked schematic scene (Figure 6.2d) in

                                             162




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        ASPECTS     OF   THE    SECONDARY          PRODUCTS         REVOLUTION




                    KAA -

                                                         OlQ




6.3 Above: representation of a four-wheeled wagon on a TRB pot from Bronocice
(Phase III, 3500-3100), Little Poland: Milisauskas and Kruk 1982; middle: motif
in schematic form on contemporary Polish TRB pots from Inowroclaw-Mqtwy
and Ostrowiec Swiqtokrzyski (Midgley 1992, figs 13 and 108); below: wagon-
representation from below the belt of a statue-menhir from Lagunda, Alto Adige,
Italy (other examples have a plough in the same position): [new drawing].
a Hesse collective-burial cist at Lohne (Ziischen) with a similar dating
(Uenze 1958). The scene is a vertical view of pairs of oxen yoked to what
are probably carts. A similar view of a four-wheeled vehicle has recently
been found in a TRB context at Bronocice in south-east Poland (Milisauskas
and Kruk 1978: see Figure 6.3).
   Finds of actual cart components have been made in Europe only in water-
logged contexts. Wheels from the Netherlands and Denmark have been
dated by pollen analysis and radiocarbon dating to the third-millennium BC

                                            163




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         PLOUGH        AND       PASTORALISM:




                     _mnk            —       ^               -^k




                     ^                                       ^
6.4 Clay tablets of the fourth millennium BC with symbols in pictographic script,
including the sign for 'plough3: above, from Uruk, Mesopotamia (Uruk period);
below, from Susa, Khuzestan (proto-Elamite period). After Falkenstein (1936)
andScheil (1923).
Corded-ware period (van der Waals 1964; Rostholm 1977). Two yokes, one
from Switzerland (Vinelz) and one from Lower Saxony (Petersfehn), may
also be of third-millennium date (Gandert 1964).
   Turning east, there are many examples of models showing solid-wheeled
carts from the Harappan culture of the mid-third millennium BC in north-
east India. In China, however (as also apparently in Egypt), the wheel only
arrived in its spoked form in the second millennium. This spread across cen-
tral Asia was associated with the use of the horse, and is considered below.
   The evidence thus suggests that wheeled vehicles were first produced in
the Near East in the fourth millennium BC, and that they rapidly spread
from there both to Europe and India during the course of the third millen-
nium, and across the central Asian steppes in the second. The occurrence of

                                             164




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        ASPECTS     OF   THE    SECONDARY          PRODUCTS          REVOLUTION




6.5 Third- and second-millennium ploughs: left, impression of a cylinder-seal
showing two-handled plough (ard) with sowing-funnel, Akkadian period, late
third millennium BC (Ashmolean Museum); right, sole-ards in Cretan hieroglyphic
script, early second millennium (after Evans).
model wheels in New World contexts, indicating that the principle was
known even though wheeled vehicles were not used in transport, shows that
the availability of draught animals was the critical factor in this technology.
The plough. Again, earliest indications are in pictograms (Figure 6.4)
(Falkenstein 1936, sign 214; Scheil 1923, signs 668-77). The basic model
seems to be the same in both cases, with two stilts (handles) and a composite
draught-pole. Representations of such ploughs (or, more accurately, ards)
are plentiful as ritual scenes on cylinder-seals in the Akkadian period around
2300 BC, both in Mesopotamia and Assyria. These sometimes show a de-
veloped form with a sowing funnel (Figure 6.5), a device for sowing
in regular lines which was especially useful with irrigation and generally
in semi-arid conditions because of the deep implantation of the seed
(Christiansen-Weniger 1967).
   The plough, also in a two-handled version, is first evidenced in Egypt in
the mid-third millennium, in a third-dynasty representation (Hartmann
1923). The construction of the Egyptian plough owed features of design like
the rope binding to earlier hoe types.
   In contrast to these Near Eastern forms, the earliest European ones are
simpler and have only a single handle (Figures 6.6, 6.7). In the Mediter-
ranean region it consisted of a flat sole into which were inserted both the stilt
and the draught-pole. Further north, the even simpler design of the crook-
shaft was used - a branch with a recurving projection, carved from the trunk
itself, into which was set the stilt. As in Egypt, this resembled local hoe
types, and was indeed the basic form of hafting in use at the time.
   Ploughs of the sole-ard type are demonstrated from Early Bronze Age
Cyprus from small terracotta models [e.g. Vounous: Karageorghis 1982, fig.
29], and the signs of the Cretan pictographic and Linear A scripts (Figure
6.5; Evans 1909) make it clear that this design was also in use there in the
Bronze Age. It is not known what form was in use in Anatolia, but it was
probably also a one-handled type. The crook-ard is known to have been in

                                            165




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         PLOUGH       AND     PASTORALISM:




6.6 Finds of ards of crook-ard type from northern Europe and the Ukraine:
(a) Walle, Germany; (b) Wieu/ioki, Poland; (c) Polessje, Ukraine; (d) Tokari,
Ukraine; (e) Hvorslev; Denmark; ( f ) Sergeiev, Ukraine; (g) Vebbestrup, Denmark.
After Glob (1951) and Sramko (1971).
use in the second millennium north of the Black Sea in the area around Kiev,
as shown by finds from Polessje, Tokari and Sergeiev, the first radiocarbon
dated to the early second millennium BC (Sramko 1971). There is no reason
to suppose that it was not in contemporary use in the better-watered parts
of the true steppes further south.
   The use of the plough in the later third millennium in Harappan India has
recently been demonstrated by finds of plough-marks at Kalibangan in the
Punjab (Steensberg 1971). Its arrival in China, however, seems even later

                                            166




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                 ASPECTS              OF        THE    SECONDARY       PRODUCTS     REVOLUTION




                                                                             £ vnmnce ft he pimjgh
                                                                             and
                                                                              s 4
                                                                                  yoked tract**?*
                                                                             <*l               H''*.**^




             v-

                     '                     it

                   i; • n           --
                             0 " Oiw *
                      Ililll
                                                                   , - \\v
                    • P IIS
                    MBl \\ *
                              /
                            trill!!
                                                      •J.'-::-
                                           ""'v..       '   £-"7
                                                                                        111!

6.7 Nlap of plough-marks and of ard finds and representations, showing the
division between two-handled Near Eastern forms and European sole- and crook-
ards [cf. Fig. 0.5].
than that of wheeled vehicles, and occurred only in the first millennium BC.
   In southern Europe, finds of ploughs and plough-like objects are known
from second- and third-millennia circum-Alpine lakeside-village sites such
Early p l o u g h - m a r k s
l^frt Furrows
r 1 Megalithic blocks
      Disturbance
 0   Scalefor(a),(b),(c)   5 metres




6.8 Plough-marks preserved under north European long-barrows: (a) Avebury;
England; (b) Fuglebaeksbanken, Denmark; (c) Sarnowo, Poland; (d) Lundehoj,
Denmark. After Evans (1967), Ebbesen and Brinch-Peterson (1973), 0rsnes
(1956) and Dqbrowski (1971).

                                                                 167




                                             This content downloaded from
                           128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                                     All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         PLOUGH       AND      PASTORALISM:




6.9 Summary of evidence on the date of early ox-traction in Europe (scale in
hundreds of dendro-calibrated C14 years).
as the Lago di Ledro near Trento and Seeberg-Burgaschisee Sud near Berne.
The former yielded a crook-ard, the latter a rather similar 'hand-ard' or
Furchenstock (Battaglia 1943; Miiller-Beck 1965). The most extensive series
of early plough finds, however, comes from the North European Plain (Glob
1951). Four crook-ards are known from Jutland, of which two are dated
to the second millennium. Another, three metres in length, came from Walle
in East Friesland, Germany. Two more examples are known from the bend
of the Vistula in Poland.
   These finds of actual ploughs do not date the introduction of the im-
plement. It has long been known that traces of criss-cross plough-marks are
preserved under third-millennium round-barrows in north-west Europe; but

                                           168




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        ASPECTS     OF   THE    SECONDARY          PRODUCTS          REVOLUTION


               North-central       Carpathian          Western
B.C.             Europe              Basin             steppes

4OOO           Roessen             Tiszapolgar         Tripole BII



                Early TRB           Bodrogkeresztur Tripole CI
35OO


                Middle              Baden              Tripole CI I      <= Plough
                Neolithic                               (Usatovo)          Cart
                                                                           (Milk?)
3OOO

                Corded-ware/        Vucedol             Pit-graves       <= Wool
                 Beaker                                                    Horse
                                                                           Tumuli
                                                                           Alloying
2500            Early               Nagyrev             Catacomb-
                 Unetice                                 graves



2000            Late Unetice        Otomani            Timber-graves     <=• Chariot


Table 6.1 The earliest cultural contexts of features of the secondary products
complex in Europe.
now six examples preserved under late fourth-millennium long-barrows
are known, from Britain to Poland (Figure 6.8). At Sarnowo in Kujavia
a trapezoid barrow of the Wiorek phase of TRB overlay parallel plough-
furrows. A radiocarbon date for a pit beneath the barrow gave a terminus
post quern in the fifth millennium BC (Bakker et al. 1969, 7; Wislanski 1970)
and a more direct date is suggested from a nearby Wiorek site at Zar^bowo
dated to 3400 BC (2674 ± 40 b.c.). In Denmark four examples are known,
dating to the Middle Neolithic, around 3400-3200 BC. They are Lundehoj
on Mon (MN II-IV: 0rsnes 1956), Fuglebaeksbanken on Stevns in west
Zealand (MN lb: Ebbesen and Petersen 1973), Himmelev 53 in central
Zealand (MN lb) and Steneng in south Jutland (Skaarup 1975, note 239).
Finally, in southern England a long-barrow at Avebury, Wiltshire covered an
area of plough-marks some fifteen metres square. It was radiocarbon dated
by material from underneath and within it to 3500-3200 BC (Fowler and
Evans 1967). The coincidence of these dates is remarkable.
   There is also a striking similarity between the dates for the appearance of
the plough and the cart, and when the evidence is plotted in conjunction
(Figure 6.9) it forms a consistent pattern. The plough and cart seem to have
been developed somewhere in northern Mesopotamia by the early fourth
millennium BC, and to have spread in not much more than 500 years as
far as north-west Europe (Table 6.1), where it arrived around 3500 BC.

                                            169




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


Assuming a similar rate of spread to other parts of Europe, it would have
reached the Aegean by around 3400 BC, and Iberia by 3200 BC.
   This horizon has long been recognised as marking a major change in
culture and settlement patterns. It marks the beginning of the Early Bronze
Age in Transcaucasia, Anatolia, the Aegean and the Balkans; the Tripole-
Usatovo transition in the Ukraine; the Baden culture in central Europe;
the Middle Neolithic (Passage-grave) period in north-west Europe, and the
Chalcolithic of south-west Europe. There is thus reason to believe that the
introduction of this traction complex, and perhaps other features, was of
major importance in European culture-history; and that its spread to other
areas may have been equally significant.

Animals for riding and transport
The fourth millennium also saw the domestication of four or five species of
animals which, although hunted in earlier periods, had not been economical
to domesticate. These, however, were animals which could be ridden, or
used as pack- or draught-animals, and included equids and camels. Their
suitability as transport animals helps to explain their independent but near-
contemporary domestication from Egypt and Arabia to the Ukraine and
Turkmenia.

The equids. The genus Equus entered the Old World in the Late Pliocene,
and the modern distribution of species is the result of geographical
speciation during the Pleistocene. This produced four main groups within
the desert-steppe belt: zebras in sub-Saharan Africa, asses in north Africa,
half asses (hemiones) or onagers in the Near East, and true horses in
Eurasia.
   The horse (Equus caballus) was widespread in the steppe-tundras of the
last glaciation, and survived in small numbers in forested areas in the
Holocene; but its main habitat was the steppe belt from the Ukraine to
Mongolia. The contexts of the earliest horse domestication were the
sedentary cattle-keeping but non-agricultural communities of the middle
Dnepr, neighbours of agricultural Tripole groups in the parallel river valleys
further west in the late fifth and fourth millennia BC. These sites of the
Sredni Stog group of the Dnepr-Donets culture contain Tripole B imports.
At one of these, Dereivka, south of Kiev, a large number of bones of a small
variety of horse have been recovered, and dated by radiocarbon to around
4400 BC (Telegin 1971). These have been widely accepted as indicative of an
early stage of domestication, and features of material culture interpreted as
riding equipment. The keeping of horses spread from this area only in the
mid-fourth millennium, at around the time when the traction complex was
becoming widespread. The percentage of horses in Tripole C assemblages
shows a leap from 5 per cent to 15 per cent over the previous period (Figure
6.10), at the same time that sheep became more common than cattle both

                                            170




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        ASPECTS     OF    THE    SECONDARY          PRODUCTS         REVOLUTION


             Tripole




             0                      10                     20                  30
                                                                 % min. ind.

6.10 Percentages of horse (minimum numbers of individuals) in faunal assem-
blages of the three phases of the Tripole culture (data from Murray 1970). [In fact,
the increase probably reflects Tripole expansion into the steppes, and thus mostly
hunted animals - not the spread of domesticated horses.]
among Tripole groups and the successors of the Sredni Stog group. This
coincided with a widespread colonisation of the true steppe area in the
interfluves between the major river valleys, and formed part of the radical
economic changes behind the emergence of the Pit-Grave culture in this
area.
   Horses spread more slowly into forested Europe than did the traction
complex, but became widespread in the later third millennium. They are
evidenced in large numbers on the Island of Csepel below Budapest in the
Beaker period, when they also seem to have reached Ireland (Nobis 1971;
van Wijngaarden-Bakker 1975). At the same time they spread down into the
Near East through the Caucasus and eastern Anatolia, down to the Levant
and Mesopotamia. Riders on horseback are shown on terracotta plaques of
the Old Babylonian period, and though difficult to distinguish from the
native onagers, horses are well documented by the later third millennium,
though the expense of keeping them in a sub-tropical environment restricted
their ownership.
   The onager (Equus hemionus) was a widely hunted species in the Near
East during the early Neolithic. Lightly built and fast-moving, it is not easy
to domesticate and is often shown muzzled in Mesopotamian represen-
tations. It was probably first used in the steppes of Assyria or Khuzestan in
the later fourth millennium BC, before the spread of the horse, and is most
probably the equid shown on proto-Elamite tablets (Scheil 1923). In Early
Dynastic times during the third millennium they (or their hybrids) were
applied as draught animals to the solid-wheeled battle-cars with two or four
wheels of the kind shown in the Agrab model or on the Standard of Ur. They
were harnessed in the same way as cattle, and controlled by means of a nose
ring: but it took four animals to pull even the two-wheeled cars. Terracotta


                                             171




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:




6.11 Pottery model of donkey with panniers, broken from the rim of a vessel.
From Cyprus, EB III (late third millennium BC); (Ashmolean Museum).
plaques show that equids were ridden at least by the later third millennium.
   The southwards spread of the horse displaced the onager from most of its
uses, including that of traction animal. The vehicles with which it was used,
however, underwent a more rapid development to make them more suitable
for equids. This probably took place in northern Mesopotamia, Anatolia
and northern Iran: an early stage is shown by the use of the cross-bar wheel
with a central splat and two struts on a seal from Tepe Hissar, and true
spoked wheels are known from Cappadocia from the end of the third
millennium (Moorey 1968). In Mesopotamia in the early second millen-
nium, traction equids were still controlled by a nose ring: but on the
Eurasian steppes the new light vehicles were joined to more sophisticated
traditions of horsemanship using the bit. Horse bits and spoked wheels are
together evidenced in eastern Europe shortly after 2000 BC in sites of the
Mad'arovce and Otomani cultures, where bone cheek-pieces and clay
models of four-spoke wheels have been found in Hungary, Slovakia and
Moravia (Tihelka 1954; Bona 1960; Vizdal 1972). The spoke-wheeled cart
spread equally rapidly eastwards across the steppes, and it is represented in
a drawing on a pot of the Timber-Grave culture, and on rock engravings in
Kirgizia and Kazakhstan (Cherednichenko 1976). It was probably by this
route that spoke-wheeled vehicles reached China.
   The third equid to be domesticated at this time was the ass or donkey
(Equus asinus). Its natural distribution is from Algeria to Sinai and possibly

                                             172




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        ASPECTS     OF   THE SECONDALT Y PRODUCTS                    REVOLUTION


into the Levant. The advantage of the species is its docility and low dietary
needs, making it a most economical animal especially in the Near East and
Mediterranean. It thus provided a natural complement to the horse in this
region. It was known as a domesticated animal for pack use in the EBA of
Palestine around 3000 BC and in Egypt from the early third millennium BC
onwards. It was used in Cyprus in the later third millennium as a pack
animal, as shown in EB III figurines (Figure 6.11). Especially when crossed
with the horse to produce the mule, the vigorous but infertile inter-specific
hybrid, it was perhaps the most important form of bulk, long-distance
transport, and must have formed the basis for the expanding overland trade
networks of the later third and second millennia, such as the well-
documented route linking Assur with the karum of Kanis. In this role, it was
of even greater economic importance than the horse itself.

The camels. Like the equids, camels also spread through the Old World
in the Pleistocene, though they did not penetrate so far or split into geo-
graphical species to the same extent. While all belong to the species Camelus
dromedarius, they fall into two regional populations which were probably
independently domesticated. The more primitive woolly, two-humped or
'Bactrian' camel is adapted to the cooler steppe and mountain fringe of
Eurasia, and the more advanced, single-humped dromedary or 'Arabian'
camel to the more arid areas of Arabia and north Africa. The advantage of
the camel as a transport animal is that it can carry twice as much as a
donkey, faster, for less frequent feeding and watering (Bulliet 1975).
   The one-hump camel was probably domesticated from at least the early
third millennium, and is possibly shown loaded on a pot from the cemetery
of Abusir-el-Melek in lower Egypt; while the two-humped form is shown on
a contemporary bronze pick from Khurab in southern Iran (Zeuner 1963).
The two-hump form seems to have been part of the traction complex, being
controlled by a nose ring and shown pulling vehicles in central Asia, for
instance on third-millennium cart models with solid wheels and a camel's
head from Turkmenia, or on rock drawings showing camels pulling spoke-
wheeled carts from the region of Minusinsk (Bulliet 1975, 153,185; Figure
7.6). Camel bones are known from the Andronovo and Timber-Grave
cultures, and camel-hair was claimed at Maikop. The one-hump form,
traditionally controlled by a noseband, became more common in the first
millennium as Arab groups opened up the desert trade routes.
   With the equids and the camels, five independent but parallel episodes of
domestication took place during the fourth millennium, partly in direct
association with the traction complex, and partly in adjoining parts of the
semi-arid zone. Asses and camels in north Africa, onagers in the Near East
itself, and horses and camels in the Eurasian steppe and semi-desert zone, all
contributed to a more general transportation complex able to deal with a
wide range of conditions. Within this area, individual animals spread and

                                            173




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


replaced or complemented the others, as well as expanding beyond this
nuclear area into many parts of the Old World. Together they produced a
revolutionary increase in transport potential.

Milk and wool
Milk. Basic to the economics of keeping animals for exploitation in the ways
discussed earlier in this article is the use of milk. If animals are being used
for purposes other than meat, they are too valuable a resource to slaughter
simply when required for food. While surplus males may be eaten, larger
numbers of females are needed for breeding stock. To carry the numbers of
beasts required for a working population and a breeding population, some
continuously usable food-product is really necessary - milk or in some cases
blood.
   Milk has several advantages. From a dietary point of view, it supplies the
amino-acid lysine which is missing in cereal-based food. It contains fat,
protein and sugar in a balanced form, and is a useful source of calcium.
Being liquid, it is easily handled, and can be converted into a variety of
storable products. These qualities, together with its almost universal associ-
ation with domesticated livestock at the present time, have led many writers
to assume that milking was practised from the earliest Neolithic onwards.
   But the matter is not so simple. In the first place, animals which are not
specially bred for the purpose do not produce large quantities of surplus
milk; and moreover may not readily surrender it to the herdsman. Nor are
human populations physiologically well adapted to use, as adults, the
specific form of sugar which milk contains. Indeed, most adults suffer an
unpleasant, even dangerous, reaction to drinking milk - 'a bloated feeling,
flatulence, belching, cramps and a watery, explosive diarrhoea' (Kretchmer
1972, 72). Realisation that Euroamerican populations are unusual in their
tolerance to milk as adults has come only recently. Tests with American
negroes first showed that the adult ability to digest milk is not present in
mankind as a whole (Bayless and Rosenzweig 1966), and tests of popu-
lations around the world showed how restricted that ability is (McCracken
1971). This realisation made sense of the evidence being assembled on the
distribution of the milking habit itself (Simoons 1969; 1970). It was so long
in being recognised because of the concentration of research and medical
skills among the populations most tolerant of milk - European and
American whites. In the present context, it is of fundamental importance.
    Milk has three components: fat, protein, and milk-sugar, known as
lactose. This last is a disaccharide, composed of glucose and galactose, and
is synthesised only in the mammary gland. It is broken down in the small
intestine by the enzyme lactase, which splits the disaccharide into glucose -
which is used directly - and galactose, which is metabolised by the liver.
In the absence of lactase, the lactose remains undigested and is fermented
by the bacteria of the colon. It is this which causes the explosive diarrhoea.

                                             174




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        ASPECTS     OF   THE SECONDALT Y PRODUCTS                    REVOLUTION


The cause of lactose intolerance is thus lactase deficiency (Kretchmer 1972).
   In all mammals except human lactose-tolerant populations, the pro-
duction of lactase is at a maximum shortly after birth and ceases after
infancy - in man, from two to four years of age. This represents the normal
situation, and fits the pattern of other temporarily produced enzymes.
Lactase production is not stimulated to any extent by the continued in-
gestion of lactose. Lactose-tolerance is transmitted genetically, and indeed is
a dominant trait, although incompletely so. American black populations are
approximately 70 per cent intolerant in comparison with ancestral West
African populations, who at the present time are 98 per cent intolerant.
Lactose-intolerance is particularly high among Chinese, Thais, agricultural
West Africans (though not nomadic groups like the Fulani), South Ameri-
cans and New Guineans, of those tested. In short, lactose-tolerance is the
result of a relatively recent evolutionary episode, and adult milk-drinking a
late and restricted feature of human diet (Kretchmer 1972; Simoons 1969).
   The elaborate preparation of milk products may have been necessary
because of a limited tolerance of lactose. Fermented products such as yogurt
and cheese have a lower lactose content than fresh milk (McCracken 1971),
and it is a general pattern in the Mediterranean that most of the milk is pro-
cessed in this way. Low levels of tolerance are common today in Greece and
south Italy, and such processing is analogous to the preparation of bitter
manioc for consumption in South America.
   The well-known Chinese aversion to milk, often cited as an example of
an irrational food preference, is part of a more widespread phenomenon
with a basic biological explanation. The geographical distribution of the
practice of milking (Simoons 1970, 702) shows a continuous area from
Morocco to eastern India (with non-milking enclaves there suggesting a
recent expansion of the practice), extending southwards in east Africa but
not penetrating into south-east Asia and Oceania. It comprises those areas
connected via the steppe corridor and the Sahara, the arid belt across Africa
and Eurasia. In the centre of this area are the mountains of the Near East
and surrounding steppes. The distribution suggests a mid-Holocene origin
for the practice, somewhere in this central area, and it seems likely that
milking and milk-consumption form another aspect of the complex of
secondary uses and products which has been outlined above; indeed, it was
probably a precondition for these developments.
   The limited tolerance of human populations to milk is only one side of
the problem: the reluctance or inability of the cow to provide it is the other.
For a modern perspective on this we may turn to the pastoral groups studied
by ethnographers (Cranstone 1969). These illustrate the difficulties faced
by people who do not have the highly bred milch animals of north-west
Europe. The problem is to allow the animals to accumulate their milk, and
to persuade them to let it down to a human milker. Cows are often separated
from their calves during the day, to prevent their taking milk. However, they

                                            175




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:




6.12 Cylinder-seal and drawing of its impression, showing reed-built byres with
calves and milk-jugs, with a frieze of adult animals above. The seal itself is
surmounted by a silver ram. From Iraq, Uruk period (late fourth millennium BC);
(Ashmolean Museum).

                                            176




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        ASPECTS     OF   THE    SECONDALT Y P R O D U C T S          REVOLUTION




6.13 Inlaid scene of milking, forming part of the frieze of the temple to Nin-
Hursag built by A-an-ni-pa-da at El 'Ubeid, Iraq. Early Dynastic (mid-third
millennium BC); (by permission of the Trustees of the British Museum).

or some surrogate need to be present at the milking, to stimulate lactation
and to activate the milk ejection reflex (Amoroso and Jewell 1963). The
action of letting down the milk is a true reflex, involving the release by the
pituitary gland of the hormone oxytocin which stimulates contraction of the
muscles which press on the milk storage sacs. This reflex may be activated
by stimulation either of the teat and mammary gland, or (because of the role
of oxytocin in initiating uterine contractions) the vagina and cervix. It is
thus a common custom among present and ancient pastoralists to blow,
often using a special tube, into the rectum or vagina of the animal during
milking. The milker is thus positioned behind the animal, rather than at the
side as is otherwise more convenient. Instruments for this purpose have been
identified archaeologically, for instance in the Baden culture (Banner 1956)
and in south Russia (Galkin 1975).
   These features were once widespread, not only among specialised
pastoralists but in all the groups which practised milking. Uruk period seals
show the adult cattle returning to huts where the young have been stalled
during the day (Figure 6.12). From the Early Dynastic III period comes the
famous relief from the temple of Nin-Hursag at El Ubeid, built by A-an-ni-
pad-da, second king of the first dynasty of Ur. This shows in great detail the
actual milking - from the back, with the aid of an insufflator - and the
processing of the milk (Figure 6.13). The small udders on these early cows
suggest that they were not highly bred for milk, and such stimulation would
be essential. The milking position behind the animal is also shown in an
Early Dynastic inlay from Kish; and it was still in use in Minoan times,
as shown by a sealing (Figure 6.14) from the Archives Deposit at Knossos
(Evans 1935). Goats are also shown being milked on Early Dynastic
cylinder-seals. In Egypt a hobbled cow is shown being milked in the presence
of a calf in the tomb of Ti in the Old Kingdom (Klebs 1915, 63). Milking is
apparently shown on some central Saharan rock drawings from Tassili and
the Fezzan, but their date is difficult to determine and there is no evidence that
they are earlier than the third millennium BC (Simoons 1971; Clark 1976).
   The biochemical and iconographic evidence thus suggests that although
milking was known by the time of the first representations in early urban

                                            177




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                          PLOUGH       AND       PASTORALISM:




                                        \
                                            \




                                                                    i^MMlHlfl
                                            /
                                        /



                                                        ill

6.14 Early milking: left, sealing from Knossos, Crete, Late Bronze Age (later
second millennium), showing milking from behind (Evans 1935(4), fig. 534);
right, shell inlay from Kish, Iraq, ED III (mid-second millennium) (Ashmolean
Museum).

contexts in the Near East, it was not of much greater antiquity. Is there any
other evidence which would date the adoption and spread of the practice?
One suggestion comes from pottery. It has long been noted that the Bronze
Age sees a radical change in the kinds of vessels which constitute typical
assemblages. Specifically, the open bowls which dominated Neolithic assem-
blages were supplemented by a range of drinking and pouring vessels, and
a variety of pails (Figure 6.15). In the Mediterranean, the jugs and cups have
been attributed to the discovery of wine (Renfrew 1971, 282), and this may
be the case, but the changes affect a much wider area than that feature could
explain. They clearly reflect some dietary innovation occurring in southern,
central and northern Europe within a similar time range. Some types of
Bronze Age pottery, like the Appenine 'milk boilers' or the Cypriot 'milk
bowls' have already been characterised as being for such use. It seems likely
that the widespread adoption of shapes appropriate for the manipulation of
liquids is connected with the spread of the milking habit and the use of milk
products. This would explain the often uncanny resemblances between
distant areas, which have usually been used to argue for major migrations.
The massive array of parallels assembled by Kalicz between the Baden
culture and Anatolian Early Bronze Age cultures, for instance, finds an
acceptable explanation here [though see Chapters 8, 15 and 16]. Parallels
between EBA Bulgaria and Cyprus become comprehensible. The universal
appearance of strapwork-ornamented bucket-shaped pots, from one end of
Europe to the other, becomes less surprising; while the Fischbuttengefass
which appears in central Europe with the Baden culture has long been
explained in Ghassulian contexts in Palestine as a churn.
   Such lactic products, if such they were, probably had initially some ritual
and social significance, especially if they included the intoxicating products
of fermentation such as kumish. Precisely such an association is demon-
strated in the Baden culture cemeteries of Hungary, where the two cart


                                                178




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

       ASPECTS      OF THE SECONDALT Y PRODUCTS                     REVOLUTION

    CENTRAL EUROPE                        BALKANS                        CYPRUS




     N-W. EUROPE                         BALKANS                          T
                                                                          IAL
                                                                            Y




6.15 Pottery forms concerned with the manipulation of liquids and associated
with the spread of the secondary products complex. [The lower ones may be for
milk-processing, the upper ones - many with metal models - more probably for
alcoholic drinks.]



                                            179




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


burials at Alsonemedi were accompanied by identical assemblages consist-
ing of a finely made pottery jug, cup, dipper and bipartite bowl. From the
grave which produced the Szigetszentmarton cart model (Figure 6.2a) came
a precisely similar combination; and that model was itself a cup! The asso-
ciation of drinking and driving evidently began at an early stage in their
history. These coincidences strengthen the view that we are dealing with
an interdependent complex of features, which spread to a large extent in
association.

Wool. The textile-fibre which became most important in the Old World,
wool, was not present in the first four to five millennia after the initial
domestication of the sheep. Vegetable fibres formed the basis of the earliest
textiles, as in the New World, where cotton (Gossypium) fibre was de-
veloped by agricultural groups to supplement the older tradition of skin and
leather clothing. Flax (Linum usitatissimum) was the most common Old
World vegetable fibre, and already woven into elaborately patterned linen
textiles before the emergence of wool. This persisted in some hot countries
even after wool became common elsewhere: Egyptian Old Kingdom sheep
were commonly of non-woolly types. Wool sheep were not introduced into
Egypt until the Middle Kingdom.
   The date at which wool sheep developed is being made more precise by
microscopic examination of prehistoric fibres (Ryder 1969). These have
already suggested that claims of an early date for woollen fibres (as at Qatal
Hiiyiik) are mistaken. As with milking and paired-draught traction, the
earliest evidence comes with the beginning of a literary and pictorial record
during urbanisation in Mesopotamia. While such evidence gives only a
terminus ante quern, the replacement of linen by woollen textiles can be
traced in some detail from waterlogged contexts in Europe, and these show
that the transition had not occurred there before the mid-third millennium
BC. It seems most likely, therefore, that it had developed not long before the
first indications in the Near East. Examination of further samples will make
this more precise.
    The wild sheep has a brown, hairy coat with short, woolly underhair.
It was the development of underhair at the expense of the coarser outer hairs
or kemps which produced the wool sheep. This was probably deliberately
selected, in cold environments where the tendency was already present in
wild populations. Lighter colours of fleece were also sought, though early
sheep were probably more pigmented than today's breeds.
    By the time of the Uruk pictographs (Falkenstein 1936) there were over
thirty signs representing sheep. Pictorial evidence from the Proto-literate
period indicates that both hairy and woolly sheep were known, as well as
the fat-tailed breed. Sheep which are shown as being milked belong to the
spiral-horned variant of the wool sheep (Zeuner 1963, 173; Amoroso and
Jewell 1963). Early Dynastic sculptures and cylinder-seals not infrequently

                                             180




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        ASPECTS    OF   THE SECONDALT Y P R O D U C T S             REVOLUTION


show woolly sheep alongside hairy ones, while Old Babylonian shearing
lists indicate the organisation of wool collection (Kraus 1966, 47) and the
importance of the spring shearing in the agricultural calendar. The wool
would at this stage have been plucked, as it was naturally moulted, and
somewhat finer wool obtained as many of the coarser hairs were left behind.
    Marked changes in the exploitation of sheep appear in Europe in the
third millennium. In Hungary, sheep increase as a percentage of bones on
sites to 40 per cent or more, in comparison to figures of around 10 per cent
in the preceding period (Bokonyi 1974, figs 1 and 2). A similar change
occurs in the Early Bronze Age in the Alpine region and in Greece (Halstead
1981). In addition, the withers height increases dramatically, and there are
higher percentages of mature and old animals. Horns also increase in size,
though individuals without horns are common. These Bronze Age sheep
must have resembled the still-surviving Soay breed.
    These changes become comprehensible when attention is paid to the
textiles preserved in the Swiss lake villages (Vogt 1937). Of the fourth- and
early-third-millennium examples, all are linen, with leather being used for
garments requiring greater robustness. Wool appears in the late third
millennium. The proliferation of Early Bronze Age pin types represents the
adoption of fastenings suitable to the loose woollen weaves which were
introduced in this period, replacing the buttoned leather clothing of the
Neolithic. The extensively preserved Bronze Age costumes from Danish
coffin burials (Hald 1950) indicate the types of garment produced.
    One factor which favoured the expansion of textile production was the
change to a predominant male role in agriculture, leaving the women free to
spin and weave (see below). As medieval economic historians have long
been aware, woollen commodities are among the most basic items of inter-
regional trade, and are usually the first manufactured goods to be traded on
a large scale. Exports in developing areas shift from basic subsistence items
like grain to manufactured products. This process can be observed in Meso-
potamia during the course of the third millennium, and the development of
such trade may have had an important role in extending the urban network.
The role which wool and textiles played in the economies of the second
millennium is clear from the textual evidence, both in Mesopotamia,
Anatolia, and in Crete (Killen 1964).

The economics of secondary products            exploitation
When animals are raised purely for meat, it is economic to slaughter them
while they are relatively young. For instance, the same amount of fodder
(33,000kg of hay-equivalent) would raise seven calves to two years as would
be needed to take three of them to three and a half years; and the former
strategy yields 40 per cent more meat (Lotka 1956,120). The increase in live
weight for the first two years is roughly proportional to the amount of feed
consumed, but after that age the live weight increases more slowly while the

                                            181




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         PLOUGH        AND    PASTORALISM:


feed consumption stays consent (ibid., 133). It is th         ~e advantageous
to crop the population at this point (or even earlier, whe„ aiere are seasonal
fodder shortages), leaving only breeding stock, mostly females. Even the
breeding stock, however, would not be kept beyond the age of reproduction.
   Milking is a highly efficient mode of exploitation, giving four or five times
the amount of protein and energy from the same amount of feed as would
exploitation for meat. The use of cattle for beef recovers about 3.5 per cent
of the energy which they have consumed in feed: with modern breeds the use
for milk recovers 18 per cent (ibid., 136). Vitamins and salts (like calcium
compounds) which are present only in small quantities in muscular tissue
are abundant in milk. The kill-off strategy must be thus adjusted to
maximise the number of lactating animals, by increasing the proportion of
mature females. Male animals may either be mostly slaughtered very early
(even at birth in a documented example from medieval Ireland: Amoroso
and Jewell 1963, 135), or else kept for a longer period as an insured meat
supply in extreme environments. Thus the Karimojong of Uganda, although
dependent largely on milk (Dyson-Hudson and Dyson-Hudson 1969), may
have only 12 per cent of lactating animals in their herds because of the high
proportion of males (40 per cent), the long maturation period for cattle
(three and a half to four years), the long period between calves (fourteen
months), and the short lactation period (eight months or less). Female
animals kept for milk are usually retained for long periods: an Estonian herd
recorded in 1651 had half its cows over seven years and a third over ten
years old (Slicher van Bath 1963, 287).
   Animals used for traction are usually castrated males which at the age
of three to four years are almost fully-grown, and have been trained as
draught-animals since the age of two or three. The numbers of animals
which must be maintained depends on the total amount of work during the
year, and the extent to which it has to be done simultaneously. In India
(especially the Central region), a short wet-season makes it imperative that
each peasant should have a pair of bullocks to get his cultivation completed
in time, since it must be done at once when the rains come (Clark and
Haswell 1964, 55): this need underlies the maintenance of large numbers of
scavenging cows as breeding stock, even though their milk yields are poor
(Harris 1966). In medieval Europe there was increasing pressure on working
livestock because of the expanding arable, even though plough teams were
shared by the community (Warriner 1939).
   The interpretation of kill-off patterns in a prehistoric European cattle
population has been considered by Higham and Message for the TRB Middle
Neolithic settlement of Troldebjerg in Langeland, Denmark (1969). On the
basis of metacarpals, radii and mandibles, they reconstructed a pattern with
low mortality in animals of both sexes up to two or three years of age,
differential slaughter of castrated males from that age up to four years, with
about a sixth of all animals surviving beyond that point. This argues against


                                             182




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        ASPECTS     OF   THE SECONDALT Y PRODUCTS                   REVOLUTION


a pure meat economy, but does not suggest very highly developed ex-
ploitation of secondary products. It suggests small numbers of milch cows,
and the possibility of a few traction-animals. The pattern conforms to
Boessneck's observations (1956, 34) from Bavarian Neolithic settlements,
that half the animals slaughtered were young to subadult. The handful of
systematic investigations which have so far been made on this material,
however, needs to be multiplied many times before comparative patterns can
be defined. [Recent publications (Davis 1987; 1993; Benecke 1994a; 1994b)
have continued to refine the picture presented here.]
    For sheep, Payne (1973) has reported early results from his continuing
investigation into comparative patterns of mortality. He has suggested
model life-tables for different types of exploitation (ibid., figs 1-3). For
meat, similar considerations apply as to cattle: the optimum period for
cropping surplus stock is between one and a half and two and a half years,
with males preferentially slaughtered at this point. Milk production makes
it advantageous to keep at least half of the female animals beyond five years,
and some even up to ten. With wool production, males become equally
valuable at these ages also, so that there is a roughly symmetrical distri-
bution with a high proportion of both sexes being kept up to six years and
beyond. Historical samples studied by Payne show animals being carried up
to eight years, as does a Bronze Age sample from the west Anatolian site of
Beycesultan: by contrast, the sheep from the Early Neolithic site of Nea
Nikomedia in north Greece were all killed before four years of age, many
in their first year (Payne, pers. comm.). Ducos has suggested that kill-off
patterns characteristic of secondary product utilisation began in Palestine
with the Ghassulian (1973, 84). Halstead (1981) has investigated these
suggestions in Neolithic Greece and concludes that secondary products were
not a feature of early stock economies there. The evidence from osteological
studies thus supports the contention that domestic animals before the fourth
and third millennia BC were exploited only for their meat, and that the
spread of secondary products utilisation brought about major changes in
animal husbandry.



INTERACTIONS A N D EFFECTS
A general model
The evidence reviewed above suggests that a number of major innovations
occurred in the Near East and adjacent areas in the middle or later fourth
millennium BC; and that these innovations spread and interacted with each
other so as to cause major economic changes during the course of the third
millennium. This revolution in animal husbandry involved using old
domesticates in new ways, and in domesticating a new range of species. It
resembled the previous phase of Near Eastern domestication in the eighth

                                           183




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


and seventh millennia in that different parts of the area, evolving in parallel
with local resources, each contributed to a package of compatible elements
with widespread application. A general explanation may therefore be
suggested.
   These developments were not accidentally coincident. They represented
a variety of similar responses to a common problem, the pattern of popu-
lation growth and territorial expansion which had been initiated by the
beginnings of animal and plant domestication in that area some four
thousand years before. Such problems became especially acute with the need
to penetrate increasingly marginal environments in a landscape containing
sharp contrasts in climate and terrain within short distances. They were
partly dependent on biological changes both in man, in the case of tolerance
to lactose, and his stock, for instance with wool. They involved an increased
scale of investment in animal husbandry, and together they produced a new
phase of man-animal relationships (Figure 6.16).
   An increase in the scale of animal keeping was the basic feature. The
population of domestic animals had to contain both breeding stock and
working or production stock, as well as any beasts kept solely for meat. The
maintenance of such an increased population was greatly facilitated by the
practice of milking. It was this which made other uses possible, by allowing
the continuous cropping of a subsistence product from a standing herd.
   As agricultural communities expanded to the edges of the Fertile Cres-
cent, they encountered extensive semi-arid areas which supported large
mobile animal populations. Because of the uncertainty it involved, in areas
without alternative resources, hunting was not a viable economy. With a
product like milk which could be continuously obtained, and especially with
the added mobility given by draught- and riding-animals, such areas could
be exploited by pastoralism. Because of the easier alternative methods of
increasing subsistence, especially by small-scale irrigation, this pattern was
slow to evolve. The evolution of lactose-tolerant populations removed an
important brake on the development of such systems, which could them-
selves develop techniques of milk processing (initially for storage) which
rendered it usable by non-tolerant populations. The adaptation could thus
spread more rapidly than its genetic basis.
    Where did this process of adaptation take place? It is probably mis-
leading to look for any closely defined region of origin, but it would appear
that the process was occurring during the late Ubaid period in the second
half of the fifth millennium BC and first half of the fourth, in northern Iraq,
Syria and Palestine. The Ghassulian culture in Palestine shows a ceramic
inventory including vessels for pouring and manipulating liquids, including
the famous 'butter churn', and the suggestion of a mortality pattern among
its livestock of the kind indicating secondary products has already been
noted. Equally suggestive are the large numbers of sites which appear at this
period in the arid areas of south Palestine and Sinai (Rothenberg 1970),


                                             184




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

         ASPECTS         OF    THE SECONDALT Y PRODUCTS                  REVOLUTION




                                                                               New social
                                                                               structures
                                                                               wider networks,
                                                                               more centralisation
                                                                               of exchange,
                                                                               inter-regional roles

                                                                               New land use
                                                                               systems
                                                                               plough agriculture,
                                                                               transhumance,
                                                                               pastoralism


                                                                               New social
                                                                               structures
    Continuous                                                                 male dominated,
    deforestation and                                                          emphasis on property
    increasing pasture                                                         transmission



                              Milking                     Tree crops
                 {lactose tolerance)
                                            J   L
             Stage I (4th millennium B C)       Stage II (3rd millenium BC)



6.16 Interaction of the components of the secondary products complex in western
Eurasia through time. [This diagram has been much misunderstood, and is
perhaps misleading in trying to combine chronology and causality in a single
representation. Note, in any case, that it is not regionally specific: it offers a
general picture of western Eurasia as a whole.]

indicative of methods of coping with such dry environments, and important
also in the acquisition of raw materials like copper. Indeed, the formation of
populations in the dryer interstices would have had an important effect on
patterns of trade and contact (Sherratt 1976).
   The application of certain features of this system was not restricted,
however, to semi-arid areas. The use of draught-animals, especially, had
revolutionary implications for cultivation in better-watered areas. Not only
did the cart improve transport on the farm, but the innovation of a
'mechanical hoe', the plough, increased the farmer's ability to prepare his
land by a factor of up to four or more. (For the economics of this, see Clark
and Haswell 1964, 55.) This both increased the productivity of good land,
and made economical the preparation of land from which a poorer yield
might be expected. It seems likely that the plough played a critical role in the
cultivation of tree crops which began at this period (Zohary and Spiegel-
Roy 1975). An intensification of agricultural production was thus a parallel
development to the expansion of pastoral populations. Furthermore, the
large-scale production of wool, an animal product suitable for manu-
factures, provided a greatly increased potential for trade. It was the juxta-
position of contrasting environmental zones which produced in the Near
East such innovating co-action (Figure 6.17; cf. Clarke 1968, 355).

                                                    185




                                   This content downloaded from
                 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                           All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

6.17 Origins and interaction of the main elements of the secondary products
complex: (a) 4000 BC, primary developments; (b) 3000 BC, inter-regional exchange
and spread; (c) 2000 BC, continuing exchange and interaction. [In (b), I would
now take ox-traction through Anatolia as well as the Pontic steppes, as in Fig. 0.5;
and in (c) I would take the chariot through the Balkans rather than the Caucasus,
as described in Chapter 7.]

                                            186




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        ASPECTS     OF   THE SECONDALT Y PRODUCTS                    REVOLUTION


   This agricultural revolution was well under way by the later fourth
millennium in Mesopotamia and Khuzestan, where the massive increase in
population on the alluvium created an extensive demand for raw materials.
Ramifying trade links spread advanced techniques into the hinterlands,
while the increasingly urbanised populations of the lowlands began the
manufacture of woollen textiles. At the same time, semi-dependent pastoral
populations continued to grow in the areas where grain-growing was un-
profitable.
   The links between these differentiating subsistence specialisations, in-
tensive cultivation and mobile pastoralism, were probably deeper than
simple trading relationships. Such diversity opens up the possibility of poly-
ethnic and symbiotic social systems (Barth 1969), with a fluctuating balance
between sedentarisation and nomadisation, or long-term flows of popu-
lation between economies with different patterns of fertility and mortality -
notably across ethnic boundaries (Barth 1964, ch. 9). Such a complex
system, despite its inbuilt homeostatic features, has the potential for violent
change when there are rapid shifts in the balance of power: the relationship
between villager or town-dweller and nomad was always ambivalent. The
degree of interdependence involved in a closely adjusted timetable for
stubble grazing and use of winter pastures always contained the potential
for conflict.
   The dual economy of plough and pastoralism was characteristic of areas
of ecological diversity. Thus in mountain areas the pastoral sector was
occupied by transhumant groups which were directly analogous to the
nomads of the arid plains. This pattern became characteristic not only of the
Zagros and the Taurus but also of the Tertiary fold mountains of southern
Europe, where it was also a creation of the third millennium.
   In more arid areas, pastoralism spread without the plough. While plough
cultivation spread along with the rest of the secondary products complex
both to Europe and to India, it did not reach into Africa further than the
upper Nile. Pastoralism, involving milking, was common in the Sahara
probably by the later fourth and almost certainly by the third millennium
BC, and with the third-millennium desiccation some of these populations
were forced southwards (Clark 1976). The continuing penetration into east
Africa took a ploughless and cartless pastoralism down the tropical
grassland corridor, as cattle replaced the native wild ungulates. Cattle were
much less efficient than these animals, some of which (like the eland) were
potentially herdable; and indeed it was their plentiful provision of milk,
urine and dung - which in the native antelopes were sparse and con-
centrated - that made the introduced animals so valuable a resource (Kyle
1972).
   On the Eurasian steppes, pastoralism did not become divorced from
traction and the plough was used in oasis situations. On the other hand, the
well-known Chinese intolerance to lactose inhibited the development of a

                                            187




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


pastoral sector and thus a ready supply c draught-animals, which may
explain the occurrence of draw-spades and plough-like instruments pulled
by human traction (Leser 1931). In India, Harris (1966) has argued that the
very large numbers of animals needed for ploughing with the sharp onset of
the monsoon necessitates a large population of generally poorly nourished
cattle. He has also suggested that the prohibition on pork in large parts
of the Near East stems from the need to devote resources to animals giving
secondary benefits of milk or traction.
   The spread of the secondary products complex, then, offered new
opportunities to populations in many areas of the Old World. Many of the
characteristic features of the present-day ethnographic pattern can be traced
back to this dispersal.

Changes in agricultural systems and settlement               patterns
The changes which the secondary products revolution brought to pre-
historic Europe and the Near East are best demonstrated by the major
changes in settlement pattern which are characteristic of the fourth and
third millennia BC. Before looking at the archaeological evidence, however,
a brief comment on models of early agricultural economies is needed.
   It has often been assumed that the earliest agriculture was some form
of shifting cultivation, involving a 'slash and burn' system of temporary
clearings which were allowed to revert to woodland after a few years of
cropping. Such systems are widely known from agriculturally less developed
areas in the tropics and in peripheral parts of Europe. Ester Boserup (1965)
has suggested a general model of agricultural change in which the fallowing
cycle is progressively reduced as population pressure forces intensification
of production. Plough agriculture would thus be a threshold of development
separating temporary from permanent cultivation.
   The archaeological evidence from Europe and the Near East, however,
does not support such a scheme, and suggests that it may be misleading
to apply directly a model based largely on cultivation in the tropics to the
situation in temperate and sub-tropical regions. In these areas, cultivation
began by being concentrated in small areas of high-yielding land which did
not require a long fallowing cycle. Only later did cultivation spread to
poorer soils where longer fallows were required. In temperate Europe, slash
and burn systems are characteristic of the poor soils under coniferous forest
in Finland and the Carpathians (Balassa 1972) which were among the last to
be settled agriculturally. The introduction of the scratch-plough to Europe
made it economical to cultivate a wider range of soils than before, and thus
to extend the area of cultivation.
    In the Near East and Europe, present evidence suggests an early stage of
spatially restricted, fairly intensive cultivation of areas of high productivity
(Allan 1972), followed by an expansion of the cultivated area either through
irrigation or by tackling more extensive areas of less productive land. The

                                             188




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        ASPECTS      OF   THE SECONDALT Y P R O D U C T S            REVOLUTION


earliest cultivation systems in the Near East seem to have resembled the
floodwater-farming of the American south-west (Bryan 1929), and to have
concentrated on naturally watered mudflats by lakes, rivers and springs.
Expansion in the sixth millennium took place by small-scale irrigation by
water-spreading on alluvial fans, marking the beginning of the Early
Chalcolithic pattern (Oates and Oates 1976). Forms of settlement reflect
a continuing interest in localised resources, with substantial and long-lived
settlements like Jericho and Qatal Hiiyiik existing at an early stage and tell
sites continuing to be characteristic. Despite this stability, however, many
of these early agricultural sites continued to obtain their animal protein by
hunting or loose herding. Gazelle were still the animal staple at Jericho,
while frescoes of cattle at £atal Hiiyiik and onagers at Umm Dabagiyeh
show that there was little incentive to full domestication in open areas
supporting large herds.
    In central Europe, it has been usual to see the first Neolithic communities
as slash and burn agriculturalists with shifting cultivation and settlement
(Wanderbauerntum). This idea was supported by tropical and boreal-forest
analogies, by the existence of temporary clearance phases in pollen dia-
grams, and by inference from the fact that the settlements did not form tells.
This would conform with expectations on the Boserup (1965) model. How-
ever, close study of Early Neolithic settlement, especially in Poland and in
the Netherlands and adjacent parts of Germany (Kruk 1973; Modderman
1970), has demonstrated the stability and longevity of such sites. The
absence of tell formation relates more to differences in building material
than to the character of agriculture, and individual locations were con-
tinuously occupied for comparable spans of time, up to 1000 years in some
cases.
   Moreover, the locations chosen for such sites show a marked preference
for high-quality loessic soils, and within these for waterside positions. In
Little Poland, where the topography has sufficient relief to show locational
preferences with particular clarity, it is clear that these valley-bottom
locations offered access only to a relatively narrow area of land along the
rivers. The distribution of such sites is conspicuously linear throughout
central Europe, and the exploited zone was spatially very restricted although
of maximum productivity. Such limited clearances in the primary forest
would have offered very limited grazing. Cattle must have been kept only in
small numbers and probably partly stall-fed in the characteristic long-
houses.
   The economy would thus have resembled a garden system not unlike
the horticulture or semi-agriculture of the south-eastern parts of pre-contact
North America. While some comparison may be made with hoe cultivation
in the tropics, this temperate hoe cultivation has no true analogy in the Old
World, where it represents an extinct economic type which has everywhere
been replaced by plough cultivation.

                                            189




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


   These early agricultural systems were characterised by a highly selective
pattern of land use, in which population was concentrated in a few zones of
high productivity, and relatively small areas of land were intensively culti-
vated. The system allowed the maintenance of large herds only where there
were significant tracts of naturally open countryside accessible from the
'oases' of settlement. Grazing was increasingly problematic as such systems
penetrated into European forest environments. The lack of large-scale forest
clearance is reflected in a toolkit lacking large, wide-bladed axe forms.
   The effect of the spread of plough cultivation was to produce major
alterations in the structure and distribution of settlement. By contrast to the
limited areas along rivers which the earliest settlers opened up in the forest,
the wider areas opened up by third-millennium groups would have provided
the necessary grazing for the animals needed to till them, and the new system
operated on an extensive rather than a localised, intensive basis. The sites
chosen for settlement were less long-lived, and more rapid turnover of culti-
vated area would have left sufficient fallow for a more balanced form of
mixed agriculture in which the pastoral component was able to grow con-
tinuously with the progress of deforestation. The appearance [or, rather, in-
tensification of activity] at a similar date from England to Russia of mines
and quarries to produce material for effective flint and stone axes for forest
clearance is eloquent testimony to this new scale of attack on the woodland
(Sherratt 1976).
   An increase in the animal component of agriculture which was thus made
possible would have introduced for the first time problems of over-wintering
numbers of stock, but would also have provided manure in useful quanti-
ties. For the first time a balanced crop-livestock husbandry came into being,
with different requirements and patterns of land use. In central and northern
Europe, on the loess lands and the North European Plain, functionally un-
differentiated villages of longhouses were replaced by the variety of sites
which are characteristic of the TRB and related cultures. [This was initially
because of the integration of indigenous populations, as described in
Chapter 13, using more extensive methods of cultivation in which the
plough was increasingly advantageous; but the real shift in settlement
patterns did not occur until Corded Ware: see Chapter 16.]
   The main expansion of hoe agriculture had taken place on medium (silt-
grade) soils like loess. The main expansion of agriculture based on the
scratch-plough in the later third and second millennia took place on lighter
land, especially on sandy soils which were less able to withstand prolonged
cultivation. The vast numbers of round-barrows in areas like central Jut-
land, for instance, bear tribute to the speed with which Late Neolithic and
Early Bronze Age farmers effectively reduced large areas of precariously
wooded glacial outwash-sands to infertile heathland. The occurrence of
Bronze Age tumuli under forest in many parts of Europe show that, once
exhausted, such land was often never recolonised. This cycle of expansion


                                             190




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

              ASPECTS           OF        THE SECONDALT Y P R O D U C T S                    REVOLUTION

                                              Brown   Chernozem Glei     Rendsma
                                              Earth
                                            iO      500       500      500     50       V. '9P
                                                                                       ...m
                                                                                    fy valleys^
                                                                                      . Sites m ,

                                            ItllD                                   v



                                                                                                      A N
0   10
' km 1
                      LBK c 5 0 0 0 B C

           — Edge of survey
          H I Linked sites
              (< 5 km apart)
                                   Lengyel  llll                                                      A N
                                            EIED                                                      EH
                                                                                         Sues on


                            Corded Ware
           ^ Corded Ware c 2000 B C
                                            MOD I                                        elevations




                                                                                    Settlement
                                                                                                      Ml
                                                                                                      • Maiorsites
                                                                                                      C Minor sues
                                                                                                                      • Tumulus
                                                                                                                     //f Contours
Inter-site links                              Soil preference                       situation         Locational pattern
6.18 The development of settlement in the loess uplands of Little Poland, from
5000 to 2000 BC: locational preferences and contact networks. Note the simi-
larities between the first and last pairs, and the shift between Lengyel and TRB
(data from Kruk 1973). [This major shift in fact pre-dates my plough horizon,
and owes more to fusion with native groups, as discussed in Chapter 13.]
reached its limits in the later second millennium, when heavier types of ard
capable of turning a sod were developed as settlement spread to the still
little-used heavy clay and alluvial soils.
    The move from a pattern of concentrated and localised agricultural
exploitation to a wider use of the terrain for light plough cultivation and
extensive grazing had a marked effect on settlement patterns further south.
It is a notable feature of the later fourth millennium BC that the pattern of
tell sites established over the previous two millennia underwent substantial
modifications over a wide area, from Transcausasia to the Balkans. Instead
of long-lived tell sites in the valleys near to water, valley-edge or spur sites
appear and settlements are found in upland locations. The tell sites which
do continue are usually larger, frequently fortified, and with greater inter-
vening distances (Sherratt 1976). The disappearance of large, nucleated
Neolithic sites is also evidenced from the Tavoliere of Apulia, where the
large ditched settlements have been documented by aerial photography.
The shift of population to the plain edge and surrounding mountains in
the Bronze Age indicates the relative advantage of a milk-based pastoral
economy over intensive lowland cereal cultivation. The model has a wide
predictive value throughout the Mediterranean, especially where extensive
upland areas suitable for transhumance surround lowland plains.
    In the Near East, these processes lay behind the increasingly urbanised
character of settlement. Population expanded in the fourth millennium BC
in areas like the terraces of the Konya Plain or the alluvium of lowland
Mesopotamia. In the latter case, the use of the plough was part of the
irrigation-based system which made possible a fivefold increase in the

                                                                191




                                       This content downloaded from
                     128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                               All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


number of sites during the Uruk period. Subsequent development involved
an increasing concentration of population in a few defended centres.
Whether such defences were erected against potentially hostile pastoralist
populations in the drier areas between the irrigated farming areas, or against
the other cities of the region, such concentrations of agrarian population
were made possible by use of the ox-drawn cart for local transport.
   Longer-distance transport links were also made possible by the domesti-
cation of equids as transport-animals. The fertile but stoneless and metal-
less alluvial basin of the Euphrates and Tigris generated an enormous
demand for raw materials. The size of the hinterland over which effective
trade links existed has been demonstrated to extend for up to 1000km in
each direction. To the south-east, the discovery of Proto-Elamite tablets
at Tepe Yahya demonstrates links from Khuzestan to Kirman as early as the
later fourth millennium; while at the same time the site of Habuba el-
Kabireh in northern Syria indicates links along the Euphrates to southern
Iraq (Lamberg-Karlovsky and Lamberg-Karlovsky 1971; Strommenger
1976). In the third millennium the importance of east-central Anatolia to
Mesopotamia is shown both by the military expeditions of Sargon and the
Anatolian origin of gold from the royal graves at Ur (Maxwell-Hyslop
1977). By the second millennium the overland trade routes northwards from
Assur and westwards from Mari were major distribution lines for bulk
supplies both of raw materials like metals and manufactured products like
textiles. These would have been impossible without the use of transport-
animals.
   While the Mesoamerican evidence shows that animal-traction is not
a necessary precondition for the development of urban communities, the
rarity and much later appearance of towns in the New World suggests that
while a variety of settlement systems may eventually reach an urban form,
the higher energy of Old World systems greatly accelerated movement along
this trajectory.

Pastoralism and linguistic change [See also Chapter 19]
The secondary products revolution had large-scale effects in the semi-arid
areas of the Old World. The Eurasian steppes in particular saw important
changes in the distribution and density of population.
   Previously, in the fifth and early fourth millennia, population had been
largely concentrated in the valleys of the major rivers flowing into the Black
Sea. Agricultural settlements of the Tripole culture were confined to the
forest steppe parts, with cattle-keeping, fishing and collecting groups of the
Dnepr-Donets culture along the rivers in the true steppes.
   With the arrival of the cart and traction complex and the spread of the
horse, both groups began to make a greater use of the drier interfluves; and
sheep became the predominant domestic animal. The effect of new transport
possibilities, and probably also milking, was to create on the steppes an

                                             192




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        ASPECTS     OF   THE SECONDALT Y PRODUCTS                    REVOLUTION


economy with sufficient mobility to be able to exploit effectively the pre-
viously neglected zone stretching eastwards into central Asia; though at this
stage such pastoralism was probably 'transhumant' rather than 'nomadic'.
   This set of economic changes precipitated the formation of a new cultural
group on the basis of the previous riverine groups and under strong techno-
logical influence from the Caucasus. A characteristic of this group was the
erection of burial mounds covering graves in increasingly elaborate pits and
wood-lined chambers - the Pit-Grave, Catacomb-Grave and Timber-Grave
phases of expanding steppe culture. These herding and farming groups
penetrated eastwards along the Eurasian steppe belt as far as the Volga-Ural
interfluve in the early third millennium, and (using spoke-wheeled vehicles)
as far as the Altai in the early second.
   Some backwash of this expansion was also felt in Europe. Wool sheep
and the horse, along with tumuli and alloy metallurgy, spread westwards
from 3000 onwards and spoke-wheeled vehicles followed at the end of the
third millennium. The opening-up of the European forests, and especially
the creation of large areas of heathland on sandy soils, allowed a wider net-
work of contacts and facilitated the penetration of steppe elements into the
temperate forest area.
   It is instructive to compare the effects of horses and wheeled vehicles to
the spread of imported Spanish horses among the tribes in the Plains area
of north America (Roe 1955). As well as tempting a variety of formerly
settled riverine groups to colonise the prairies and create the classic Plains
Indian cultures of popular image, it also gave the opportunity for mounted
Athebascan sheep-herders - like the Navajo - to spread over a thousand
kilometres from the home area of their language group.
   The spread of settlement in the semi-arid corridors of the Old World had
important implications for linguistic distribution there. The expansion of
population in east Europe and central Asia provided the opportunity for the
spread and differentiation of a previously localised language group which
now occupies a major area of Eurasia. The dispersal of these Indo-European
languages was paralleled by the similar expansion and differentiation of the
Semito-Hamitic group in the Near East and north Africa.
   Philologists have long contended that the extensive resemblances in form
and vocabulary between geographically removed languages like Latin and
Sanskrit imply a common ancestral Ursprache which differentiated after
dispersal: and that, moreover, since such resemblances rapidly decay, it
must have taken place relatively recently. An often quoted estimate for such
a dispersal (Robins 1964) is 3000 BC - to some extent a circular argument
from the archaeology, but consistent with observed rates of change
(Swadesh 1968). The eastward movements of population onto the steppes
in the third millennium BC linked east Europe with the Pontic and Trans-
Caspian regions as far as the Tarim Basin and the Iranian Plateau, and there
seems no doubt that it was such relatively rapid movements in the semi-arid

                                            193




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


zone which gave Indo-European its geographical range. This is also con-
sistent with the first appearance of specifically Indo-Iranian names in
northern Syria and Mesopotamia in the second millennium BC.
   The extent to which Indo-European languages were already present
in the forested parts of Europe is uncertain. Nevertheless there are good
philological grounds for inferring some westwards spread of Indo-European
languages in the second millennium BC, and this could well have taken place
in the context of the changes in settlement and economy documented in a
previous section.

Social structure
Besides the large-scale effects of the secondary products revolution in
creating new forms of subsistence economy, its effects on the texture of
social relations was equally important. By its major alterations in the
allocation of subsistence roles between the sexes, it created new social
structures and patterns of organisation, and by giving a new importance to
the transmission of land it necessitated new mechanisms of inheritance.
   The arguments for associations of this kind are inevitably based on cross-
cultural surveys, and especially the Area Files of the Institute of Human
Relations and the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock 1967) abstracted from
them. Interpretations of such material in historical terms is especially
dangerous: but the archaeological perspective given above on the spread of
features such as the plough allows a time dimension to be fitted to the
recurrent patterns of association which have become clear from statistical
analysis of this data. Such considerations allow a sketch of the kinds of
society which may have been characteristic of temperate hoe-based horti-
culture.
   In common with some of the systems based on the intensive collecting of
localised subsistence products on a sedentary basis, agriculture involved the
transmission of property consisting of facilities such as fields and houses.
It is therefore usually associated with continuing kin-based corporations
such as lineages, often with a specifically unilineal mode of inheritance
(Harner 1970). The mode of inheritance is strongly influenced by patterns
of residence: in an uxorilocal system, where the husband joins the wife's
community on marriage, transmission is likely to follow the female line.
Residence systems, in turn, reflect the relative importance of the sexes in
subsistence pursuits. In simple hoe agriculture, the major subsistence contri-
bution comes from female labour in sowing, weeding and harvesting. There
have been some suggestions that a clear worldwide association occurs be-
tween simple hoe-based agricultural economies and matrilineal inheritance,
and that this association would be even stronger were it not for the effect of
recent influences (Keesing 1975). Societies based on matrilineal lineages are
thus likely to have been typical of early agricultural communities in the Old
World. This pattern is characteristic of aboriginal societies in the woodlands

                                             194




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        ASPECTS     OF    THE SECONDALT Y P R O D U C T S            REVOLUTION


of the American south-east which have been identified as the closest
parallels to pre-plough agriculturalists in Europe (Driver 1961).
    Both plough agriculture and pastoraliSfti, by contrast, show a strong
association with male dominance in subsistence activities, virilocal resi-
dence, and patrilineal descent. This pattern is often reinforced by the kinds
of warfare which are common when large quantities of livestock are present.
On a world sample, two-thirds of plough agriculturalists and two-thirds of
pastoralists have purely patrilineal inheritance. Moreover, such societies are
likely to evolve beyond the lineage mode of production to be composed of
larger non-localised clans or to become stratified as scarcity of land becomes
increasingly important.
    Changes in the sexual allocation of tasks affected non-agricultural pro-
duction. The decline of the female role in agriculture released labour from
the fields to the home, making possible an expansion in spinning, weaving
and textile production. This increase in scale made economical the use of
more elaborate forms of loom. Archaeologically, traces of weaving equip-
ment become much more prominent in the third millennium (e.g. Trump
1960).
    Besides reallocating productive roles between the sexes, plough agri-
culture introduced new principles to the transmission of property. Greater
flexibility of land use and the ability to use wider holdings gave a new
importance to the acquisition and devolution of land. The advantages of
'marrying out' came to be balanced by the advantages of keeping land
within the descent group, retaining resources within the productive unit.
Marriage would thus tend to become an important move in the de-
termination of patterns of land-holding, and a focus of interest to the
descent group as a whole (Goody 1969). Such a concern leads to arranged
marriages in which women, as carriers of property, have to be appropriately
matched to maintain the status of the family. These features are likely to be
more pronounced the greater the scarcity of land and the more intensive its
use.
    Goody (1976) has recently contrasted the kinds of property transmission
characteristic of plough-less Africa with those commonly found among the
plough-based agriculturalists of Eurasia. He characterises the contrast as the
difference between homogeneous devolution, where property is transmitted
between members of the same sex and there is no community of property on
marriage, and diverging devolution, where children of both sexes inherit
and marriage establishes a joint fund. In the former case, typical of African
hoe cultivators, property reverts to the lineage of a deceased person, and
is not passed to his or her offspring: in the latter, typical of Eurasian plough
cultivation, marriage produces successive recombinations of holdings in
each generation. Diverging devolution is characteristic of societies where
land forms a major heritable commodity, and is associated with a particular
emphasis on marriage and control over the choice of mate.


                                             195




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


   In examining a worldwide sample from the Ethnographic Atlas
(Murdock 1967), Goody found diverging devolution to be characteristic of
over half of the societies of Eurasia, including the most populous, but to
occur in only a twentieth of the African examples; and moreover that the
earliest Eurasian law codes show this contrast to reach back to the second
millennium BC. Features which showed a high correlation with diverging
devolution were advanced and plough agriculture, male farming, in-
marriage, monogamy, prohibited pre-marital sex, and kinship terminologies
separated siblings from cousins. Such features are often associated with
stratified and state societies. Goody (1976, 25) suggests that the increase in
production made possible by the plough had major implications for inter-
personal relations: Tor differentiation arose even at village level and the
scene was set for the development of relationships such as lord and serf,
landlord and tenant, which exist in Eurasia but not in Africa.'
   In so far as forms of society are determined by the organisation required
for work and the types of property which are passed between generations,
we may apply these insights to the historic situation in Eurasia. The
secondary products revolution produced an economy dominated by men,
who played a dominant role in handling large livestock either as herds or in
ploughing. Women became increasingly relegated to the domestic sphere.
Where the absolute amount of cultivable land was relatively restricted, as in
the Near East and the Mediterranean, ownership of land became increas-
ingly subject to competition. Differences in access to land became the basis
of growing inequalities, while the transmission and coalition of property
became a major preoccupation of the landed classes.
   In inland Europe, the archaeological evidence indicates that land was still
relatively plentiful as the Bronze Age farmers continued to clear primary
forest on somewhat less fertile soils. These features were probably not pre-
cipitated, therefore, until the end of the second millennium when organised
field systems were laid out, heavier forms of plough were developed, and
extensive indications of status differences appeared. Second-millennium
Europe may thus have exemplified a second extinct economy of the tem-
perate zone - an extensive light-plough cultivation with a predominantly
male role in agriculture, but without the highly differentiated social order
where groups struggled to maintain their status by the vertical transmission
of property. The 'rich' graves with prestige items at this time probably repre-
sent a 'big-man' system rather than true chiefdoms (Sahlins 1963). Essen-
tially a transient type, such societies have not survived to reach the pages of
the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock 1967); only the extreme contrast between
tropical matrilineal shifting hoe cultivators with homogeneous devolution,
and the more northerly patrilineal intensive plough cultivators with
stratified societies and diverging devolution, suggests the possibility of
structurally intermediate ancestral forms.



                                             196




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        ASPECTS    OF   THE SECONDALT Y P R O D U C T S             REVOLUTION


CONCLUSION
Eduard Hahn's perceptive remark quoted at the beginning of this section
still stands as a fundamental observation about the origins of western
society. The progress of archaeological research, however, has provided a
time-depth which allows a further definition of the processes involved. As
the beginnings of agriculture and domestication have been traced further
back into the post-glacial period, so the major developments of the fourth
and third millennia BC have emerged as a second burst of economic inno-
vation with far-reaching consequences.
    The spread of the plough was arguably the most important development
in Old World prehistory after the adoption of cereal cultivation itself.
It firmly tied together the arable and pastoral sectors of husbandry in an
interdependent system, and it fundamentally affected the character of settle-
ment and the structure of society. Use of the plough was only part of a wider
set of changes, however, which marked a new phase in man-animal relation-
ships, involving larger numbers of domestic animals, the domestication of
new species, and new uses for long-domesticated ones.
    The use of animals for traction purposes seems to have begun in Meso-
potamia, and involved first the familiar ox and then the onager, spreading
to include the Bactrian camel in the lands east of the Zagros. Riding was
developed on the steppe-plains north of the Caucasus and the Black Sea,
as the horse was domesticated. Pack-transport began in the lands around
the head of the Red Sea with the domestication of the ass, and then of the
dromedary. The production of wool was probably a development in the
sheep populations of the Taurus-Zagros arc. These innovations spread and
interacted, some animals changing role or adding new ones. Basic to all of
them was probably the beginning of milking, giving a continuously available
form of animal food and making economical the keeping of large numbers
of animals which could be put to a variety of uses.
    The focus of all these developments was the Near East, in different parts
of which the various elements emerged and spread. The key to this pro-
ductivity lay in large part in the diversity of adjacent environments which
this area offers. The arid belt of the Old World crosses north Africa and
swings north-east into central Asia: but it is interrupted in its course by
the great chain of Tertiary fold-mountains running from the Alps to the
Himalayas, which catch the rain-bearing winds of winter. This intersection
of desert, mountain and sea provides an intimate mixture of zones with
different stresses and opportunities, maximising the possibilities of inno-
vation and providing a theatre in which interaction and cross-fertilisation
can take place.
    The impact of the secondary products revolution was felt principally in
that part of the agricultural zone of the Old World characterised by cereal
crops, rather than the tropical part where root-crops were cultivated. Its


                                           197




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         PLOUGH        AND     PASTORALISM:


innovations spread rapidly along the arid corridors and penetrated into
more temperate regions. The axis of Old World development from Europe
to India came into being as a result. These influences penetrated only slowly
and incompletely into east Asia. There an alternative system of protein
capture based on fish (especially in rice-paddies) and on the pig was already
supporting a relatively dense population, and the expanded pastoral sector
which the secondary products revolution required could not easily be
brought about. For this reason, the civilisation of China was in many re-
spects comparable to those civilisations of the New World where domestic
animals played a minor role.
    Beyond the zone of cultivation, the practice of milking allowed the in-
filling of arid areas by animal-based groups, and produced a secondary
impact on the hunting peoples of the northern forests. The milking of
reindeer by Lapp populations is a notable example. In Africa, milking may
have spread relatively early from its south-west Asian focus, but pastoralism
was imposed on existing systems of tropical hoe cultivation. It did not
achieve the organic linkage with cultivation that was characteristic of
Eurasia, and animals were not used as sources of energy.
    The effects of the secondary products revolution thus spread widely both
to north and south of the main axis, affecting much of the Old World. Many
of the cultures recorded ethnographically therefore were, like the historical
societies of Eurasia, products of the second half of the post-glacial period.
    As David Clarke showed in 'Mesolithic Europe: the economic basis'
(1976), archaeological data are most effectively used in the context of wider
ethnographic comparison; not by taking recent groups as direct analogies of
prehistoric ones, but by analysing both in the perspective of evolutionary
change. The societies which flourished in temperate and sub-tropical
Eurasia in the Early Holocene form an important extinct phylum of human
culture, which cannot be directly compared to any surviving groups. Their
character was completely altered by the secondary products revolution,
which created many of the basic features of the modern world.




                                             198




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:27:37 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

