             Mobile Resources:
          Settlement and Exchange
        in Early Agricultural Europe
                                    (1982)

Interpretations of the archaeological record in social terms have usually
been undertaken within an implicit evolutionary framework. The most
successful of these studies have been those concerned with the Near East and
Mesoamerica. In these areas the rapid onset of social inequality following
the adoption of agriculture has suggested that stages of increasing social
complexity are a normal succession in agricultural communities. In
Europe, however, this approach has been less fruitful. One of the notable
features of the European prehistoric sequence is the relatively late
appearance of complex societies associated with an urban base. Yet the
first farming communities appeared in Europe in the seventh millennium BC,
and the long intervening period cannot be adequately described by a simple
evolutionary succession of increasingly ranked societies. Archaeologists
have used technological criteria to divide this time into Neolithic,
Copper and Bronze Ages on the basis of surviving artefacts; but although
the use of metal is clearly relevant to the question of social change,
the dynamics of such a process cannot be inferred from the artefacts alone.
It is necessary to try and reconstruct the total flow of produce between
different areas, since it is this pattern that determines how particular

The objective of this article was to break down the artificial distinction between
'subsistence and settlement' and ftrade and exchangeby suggesting that the move-
ment of livestock was an important part of prehistoric economies, especially at
certain phases of development. To avoid constant recourse to external causes, it
took as its dominant metaphor the idea of (ecological) succession, in an attempt to
look at purely autonomous reasons for change: the evolving role of livestock in a
newly Neolithicised region. It was originally prepared for the 45th Annual Meeting
of the Society for American Archaeology in Philadelphia (1980), in a symposium
masterminded with characteristic flair by Colin Renfrew, and described by Shanks
and Tilley (1987, 37) as (in many respects the culmination of the programme of
functionalist social archaeology in Britain\

                                       252




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

  SETTLEMENT      AND   EXCHANGE        IN   EARLY   AGRICULTURAL          EUROPE


areas develop in terms of the opportunities open to them at different
times.
   Gordon Childe attributed the egalitarian nature of early farming com-
munities to the primitive character of agriculture and the lack of a surplus
for trade (1951). This view can be criticised on several grounds, not least the
clear evidence that Neolithic groups were capable of acquiring substantial
quantities of materials from considerable distances (Chapter 4). Because of
the importance of regional interaction in determining the course of econ-
omic and social development, it is worthwhile to examine the nature of such
Neolithic exchange networks and their social contexts. This chapter pro-
poses a fundamental reason for large-scale regional exchange in Early Old
World agricultural societies, and investigates the social structures in which
it was embedded. It uses detailed evidence from an area of central Europe to
explore the usefulness of this model in explaining a wide range of archae-
ological observations.


T H E POTENTIAL FOR EXCHANGE IN EARLY
AGRICULTURAL SOCIETIES
In discussions of exchange in simple agricultural societies, attention has
usually focused on the movement of hard stones for axes and cutting tools
(Chapter 4; cf. Hughes 1973). In a stimulating article in 1965, however,
Kent Flannery discussed the development of early agricultural communities
in the Zagros in terms of inter-zonal exchanges both of mineral resources
and of new domesticates. The movement of domesticated species was seen
as an aspect of social contact and trade rather than just a biogeographic
dispersal. That domestic livestock were an important item of trade among
early agriculturalists should not be surprising in view of their prominence in
New Guinea exchange cycles (Rappaport 1968, 105); but archaeologists
have usually considered them under the heading of 'subsistence' rather than
of 'exchange'. While the role of horses as trade items (by analogy with their
spread in North America) has recently been raised in unpublished work by
Stephen Shennan and John O'Shea in connection with Beaker and early
Bronze Age trade networks in Europe (cf. Schiile 1969), the significance of
livestock as an item of Neolithic trade has not been systematically explored.
   The role of cattle in this context is likely to have been particularly
important. The earliest Neolithic economies were based on sheep, which
spread as part of the primary agricultural complex from a restricted
mountain habitat. Cattle, on the other hand, were a widespread native
animal in the areas to which agriculture was introduced, and were probably
domesticated independently in a number of lowland foci (Herre and Rohrs
1977). These included northern Mesopotamia, central Anatolia and parts of
southern Europe. Domesticated cattle were supplied from these areas to
surrounding regions. The continuing significance of lowland cattle-breeding

                                       253




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                             MOBILE     R E SOURCES:


centres is well known from the historical period: Thessaly and Boeotia
exported animals in Homeric times, while classical Attica brought cattle by
ship from as far away as Macedonia, North Africa and Scythia (Semple
1932, 318). The movement of livestock is thus likely to be of major im-
portance in explaining regional exchange systems in prehistory.
    One site which may be illuminated by being considered in this light is
(Jatal Hiiyiik in central Anatolia (Mellaart 1967; Todd 1976). Large herds
of wild cattle (aurochsen) flourished in the seventh millennium in this well-
watered part of the alluvial Konya Plain, and their skulls are a prominent
feature of the numerous shrines found at the site. The capture or handling
of an aurochs bull is actually shown in wall paintings. Cattle formed over
ninety per cent of the faunal remains recovered from the site, and the stature
of the animals decreased in the upper levels. Since domestic cattle arguably
appeared in this region for the first time at Qatal Hiiyiik, it is likely that the
site had a major role in the domestication of these animals (Perkins 1969).
    The site also had a key role in relation to its surrounding region, since it
is notable for the extraordinary quantity and variety of imported materials:
some thirty-five different foreign minerals have been identified, including
rocks for axes, grinding stones, pigments and beads, as well as several
varieties of flint and very large quantities of obsidian (Todd 1976, 126; cf.
Jacobs 1969, 27-54). The last is particularly notable, as it was obtained
from the Acigol source, which is 200km away to the north-east. This trading
florescence was a temporary one, however, as the site had no immediate
successor of comparable size or importance - James Mellaart has called it
a 'supernova'. A possible explanation for this brief concentration of wealth
is the role of the site as a source of domestic cattle during the phase of
agricultural expansion, when it supplied sites proliferating in the nearby
upland basins and was thus able to acquire abundant supplies of highland
resources.
    Despite the flow of traded items at £atal Hiiyiik, it did not form part of
a site hierarchy in the same way as (for instance) the Protoliterate communi-
ties of the Mesopotamian Plain (Adams and Nissen 1972). Although only
a fraction of the site has been excavated, the buildings are remarkably uni-
form and there is no differentiation of large elite or public buildings: the
numerous shrines form part of domestic complexes. Whatever the precise
social organisation of the site or the character of the trade that supported it,
there is little indication of ranking of the kind discussed elsewhere in this
volume. The site thus raises in acute form the question of the nature of ex-
change in Neolithic communities and the social structures associated with
it. It suggests that early agricultural communities were on occasion capable
of operating large-scale exchanges in the absence of developed hierarchies,
and that such societies may have undergone cycles of increasing complexity
and devolution that defy characterisation as stages in an unilinear pro-
gression.


                                        254




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

  SETTLEMENT      AND   EXCHANGE       IN   EARLY    AGRICULTURAL          EUROPE




10.1 The Carpathian Basin and its regions, showing the Great Hungarian Plain
(Nagy Alfold); [from Sherratt 1983b].



   Another area where a phenomenon of this kind may have taken place is
the Great Hungarian Plain. Its marshy depressions and open, steppe charac-
ter provided a similar habitat for numerous herds of cattle in the postglacial
period. Early farming groups (as in Thessaly) concentrated chiefly on raising
sheep, though domestic cattle were known and aurochsen occasionally
hunted. During the fifth millennium BC, however, cattle became the prin-
cipal form of domestic livestock, and there is evidence in one area for inter-
breeding with wild herds and probably an intake of the latter for
domestication. What is particularly interesting is that this period saw a
notable increase in 'wealth' (in terms of both imported materials and local
craft products), an elaboration of ritual, and a significant change in the
character of settlements, with the emergence of large aggregated sites in
between phases of dispersed settlement.
   The rest of this chapter consists of an examination of the relationships
between these changes, at both a local and a regional level. It uses some of
the preliminary results of intensive survey work around Szeghalom in the
Koros depression1 to describe patterns of settlement and material culture in
the centre of the Plain. It then uses a colonisation model to examine changes
in the role of this area within the larger regional system of the Carpathian
Basin.

                                       255




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                                      MOBILE         R E SOURCES:


                                 Settlement            Subsistence          Material culture Exchange                       Cemeteries


  tiszapolgAr &                  Dispersed; small     Domestic cattle       Plain pottery,          Some obsidian,          Large formal
  bodrogkeresztur                coherent settlements predominate;          without local styles;   greenstone, etc.;       cemeteries (for
  (late 5th / early 4th mill.)   (not ditched);       cereals, etc.         no figurines; "battle   occasional extra-       whole community
                                 stable pattern                             axes"; (copper axes     Carpathian imports      or several sites)
                                                                            and daggers +           (esp. on edge of
                                                                            gold ornaments on       Plain)
                                                                            edge of Plain




  szakAlhat&                     Large aggregated      Domestic cattle      Elaborately             Large quantity          Small formal
  tisza                          settlements           predominate; wild    decorated pottery       and variety of          groups of graves
  (early 5th mill.)              (defence?); often     cattle locally       and cult objects        imported materials      (households or
                                 burnt; stable         important;           in local styles;        - obsidian, flint,      lineages)
                                 pattern               cereals etc.         textiles                greenstone, grinders,
                                                                                                    etc.; imported fine
                                                                                                    pottery




  koros                          Dispersed; linear     Domestic sheep       Basic craft skills;     Obsidian becoming       No formal
  & avk                          shoreline             predominate;         decoration not          important; some         cemeteries
  (6th mill.)                    settlements; fluid    fishing important;   regionally specific     greenstone and
                                 pattern               cereals etc.                                 grinders




                                                                                                                                                ®
10.2 Summary of evidence for settlement and exchange in the central part of
the Great Hungarian Plain, 6000-3500 BC, divided into three major phases:
(a) descriptive summary; (b) schematic settlement-forms, at the level of the
individual house, settlement, and settlement-cluster. Compare the detailed
survey results in Chapter 11 below. [Re-arranged.]


SETTLEMENT AND ECONOMY IN THE CENTRAL PART
OF THE GREAT HUNGARIAN PLAIN
The Great Hungarian Plain is an alluvial basin with extensive areas of fertile
land along its broad floodplains (Figure 10.1).2 Although it has a steppe
climate, irrigation was not necessary in preindustrial times, and there are
no sharp contrasts in productive potential as in the Mesopotamian Plain.
The landscape was undegraded at the time under discussion, and cultivation
systems based on the hoe or digging stick can be inferred for the whole of
the period before c.3000 BC. The contrasts discussed here thus emerged
from a relatively uniform environmental and technological base. The prin-
cipal changes are summarised in Figure 10.2.
   The earliest agrarian communities of the Koros culture,3 spreading into
the Carpathian Basin from the south along the major rivers, took the form
of linear settlements up to a kilometre or more in length, along the levees
of old watercourses. Such sites were composed of individual household
clusters - consisting of postbuilt rectangular houses with their associated
pits - arranged at intervals of 50 metres or so along the riverbank. They
yield evidence of cereal cultivation, the keeping of domestic livestock

                                                                     256




                                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

  SETTLEMENT      AND     EXCHANGE      IN    EARLY   AGRICULTURAL                EUROPE


                  House style        Site location    Settlement pattern
                                                                               4000 BC
                                                           •



                    o "7
                                                                   •
                                                       •

  TISZAPOLGAR                                                          •

                                                                  •



                                                                               5000 BC



                                                      %                    •
                                                                               AGGREGATED




                                                      (.                       6000 BC


  KftROS
                                -     m          .    \ •                      SHOREUNE
                                                                               SETTLEMENT

                                                                  \


                                                                                            ©
(mainly sheep), hunting of deer and wild cattle (Bokonyi 1974), and plenti-
ful indications of fishing in the form of fish remains and net-sinkers. Large
quantities of locally produced coarse pottery are present. The finer pottery
is undecorated, and there are no marked local stylistic groupings. There are
some clay figurines, but they are not elaborate. By the end of this period
obsidian was reaching the area from the edge of the Plain to the north
(Tokaj), though the chipped stone industry lacks the variety of materials
used in later periods, and stone axes are rare. Burials were placed within the
settlements, not unusually in rubbish pits with other animal bone, and no
formal cemetery areas have been recognised.
   The linear arrangement of settlement and the very large number of sites
probably indicate frequent minor shifts of individual household clusters
within the general area of exploitation over a relatively long span of time,
rather than a high density of large contemporary settlements. The absence
of cemeteries may imply that descent was not important in defining group
membership. This pattern suggests considerable fluidity of pioneer settle-
ment, freely growing and proliferating without constraint. Such ad-
ventitious colonisation at a low overall population density in a productive
environment would not have created competition and would have made
unnecessary the development of wider networks of alliance.
   This pattern persisted with only minor modifications throughout the
sixth millennium, during which the wave of population advance passed on
through the Carpathian Basin to the other parts of the central European
loess belt. Broad cultural affinities were maintained between these pro-

                                        257




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                             MOBILE     R E SOURCES:


liferating Bandkeramik populations further north and their contemporaries
in eastern Hungary, who are distinguished as the Alfold variant (AVK).
    A major change occurred in the Great Hungarian Plain around the
beginning of the fifth millennium BC, affecting both settlement patterns and
material culture. This corresponds to the beginning of the Szakalhat and
Tisza cultures.4 Although the same parts of the Plain continued to be occu-
pied, settlement became increasingly aggregated. Far fewer sites are known,
but on further investigation these turn out to be very large (of the order of
500m x 500m) and to consist of parallel lines of household-clusters, often
centred on a slight prominence with natural defences or suggestions of
artificial ditches.5 True tells first appeared at this time. All sites have sub-
stantial accumulations of settlement debris consisting of several layers of
mud-walled buildings, sometimes simultaneously burnt over large parts of
the site. The subsistence base of these settlements contained no new species,
but cattle now predominated heavily over sheep among the domestic
livestock, while the hunting of aurochsen made a substantial contribution in
the eastern part of the area. Fishing was now with harpoon rather than net,
perhaps indicating that animal protein came mainly from meat.
    The pottery includes a high proportion of elaborately decorated wares
with painted and incised ornament often imitating textile patterns. These
divide clearly into specific local styles in different parts of the Plain and
surrounding areas.6 Figurines and anthropomorphic vessels are similarly
elaborate, as are decorated household fittings. Equally striking are the
quantity and variety of imported materials. Many new types of flint make
their appearance, along with large quantities of obsidian (see Chapter 12).
Massive fragments of tabular flint up to 20cm long show the size of the raw
materials that were acquired. Saddle querns and grindstones are frequent
finds, while greenstone axes occur in very large numbers. All these materials
were imported from beyond the alluvial plain. Finely decorated pottery was
also widely traded. Although burials occur in small formal groups within
the settlement area, and male and female graves were differentiated by their
orientation, large quantities of objects were not deposited with the dead.
    The emergence of large, rich 'supersites' some 10km or so apart indicates
a greater stability and constraint on settlement coincident with the ex-
pansion of trading activity. The overall density of settlement was still
relatively low, since there are few smaller settlements between the 'super-
sites'. Such sites, therefore, do not appear to form the upper level of a
hierarchy, but rather a general tendency to aggregation of settlement. The
two factors most likely to have promoted aggregation are an enlargement of
the resident co-operative (e.g. animal-breeding) unit, or more likely the need
for defence - though the threat was not sufficiently severe to require en-
closing earthworks (as in the Bronze Age). The sites probably consisted of
an aggregation of compounds with livestock enclosures and kitchen gardens
in between (cf. Brookfield and Hart 1971, fig. 9.1. A4). The burials, which


                                        258




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

  SETTLEMENT      AND   EXCHANGE        IN   EARLY   AGRICULTURAL          EUROPE


seem to have taken place in the context of the domestic or lineage group
rather than of the whole community, also suggest a loose aggregation of
lineage groups rather than fusion into a single integrated unit. The evidence
of ritual activities in the form of figurines and cult fittings also has a
domestic context.
    The pattern which succeeded this one in the later fifth millennium
 (Tiszapolgar culture) reversed many aspects of the picture, at least in the
central area of the Plain. While the same parts of the area continued to be
occupied, settlement reverted to a dispersed pattern. The sites themselves
were more integrated than before, however, and consist of a concentration
of huts and other facilities within a more or less circular area having a modal
diameter of 50-100m. They do not appear to have been ditched. Many tells
continued to be occupied, though the layers are thinner and rarely burnt
 (Bognar-Kutzian 1972). The domesticates included no new species (with the
exception of occasional bones of horse, which appeared in appreciable
numbers only in the third millennium), and domestic cattle remained the
most common animal. By the beginning of the fourth millennium cattle
remains are almost entirely from domestic stock (Bokonyi 1974). The
pottery is predominantly plain, with decoration consisting for the most part
of knobs and perforations rather than elaborate patterns. Figurines are
absent. The pottery is remarkably uniform over the whole of the Plain and
does not divide into clear regional styles as in the preceding periods. Larger
formal cemetery areas outside the settlements appear for the first time in this
period, with graves arranged in rows and differentiated both by sex and
by relative quantities of grave goods. The larger and richer excavated
examples, however, come from outside the central area of the Plain. Stone
continued to be imported for tools, but not in the quantity and variety of the
preceding phase. New materials and products - long flint blades, and axes
and simple ornaments of copper - are known from this period, but few seem
to have reached the centre of the Plain.
    The large number of substantial sites indicates that this period was stable
and prosperous, and there is no evidence for declining fertility, even though
materials from outside the Plain were not imported in such quantity. Con-
ditions seem to have been more peaceful than in the preceding phase, since
settlement was able to disperse and there is less evidence of destruction.
Both the layout of Tiszapolgar sites and the existence of community
cemeteries indicate a more organised composition of local groups, probably
structured by descent.
    The early fourth millennium BC (Bodrogkeresztur culture) saw for the
first time a major shift in the area under occupation in the central part of the
Plain, with relative depopulation (or less visible settlement) in the parts
previously settled most intensively. A truly radical break occurred in the
later fourth millennium (Baden culture), with the settlement of new micro-
areas and the construction of large burial mounds in the previously

                                       259




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                         MOBILE        R ESOURCES:




             KOROS                     AVK               szakAlhAt&tisza        TISZAPOLGAR
             Early sixth               Late sixth        Early fifth            Late fifth
             millennium BC             millennium BC     millennium BC          millennium BC




POPULATION
                   &
                 POPULATION
                                     /
                                  EXCHANGE   CONCENTRATION
                  MOVEMENT                     OF WEALTH

10.3 A model of agrarian colonisation and changing patterns of exchange in
relation to new opportunities, as exemplified by the eastern part of the Carpathian
Basin, 6000-4000 BC. [The diagram does not show long-distance inter-regional
exchange, which becomes significant in thefinalperiod.]

inhabited ones. Faunal remains show a shift to sheep (now probably for
secondary products), while other parts of central Europe provide evidence
for the use of paired draught animals and the plough. This major trans-
formation is beyond the scope of the present discussion.


T H E CARPATHIAN BASIN AS A REGIONAL SYSTEM
These developments can only be understood in a regional setting (Figures
10.3, 10.4). The earliest settlers in the sixth millennium formed part of a
river-based network, spreading from the south and largely confined to the
Plain itself. Contemporary settlements in adjacent areas occupied similar
environments, and there was little penetration of surrounding uplands.
Small quantities of necessary materials were imported, but early populations
had a high degree of self-sufficiency.
   The changes of the early fifth millennium coincided with the first major
penetration of the uplands (Kalicz and Makkay 1977). Sites with clear
cultural affinities to those on the Hungarian Plain are known not only from
the valleys reaching up into the mountains but also up to 900m in the
limestone caves of the Biikk mountains themselves. The existence of groups
with direct access to highland materials and the resources on the edge of
the Plain7 opened new possibilities for the supply of desirable materials to
lowland areas. The appearance of large quantities of imported materials
there suggests that contemporary alterations in settlement and material
culture may be a part of a change in organisation to take advantage of these
opportunities. The new pattern of relationships was a relatively short-lived


                                                       260




                             This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                              All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

  SETTLEMENT       AND E X C H A N G E           IN E A R L Y       AGRICULTURAL        EUROPE

                   elaboration                  long-                         4000 BC
        06         of status                    distance
                   items (e.g.                  trade
                   metal)
      5 £3                                                                 rising wealth of
      -J *                                                                 communities on
      O UJ   large               dispersal of        regional              edge of Plain
      gS     community           settlement          devolution
      HQ     cemeteries          (peaceful           (local
        s                        conditions)         subsistence)




                                                                              6000 BC




10.4 Descriptive model of the inter-relationships between the succession of
settlement and exchange systems in the eastern part of the Carpathian Basin,
6000-3500 BC. (Similar models would apply, for instance, to the Konya Plain,
central Turkey 7000-5000 BC, or parts of northern Europe 4000-2000 BC.)

episode, however, for many of its elements disappeared in the succeeding
phase; though even so it lasted for several hundred years.
   The sources of imported materials on one Idwland site are considered in
Chapter 12, and can be seen to lie in a broad airborne 100 to 150km away
in the surrounding uplands to the north and east (cf. Com§a 1967). Such
resources could only have been mobilised if the intensification of lowland
production were articulated within a regional system of exchange. The first
requirement of such a system would have been the existence of an export-
able lowland resource (cf. Godelier 1977, 141-5). While the archaeological
record gives no direct evidence of what this was, it can be argued that cattle
were the most important lowland product. The movement of surplus grain
over such distances is unlikely in primitive conditions of transport, and
in any case would give the central area no advantage over the peripheries.
Textiles of plant fibres are a possibility, especially in view of the charac-
teristic geometrical designs on pottery, though as flax grows well in
surrounding areas (Illes and Halasz 1926) its production is unlikely to have


                                                 261




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                            MOBILE      R E SOURCES:


been a monopoly of the lowlands. Similar considerations apply to salt,
which is known to have played an important role in the acquisition of stone
resources by groups in alluvial lowlands in New Guinea (Godelier 1977).
Fine pottery was manufactured both in the lowlands and in the area of the
Biikk mountains, and traded in both directions.
    The most likely commodities for specialised production in the Plain,
therefore, are cattle and cattle products. The well-watered, open plains were
a natural breeding-ground for cattle, both wild and domestic. Faunal re-
mains from the Plain show a predominance (fifty to seventy-five per cent) of
cattle at this period, with very high proportions of wild forms especially in
the eastern part. In this area (around Berettyoujfalu) the intergradation of
sizes and mixture of morphological characteristics between domestic and
wild forms is taken by Bokonyi (1962) as evidence of local domestication.
The open character of the Plain environment (Kosse 1979) would have
provided a valuable reservoir of livestock as population moved into the
wooded areas on the fringes of the Carpathian Basin. The demand for cattle
among these expanding populations could have been met by breeding cattle
for export in much of the central Plain, and by actually domesticating new
stock in the eastern part, where wild herds were extensive. If the practice of
milking was a later introduction, as has been suggested (Chapter 6), then it
is the animals themselves rather than their secondary products that are likely
to have been of importance. Such an export could literally move itself over
the required distances. Since the initial clearings in forested areas would
have been small,8 herds in the wooded fringes and uplands would have taken
some time to become self-sustaining. As it would in any case have been
difficult to maintain large herds (which would only be able to expand after
several generations of forest clearances), there was probably a continuing
dependence on lowland supplies, both as breeding stock and as meat on the
hoof.
    If this interpretation is correct, then it suggests that the changes in
settlement pattern and material culture in the Great Hungarian Plain in the
early fifth millennium represented the intensification of one aspect of local
production and the consumption of a wider range of goods through partici-
pation in regional exchange. The use of livestock as a commodity moved
it from the subsistence sphere into that of negotiable wealth. The effect on
settlement patterns was to concentrate population into larger and more
permanent social units that could handle and protect a valuable and mobile
resource.
    The trade in livestock was the main means of acquiring necessary
materials from the surrounding highland zone. These complementary ex-
changes also provided the opportunity for the distribution of other goods
based on craft skills at a village level, such as fine pottery and textiles (cf.
Jacobs 1969). The increase in the volume of traded goods thus coincided
with the greatest diversity of local pottery styles and most elaborate types of

                                        262




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

  SETTLEMENT      AND   EXCHANGE        IN   EARLY   AGRICULTURAL          EUROPE


decoration: it was advantageous to make local products sufficiently distinc-
tive to break into the flourishing regional exchange system. (This is equally
true of highland areas: it is the limestone mountains of the Biikk - without
volcanic rocks for axes etc. - that are most notable for their fine pottery.)
Such local specialisation disappeared in the following period.
    One feature that was characteristic of the whole region during the early
fifth millennium, and disappeared in the following phase, was the pro-
duction of elaborate cult items, especially figurines. These include some of
the finest examples of Neolithic art (e.g. Gimbutas 1974, figs 102-9). Ritual
activity was clearly an important feature of the social system, and its sig-
nificance in this context is considered in the next section.
    In the later fifth millennium, a somewhat different pattern can be dis-
cerned. Some measure of local devolution (reflected in the dispersion of
settlement and decline in imports) seems to have taken place within the
central area of the Plain, but this was balanced by the rising wealth of areas
nearer to the edge of the Plain (Figure 10.3). Metal objects (copper shafthole
axes and daggers, gold ornaments) now supplemented those of stone as
status items (Bognar-Kutzian 1972), and their distribution in the late fifth
millennium is clearly restricted to sites immediately adjacent to the high-
lands or within 100km along the major rivers (Tisza and Maros).9 This most
probably reflects the decline in importance of the central region as a cattle-
breeding area and supplier of a major commodity. Groups on the Plain
margins, however, were able to acquire objects such as fine flint blades (and
perhaps also the first horses) from expanding populations on the other side
of the Carpathians; and some of these objects travelled over longer distances
than the commodities used in earlier intra-Carpathian exchanges (Chapter
4).


THE SOCIAL CONTEXT OF EXCHANGE
Discussion of the archaeological evidence for fifth-millennium exchange has
emphasised the lack of discernible hierarchies, the general conditions of
insecurity, and the increasing concern with ritual. A model of this exchange
must encompass these three interdependent elements. Dalton (1977) has
characterised exchange in acephalous (egalitarian)10 societies as one aspect
of alliance. Since the largest political unit was the local descent group,
relations were horizontal - fluctuating coalitions and enmities between a
multitude of similar small groups. Alliance allowed peace and therefore
social and economic relationships. Such alliances were both initiated and
maintained by exchanges of women, valuables and trade items; relations
outside this network took the form of raiding, abduction and capture.
Power within the group consisted in control over marriageable women, both
directly and through valuables used as bridewealth and exchange items, and
through access to ritual formulae for ceremonial.


                                       263




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                             MOBILE     R E SOURCES:


   Where relations between neighbouring groups were minimal, as in the
phase of early settlement in the sixth millennium, such networks of alliance
were little developed. The intensification of economic activity in the fifth
millennium, however, was accompanied by increased competition between
groups and a strengthening of control within them. Since alliances would
have taken the form of chains linking different resource areas, rather than
clusters in a coherent block of territory, individual settlements or groups are
likely to have had potentially hostile relations with at least some of their
neighbours. Defensive aggregation was the logical settlement pattern for
an open plain. Control within the community, however, was a problem
common to all. This control may have been accomplished by ritual and
ideological means rather than by more overt expressions of power. The
elaboration of cult objects at this period indicates the existence of ritual
codes shared by all the communities of the area. Relations within groups
could thus have been regulated by ritual; those between groups by selective
alliance.
    The pivotal points in both of these sets of relationships are likely to have
been the men, especially senior males and lineage heads. The evidence for
this comes from grave associations of goods which are likely to have played
the role of primitive valuables. The late Bandkeramik cemetery at Nitra in
Slovakia (Pavuk 1972) exhibits a striking pattern in which both stone axes
and ornaments of imported Spondylus shell occur in all but one case in the
graves of older males (Figure 4.8). Some forty per cent of men over twenty
years old were buried with such items, and they occur in increasing pro-
portion to age. Moreover, the greater longevity of males makes it likely that
the age of marriage for men was high, so that powerful seniors could
monopolise the women of marriageable age, probably by control of bride-
wealth valuables. Such valuables, which would have included the main
prestige items of intergroup exchange like axes, obsidian blades, ornaments,
fine pottery and cattle, are likely to have circulated in their own economic
sphere and to have been exchanged only between eligible males (cf. Godelier
 1977, 231 n. 29). The social system of these later Neolithic groups can thus
be reconstructed as one dominated by senior men, who controlled both the
movement of goods and the formation of alliances through the exchange of
marriage partners.
    This picture of autonomous communities linked only by alliance and the
attendant circulation of valuables, with ritual as an important medium of
internal control, does not fit the pattern of the following Tiszapolgar and
Bodrogkeresztur periods. The evidence of insecurity diminishes, the volume
of traded valuables declines, and the evidence of cult activity disappears.
The large number of distinctive pottery types gives way to uniformity,
suggesting that the pottery was no longer a competitive prestige item. At the
same time, specific status-linked items appear, like shafthole axes and
 daggers of stone and copper, and ornaments of gold.11 These are less com-


                                        264




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

  SETTLEMENT      AND    EXCHANGE       IN   EARLY   AGRICULTURAL          EUROPE


mon than the stone axes and shell ornaments at Nitra (occurring only in
fifteen per cent of adult male graves at Tiszapolgar II (Figure 4.8), and argu-
ably indicate a new level of status differentiation. These items may also
occur with younger adult men, especially the daggers. The cemeteries are
larger, representing whole communities rather than household or lineage
groups, and contain greater quantities of grave goods. (The cemeteries
themselves may now have served as foci for groups of scattered settlements.)
Family authority and ritual regulation seem to be giving way to wider
structures in which a greater element of relative ranking and hierarchisation
was possible. In regional terms, wealth was being spatially concentrated,
with communities on the edge of the Plain or on main waterways becoming
conspicuously richer than those in the centre. These communities had access
for the first time to items of extra-regional trade.
    The contrast with the preceding period should not be overdrawn: an
ethnographic equivalent might be the difference between highland New
Guinea and the more advanced parts of coastal and island Melanesia - both
within the ethos of the Big Man rather than the Polynesian chief (Sahlins
1963). Nevertheless, European societies had entered the era of inequality.


CONCLUSIONS
The model presented here has important implications for the interpretation
of early agricultural societies in many parts of the Old World. Although
£atal Hiiyiik is probably unique in that the whole region seems to have been
focused on a single site, the early spread of domestic cattle is likely to have
had a similar effect in promoting regional exchange systems linking nodal
lowland areas and their hinterlands, for instance during the Halaf period in
northern Mesopotamia, and somewhat later in highland Iran. Such nodes
may also have existed in south-east Europe, for instance in Thessaly, the
Marica Basin and the lower Danube.12
   A comparable, though attenuated, process may also have occurred even
where initial agricultural occupation took place in forested areas, as in much
of central and northern Europe. In these areas there is a clear distinction
between primary settlement, usually on loess, and secondary expansion,
which occurred up to 1000 years later. By this time there would have been
a marked contrast between the already cleared and partly exhausted land-
scapes of initial settlement (where animals could be reared in quantity), and
the small clearings round newly founded sites (cf. Kruk 1980). It is thus
significant that enclosures often interpreted as cattle-pounds should appear
by late Bandkeramik times, for example in the Rhineland; and that larger,
centrally placed enclosures of a more elaborate kind should be associated
with expanding settlement in the subsequent Michelsberg period (Boelicke
1976/7). [These enclosures may have a defensive purpose: for trade and
warfare are two sides of the same coin.] Such enclosures are increasingly


                                        265




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                            MOBILE     R E SOURCES:


being recognised as characteristic elements of the late foun and third-
millennium settlement patterns in north-west Europe, as forest cover was
being opened up, and have analogies in many parts of the continent, from
Les Matignons in the Charente to Dolauer Heide in central Germany.13 They
are likely to have served as centres for the concentration of surplus animals
from the surrounding area, and their dispersal to outlying communities.
These seasonal cattle fairs would have been occasions for general trade, as
well as the observance of ritual. Such sites are of particular significance in
northern Europe (including Britain), where expansion into forested environ-
ments was a large-scale process that continued into the period when animals
were used for traction and secondary products.
   The model is equally significant for understanding the social structure of
early agricultural groups. The idea of self-sufficient groups 'budding off'
and immediately achieving independence is probably true only in large
uniform areas. In many cases there was probably an initial phase of con-
tinuing dependence and linkage. Where colonisation linked zones with com-
plementary resources, regional exchange systems could develop that were
capable of handling impressive quantities of goods. Such exchanges could
be handled by transactions between acephalous groups linked only by
alliance in conditions of general insecurity. A characteristic of such systems
was the elaboration of many kinds of competing prestige items within the
range of utilitarian artefacts. Since objects such as stone axes were used as
social tokens (for example as bridewealth), they were probably produced in
quantities beyond practical necessity. Although the importation of stone
axes no doubt raised the productivity of the Hungarian Plain, demand was
stimulated by social rather than technological factors. These societies
appear 'wealthy' to the archaeologist in the sense that many sites produce
quantities of stone tools, decorated pottery, ritual items, etc.
    As regional differences in animal-raising potential became evened out
with continuing forest clearance, the former structure, based on com-
plementary exchanges in a regional system, began to break down. Contrasts
emerged between areas whose wealth was purely agricultural and those
which had both agricultural and mineral wealth. In the latter, competition
was increasingly focused on rarer and rarer prestige goods, especially metal
objects. These usually take the form of prestige symbols (for example battle
axes and sceptres) rather than commonly used items (for example work
axes). Exchanges between these richer nuclei brought exotic materials over
longer distances than before, and greater inequalities in access to imported
materials are evident within the richer areas. These are well exemplified in
the contemporary cemeteries of Tibava and Lucky (Bognar-Kutzian 1972)
in the north-east of the Carpathian Basin (with both local stone and metal
artefacts and imported materials from across the Carpathians) and at Varna
(Todorova 1978) on the Black Sea coast of Bulgaria (with local copper and
 PAnatolian gold).14 Both areas have relatively undeveloped hinterlands


                                        266




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

  SETTLEMENT      AND   EXCHANGE        IN   EARLY    AGRICULTURAL         EUROPE


where such prestige items are not found. These societies appear 'wealthy' to
the archaeologist in the sense that a few sites produce spectacular quantities
of specifically status items. Although many of these items are weapons,
conditions appear to have been more peaceful than in the previous phase of
acephalous communities linked by alliance.
    A very similar succession seems to be behind later Neolithic develop-
ments in north-west Europe. The communities of 'middle Neolithic'
megalith-builders, with their emphasis on ritual rather than rank, have
many of the attributes of central European acephalous communities in the
period of intensive regional trade. The main difference lay in the availability
of draught animals for tillage and construction. The significance of middle
Neolithic defended enclosures has already been noted. Ritual played a
prominent part in social control, and burial took place in communal lineage
ossuaries. Explicit symbols of rank are absent, but there was an elaboration
of everyday items - decorated pottery, stone axes, flint leaf-points - for use
as valuables. The succeeding 'late Neolithic' pattern of Corded Ware and
Bell Beakers was characterised by dispersed settlement without defensive
and ritual elements, at the same time as the emergence of status-linked
weaponry - battle axes, daggers and archery equipment, and rare orna-
ments. Long-distance trade (as opposed to the regional axe trade) brought
increasingly rare materials into circulation, especially metals. This fits the
pattern of rank competition. The last area to adopt the new pattern was the
British Isles, where archaic structures (with a strongly ritual aspect) con-
tinued to be elaborated, producing sites like Avebury and Stonehenge long
after comparable forms had disappeared from continental settlement
patterns.
    The element that transformed European economies in the early Bronze
Age was the arrival (along with the horse) of woolly sheep (Chapter 6), that
first provided a cash crop and the basis for a larger scale of textile pro-
duction.15 In this way, well-populated areas with extensive grazing were able
to enrich themselves despite the lack of local metal sources. The chalklands
and sands of Wessex and Jutland were able to develop a complementary
relationship with the Irish/Welsh and Harz metal sources respectively, and
to intensify regional differences in wealth. Bronze (and textiles?) became a
'fetishised commodity' (Godelier 1977, 152) that could now be accumu-
lated, with some of the characteristics of primitive money (cf. Douglas 1958;
Dalton 1977) as opposed to primitive valuables. Competition was still
largely for goods, and not linked to ownership of land. The rapid expansion
of this extensive, land-hungry economy reached its ecological limits in the
later second millennium, when land became a scarce good. Laid-out fields
mark the beginning of formal landholding systems in which true social
stratification could occur (Bradley 1980), creating the preconditions for
interaction with the expanding Mediterranean world.16
   The contrast between European and Near Eastern developmental

                                       267




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                  MOBILE       R E SOURCES:


trajectories from the fifth millennium onwards thus lay in the way such
landholding inequalities were linked to the operation of regional exchange
systems from an early date in areas like the Mesopotamian Plain. The con-
junction of increasingly large-scale exchange with competition for access to
high-yielding irrigated land caused inequalities between descent groups to
build up into a truly stratified pattern from the fourth millennium onwards.
The greater uniformity of the temperate European landscape deferred the
emergence of such rigid forms of inequality for another 3000 years.


NOTES

 1. Systematic surveys have been carried out by the Archaeological Institute of the Hun-
    garian Academy of Sciences as part of the Archaeological Topography programme in
    Co. Bekes (Bekes Megye Regeszeti Topografiaja: A Szeghalmi Jaras, 1982). This was the
    basis for further fieldwork by a joint Hungarian-British team directed by Dr I. Torma
    and the author (see following chapters).
 2. For a less schematic view of the topography, see maps in the following chapter.
 3. For a general archaeological background see Kalicz (1970) and Tringham (1971).
 4. Szakalhat and Hsza are successive phases, closely related in both material culture and
    settlement pattern. For other contemporary groups in the Great Hungarian Plain see n. 6.
 5. Many examples are well known in the archaeological literature: Hodmezovasarhely-
    Kokenydomb, H.-Gorzsa, Szegvar-Tiizkoves, Battonya-Godrosok, Szeghalom-
    Kovacshalom, Devavanya-Sarto.
 6. E.g. Szilmeg, Esztar and Biikk in the Szakalhat phase; Herpaly and Csoszhalom in the
    Tisza phase.
 7. Well exemplified in the settlement of Boldogkovaralya-Tekeres Patak (Co. Abauj-Borsod-
    Zemplen), a site of the Biikk culture which included several workshops for flint and
    obsidian, including a cache of 567 blades as well as cores and lumps of raw material
    (Kalicz and Makkay, 1977, 68-9.
 8. It is likely that many animals were partly stall-fed on leaf-fodder in the early stages of
    settlement in forested areas, as suggested for Neolithic Denmark and Switzerland on the
    basis of pollen diagrams and finds of excrement and leaf-fodder in settlements (see Guyan
    1971,151-4). If early Neolithic animals were not kept for milk, this would involve the
    fattening of individuals for slaughter; like the 'family pig* of recent times.
 9. Access to rivers for canoe transport became an important element in determining settle-
    ment patterns from this time onwards, and is especially notable in the Bodrogkeresztur
    and EBA periods.
10. Dalton's term is 'stateless': but this is too inclusive since it is not intended to describe the
    various kinds of ranked society (best attested by archaeology) that preceded the state.
11. A similar contrast may be observed at this time further north, in Czechoslovakia and
    Poland, between the earlier and later phases of the 'Lengyel culture'. The early phase has
    many local styles of painted pottery, figurines, intensive use of local resources (salt pans),
    regional exchange (obsidian) and defended or enclosed sites (Kyjovice-Tesetice, Hluboke
    Masuvsky, Krepice); the later phase has plain pottery, no figurines, long-distance contacts
    (metal, flint, pottery types) and 'rich' graves (Jordanow, Brzesc Kujawski).
12. For the west Mediterranean, Jim Lewthwaite has discussed the importance of sheep as
    traded items in the Cardial interaction area. As in central Europe, cattle seem to have
    increased in importance in the fifth and fourth millennia, and the large enclosed site of
    Passo di Corvo in Apulia - contemporary with the Tisza sites discussed above - is likely
    to have had an important role in this respect. The expansion of sheep-herding (for
    secondary products) in the third millennium is again associated with large defended sites,
    especially on limestone plateaux.


                                               268




                      This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

   SETTLEMENT         AND    EXCHANGE        IN   EARLY     AGRICULTURAL           EUROPE

13. The existence of earthworks and earth or stone monuments is sometimes taken as
    evidence of the central direction of labour: but this is to underestimate the capacity of
    egalitarian societies to mobilise labour for communal projects (L. Groube, pers. comm.).
    The existence of settlement networks with enclosed, centrally placed sites is not evidence
    for social hierarchisation, but is often characteristic of developed egalitarian societies
    with a strongly ritual focus (cf. the fifth-millennium Moravian Painted Ware sites in n. 11).
14. The importance of Varna is closely linked to its potential for coastal trade. The com-
    position of the goldwork, with its high values for platinum, is almost unparalleled in
    Europe (Hartmann 1978). Although little is known of late Chalcolithic northern
    Anatolia, this source seems very likely. The objects were manufactured locally, however
    in the Balkan Copper Age tradition.
15. In the east Mediterranean this was combined with another cash crop, the olive, to
    produce high-quality manufactured commodities for the international maritime trade.
    This was the economic basis of the Aegean palace system.
16. In sub-Saharan Africa, complex societies developed in the absence of intensive agriculture
    and its attendant landholding systems: hence the critical role played by competition for
    prestige goods at the time of the early states (Goody 1969, 25ff.). Such systems are thus
    only partly analogous to those of first-millennium Europe.




                                             269




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 22:29:10 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                         10
  The Development of Neolithic and
    Copper Age Settlement in the
       Great Hungarian Plain
                               (1983,          1984)


                  I: T H E REGIONAL SETTING
The purpose of this chapter is to describe the succession of patterns which
characterise the first four millennia of agricultural settlement in the Great
Hungarian Plain. It consists of two parts: a regional description and analysis
of the distribution of known Neolithic and Copper Age sites in Eastern
Hungary, and a more detailed consideration of the patterns of site location
as they have been revealed by recent survey work in the Koros basin.1
The aim is to relate the evidence from a planned survey programme to the
development of prehistoric settlement in the region as a whole.
   The area chosen has particular advantages for a study of this kind. The
archaeological study of the region has a continuous history from the early
nineteenth century when finds were first systematically recorded. The
cultural sequence is well known from numerous excavations, including
deeply-stratified tell settlements. The Neolithic and Copper Age cultures
have been well described in a series of monographs which contain compre-
hensive lists of known sites. The environmental setting of these distri-
butions, consisting of an alluvial plain with surrounding terraces and
uplands, has been systematically mapped and described. The large areas of
relatively uniform landscape simplify the problem of analysis and general-
Fieldwork in Hungary was designed to track changes in object-distributions and
settlement-patterns over thousands of years, from c.6000 down to 2000 BC, in
order to see how long-term social processes worked out on the ground in a nodal
area of central Europe. This long chapter, originally published in two parts,
attempts a systematic presentation of these patterns, zooming in from a regional
to a local perspective. The contrasting patterns of site-distribution in the survey
area are a unique record of fluctuating (and slowly evolving) forms of spatial
organisation over long periods of time, with a comprehensiveness and degree
of resolution unequalled anywhere.

                                        270




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


isation. The sample of sites at a regional level is thus both large and well
dated, and its geographical context is well known.
    In addition, a central part of the region has been selected for planned
investigation in the programme of the Archaeological Topography of
Hungary.2 This county-by-county survey consists not only of the systematic
recording of known finds but also of active fieldwork directed to an
assessment of the density of archaeological sites in the area. For the first time
it has been possible to appreciate the numbers of prehistoric settlements and
the regularities of their distribution at a local level. This both revolutionises
the interpretation of distribution patterns on a regional scale, and must itself
be interpreted in the wider context of regional development. A major theme
of this article is thus the interplay between different types of sample of the
spatial patterning, and the way in which each contributes to a comprehen-
sive view.
    The information from the topographic survey of Co. Bekes was the basis
for a co-operative research programme between the Ashmolean Museum of
the University of Oxford and the Archaeological Institute of the Hungarian
Academy of Sciences. This was concerned with the closer definition of the
distribution and structure of Neolithic and Copper Age settlement by an
integrated programme of surface collecting, geophysical survey and
sampling by excavations.3 The present chapter provides a background to
this programme of fieldwork, which takes the analysis offered here down
to the level of individual communities and their components. The com-
plementary study of traded materials is discussed in Chapter 12.


EASTERN HUNGARY WITHIN THE CARPATHIAN BASIN 4
The Carpathian Basin (Figures 10.1, 11.1) occupies a critical position in
European prehistory. As a major lowland area on the middle course of the
Danube, it is connected by natural routes with the Mediterranean, the
Pontic steppes and the loess-lands of central Europe. It was important both
in the initial spread of agriculture from the east Mediterranean in the sixth
millennium BC,5 and also in the transmission of elements from the steppe
belt from the third millennium onwards. Its largely enclosed character,
ringed on all sides by mountains rising to over 1000m, nevertheless made it
the focus of a distinctive series of cultures which had a continuing influence
on surrounding areas.
   The Basin itself is a downfaulted median mass formed during the Tertiary
mountain-building phase that produced the Alps and the Carpathians.6 Its
sinking surface has been covered by the erosion products of the surrounding
uplands. During the Miocene and Pliocene it was occupied by the sea, and
marine limestones were deposited. These, mantled during the Pleistocene by
loess, form the predominant landscape in the area to the west of the Danube
- the historical Pannonia. The eastern part, affected by continuing tectonic

                                        271




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE   DEVELOPMENT        OF   NEOLITHIC       AND   COPPER      AGE    SETTLEMENT




11.1 The Carpathian Basin, showing the areas covered by detailed maps.
Hatched area: eastern Hungary (regional distribution maps, Figs 11.3-4, 11.8-9);
rectangular outlined area: the Koros-Berettyo region (Figs 11.10, 11.12-13, 11.16);
rectangular filled area: the Szeghalom survey (Figs 11.18-27) [from Sherratt 1984a].

depression, has been filled by alluvial deposits of various kinds to produce
a level plain with only minor changes in relief - the Great Hungarian Plain
(Nagy Alfold).
   This contrast is accentuated by a climatic difference, the eastern part
having the low rainfall and high evaporation characteristic of the Pontic
steppe belt further east. While the western part forms a southern projection
of the central European loess region, the eastern part has an individual
character resulting from the combination of a concentration of surface
water from the surrounding mountains with a yearly precipitation in the
Plain of less than 600mm. The slow drainage from its level surface has
created a mosaic of marshy floodplains and dry interfluves, in which minor
differences in relief have a marked effect in creating suitable conditions for
early settlement.
   The alluvial plain, covering an area of 100,000km2, is surrounded first
by a narrow terrace of marine limestones, and then by the ring of fold
mountains, rich in the hard stone and metal ores sought by early man.
The upland and lowland areas thus formed a complementary unity in their
respective mineral and agricultural resources.
   In cultural terms, the western part of the Carpathian Basin has always
had strong links via Moravia with the central European loess area, begin-

                                        272




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


TISZAPOLGAR                                   HATVAN




11.2 The contrasting distribution of settlement in north-east Hungary in the Early
Copper Age (Tiszapolgar culture) and Early Bronze Age (Hatvan culture).
Compiled from Bognar-Kutzian (1972) and Kalicz (1968).

ning with the formation there of the Neolithic Bandkeramik complex which
spread throughout central Europe. This pattern may also be discerned in the
later Neolithic and Copper Age Lengyel culture, and was still evident in
the Bronze Age. The eastern part of the Carpathian Basin, lacking an easy
northern outlet, followed a rather different course, with more evident
southern links. It formed the northern margin of early Neolithic cultures of
Balkan/Near Eastern character, and later in the Neolithic it again marked
the furthest extension of settlement types including tells. It was increasingly
integrated within the central European sphere, however, first by the
strengthening of links with the Ukraine and southern Poland across the
north-eastern Carpathians and secondly by the infilling of the sandy area
between the Tisza and the Danube which allowed the first cultural unifi-
cation of the Carpathian Basin in the Baden period.
   From this time onwards the eastern part of the Carpathian Basin began
to play a major innovating role in central European prehistory. The focus
of settlement shifted from the central areas of the Plain to the fringes of
surrounding uplands (Figure 11.2). This marks the beginning of a new
pattern characteristic of the Bronze Age, in which a powerful centre of
political and cultural development emerged in the north-eastern part of the
Carpathian Basin. The advanced social organisation and metallurgical skills
associated with the rise of the Otomani culture had a major impact on
surrounding regions.

                                        273




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE   DEVELOPMENT      OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER     AGE    SETTLEMENT


T H E EVOLUTION OF THE EAST HUNGARIAN LANDSCAPE
Geomorphology
The surface of the Great Hungarian Plain took its present shape within the
Quaternary epoch. Infilling by rivers during the Pleistocene period con-
tributed up to 300m of alluvial deposit. This accumulation created the basic
units of relief (Figure 11.3), which relate to the main bodies of water
entering the region (Pecsi 1970). The largest of these was the Danube, which
in the Pleistocene flowed south-westwards in a number of braided channels
to create a major fan now lying between the present courses of the Danube
and Tisza. From the north-east, the waters from the catchment now drained
by the Tisza, Szamos and their northern tributaries converged to form
another fan in the area now known as the Nyirseg.7 These fans lie at 150-
120m above sea-level, having been extensively mantled by blown sand
during the closing phases of the Pleistocene and the early Holocene. The
Maros, draining southern Transylvania and entering the Plain from the
south-east, also built up a large loess-covered fan at 110-90m. A row of
piedmont fans produced by smaller rivers along the edge of the Tertiary
terrace completes the picture. Together, all these fans enclose a central tri-
angular depression - the Koros region - forming a water and sediment basin
some 5-10m below the level of the surrounding Plain, within which loessic
sediments were redeposited.
   At the beginning of the Holocene, this area received water from all the
surrounding territories (Papp 1969), the greatest volume being supplied by
the palaeo-Szamos + Tisza, which flowed along the southern margin of the
Nyirseg in a valley now occupied by a small creek called the fir. This major
river, flowing across the area in a south-westerly direction, built up a sub-
stantial series of raised beds at about 85m, with backswamps on either side.
Its frequently changing course created a tangle of old channels outlined
by levees, coalescing to form a discontinuous flat-topped ridge or terrace
known as the Devavanya Plain.
   At the end of the pre-boreal phase, this situation was abruptly altered.
Sinkage of the northern margin of the Plain diverted the Tisza and Szamos
across the northern part of the Nyirseg through the chain of depressions
now marked by the Szatmar basin and the Retkoz. This water then found
its way southwards, at first through the Hortobagy and then along the
present valley of the upper Tisza, separating the outlier known as Great
Cumania (Nagykunsdg) from the main body of the north Alfold fans. At
about the same time the Maros also moved southwards to occupy its present
course. These two diversions reduced the hydrographic importance of the
Koros region and interrupted the process of infilling. The rivers draining
into it were now smaller, and the sediments which continued to accumulate
there became generally finer. The Devavanya Plain was left in a fossilised
form, as the Berettyo and Rapid Koros spread respectively into the back-


                                       274




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    IN   THE   GREAT   HUNGARIAN         PLAIN




11.3 The development of the landscape of eastern Hungary during the Quaternary
(after Pecsi and others).
swamps on either side, where their slow drainage created the bog-like
conditions of the Great (Nagy-) and the Little (Kis-) Sarret (literally 'bog-
meadow'). Water from the Tisza and Szamos still occasionally found its way
into this region as overspill in times of flood, following both the fir valley
and the Hortobagy.
   The floods of the Tisza and its tributaries occur in two peaks, one in early
spring and a larger one in early summer, the former caused by snowmelt and
the latter by rainfall. At these times the water occupied large parts of the
Koros area, depositing a black organic meadow-clay that contrasts with the
yellow loessic deposits of the ridges. The river-courses themselves were in
any case highly unstable, with extensive meanders and ox-bow lakes reflect-
ing frequent changes of course. Regulation of the Tisza during the nine-
teenth century reduced its length by approximately one third, and all the
rivers of the Plain are now constrained by massive dykes. This canalisation,
by restricting the flood areas and altering the water-table, had extensive
secondary effects on sedimentation and soil-formation.


                                       275




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE   DEVELOPMENT      OF   NEOLITHIC       AND   COPPER      AGE    SETTLEMENT



       EASTERN HUNGARY
        LANDSCAPE TYPES




11.4 The geomorphic landscape units of eastern Hungary and their associated soils.

Soils and     vegetation
The soils of eastern Hungary are closely related to the relief (Figure 11.4).
The whole of the lowland area is dominated by processes producing steppe
soils (Somogyi 1964); only where the hills on the edge of the Plain rise to
over 200m, and in the north-eastern area where there is an increase in rain-
fall and summer moisture, do forest soils occur. Skeletal sandy soils occur
on the Danube fan and the Nyirseg. Over the rest of the region, varieties of
chernozem are the rule except where modified by groundwater conditions.
There is a graduated sequence from true chernozem on the loess-covered
fans to the alluvial and marsh soils of the floodplains. In between lie
meadow chernozems, and the saline soils - solonetz and solonchak - that
occur under a steppe climate where salt-charged groundwater evaporates at
the surface. These soils are particularly important since they occupy a
position intermediate between the dry soils of the interfluves and those of
the low floodplain, where inundation inhibited cultivation and permanent
settlement.


                                       276




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN         PLAIN




11.5 Initial spread of farming into the Carpathian Basin in the Early Neolithic,
showing the fwestern stream' (Starcevo) and the 'eastern stream' (Kdrds-Cri§).
    Most of the Great Hungarian Plain is covered by vegetation classified as
forest steppe. Considerable areas, notably on the chernozem-covered inter-
fluves, are unlikely to have undergone extensive afforestation during the
Holocene. Riparian forests, however, are likely to have been characteristic
of the floodplain margins and wet depressions. The extent of forest cover on
the lower terrace now characterised by solonetz soils is problematic, but
a mosaic of light forest and more open areas is most likely.
    The landscape of the Great Hungarian Plain, therefore, as it presented
itself to early settlers, offered a range of environments each with its attend-
ant problems, from aridity to inundation. This fine balance of advantage
made the choice of settlement-location a critical one, and the distribution of
prehistoric sites is thus an important source of information on the ecological
requirements of early farmers.


T H E CULTURAL SUCCESSION AND THE STRUCTURE
OF REGIONAL CONTACTS
The well-investigated succession of Neolithic and Copper Age cultures and
the growing number of radiocarbon dates provide a firm framework for the
interpretation of the settlement-evidence. The classification of these groups
will be briefly reviewed in this section before presenting the details of their
distributions.

                                        277




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 T H E   D E V E L O P M E N T   OF   N E O L I T H I C   A N D   C O P P E R     A G E   S E T T L E M E N T


                                                                                 14 C         CONTEMPORARY
                                                                                DATES           GROUPS




                                                                                              KARANOVO I * H
                                                                                             CR\f




5300             PR0T0-
                 vin£A                                                                        VESELINOVO
                                                                                              DUDE^TL
                                                                                              kour1lo
5100
                                                                                              My LBK
                                                                            4 2 0 0 be
5000                       SZAKAL-        SZAMOS/         TISZADOB/
                            HAT            ESZTAR           BOKK                              KALOJANOVETS
                           ( • SZJLMEG)                                                       vXdastra

4800     -
                                                                                              UU LBK
                VINCA-                                                      4 0 0 0 bc
                PLODNIK
                   c        TISZA         HERPALY         C50SZ-
                                                                                              MARICA.50IAN
                                                                                              GBADESHNITSA
                                                           HALOM                              PRECUCUTENI
                                                                                              Stichband K.
                                                                                              HinkMlstein
4400                                                                                          Ekrlier Ungyel
                                                                            3 5 0 0 bc

                                      PROTOTISZAPOLGAR.
                                                                                              GUMELNITSA
                                      TISZAPOLGAK                                             SALCUTSA
                                                                                              CUCUTEN1
                                                                                              Roessen
                                                                                              Latmr UngyeL
4000     -




              THE NEOLITHIC AND EARLY COPPER AGE
                CHRONOLOGY OF EASTERN HUNGARY
11.6 The cultural succession in eastern Hungary; showing contemporary groups in
the Balkans and west-central Europe.


The Neolithic           period
The earliest agricultural communities in eastern Hungary (Figure 11.5)
belong to the Koros culture (= Romanian Cris culture), long recognised as
part of the Balkan early Neolithic complex (Kutzian 1944). Its sites occur in
the southern part of the Plain and are characterised by plentiful pinched and
rusticated pottery with chaff tempering. Radiocarbon dates take it back to
the early sixth millennium BC (Figure 11.6). The origins of this culture have

                                                   278




                        This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


usually been sought in the Starcevo culture of Jugoslavia, but since material
closely resembling the Koros assemblage occurs as far east as Moldavia, on
the border of the USSR, a primary dispersal centre in Transylvania seems
more probable. The recent discovery here of a pre-Kdrds phase of painted
pottery with strong analogies in northern Bulgaria (Comsa 1974) indicates
the possibility of an eastern stream of Neolithic population, parallel to that
of Starcevo further west, which would have provided the basis for such a
Koros dispersal. In this case, the eastern part of the Carpathian Basin would
have been the meeting point for two streams of incoming Neolithic popu-
lation as shown in Figure 11.5. True Starcevo sites occur in the southern part
of western Hungary, where they are represented by recent finds at Lanycsok-
and Becsehely (Kalicz 1980).
   A further element in this picture is the recently-defined Szatmar group in
the north-east part of the Carpathian Basin with a material culture basically
similar to that of Koros (Kalicz and Makkay 1977). It can plausibly be
interpreted as a further movement from Transylvania around the northern
margin of the Bihor Mountains. Far fewer sites are known than for Koros,
and it probably arrived somewhat later (Figure 11.5).
   Around 5300 BC major changes took place within the Carpathian Basin.
Eastern Hungary became the focus of a new group centred in the Great
Hungarian Plain, while western Hungary was occupied for the first time
by agricultural groups expanding from the former Starcevo area. These
changes must be seen as part of a wider reorganisation throughout south-
east Europe, reflected in new cultural groupings such as Vinca and
Veselinovo. The south part of the Carpathian Basin formed part of the zone
characterised by dark, burnished pottery ornamented by channelling; in the
south-east (from Serbia along the Maros to Transylvania) it is represented
by the Vinca culture, and in the south-west (along the Sava and Drava) by
the related Sopot group. To the north of this zone, incised, linear ornament
was characteristic - the so-called LBK or Linienbandkeramik - which divides
into two regional groups. Within the previously occupied area of the Great
Hungarian Plain, the group known as AVK (Alfoldi Vonaldiszes Keramia =
Alfold Linear Pottery) developed from local Koros and Szatmar populations
under strong Vinca influence (Kalicz and Makkay 1977). In the hitherto un-
occupied area west of the Danube a new group, the west Hungarian branch
of pan-European LBK, made its appearance as the first stage in a major
movement of agricultural expansion.
   These two groups in the east and west of the Carpathian Basin thus
emerged in parallel, with a common background in the earlier agricultural
communities of the Balkans. Although imports demonstrate a continuing
contact between them, they continued on independent lines of development.
In terms of European prehistory, the western group was the more significant:
for it was this group that carried agriculture into Moravia and northwards
beyond the Carpathians to the whole of the central European loess belt from

                                       279




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE   DEVELOPMENT        OF   NEOLITHIC       AND   COPPER      AGE    SETTLEMENT


France to the Ukraine. Expansion in eastern Hungary took place along the
valleys reaching up into the mountain foreland to produce important
peripheral groups in the karstic landscapes of north-east Hungary and
Slovakia, but major expansion was blocked. While western Hungary main-
tained an important role as intermediary between the Balkans and central
Europe, eastern Hungary continued an introverted development in which
Balkan elements became increasingly pronounced.
   The changes marked by the appearance of AVK and earliest western
Bandkeramik seem to have been relatively rapid (Figure 11.6), for by c.5200
BC the cultural uniformity of eastern Hungary had given way to a series
of regional pottery styles (Bognar-Kutzian 1966; Kalicz and Makkay 1977)
with further Vinca influence in the south and a lively focus of trade and
stylistic innovation in the north. This pattern was more stable, lasting for
some 300 to 400 years. On the lower and middle Tisza and along the Koros,
the Szakalhat group is distinguished by pottery ornamented with paint
outlined by incised decoration. To the north of this the Esztar group
occupied a wide territory on the Nyirseg, Szamos and upper Berettyo,
in which pottery with dark painted ornament was used. Various smaller
groups emerged on the fringes of the northern mountains: Szilmeg in the
Biikk foothills, Tiszadob in the Sajo valley, and Biikk in the mountains
themselves, with exceptionally fine incised and occasionally painted pottery.
All these groups are distinguished by their characteristic finewares, which
occur in smaller quantities as imports in each others' areas. This small-scale
cultural distinctiveness is probably related to a degree of economic differ-
entiation, and the trade between mountain and plain in obsidian and other
hard stones was greatly expanded. Biikk sherds and obsidian from the Tokaj
and neighbouring sources occur on Vinca sites in Serbia and southern
Transylvania, a distance of 400km.
   Around 4800 BC another horizon of stylistic cultural change can be
observed in many parts of the Balkans, for instance in the transition from
Vinca-Tordos to Vinca-Plocnik. At this time the Great Hungarian Plain saw
the emergence of Late Neolithic groups represented by the Tisza and
Herpaly-Csoszhalom groups (Bognar-Kutzian 1966). Decorated Tisza fine
pottery, with its intricate incised, textile-like patterns is characteristic of the
southern area and shows continuity from the Szakalhat group. The northern
part of the Plain - with the exception of the mountain fringes, where settle-
ment was abandoned - was occupied by the Herpaly-Csoszhalom group,
with painted finewares. This replaced the multitude of smaller groups on
the northern edge of the Plain, and is found in the former Esztar area.
Small differences in the colour-combinations distinguish Herpaly from
Csoszhalom, but together they differ from Tisza not only in their pottery
but also in their settlement-pattern and in the occurrence of small numbers
of simple copper objects, for instance at Herpaly. Since both these groups
shared a common set of domestic pottery, the sharp frontier between Tisza


                                         280




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


and Herpaly finewares may indicate a genuine social boundary that is
particularly interesting because of the differences in settlement-types, in
which true tells are confined to the north and east. These groups were long-
lived, persisting for perhaps a 300 to 400 year span. During this period the
elaborately-decorated finewares declined, with the final phase of Tisza being
distinguished as the Gorzsa group.

The Copper Age
A new pattern marks the beginning of the Copper Age8 around 4400 BC,
when a much more uniform culture developed over eastern Hungary and
neighbouring parts of Transylvania (Bognar-Kutzian 1972). This was the
Tiszapolgar culture, which has a new range of shapes (especially pedestalled
forms with decorative lugs), but lacks the element of painted decoration.
The larger cemeteries of this period provide evidence of the first heavy
copper objects and also goldwork. These indicate the rising wealth of areas
on the edge of the Plain, with access both to the highland metal sources and
to trade routes, which for the first time crossed the Carpathians to bring
commodities such as blades of Ukrainian flint into circulation. This new,
outward-looking pattern reduced the importance of the hitherto wealthy
central area.
   By 4000 BC this pattern may be perceived with even greater clarity in the
succeeding Bodrogkeresztur culture (Patay 1974). The scale of copper pro-
duction was greatly expanded, with copper axes occurring in graves up to
200km from the copper sources. This metalwork and even pottery occur
north of the Carpathians in Little Poland, while cultural mixing with late
Salcutsa groups on the Lower Danube testifies to the increased importance
of links in this direction also (Roman 1971).
   The most radical break in the prehistory of this region occurred around
3500 BC. The appearance of the Baden culture, with its roots in the Lengyel
tradition of western Hungary and Czechoslovakia, marks the integration
of eastern Hungary into a wider grouping including the whole of the
Carpathian Basin (Banner 1956). The pottery assemblage was transformed
by a new range of types including pails, jugs and cups that testify to funda-
mental changes in eating habits, with an increased importance of liquids.
This occurs over a wide area of south-east and central Europe. The first
evidence for the cart, and probably also the plough, appears at this time
(Chapter 6).
   Another important development of this period was the appearance of
large numbers of tumuli (some up to 70m in diameter and 10m high) con-
taining burials covered by planks and hides, with the body in a characteristic
supine position, with knees drawn up, and the skull painted with stripes of
red ochre. They have few grave-goods, but occasionally ear- [or hair-] rings
of silver. Such burials have close analogies on the Pontic steppes, and other
examples are known from the Lower Danube. They have plausibly been in

                                       281




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE   DEVELOPMENT            OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER     AGE     SETTLEMENT



 NEOLITHIC                   &     COPPER             AGE          POTTERY

                                                         BODROGKERESZTUR
                                                           C . 3 9 0 0 - 3 5 0 0 BC.



                                                              TISZAPOLGAR

                                                            C . 4 4 0 0 - 3 9 0 0 BC.



                                                                   TISZA
                                                S§|         c . 4 8 0 0 - 4 4 0 0 BC.

                                                              SZAKALHAT
                                                            c. 51OO - 4 8 0 0 BC.


                                                                    A.V.K
                                                            c. 5 3 0 0 - 5 1 0 0 BC.


           o                                                      KOROS
          - 0 o.
                                                            c. 6 0 0 0 - 53OO BC.
               0 -o/

11.7 Selected pottery types characteristic of the main phases of the Neolithic and
Copper Ages in eastern Hungary.
terpreted as evidence for an intrusive steppe population, maintaining a
cultural distinctiveness alongside native groups (Ecsedy 1979).

The Early Bronze Age
By 2800 BC these populations had fused to form the Early Bronze Age
groups of this area, broadly divided between a north-eastern (Nyirseg)
group and a central (Mako) group (Kalicz 1968). Innovations at this time
include improved techniques of copperworking such as the two-piece mould
and the new types it made possible, and also the advent of horse-breeding
on a large scale. Trade in metal items, and also warfare increased in signifi-
cance, reaching their full development in the Nagyrev, Hatvan, Otomani
and Perjamos cultures. These occupy discrete territories, the first on the


                                             282




                       This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


Danube and middle Tisza, the second and third in northern and north-
eastern Hungary, and the last on the Maros. These are more than simply
ceramic styles, and the burial evidence indicates that they may be con-
sciously distinguished cultural groups (O'Shea 1978). Sites of this period
show significant new features such as large cemeteries with several hundred
graves (especially in the south, on the major rivers at the Maros confluence)
and the reappearance of tell sites, which now had a fortified character. These
are especially common on the margins of the Basin (though flat sites fortified
with ring ditches are known from the Koros region). The Otomani culture
in particular shows a new level of centralisation, and its sites have produced
evidence of bronze- and gold-working, early ironwork, chariotry and stone-
built fortifications (Vladar 1973).


T H E REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF SETTLEMENT
The agricultural occupation of eastern Hungary in the periods described in
the preceding section may be followed in the series of distribution maps
presented in Sherratt (1983b).9 What is essential to such comparisons,
however, is an appreciation of how this archaeological record has been built
up and how it must be supplemented by future research. The characteristics
of this record will therefore be briefly reviewed before discussion of the
distributions.

History of research
Hungary has a long tradition of archaeological research, with the oldest
national museum in Europe, founded in 1802. As well as this national focus,
local museums and amateur societies have been active from the later nine-
teenth century onwards. By the time of the International Congress of Pre-
historic Anthropology and Archaeology in Budapest in 1876, organised by
Floris Romer (1878), commissions with local correspondents were investi-
gating the problems of obsidian distribution, tell settlements, tumuli and
hillforts. County archaeological maps were exhibited at the Congress. The
Tisza/Koros region was well represented, with reports on excavations at the
Bronze Age tell of Nagyrev and finds from the important Tisza culture sites
of Szegvar-Tiizkoves and Bekesszentandras (Romer 1878). Before the First
World War excavations had taken place at the eponymous sites of Lengyel
(1880s), Tiszapolgar (1900s) and the crucial Bronze Age tell at Toszeg
(1906-13).
   Investigations in the Interwar years clarified the Neolithic cultural
succession (Tompa 1929; 1937) and saw extensive regional fieldwork -
notably by Janos Banner (1942) in the Szeged-Hodmezovasarhely area and
by Jeno Hillebrand (1937) in the Biikk mountains. Kutzian summarised the
Koros culture, and since the Second World War further monographs in the
series Archaeologia Hungarica have described the assemblages and known

                                       283




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

T H E   D E V E L O P M E N T   OF   N E O L I T H I C   AND   C O P P E R   AGE       S E T T L E M E N T



        EASTERN HUNGARY
  INTENSITY OF RESEARCH




                                                                                   n* to ton- sfuere *ith one or
                                                                                   more Neolithic/Copper   Aft
                                                                                   findspots



                                                                                   Areas of intensive   research

                                                                                   Btse-mop outlines show
                                                                                   boundaries cflgndeope types,
                                                                                   modified from Pksi and others




11.8 The intensity of field research in eastern Hungary before the commencement
of the Archaeological Topography of Hungary, showing the distribution of
reported Neolithic and Copper Agefinds,and individual surveys or projects.
   Key: (1) Banner - Hodmezovasarhely; (2) Kalicz - Tiszazug; (3) Banner -
   Szarvas; (4) Bereczky - Devavanya; (5) Makkay - Derecske; (6) Korek,
   Gazdapusztai and Mesterhdzy - Hortobagy; (7) Kalicz - Tarnabod; (8) Bognar-
   Kutzian - Polgar; (9) Kalicz - Nyiregyhaza.

findspots of the Koros, AVK, Tiszapolgar, Baden and EBA cultures (Kalicz
and Makkay 1977; Bognar-Kutzian 1972; Banner 1956; Kalicz 1968), while
Bodrogkeresztur has been summarised in a major article (Patay 1974). Only
the Tisza-Herpaly-Csoszhalom complex remains without monographic
treatment. Excavations on tell settlements have taken place at Herpaly,
Tape-Lebo, Szegvar-Tiizkoves, Battonya-Parazstanya and Veszto Magor, as
well as the settlement and cemetery at Aszod and at many Koros sites.10
   At the same time regional surveys have been conducted, first by Kalicz
in the Tiszazug (1957), by Bognar-Kutzian in connection with the major
excavation of the Tiszapolgar cemetery (Bognar-Kutzian 1963), and by
Makkay near Derecske (Makkay 1957). These pioneer projects have led to

                                                  284




                       This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


a current interest in the discovery and registration of sites, fuelled by the
need to identify priorities in rescue work on the part of local institutions in
many areas. This work has been organised and given central direction by the
Hungarian Academy in the programme of the Archaeological Topography
of Hungary (Magyarorszdg Regeszeti Topografiaja), a county-by-county
survey of finds, sites, and monuments. Although the initial volumes have
been concerned with western Hungary (Co. Veszprem, Co. Komarom), a
major programme on the northern part of Co. Bekes (covering the Koros
area from the Romanian border to Szarvas) is nearing completion (e.g.
Ecsedy et al. 1982). This work is unique in its scale and sustained in-
tensity, and has multiplied the number of known prehistoric sites by a factor
of ten.
   These planned surveys represent a new threshold in the discovery of pre-
historic settlement-patterns which complements the overall picture built up
by chance finds and selective recording. They can be used to calibrate exist-
ing maps by demonstrating the arbitrary character of existing records and
indicating the real nature of changes in the number, character and location
of sites. But they must also be interpreted in the light of conclusions gained
from wider studies about the role and significance of the areas in question
within the region as a whole. Both levels of analysis are needed to make
sense of the information.
   On a practical point, it is difficult (and misleading) to mix the two kinds
of information on a single small-scale map. It is better to realise that
traditional distribution-maps indicate only the occurrence of sites in a given
area, but not their relative density: this can only be assessed from full survey
data.11 For this reason, findspots from the recent Topographic Survey have
not been plotted on the small-scale regional maps. Figure 11.8 shows a first
attempt to map the intensity of research which underlies the following
distributions. [Maps of Koros, AVK, Tiszapolgar, Bodrogkeresztur and
Baden distributions are not reproduced here.]

The Koros and Szatmdr cultures
The first Neolithic communities show a strongly constrained distribution
with a riverine emphasis and little or no expansion into the side valleys or
onto the fans. The Koros and Szatmar distributions are very similar in this
respect, and their complementary character, with a boundary on the middle
Tisza, is consistent with a convergence along the Tisza from south and north
respectively. Although the apparent clusters of settlement are largely related
to the intensity of fieldwork (e.g. around Hodmezovasarhely and in the
Tiszazug), there appears to be a real difference between the density of Koros
sites and those of Szatmar. The very high density of Koros sites is re-
markable, and contrasts in this respect also with Starcevo (Kalicz 1980).
Where the floodplain is narrow, the sites show a linear arrangement on
bluffs overlooking the valley; where the floodplain is broader they occur


                                       285 -




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE   DEVELOPMENT      OF   NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER      AGE    SETTLEMENT


on the small islands of higher ground within it. In places (as around
Hodmezovasarhely) the pattern of sites may relate to an earlier course of the
Tisza. The only exception to the general riverine distribution is the group of
sites on the Maros fan around Oroshaza, which may indicate more ex-
tensive penetration of this region. By comparison with the following period,
there is a notable absence of sites on the broad, flat floodplains of the
Hortobagy and the middle Tisza.
   Excavated evidence of the Koros economy demonstrates a substantial
seasonal contribution from fishing, shellfish-gathering and fowling, as well
as the cultivation of grain and the keeping of domestic livestock, mainly
sheep (Bokonyi 1974). Clay weights, probably net-sinkers, are common
finds.

The Alfold Linear Pottery (AVK) culture
This period was probably shorter than the others considered here, and
is contemporary with the earliest phases of the Vinca culture (sites not
known), which extended up to the Maros confluence. The basic pattern re-
sembles that of Koros, with some additional movement along the side-
valleys up into the Jaszsag and along the Sajo, with an initial penetration
into the foothills. (It is likely that some of the sites of the Tiszadob group
shown in the following map began before the end of this period.) A com-
plementary expansion occurred on the floodplain to the north of the middle
Tisza, and in the now highly saline lands of the Hortobagy. The distribution
was still predominantly riverine, with no settlement of the northern fan on
the Hajdusag and Nyirseg.
   The economy is less well known, but there are indications that there was
less reliance on wild resources and a greater emphasis on cattle and perhaps
cereals. Net-sinkers no longer occur.

Szakdlhat and its contemporaries (Figure 11.9)
This period saw a general expansion in the north, encompassing the Jaszsag,
the northern foothills and limestone mountains, and the Nyirseg with its
surrounding floodplains - the upper Tisza depressions and the upper
Berettyo. Some expansion is also observable in the south, on the east bank
of the Tisza (e.g. around Szentes) and lower Koros, and also around the
marshy depressions on the Maros fan around Battonya. Many tell sites were
founded in this period, e.g. Veszto Magor. There was no penetration of the
Danube-Tisza interfluve, and the sites in the Hortobagy appear to have been
abandoned.
   The emergence of the Nyirseg and its surrounding areas created a north-
eastern focus marked by Esztar pottery. The lower foothills of the Biikk
mountains are picked out by the curious small concentration of the Szilmeg
group, extending to the opposite bank of the Tisza. The mountains them-
selves, and the adjacent valleys of the Sajo and the Hernad, were the focus

                                        286




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN        PLAIN




11.9 Mapping at the scale of cultural distributions: Late Neolithic (late sixth/early
fifth millennia BC) findspots of Szakalhat, Szilmeg, Biikk and Esztdr material (data
from Kalicz and Makkay 1977); findspots of contemporary Zseliz and Vinca
material not shown. (For distributions of material from other periods plotted at
this scale, but not reproduced here, see Sherratt 1983b.)

of the distinctive Tiszadob and the Biikk groups, which are also represented
on the Retkoz and the northern Nyirseg.
   Biikk sites (both on terraces and in the plentiful caves) occur in the
greatest number in the limestone mountains of the Biikk itself and the North
Borsod Karst. The absence of sites in the acid Matra mountains is con-
spicuous. They are, however, frequent in the foothills of the Cserehat and
around the fringes of the volcanic mountains of the Zemplen range, where
raw materials are likely to have been the motive for settlement. The presence
of sites in the deep, well-watered upland valleys of the northern karstic
mountains indicates an emphasis other than cereal-growing. Animal
remains from the Domica cave across the border in Slovakia indicate a high
proportion of hunted species, with predominance of sheep among the
domestic stock. Within the cave, lines of postholes outline rectangular pens

                                        287




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE   DEVELOPMENT      OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER     AGE     SETTLEMENT


some three by four metres, while smaller camp-sites occur nearby next to
springs. These indicate the importance of animal-keeping, perhaps on a
transhumant basis, though carbonised cereals and grinders indicate the
consumption of grain. The village-like open sites at lower altitudes had an
economy similar to that of sites in the Plain, based on cattle-keeping
(Lichardus 1974).
   An important element in the economy of the region was trade, both in
raw materials and manufactured products.12 Although the limestone areas
themselves have no hard rocks, the andesites and rhyolites of the Biikk
foothills and the Zemplen mountains, along with the obsidian deposits of
the latter (especially around Erdohorvati) were both exploited and widely
traded. Hoards of blades in local siliceous rock are known from Barca and
Boldogkovaralja - the latter apparently an obsidian workshop also - and
there is a group of nine axes from Domica (Kalicz and Makkay 1977;
Lichardus 1974; see Figure 12.10). Biikk groups were active both in the
direct exploitation of these resources and as middlemen in their distribution
both northwards and southwards. Another traded commodity was pottery
- apparently manufactured from terra rossa in the caves themselves. This
was superbly decorated with fine parallel lines and was traded over a similar
area as obsidian, as far as Serbia, Transylvania and southern Poland.
The economy of these sites cannot be understood in terms of local self-
sufficiency.
   In the Plain to the south the prosperity of this period is emphasised both
by the number and size of sites and by their evident ability to acquire
highland products and materials. The emphasis on cattle has prompted
speculation that this formed an important traded commodity in its own
right (Chapter 10).

Tisza-Herpdly-Csoszhalom
The sites of this period have not been systematically mapped, but from the
known distribution a great similarity to that of the preceding groups may be
inferred, the main difference being the lack of sites in the northern mountain
fringe. Continuity in the main cultural boundary, from Szakalhat/Esztar to
Tisza/Herpaly-Csoszhalom is very striking, with a proliferation of sites in
the upper Berettyo region, which continued as a major focus of settlement.
Large numbers of tell sites (including Herpaly itself: Korek and Patay 1956)
are known from this area. The tell at Csoszhalom near Polgar (Bognar-
Kutzian 1958) can be seen as part of the northern wing of this group on the
other side of the Nyirseg.
   In the Tisza province further south two types of settlement are known
(Kalicz 1965): a zone of 'pit settlements' on the middle Tisza and a zone
on the Lower Tisza and Koros where very large aggregated sites up to a
kilometre across are common.13 Such sites are usually near to important
river links, and may reflect the advantages of congregation at nodal points

                                       288




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN        PLAIN


of trade. (This seems to be the case in the Vinca area, as at Vinca itself.) The
smaller size of Herpaly tells may thus reflect a different organisation of
trading activity in a zone with more immediate access to highland resources.
   The lowland economy continued to be dominated by cattle-raising,
with high proportions of large animals of aurochs size on sites of the
Herpaly-Csoszhalom group (Bokonyi 1974). Lowland sites continued
to import large quantities of highland materials. The lack of sites in the
mountains appears to indicate that control of these resources now lay with
adjacent lowland groups, and that the regional economy no longer sup-
ported a fringe of specialised middleman-trading combined with herding.
Examples of spectacular long-distance trading in pottery or obsidian are less
frequent.

The Tiszapolgar culture
The map of Tiszapolgar settlement shows a pattern (emphasised by the loss
of the mountain fringe) that was still essentially riverine. The territory on
and around the Nyirseg remained the main area of interest outside the river
valleys. Contemporary Lengyel groups again occupied the north-west of the
area (sites not shown) on the upper Galga and Zagyva, forming a link
westwards from the Jaszsag. One or two Tiszapolgar sites are known from
the eastern fringes of the Danube-Tisza Interfluve, but there was no real
penetration of this area. The Koros-Berettyo area was well populated, while
Makkay's survey of the Derecske region (1957) indicated a large number
of sites between the upper Berettyo and the Nyirseg. The Polgar area is
similarly highlighted by Bognar-Kutzian's work, while the Tiszazug again
shows the plentiful sites from Kalicz' survey. Two areas of settlement, indi-
cating the possibility of further sites, are picked out on the Maros fan,
around Oroshaza and Battonya.
    Although they have not been differentiated on the map, large cemetery
sites are known. The Tiszapolgar-Basatanya cemetery contained over sixty
graves of this period and was not directly associated with an adjacent
settlement (Bognar-Kutzian 1963). Such cemeteries seem to have had a dis-
tinctive role in the settlement pattern, perhaps serving as the common focus
for several small hamlets.
    Subsistence evidence shows a continuing emphasis on cattle, though now
without the large, aurochs-sized specimens that have been interpreted as
evidence of hunting and local domestication. A new traded commodity,
however, was the heavy copper axe, mostly in the form of simple axe-
hammers. The distribution of these finds (Schubert 1965) is notably
restricted to the edge of the Plain, mostly outside Hungary: one group
occurs in the north-east, for instance as grave-goods at Lucky and Tibava
in Slovakia, another group is at the foot of the Rezhegyseg (Copper
mountains) along the headwaters of the Berettyo in Romania, and a third
lies in the portion of the Plain in northern Jugoslavia (Bognar-Kutzian

                                        289




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER     AGE     SETTLEMENT


1972). The central area of the Plain, although well populated, was not rich
in metal goods.

Bodrogkeresztur
The map of this period is more complicated, since it attempts to differentiate
settlements and cemeteries, and also records stray finds of copper axes.
Characteristically, rather few settlements have been recognised, though
eight times as many cemeteries are known and an equal number of stray
axes - many themselves probably derived from destroyed graves. Cemeteries
clearly continued to be important in the settlement pattern, and the
Tiszapolgar-Basatanya cemetery contained nearly 100 graves of this period.
The small number of settlement-sites is partly related to the difficulty of
recognising Bodrogkeresztur pottery, only a small proportion of which is
decorated. The distribution of sites defined on the occurrence of pottery (less
than half the number of comparable Tiszapolgar sites) can usefully be sup-
plemented by findspots of types of copper axes known to belong to this
period. This information amplifies, but does not radically change, the basic
pattern shown by settlements and cemeteries.
   While the riverine axis continued to be important, a scatter of sites occurs
on the fans, notably on the Nyirseg and less obviously on the Maros fan
(though this may be due to the poorer representation of metal finds in the
central part of the Plain). Some increase in activity is evident on the Danube-
Tisza Interfluve, while the important linking area between the Jaszsag and
the Danube bend was absorbed from Lengyel into the Bodrogkeresztur
grouping, emphasising the increasing significance of east-west links. Small
numbers of finds reappear at this period in the northern mountains and the
intermontane valleys behind, and there is evidence for some occupation in
the Hortobagy again. The most striking contrast with the preceding
distribution is in the Koros-Berettyo area, previously well settled but now
apparently deserted, which contrasts with the evident continuity of the
Szeged-Hodmezovasarhely area.
   On a regional scale, there is a large measure of continuity from Tisza-
polgar to Bodrogkeresztur, both in terms of way of life (continuity in ceramic
forms, similar subsistence pattern) and in the continuity of particular sites
such as the Tiszapolgar cemetery. The distribution of copper objects, too,
shows a similar pattern but on an expanded scale (Schubert 1965). The
greatest densities are on the northern Nyirseg and the upper Tisza, probably
representing the east Slovakian centre exemplified in the previous period by
Tibava; the southern Nyirseg, upper Berettyo and north-east Maros fan,
again the western fringe of a Transylvanian group; and in the area of the
Danube bend, reflecting west Slovakian sources. A few strays from Serbian
sources complete the picture in the south. Relatively few copper objects
reached the central part of eastern Hungary, Tiszazug and the lower Koros.



                                        290




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


Baden and Early Bronze Age
Banner's map of sites belonging to the Baden complex was published in his
monograph of 1956, and has a serious gap in its coverage of lowland eastern
Hungary. A recently-published map of the adjacent area of Romania
(Roman and Nemeti 1978) gives a better impression of the numbers of sites
now known. Together, these two maps indicate the growing importance of
the areas on the edges of the Plain. In particular, intermontane valleys such
as those of the Hernad and Sajo now supported a substantial population,
both in their lower reaches and along their headwaters in Slovakia. This
substantial upland expansion brought to an end the dominance of the Plain.
There is some suggestion of an emphasis on cattle in the upland valleys and
on sheep in the lowlands (Bokonyi 1974). Sites (including the well-known
cemetery of Alsonemedi) appeared at this time on the Danube-Tisza Inter-
fluve in larger numbers, and opened further westward links.
    Bronze Age sites have been accurately mapped only for certain cultures
(e.g. Kalicz 1968), but the general pattern follows strongly from Baden and
shows the continuing importance of the basin-edge as opposed to the centre
of the Plain. The magnitude of this contrast is well summarised in Figure
11.2, which compares the Tiszapolgar distribution with that of Hatvan. The
main EBA concentration is along the northern margin of the Plain, and picks
out the line of the terrace between the Jaszsag and the Hernad-Sajo conflu-
ence. Many of these sites are tells, including the eponymous examples of
Hatvan and Fiizesabony. This line (now followed by the main Budapest-
Miskolc road) was an important route of contact and trade, especially as
horses were now bred in large numbers and bone harness-pieces are not
uncommon finds.
    The role of trade is also significant in explaining the continuing import-
ance of the major rivers within the Plain. Positions on the river itself, rather
than just with access to the soils of the floodplain margin, were especially
sought. The Tisza and the Maros, with their potential for long-distance
trade by dugout canoe, were more important than the Koros in this context.
It is significant that the name of the eponymous EBA site on the central Tisza,
Nagyrev, actually means 'Great port'. The concentration of large cemeteries
at the Maros confluence (Szoreg, Deszk, Cszentivan, etc.) is also notable,
and imported items such as copper ornaments and fossil shell beads are con-
spicuous items in the graves (O'Shea 1978).
    The large volumes of bronze goods in circulation are indicated by stray
finds and hoards, whose distributions form a special topic that will not be
considered here (though see maps in Bona 1975; Mozsolics 1967 and 1973;
Hansel 1968). The overall pattern of metal supply, however, was dominated
by two groups of sources: a north Transylvanian group (perhaps including
the Rezhegyseg) serving north-east Hungary and adjacent parts of Romania,
and a west Slovakian group serving western Hungary and penetrating as far


                                       291




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER     AGE     SETTLEMENT


as the lower Tisza and Maros, probably through the Nagyrev and succeed-
ing Vatya groups of the Danube-Tisza Interfluve.
   Fortification is a noteworthy aspect of EBA settlement, especially around
the fringes of the Carpathian Basin - though by the time of the Vatya culture
there was also a ring of 'hillforts' around the territory of this culture in the
strategic linking area between the Danube and Tisza. The most striking
examples of defensive works are the major fortified centres at Barca and
Spissky Stvrtok in the montane valleys of Slovakia, which have notable
concentrations of wealth (Vladar 1973); but many of the lower-order tell-
and flat-sites throughout the region were protected by concentric ditches.


CONCLUSIONS
Systematic comparison of the patterns of finds over the 4000 years from the
Neolithic to the Early Bronze Age demonstrates a considerable measure of
continuity in the areas chosen for settlement, but also important variations
both in the central area of the Plain and on the margins of the occupied area.
   The rivers played a primary role, first in the initial dispersal of popu-
lation, secondly through their association with well-watered environments,
and increasingly because of the role of the waterways in trade. Year-round
settlement in the floodplain itself was precluded by the spring and early
summer floods; yet the broad interfluvial areas with their low rainfall were
equally unsuitable for early agriculture. Early settlement was therefore con-
centrated on the lower terrace or intermediate zone, overlooking the flood-
plain, either beside the major rivers or on raised areas with the basins
defined by the larger fans. Along the active river-courses, this gave settle-
ment a linear character, as in the Tiszazug; elsewhere clusters of settlement
occurred where sites occupied the margins of small islands rising from the
floodplain, as in the area around Hodmezovasarhely or the Devavanya
Plain.
   Some settlement took place within the Maros fan and the Nyirseg,
but occupation here was less continuous and confined to favourable de-
pressions. Very little penetration of the Danube-Tisza Interfluve took place
until Baden times. The upland fringe experienced a brief, specialised
occupation in the Biikk period, after which settlement was again largely
confined to the plains. Permanent occupation was pushed up the river
valleys penetrating into the highlands during the Baden period, initiating a
general movement of population from the central part of the Carpathian
Basin to the edges, particularly along the northern and eastern terrace
margins where the main concentration of Bronze Age tell sites occurs.
   The area of the Koros-Berettyo depression, for which more detailed
evidence is available, was thus a core area of Neolithic settlement which
gradually lost its importance in the later periods. The marked local shift
in population at the time of Bodrogkeresztur raises the possibility that

                                         292




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


significant ecological change took place in this extensive lowland area at this
time; but the long-term decline of this area must also be related to its struc-
tural position in the context of the expanding margin of settlement in the
Carpathian Basin as a whole.
   The detailed settlement-patterns which can be reconstructed from
planned surveys such as that in the northern part of Co. Bekes make it
possible to examine the relative densities of settlement over this period and
to follow these changes in terms of the location of particular sites. The broad
geographical treatment of this section can thus be refined to deal with the
behaviour of individual communities.


      I I : S I T E SURVEY A N D S E T T L E M E N T D Y N A M I C S
SCALES OF STUDY
In the first half of this chapter, the distribution of settlement in the four
thousand years following the introduction of agriculture in eastern Hungary
was discussed at a regional level. From the maps presented, based on the
accumulated record of chance finds, excavations and small-scale surface
surveys, it was possible to define changes in the areas selected for occupation
by early farming groups and fluctuations in the margin of settlement at
different periods. A major shift in the emphasis of settlement, from the
centre of the Plain to its periphery, was noted in the mid-fourth millennium
BC.
    To complement this picture, a more detailed view is required of the
development of settlement at a local level. This is necessary both to calibrate
the accuracy of the relatively coarse-grain mapping attempted in Part I, and
to reveal the fine structure of settlement development. This might include
localised shifts in the areas occupied at different times, and changes in the
numbers and size of sites. The nature of such changes may be expected to
reveal some of the underlying reasons for alterations in settlement pattern:
environmental, social and historical factors.
    Fortunately, a unique combination of circumstances makes it possible to
provide such evidence. The level surface of the Great Hungarian Plain has
suffered minimal erosion by comparison with many parts of central and
western Europe, where much of the Neolithic landscape has been truncated
and partly removed. The low rainfall of the area minimises the destruction
of surface-scatters of pottery, which occur in profusion there on Neolithic
sites. Uniform patterns of land-use based on collective farms provide ex-
tensive areas of ploughed land for the recovery of such material, which can
be related to the succession of cultures summarised in Figure 11.6. These
opportunities have been seized by Hungarian archaeologists as part of the
programme of the Archaeological Topography of Hungary (Magyarorszag
Regeszeti Topografiaja) undertaken by the Institute of Archaeology of the


                                       293




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER     AGE     SETTLEMENT




11.10 The Koros-Berettyo region: an enlarged portion of the geomorphological
map (Fig. 11.4) with known sites of the Tiszapolgar (after Bognar-Kutzian 1972)
and Bodrogkeresztur cultures (including both settlements and cemeteries, after
Patay 1974, and stray finds of contemporary copper axe-adzes, after Schubert
1965). The positions offindspots at this scale are approximate.

Hungarian Academy of Sciences in conjunction with local museums. The
recent publication of volume 6 in this series (Ecsedy et al. 1982) is the first
of several volumes in preparation covering the northern part of Co. Bekes.
Because of the relative scarcity of standing monuments in Hungary, this
work has not simply taken the form of a description of finds and buildings,
but an active search over one of the largest areas of prehistoric landscape yet
surveyed. The parishes covered in volume 6, comprising the administrative
district (jaras) of Szeghalom, total some 1220 square kilometres; and within
these, approximately 500 Neolithic and Copper Age sites have been recog-
nised. This survey work thus provides information whose extent and fine-
ness of resolution are unparalleled elsewhere in Neolithic Europe. The
position of this unique sample in relation to the regional distribution maps
discussed is indicated in Figure 11.1.
   As a link with the type of evidence discussed in Part I, an enlarged portion
of the geomorphological map used as a base for the regional distributions
is presented in Figure 11.10. It shows the Koros/Berettyo region with sites
from two successive periods (Tiszapolgar and Bodrogkeresztur) taken from
monographs published before the results of the Topographic Survey were
available. As can be seen by comparison with the more detailed environ-
mental map of the same area presented later (Figure 11.13), the natural
units are indicated in a highly generalised form. Nevertheless, the broad
pattern of association between sites of the Tiszapolgar period and the
tongue of redeposited loess across the centre of the map - the Devavanya


                                        294




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


Plain - is clearly evident. What is also striking is the contrast between this
pattern and the following distribution of Bodrogkeresztur sites. Although
there is some continuity in the types of environment chosen for settlement,
it is notable that the later sites avoid the major parts of the area settled in
the previous period. What seems to be occurring is a small-scale displacement
of population to previously unoccupied parts of the area, mostly to rather
similar sorts of soil but also to new sorts of location within the floodplain.
    How does this evidence compare with that of the detailed surveys? The
area of the Szeghalom survey is confined to the central area of the map,
where there are large numbers of Tiszapolgar sites but little indication of
Bodrogkeresztur occupation. We shall see that this pattern is strikingly
confirmed by the survey evidence (see below, Figures 11.21,11.22): but it is
important to note that the significance of this localised abandonment can
only be appreciated within the context of its wider setting: the shift is a
limited one of the order of c.25km, and it is possible to predict that similar
detailed surveys, for instance in the area of Co. Hajdu-Bihar to the east,
would recover larger numbers of Bodrogkeresztur sites. The levels of
analysis represented by regional mapping and local survey are thus
complementary to one another, and neither is sufficient in isolation from the
other.


T H E GEOMORPHOLOGICAL SETTING OF
THE KOROS-BERETTY6 REGION
Before presenting the detailed site distribution maps it is necessary to refine
the generalised description of this region given in Part I. The triangular
depression drained by the Berettyo and Koros rivers is defined by the three
major Pleistocene loess-covered fans to north, west and south (Figures
11.10-13). The depression has a general slope from east to west (Figure
11.11): at the Romanian border the relatively steep gradient reflects the
outwash fans of small rivers like the Rapid Koros which descends from the




11.11 East-west section across the Koros-Berettyo basin, from the outwash fans
on the Romanian border to the east (Biharkeresztes)3 through the tongue of early
Holocene redeposited loess (Zsaka), to the northern backswamp (Nagy Sarret).
Vertical scale in metres above sea-level. Adapted from Sumeghy.

                                       295




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC       AND   COPPER      AGE    SETTLEMENT




11.12 (a) Landscape units of the Koros-Berettyo region. E and W mark the ends of
the section shown in Fig. 11.11; (b) changes in the drainage pattern of the Koros-
Berettyo basin during the Postglacial period.

Bihar massif, and also the somewhat larger fan built up by the palaeo-Tisza,
when (together with the waters of the Szamos and Berettyo) it flowed across
this area in the Pleistocene and early Holocene. The major element of relief
within the depression is the deltaic formation (the Devavanya Plain) built up
by this body of water as it crossed the area in a series of raised beds. With
the tectonic diversion of the Tisza and Szamos in the early Holocene, the
smaller volume of water entering the depression was diverted to either side
of the ridge, forming peaty backswamps to the north and south of it. These
landscape elements are shown in schematic form in Figure 11.12a.
    The frequently shifting courses of these lowland rivers, and their ex-
tensive flooding, led to a major programme of canalisation in the nineteenth
century: the course of the rapid Koros through the southern backswamp
(Kis-Sarret) was straightened, and a new channel was created for the
Berettyo. This took it across the Devavanya Plain instead of through the
northern backswamp (Nagy-Sarret), where it had previously joined
the Hortobagy to flow along the edge of the Cumanian fan segment. The
lower course of the Koros was also shortened, by cutting through meander-
loops (Figure 11.12b).
    The full complexity of the situation can be appreciated from the more
detailed map of surface geology shown in Figure 11.13. While the surround-
ing loess-covered fans form a relatively uniform environment, the Koros-
Berettyo basin has a mosaic character with islands of various sizes rising
from the floodplain. With the exception of limited areas of sand on the small
fans to the east, and isolated patches of true loess, these islands are essen-
tially the levees of the early Holocene river-system. They are composed of


                                        296




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN        PLAIN




11.13 Surface geology of the Koros-Berettyo region, after Magyarorszag Foldtani
Terkepe (1:300,000), showing the position of the Szeghalom region mapped in
Figs 11.18-27.

redeposited loess. In some parts these form an extensive, more or less level
terrace with well-defined palaeochannels; in others they are broken into a
multitude of small promontories and creeks. Beyond the chain of larger
islands, smaller and more isolated hillocks break through the alluvium.
   Before the regulation of the rivers, these islands of higher ground within
the depression were literally insulated by the spring and early summer
floods, as can be seen from historical maps.14 Besides the permanently wet
areas of the backswamps where peat accumulated, the floodplain can
be further subdivided into the larger basins where loessy silt continued to
be seasonally deposited in the later Holocene, and the shallower basins
and creeks where a finer deposit of black meadow-clay was laid down.
Occasional floods of exceptional strength sometimes reached the level of the
early Holocene terrace itself, so that settlements there sought the highest
elevations available - even where the advantage was no more than an
additional metre above the surrounding area. After the regulation, the rivers
were confined by dykes within which somewhat coarser silts have accumu-
lated.
   How far is the present pattern of surface geology a valid basis for

                                       297




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER     AGE     SETTLEMENT


interpreting prehistoric settlement distributions? Ir       far as the shift in
river-courses in the early Holocene reduced the flow of water and sediment
through the depression, leaving the chain of levees in 'fossil5 form, no major
changes have occurred within this early Holocene terrace. Floodplain
deposits, however, have continued to accumulate in the lower-lying areas.
Some idea of the extent of alluvial accumulation may be gained from the
distribution map of tumuli (Figure 11.16), mainly dating to the third
millennium BC, whose significance is discussed in a later section. Their
importance here is that - unlike sherd-scatters - they can be recognised on
the surface even where alluviation has occurred. While the major concen-
tration of tumuli occurs on islands (and inaccuracies of mapping have
undoubtedly caused minor displacements around their edges), there are
significant groups of these monuments within the area of meadow-clay - for
example on the northern margin of the Nagy Sarret. The implication of this
is that the accumulation of meadow-clay and peat in the later Holocene,
particularly around the backswamp areas, has mantled lower-lying areas of
the early Holocene land-surface which may have been settled in Neolithic
times. Geological slit-trenches dug as part of the excavation programme at
Sarto15 confirm that significant accumulation of meadow-clay has also
occurred in the palaeochannels between the islands. Since the data from the
Szeghalom survey are mainly concerned with the higher parts of the early
Holocene terrace, this problem does not seriously distort the picture of
prehistoric settlement there. As the permanent sites are often located on the
higher levees on the edges of the islands (e.g. Figure 11.15), however, some
evidence of seasonal activities within the adjacent floodplain may be in-
accessible to surface investigation. This factor has been considered in
designing the excavation programme, and has led to the discovery of
previously unsuspected pits at the edge of the floodplain by the Koros
settlement at Rehely-Diilo.
    The soils of this region at the present time correspond largely with the
surface geology. They range from chernozems on the loess-covered fans to
the meadow- and raw-soils of the floodplain. The characteristic soils of the
islands are varieties of solonetz, whose saline character results from the high
watertable and net upward movement of salt-charged water during the
summer months. These are especially developed on the broad, flat islands in
the centre of the Devavanya Plain. The acutely saline character of these soils
is a natural result of their position just above the floodplain and the high
temperatures and low rainfall of eastern Hungary (Szabolcs 1971; 1974).
It is likely that salination posed a problem for prehistoric agriculture.
    The position of the parishes represented in the survey data given in
Figures 11.17-25 is shown on Figure 11.13. As noted above, this area
coincides with the largest extent of early Holocene terrace in the central part
of the Devavanya Plain. It also includes some of the lower-lying land to the
north, on the southern margin of the Nagy Sarret, and extends south-


                                        298




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN          PLAIN


eastwards to the edge of the Kis Sarret. On its north-western part, therefore,
it includes an area of broad, flat islands separated by well-defined palaeo-
channels, south of which is an extensive area of loessy silt characteristic of
the Koros lowland. To the east the islands are smaller, and separated by
broader inlets filled with meadow-clay. As well as the marked contrast
between the early Holocene terrace and the floodplain, therefore, the
difference in character between the eastern and western ends of the area is
significant in terms of prehistoric settlement.


T H E SZEGHALOM SURVEY AND ITS RESULTS
In historic times large parts of the area, and especially the expanses of
solonetz soils, have been pastureland. In the postwar period, following the
collectivisation of agriculture and the mechanisation of farming, a major
campaign to extend the area of arable has been undertaken for the culti-
vation of maize and sunflowers. Since soil salinity was a major obstacle, this
necessarily included a programme of amelioration which took the form of
digging large quarries - the so-called 'digo-pits' - into the non-saline loess.
The saline topsoil was pushed to one side, and the (archaeologically sterile)
loess was spread over the surrounding area.
    During the 1950s these operations were watched by the village school-
master in Devavanya, Dr Imre Bereczki. He noted the very frequent remains
of prehistoric sites, and made an extensive collection of Neolithic and
Copper Age pottery and other artefacts. This first revealed the potential of
this area for systematic archaeological work. The finds came to the attention
of Professor Gyula Gazdapusztai of the University of Szeged, who organised
the first programme of recording and survey in 1968. The execution of this
work was then incorporated within the framework of the Archaeological
Topography of Hungary, centrally organised by the Archaeological Institute
of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences in Budapest, with the co-operation
of local museums. The intention was to make a complete inventory of
archaeological sites in Co. Bekes. A field-by-field survey has so far been
conducted in the administrative divisions of Szeghalom (published in 1982:
Ecsedy et al. 1982) and Szarvas (Denes et al. 1989; cf. also Bokonyi 1992).
Since 1979, under an agreement for scientific co-operation between the
Ashmolean Museum and the Institute, further work has taken place to use
this information for the reconstruction of prehistoric settlement patterns
and to carry out a programme of fieldwork based upon it.
   The sites are identifiable on the surface from the scatter of pottery, lithic
artefacts and lumps of burnt daub which occur in great profusion. The large
scale of arable farming makes it possible to define the sizes of these scatters
with some precision. These sites are listed and described in the published
volumes of the Topography (in Hungarian), and limits are assigned to each
site. Since many of these have multi-period occupations, however, it has


                                        299




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER     AGE    SETTLEMENT


been necessary in using this data for settlement-pattern studies to return to
the original field-reports and make use of observations on the extent of
occupation at particular periods within the life of a site.16 It is these re-
constructed limits which have been used in plotting Figures 11.17-25.
   Not all the area is under arable, although the long period over which the
survey was conducted made it possible to make repeated visits in relation to
changing patterns of land use. Where land was continuously under pasture
- usually the highly saline puszta areas - it is often possible to recover sherds
under the dry conditions of late summer and autumn, and identify the
positions of sites even though their extent cannot be precisely defined. Other
limiting factors include the fragmented pattern of land-use and built-up area
around the villages themselves. Since modern settlement is highly nucleated,
the proportion of such land is relatively small; there is one major village
or town for each of the parishes included. The effects of one of these
(Devavanya) will be noted below, where it coincides with an area of
preferred prehistoric settlement.
   The existence of numerous soil-improvement quarries (digo-pits) has
already been noted. These are easily recognisable as rounded rectangular
hollows some 100 by 50m. Finds from the area of the quarry occur in
the dumped topsoil on its perimeter: since archaeological levels occur in the
saline soil layer, finds have not been strewn across the fields with the non-
saline loess. Their effect on the size of sherd-scatters has thus been minimal.
   Bearing in mind the limitations noted in the previous section due to the
continuing alluviation of the floodplain, therefore, the extent and character
of settlement in the prehistoric period can be reconstructed with some
accuracy. The robust patterns and internal consistency evident in the period-
by-period distribution maps are themselves testimony to the amount of
information which can be recovered. While not every site can be considered
to have been accurately defined, the regularities in size, morphology and
distribution are a true reflection of the changing character of settlement in
this region.

An example: north-west         Devavanya
In the programme of joint British/Hungarian fieldwork, certain sites known
from the survey have been selected for more intensive investigation. Most of
these have so far been in the north-western part of the parish of Devavanya.
The initial aim has been to define the limits of sites more accurately, and
as an example a worksheet from the first season's work at the large late
Neolithic site at Sarto is presented in Figure 11.14. This shows a series of
transects with 4 by 4m collecting grids over an area of c.2000 by 500m.
Finds of diagnostic pottery types are plotted, indicating the growth and
reorganisation of this major settlement. (Further work has been conducted
in later seasons, including an extensive fluxgate survey and selective ex-
cavation: Sherratt 1984c.)


                                        300




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN          PLAIN




pottery from three periods. [See Sherratt 1984c for a full plan of Sarto and survey
results.]

                                       301




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE   DEVELOPMENT        OF   NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER     AGE    SETTLEMENT




11.15 The NW corner of the parish of Devavanya, showing the site of Sarto and
contemporary settlements in relation to the early Holocene terrace (open) and
floodplain (hatched). Sites where intensive survey and excavation have taken
place are named. After Magyarorszag Regeszeti Topografiaja vol. 6, and British/
Hungarian fieldwork.

    The context of this site in terms of the environmental setting and
settlement history of the area from 6000-4000 BC is shown in Figure 11.15.
Practically without exception, the sites are located on the edge of the early
Holocene terrace, overlooking the floodplain; there is little trace of Neo-
lithic occupation on the interfluves. Each period, however, has a character-
istic pattern of site density and morphology, from the linear shoreline
settlements of Koros to the aggregated pattern of Szakalhat and Tisza and
the small, dispersed sites of Tiszapolgar. While these patterns are repeated
elsewhere, the density of such early sites in this area is characteristic only
of the western part of the Szeghalom survey, and later sites are less well
represented here. These larger patterns will now be described in chrono-
logical order, following the sequence of cultures defined in Part I.

Koros (6000-5300       BC?): Figure       11.19
The maps in Figures 11.18-27 cover the four large parishes of Devavanya,
Szeghalom, Korosladany and Veszto, together amounting to 68,400
hectares. Within this area, 125 Koros sites have been defined. The actual
number of findspots is somewhat artificial, however, since some of the
smaller adjacent sites might be considered as parts of a single linear scatter,
and elongated shapes have been defined only where there is positive
evidence for a continuous spread of material. Nevertheless, the extent and

                                         302




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN         PLAIN




11.16 The Koros-Berettyo region: surface geology (as Fig. 11.13), and the
positions of early third-millennium tumuli (after Viragh 1979). Owing to
inaccuracies of re-scaling, the positions are approximate.

density of occupation evidence is striking, and represents a vast quantity of
sherd material and settlement debris.
   This material is found over a large part of the area represented in the
map. The major unoccupied areas are to the south-west, in the basin of
loessic silt to the south of Devavanya, and in the similar basin which lies in
the north-central area east of Atyaszeg (cf. Figure 11.13: both of these
floodplain areas contain small islands, however, which were subsequently
settled). The broad band of settlement from north-west to south-east
represents the main extent of the chain of larger islands. Within this, there
is a greater density of material in the north-western part. This not only
contains two-thirds of the findspots, but the sites themselves are more
substantial. True linear 'shoreline sites' (up to 2km in length) only occur in
this part.
   After the scattered dot-distributions of chance finds of this culture
mapped at a regional level, this density of sites strikes the observer with the
force of a revelation. It highlights the arbitrary nature of the sample which
is available from sources other than planned survey. For the first time it is
possible to appreciate what the archaeological record may hold in the way


                                        303




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

             6000 BC                         5000 BC                           4000 BC                          3000 BC
        Eastern Hungary




         Szeghalom survey
                                              if"
                                     w
                                     fS         \
                                      rnikledah-st,                                                   W


         KOROS & Szatmar               SZAKALHAT et al. TISZAPOLGAR                                       BADEN & TUMULI
11.17 Summary diagram giving successive snapshots, at roughly millennial intervals, of the extent of settlement (defined by spatial
proximity linkage) at two scales: above, in eastern Hungary as a whole (see Fig. 11.9 and other maps in Sherratt 1983b: sites linked at
<20km) and below, in the Szeghalom survey area (see Figs 11.19-27: sites linked at <2 and <5km). Note the gradual south-eastward
                                      • lm
                                       <2 \/
shift in settlement, from the larger interfluvial areas in the NW to the more interrupted expanses of terrace in the SE, probably in re-
sponse to increasing salination of the earliest-settled areas. In the final snapshot, settlement is confined to the SE sector, and Fit-Grave
tumuli occupy the more saline areas. On a regional scale, settlement has expanded into the dry sandy area of the Danube-Tisza inter-
fluve, and the upland areas around the Basin.




                                        This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


of prehistoric sites. However, it would be wrong to infer from this evidence
that there was a particularly high density of population at any one time
during this phase of the Neolithic. The period in question may be a relatively
long one, since although its end is well defined, there are too few radio-
carbon dates to be sure of its beginning. It may last for more than 500
years.17 Although the sites contain substantial evidence of occupation in the
form of massive pits and large quantities of burnt daub, there is no certainty
that even the area defined as belonging to a single settlement site was in
simultaneous occupation. The linear scatters may represent a pattern of
settlement drift over several generations, with the smaller sites being similar
but less long-lived. Equally, however, the smaller sites may represent
seasonal stations subsidiary to the major scatters.
    These problems can only be resolved by intensive fieldwork and exca-
vation, and some relevant points from current work may be noted here. For
instance, it is clear that the scatters do not represent a continuous, built-up
area. Geophysical survey has demonstrated the existence of discrete clusters
of structures, some 50m or so apart, separated by areas with no structures
(and a low density of finds) that probably represent the areas where horti-
culture took place. While cereal-cultivation is demonstrated by plentiful
finds of carbonised seed-remains, the large numbers of fish-remains and
net-sinkers, as well as bones of wild mammals and birds, indicate that
seasonally-available wild resources were an important component of the
diet. The position of the settlements immediately on the low bluffs over-
looking the floodplain is consistent with this dual emphasis on cereals and
fish.
    Although the larger settlements (and perhaps the majority of finds)
probably represent permanent, sedentary occupation on a year-round basis,
it is likely that there was a considerable degree of long-term fluidity in settle-
ment location, and that the pattern shown here is a palimpsest of many
generations.

AVK (5300-5100 BC): Figure 11.20
The pattern shown by sites of the Alfold Linear Pottery culture (Alfoldi
Vonaldtszes Keramia = AVK) continues many aspects of its predecessor. Some
95 sites are represented, and although the same considerations of site
definition apply as in the Koros period, the conditions which produced a
proliferation of sites seem to have continued. The overall distribution of
sites is very similar, with a centre of gravity in the north-west and a con-
tinuing presence in the south-east, though with some abandonment of the
small sites on the far eastern edge. Some extension of settlement is evident,
however, on the small islands in the basins of Devavanya and Atyaszeg.
    The timespan covered by this period is shorter, of the order of two to
three hundred years, strengthening the argument for a relatively dispersed
character of contemporary settlement. While the absence of linear sites


                                        305




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER     AGE     SETTLEMENT


might be explained by the lack of time for settlement drift to occur, more
detailed observation of AVK sites suggests that their morphology was rather
different from that typical of Koros. Such sites are often set back somewhat
from the terrace edge, and the component units form small clusters rather
than lines. This may be linked with a decline in the importance of fish, since
net-sinkers are no longer such common finds, and perhaps a greater con-
centration on cereals. Seen in the context of the succeeding distribution
patterns, that of AVK clearly belongs to a primary phase of settlement, before
fundamentally new properties emerged in the settlement system.

Szakdlhdt (5100-4800 BC): Figure 11.21
After the widely-strewn evidence of settlement from the preceding periods,
a major change is evident with Szakalhat. Only 29 sites are known, but these
range from massive, 2km long, concentrations to small groups of sherds.
Although the central axis of the islands remained in occupation, the
peripheries were all abandoned. A process of settlement aggregation seems
to have been operating, in which previously dispersed populations came
together in larger units.
    The outstanding example is the case of Sarto discussed above, which
is the large site in the north-west corner. At this stage it was a relatively
elongated area, parallel to the shoreline and covering approximately
1800 by 400 metres. Fluxgate surveys carried out in recent field seasons
demonstrate that like earlier Neolithic sites, such aggregated sites also have
a compound character and are composed of individual concentrations of
structures, separated by 50m or so of postulated garden areas. Although this
is the only site of its kind in this area which has been investigated in detail,
the cluster of apparently separate sites in the east-central portion (including
Kovacshalom in the parish of Szeghalom) may turn out to represent a
similar aggregation in a somewhat less even topographic setting where the
clusters occupy separate hillocks. (Sarto itself is centred on a small eminence
which may have a special role in the site layout.) It is also just possible that
a third site, that of Simasziget near the town of Devavanya in the west centre
of the area, may be larger than it appears because of the character of land-
use on the edge of the town. In this case there might be some regularity in
the spacing of these 'supersites', which would occur some 10-15km apart:
though at the moment this can only be speculation. Not all sites were of this
character, however, and some formed small compact units that grew up into
minor tell-like mounds. A typical example is Rehelyi Gat, 4km from Sarto
(Figure 11.15). Two or three such sites occur in the vicinity of the major
aggregated settlements.
    A notable feature of the aggregated sites is their great wealth of imported
materials. As well as large quantities of obsidian and other stonework,
sherds of Biikk and Vadastra pottery testify to cultural contacts over a range
of 200km. This aspect is discussed more fully in Chapter 12.


                                         306




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN        PLAIN


Tisza (4800-4400 BC): Figure 11.22
The process of aggregation became more pronounced in this period,
with the number of sites falling to nineteen, mainly by loss of the
smaller peripheral stations. The three main nuclei established in the
previous period continued, and the limitations on site definitions con-
tinue to apply. At Sarto, intensive survey (Figure 11.14) has shown that
the site changed in shape to a more compact form, shortening and
extending backwards from the shoreline;18 Simasziget remains as a
possible further nucleus; while the Kovacshalom complex continued to
occupy several adjacent sites. The main subsidiary tell-like sites also
continued.
   The quantities of material items recovered from surface collection and
excavation at Sarto demonstrate the continuing wealth of the 'supersites',
which were able to pull in supplies of hard rocks and flakeable stone from
a 150km radius on the periphery of the Carpathian Basin. Such supplies
must have been moved by boat, and it is possible that the course of the
Hortobagy-Berettyo ran closer to the site than at present, perhaps even
along the Sarto channel.
   The process of aggregation characteristic of Szakalhat and Tisza seems
to have lasted for a period of the order of 700 years. The main sites were
probably occupied throughout that time, absorbing a successively greater
proportion of the population of the smaller settlements. It is not clear that
any decline in population occurred, since it has been argued that the more
abundant sites of earlier periods were a reflection of the fluidity of settle-
ment rather than the effect of a large contemporary population. The small
number of large, stable sites in the period of aggregation thus probably gives
a more accurate impression of the size of the Neolithic population at a single
moment in time.
   It may be inferred that large areas of land went out of use in this phase,
since it is unlikely that territories of the order of 10km in radius (the areas
in between major sites) were exploited even for grazing. Crops were prob-
ably grown only in the immediate vicinity of the sites (or even within them,
in the extensive 'empty' areas). Models involving nucleation within well-
defined territories are probably inappropriate for the low population
densities and small scale of agriculture of the Neolithic, which allowed great
variability in the disposition of settlement. Social factors are likely to have
been more important then ecological ones in determining these patterns:
people wished to live together in large groups and as far from their
neighbours as possible, and the large settlements may have been sited at
locations advantageous for external contacts. The conditions underlying
this pattern therefore probably included both insecurity and the importance
of exchange networks linking this area with the expanding periphery
(Chapter 10).



                                        307




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER     AGE     SETTLEMENT


Tiszapolgdr    (4400-3900      BC): Figure       11.23
The conditions which gave rise to settlement aggregation were abruptly
reversed in the Tiszapolgar period. Small sites became the rule, and these
were widely dispersed over the area available for settlement. Some 106 sites
are known, few larger than a few hundred metres in diameter and most
averaging around 100m.19 From the intensive survey investigations, these
sites seem to represent small hamlets of a few houses: unlike the settlements
of previous periods, they do not have a compound character with individual
clusters of structures and empty areas.
    Before this period there is no evidence for a differentiation of settlements
and cemeteries: burials occurred within the settlements in small groups
associated with the component units. Now, however, at a time of small,
dispersed settlements, formal cemeteries seem to have assumed a particular
importance. In the case of the best-known example, Tiszapolgar-Basatanya
(Bognar-Kutzian 1963), there seems to have been no nearby settlement, and
these fairly large cemeteries (c.50-100 graves) may have served more than
one settlement site. No cemeteries have been identified as such within the
survey area, but it is possible that some at least of the findspots may repre-
sent sites of this kind. The implications of this important shift in settlement-
pattern and contemporary burial practice must be considered as part of the
general problem of Neolithic and Copper Age social structures.
   The distribution of Tiszapolgar sites extends over the whole survey area
with the exception of the small peripheral islands. There is a roughly equal
emphasis on the eastern and western halves of the area, with a slight pre-
ponderance in the east. Many of the sites in the western part are small
stations with a few sherds, though there are also many more substantial
sites. Even the larger ones, however, do not produce the striking quantities
of imported materials noted for the preceding phase.

Bodrogkeresztur     (3900-3500        BC): Figure       11.24
In contrast to the plentiful remains of settlement in earlier periods, those of
Bodrogkeresztur are sparse in the extreme. Only a dozen findspots, each
represented by no more than a few sherds, have been identified. The period
in question is not notably shorter than the others (c.400 years), and though
the pottery assemblage is less diagnostic because of the relatively small
percentage of decorated sherds, it seems likely the small number of in-
substantial sites is a genuine reflection of a sharp fall in population in this
area.
   This result accords with earlier discussion (cf. Figure 11.10) of the
indications from stray finds: the survey area is located in the middle of a
zone of abandonment, from which population moved to a number of nearby
locations - mostly previously unoccupied. A large group of such sites occurs
at a somewhat higher elevation further east, and others appear on the edges

                                        308




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


of the Pleistocene fans or on the small islands in the floodplain. Displace-
ment of population thus seems to account for the lack of local finds. Since it
is noteworthy that the main focus of earlier settlement was on soils most
prone to salinity, this factor deserves to be considered as a major cause of
this change.

Bolerdz and Baden (3500-2900 BC): Figure 11.25;
Tumuli, Figure 11.26
The reappearance of more substantial settlement traces in the Boleraz and
Baden periods was restricted to one quarter of the total area. Some 24 sites
are known, all from the eastern part around Szeghalom. Their average size
is rather small (the majority being less than that for Tiszapolgar), with only
half a dozen extending for more than 100m. It is again possible that some
findspots represent cemeteries, though Baden cemeteries elsewhere were
generally quite small. Since the recolonisation of the area after its effective
abandonment in Bodrogkeresztur did not necessarily take place right at the
beginning of Boleraz (only a quarter of the sites belong to this phase), the
effective span of this period may be rather less than the five to six hundred
years suggested for Boleraz and Baden as a whole. Even so, the amount of
settlement material is not great by comparison with that which occurs in this
area from the Neolithic and earlier Copper Age.
    The restricted distribution of Boleraz and Baden sites (Figure 11.25)
should be compared with the occurrence of tumuli (Figure 11.26). Recent
work on these burial mounds (Ecsedy 1979), which has included the ex-
cavation of Barce-halom in the parish of Devavanya, has pointed to a date
contemporary with Baden. It is immediately apparent from the maps that
the two distributions are complementary, and should be considered to-
gether. The tumuli fall into two groups, separated by a gap representing the
intervening Boleraz and Baden settlements. The major group in the north-
west largely coincides with the area of particularly dense settlement in
Neolithic times, on the larger and flatter islands of the parish of Devavanya.
Unlike the earlier sites, however, their locations are not tied to the shore-
lines. Although they do occur along levees on the edge of the islands, they
are more commonly found on prominent spots further inland: it is the
advantage in height which is being sought. Partly as a consequence of this,
they tend to form chains along the more prominent ridges.
    Because such tumuli have often been used as landmarks on cadastral
maps, a more comprehensive record can be compiled of the distribution of
these monuments (Viragh 1979). Plotted on a base-map of surface geology
(Figure 11.16), they reveal a general pattern of which the Szeghalom survey
examples form a part. Dense concentrations occur in the Hortobagy, on
the Berettyo and Koros fans near the Romanian border, and along the
Devavanya Plain. They also occur as a general scatter on the loess-covered
Pleistocene fans.


                                        309




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE   DEVELOPMENT       OF   NEOLITHIC         AND   COPPER    AGE     SETTLEMENT


   The interpretation of these apparently contemporary tumuli and Baden
settlements has been a matter of controversy. The material culture and
burial rite of the tumuli differ from those of Baden and stand in stark con-
trast to them. Moreover, the Baden culture extends beyond the limit of the
tumuli in western Hungary, and the tumuli occur eastwards to the Pontic
steppe which is their centre of distribution. It thus seems likely that small
populations of eastern origin penetrated around and within established
groups in the eastern Carpathian Basin: and this interpretation is strength-
ened by the spatial exclusiveness of the two distributions. If this is so, then
the tumulus-building groups seem to have sought relatively open terrain
(presumably for stock-raising), either on the chernozems of the Pleistocene
fans or in those parts of the Koros Basin with a long history of settlement
and clearance of woodland but which were now perhaps unsuitable for agri-
culture. If the reasons for Bodrogkeresztur abandonment were connected
with the effects of salination, this penetration could be seen as the occu-
pation of empty niches around contemporary farming populations. Since
there is evidence in Baden contexts elsewhere for the use of animal traction
and thus probably of the plough, farmers may themselves have been able to
open new areas for cultivation, as was noted in Part I for the edges of the
Carpathian Basin.

Early Bronze Age (2900-2000 BC): Figure 11.27
Only forty-one sites are known from this long period, and many of these are
very small. The area of occupation corresponds closely to that of the pre-
ceding Baden and Boleraz period, although there is little continuity in the
location of individual sites. Only a few, small sites occur within the former
area of tumulus distribution, and the western part of the area was effectively
abandoned in favour of the east. The phase of land-use represented by the
tumuli was evidently a relatively short interlude in the settlement history of
the region.
   Seven of the EBA sites can be attributed to the earlier part of the period
(Mako-Nyirseg) and eleven to the later part (Otomani), of which four are
fortified. The latter take the form of circular ditched enclosures some
60-80m in diameter, and 10-15km apart. These densities are very low when
compared with the large numbers of such sites known, e.g. from Co. Hajdu-
Bihar (e.g. Bona 1975, Verbreitungskarten I and II), and the area continued
to be of relatively minor importance in the Middle Bronze Age.

Implications    of the survey      data
Besides demonstrating the very large number of Neolithic and Copper Age
sites in this area, the Szeghalom survey has also revealed marked contrasts
in the numbers, distribution, sizes, and shapes of settlements in different
periods. These provide raw material for the analysis of community size,
locational preferences and major demographic shifts. They do not, however,

                                          310




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN         PLAIN


provide any easy answer about the detailed course of population change
during the prehistoric period. Archaeologists have often used counts of the
number of sites in successive periods as an indication of the changing density
of settlement and thus of population levels. The survey results demonstrate
the dangers of this approach. In many cases a change in the number of sites
is accompanied by changes in their size, so that what is being measured is
effectively the relative aggregation or dispersal of population rather than the
numbers of people involved. Only in those cases where a fall in the number
of sites coincides with a steady or declining average size of site can popu-
lation decline be suggested. In fact, the calculation of relative population
densities in different periods within a given area depends on a complex
equation, many of whose variables (such as the average length of site occu-
pation) remain unknown. Without a major programme of excavation and
site-dating, therefore, estimates of the actual course of population change
remain subject to wide margins of error. It is more useful at the moment to
discuss the phenomena of settlement aggregation and dispersal or settlement
displacement in their own terms, without attempting to translate this
information into relative sizes of population.


CONCLUSION
Settlement        dynamics
It is clear that there is no single trend over the long period of agrarian
settlement recorded in the site-distribution patterns of the Szeghalom area.
General similarities persisted through successive periods - Koros and AVK,
or Szakalhat and Tisza - but the trends were reversed by factors operating
on a local, regional or even a pan-European level (Figure 11.17).
   The first 1000 years were characterised by a profusion of settlement sites.
Although some of these sites cover extensive areas, they were occupied at a
low density and may not have persisted for more than a few years. Although
there were consistent changes in the internal layout and organisation of
sites, this initial phase of relatively fluid settlement lasted until c.5100 BC.
   There then followed a period of 700 years in which population tended to
aggregate into larger, more stable units. Some of these sites were spec-
tacularly large, although still occupied at a low density. The trend towards
a concentration of settlement is evident throughout the late Neolithic of
central Europe (cf. Starling 1984). This phase seems to represent a peak in
the material prosperity of this area.
   Around 4400 BC a fundamental change in the organisation of settlement
took place. Smaller unitary settlements were dispersed widely across the
landscape. Elsewhere, it is known that cemeteries came to play a prominent
role in the settlement pattern and social fabric (Chapter 5). By this period,
the area was probably less wealthy than the zone nearer to the edge of the
Plain where finds of copper objects occur. The pattern of dispersed sites and


                                        311




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE    DEVELOPMENT          OF   NEOLITHIC        AND   COPPER      AGE     SETTLEMENT


cemeteries continued to be typical of many parts of eastern Hungary for the
next 300 years; but in this area it was interrupted by a phase of relative
abandonment. It would appear from this that local ecological factors were
responsible, and the correlation with areas of high salinity at the present day
suggests that this may be relevant.
   By some time around 3500 BC a new pattern had emerged, that was to be
characteristic of the next thousand years. The focus of settlement shifted
eastwards, at the same time as the Carpathian Basin as a whole saw a major
movement into the surrounding uplands. For part of this time, the zone
apparently abandoned for agricultural settlement was occupied by groups
coming from outside the area, who constructed large numbers of burial
mounds and apparently existed side by side with local groups. From the
general distribution of tumuli in the lowland area, it appears that these local
agricultural groups occupied only small enclaves within it (Figure 11.16).
By 2900 BC the phase of tumulus-building was apparently over, and the
agricultural areas were characterised by small defended villages occupying
an area that was now marginal to the main zone of Bronze Age occupation
further east.
   The factors responsible for these alterations of settlement pattern thus
represent a conjunction of widespread social changes, environmental pro-
cesses and historical opportunities, through which the area rose to prominence
and was then progressively reduced in importance (Chapter 10).

Implications
Few areas of Europe possess the combined advantages for surface survey of
the central part of the Great Hungarian Plain. Nevertheless, much progress
has been made in recent years through programmes of planned survey and
excavation (e.g. Kruk 1980), and the number of comparable bodies of data
may be expected to grow rapidly in the next few years. These need to be
combined with systematic mapping of all finds on a regional basis, so that
more intensive work can be planned to answer questions arising from what
is already known. Where systematic fieldwork has taken place, it has re-
vealed the often astonishing abundance of prehistoric sites and the magni-
tude of changes in the sizes and abundance of sites over long periods of time.
Work such as that described here is important because it demonstrates some
of the properties of this record, and its potential for reconstructing funda-
mental information about the nature of prehistoric communities.20


NOTES

 1. This was originally published in two parts, in vols 1 and 2 respectively, of the Oxford
    Journal of Archaeology. Some of the regional maps have been omitted in this present
    version.
 2. Magyarorszag Regeszeti Topografiaja: Vols 1-4, Co. Veszprem (1966-72); Vol. 5,
    Co. Komarom (1979); Vol. 6, Co. Bekes (Denes et al. 1989).


                                             312




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                        IN   THE   GREAT      HUNGARIAN          PLAIN

 3. The programme of Hungarian-British fieldwork was directed jointly by Dr Istvan Torma
    and the author.
 4. The natural physiographic unit is the Carpathian Basin, consisting of Pannonia in the
    west, the Great Hungarian Plain in the centre and Transylvania in the east. This was also
    a political entity until 1920, when it was divided between Hungary, Romania and Jugo-
    slavia. Since recent research has been organised within these national boundaries, the
    term 'eastern Hungary' is used here to describe the territory of the present Hungarian
    state east of the Danube.
 5. Calibrated radiocarbon dates are used throughout, using the table provided in Clark
    (1975). Uncorrected radiocarbon dates are indicated as bc.
 6. For a convenient introduction to Hungarian geography, see Pecsi and Sarfalvi (1964).
    The environmental background and its changes are usefully discussed from an
    archaeological standpoint in Kosse (1979).
 7. For the names of these physiographic units and their location, see Sherratt 1982b,
    Fig. 11.5.
 8. The Hungarian divisions of the later Neolithic and Copper Age do not directly cor-
    respond to other east European systems, where the term 'Chalcolithic' or 'Eneolithic' is
    used. Hungarian usage of the term 'Copper Age' rightly stresses the important changes
    that begin with Tiszapolgar, but by including Baden (as Late Copper Age) it fails to
    indicate the radically new aspects of the latter.
 9. A comparison of Koros and AVK distributions with various elements of the landscape
    (climate, vegetation, hydrology, geology, soils) is given in Kosse (1979), which includes
    a statistical analysis of the occurrence of sites in different zones. While this usefully
    complements the approach adopted here, it is limited to small-scale maps and uses the
    stylistic groups rather than a regional framework as the units of analysis. For further
    comments on the statistical methods, see the review in Proceedings of the Prehistoric
    Society, 46 (1980).
10. For references to recent work, see especially Kalicz (1970) and the yearly reports in
    Mitteilungen des Archaeologischen Instituts (Budapest). An unpublished study of the
    Tisza culture has been written by J. Korek, A Tiszai Kultura (Budapest 1973).
11. A more serious problem is the interpretation of negative evidence: the blank areas on
    distribution maps. Where sites are known for some periods and not others, it is reason-
    able to assume that this absence is significant. Where no prehistoric sites of any period
    are known, judgement must be suspended until the region has been actively investigated.
    The interpretation of distribution maps is therefore only one point in the cycle of
    archaeological research, reaching preliminary conclusions and posing questions for future
    fieldwork.
12. It is worth noting the presence in the uplands of a macrolithic industry ('Grobgeratiges
    Mesolithikum' or Eger-Avas culture) usually taken to be of Mesolithic date and some-
    times seen as a source of the Szatmar and AVK populations (e.g. Kalicz 1980). Its dating,
    however, is uncertain, and such tools have occasionally been found in association with
    pottery (Dobosi 1976). It is possible that these actually indicate Neolithic extraction sites,
    and are thus similar to the Lengfeld, Campignian, Montmorencian and Hackpen Hill
    industries in western Europe.
13. These include some of the most famous Late Neolithic sites in Hungary, many of
    which are on present or former courses of important rivers, e.g. Hodmezovasarhely-
    Kokenydomb (Tisza), Szegvar-Tiizkoves (Tisza), Szarvas-Pepikert = Bekesszentandras
    (Koros), Devavanya-Sarto (Hortobagy-Berettyo), Szeghalom-Kovacshalom (Sebes Koros)
    and Battonya-Parasztanya (Szaraz-£r).
14. E.g. Matyas Huszar (1822) Hydrographia depressae regionis fluviatilis Crisiorum Magni,
    Albi, Nigri, Velocis, Parvi, Fl. Berettyo cum ramificatiortibus ... horumque omnium
    illustrata inundationis topographia.
15. In 1981 a test-trench 50m from the terrace edge at Sarto demonstrated that a scatter of
    Neolithic artefacts from the settlement, directly overlying redeposited loess of the early
    Holocene, was covered by 75cm of meadow-clay.


                                              313




                      This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 THE    DEVELOPMENT          OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COPPER      AGE    SETTLEMENT

16. The extent to which surface pottery is attributable to particular cultural groups depends
    on the proportions of diagnostic pieces such as decorated sherds or distinctive knobs,
    handles, etc. For some periods the fabric is immediately recognisable (e.g. Koros chaff-
    tempered ware). The following table offers a rough, order-of-magnitude guide to the
    proportion of diagnostic pieces:
       Koros: almost all
       AVK: more than a quarter
       Szakalhat: less than a quarter
       Tisza: less than a quarter
       Tiszapolgar: about half
        Bodrogkeresztur: perhaps a twentieth
        Boleraz, Baden and EBA: about half
    Changes of fabric, e.g. from chaff- to sand- and grog-tempering, allow a further
    proportion to be classified as 'Neolithic', 'Copper Age' or 'Bronze Age', and others as
    merely 'Prehistoric'. A relatively small proportion of the total number of sites can only
    be attributed to these gross periods: 85 Neolithic, 5 Copper Age, 23 Bronze Age,
    95 Prehistoric. Most of these are small finds in the vicinity of larger, attributed sites.
17. Many of the sites, however may belong to a relatively late phase within it, since exca-
    vations at Rehely Diilo in 1980 produced Koros material in association with proto-Vinca
    pottery.
18. In 1981 a fluxgate survey carried out by Mr Basil Turton covered an area of 40,000m2.
    This indicates a pattern of magnetic anomalies (shown by excavation to represent burnt
    houses) spaced about 50m apart.
19. The dimensions of these settlements may be slightly exaggerated, since comparison of the
    extent of the surface pottery scatter with the limits of features revealed by the fluxgate
    survey at Pohalom in 1980 showed that the pottery spread beyond the indications of
    structures.
20. It is a pleasure to acknowledge the advice and help of Hungarian colleagues: Nandor
    Kalicz, Janos Makkay, Istvan Torma and Gyorgy Goldman - none of whom should,
    however be held responsible for any errors or deficiencies of this article. The maps are
    the work of Nick Griffiths. Fieldwork in Hungary has been supported by the British
    Academy, University of Oxford, the Leverhulme Trust and the National Geographic
    Society.


The following 10 maps show the distribution of sites of successive periods in the
parishes of Devavanya, Szeghalom, Korosladany and Veszto (see Fig. 11.13 for
location), with limits of occupation reconstructed from MRT vol. 6 and field notes.




                                            314




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:09:07 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

11.19 The distribution ofKoros culture sites.


                                        315




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE    DEVELOPMENT          OF   NEOLITHIC       AND     COTTER   AGE    SETTLEMENT




11.20 The distribution of AVK (Alfold Linear Pottery) culture sites.




11.25 The distribution ofBolerazandBadenculture sites.


                                           316




                    This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                     All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     IN   THE   GREAT    HUNGARIAN        PLAIN




11.22 The distribution of Tisza culture sites.




11.23 The distribution of Tiszapolgar culture sites.


                                        317




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE   DEVELOPMENT        OF   NEOLITHIC       AND    COTTER     AGE     SETTLEMENT




11.24 The distribution of Bodrogkeresztur culture sites.




11.25 The distribution of Boleraz and Baden culture sites.


                                        318




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    IN   THE   GREAT     HUNGARIAN         PLAIN




11.26 The distribution of third-millennium, tumuli.




11.27 The distribution of Early Bronze Age sites.


                                         319




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                        12
