 Metal Vessels in Bronze Age Europe
   and the Context of Vulchetrun
                          (with T. Taylor)
                       (1984,       published            1989)


METAL VESSELS AND THEIR SOCIAL SETTING
IN BRONZE A G E EUROPE
One of the recurring themes of Bronze Age archaeology is the occurrence
of drinking equipment. This theme was present from its very inception:
the beginning of the Bronze Age in the Aegean is defined by the arrival of a
pottery assemblage containing handled jugs and cups (with good prototypes
in metal), while contemporary third-millennium cultures further north are
distinguished by 'Globular Amphorae', 'Corded Ware beakers' and 'Bell-
Beakers'. This interest in the social uses of alcohol - whether mead, beer,
koumish or wine - was to continue throughout later prehistory, and is
presumably related to the importance of hospitality and competitive feasting
in Bronze Age society: a ritualised practice of communal drinking that was
to emerge in the literary record of archaic and classical Greek times as the
symposium.
   Throughout the Bronze and Iron Ages, the style of such entertainment in

This chapter was put together with Tim Taylor for a conference in Amsterdam,
and is reproduced here in abbreviated form. Tim had just examined the Vulchetrun
treasure in Sofia, and concluded that it was a conflation of two assemblages of
different dates (see technical details in the original publication). Isolation of an
earlier part produced a convincing local context, reflected in mid-second-millen-
nium ceramic forms, and so providing evidence of contemporary goldsmithing
techniques and contacts with craft workshops in neighbouring areas; it also illus-
trated a 'drinking set3 or 1symposium kit' of the kind otherwise known only from
the Troy treasures or the Mycenae Shaft-Graves. This interest in alcohol and
ostentation parallels my colleague Michael Vickers' work on the relationship be-
tween pottery design and precious metalwork in the classical period, and has a
common inspiration in the work of our Oxford predecessors Arthur Evans and
J. L. Myres, and their pupil V. G. Childe.


                                         431




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

               METAL     VESSELS     IN   BRONZE     AGE     EUROPE:


Europe was set by Aegean practice - a land of exotic fruits, wine and sun-
shine, and also the most advanced area in terms of economy and technology.
Basic to this style was the use of metal - especially precious metal - vessels,
which were frequently copied in pottery. This theme can be traced from the
treasures of Troy II, through the Shaft-Graves of Mycenae, to the metal
prototypes that lie behind the typological proliferation of archaic and
classical Greek vases. The set of mixing, serving and drinking vessels defines
a 'wine ceremony' that may be compared with the oriental 'tea ceremony'
and the appropriate set of equipment which accompanied its diffusion in
eighteenth-century Europe.
    Europe beyond the Mediterranean initially lacked both the practice of
viticulture and the technological expertise for making metal vessels. The
spread of wine, first by large-scale import and then by local production, is
a story that belongs to the later first millennium BC. Nevertheless, the style
of temperate European drinking equipment in the second and early first
millennia owed much to Mediterranean models; and the technological
development of European sheet-metal industries can usefully be considered
in the light of this relationship. The three maps which accompany this article
are an attempt to chart the spread of sheet metalworking techniques as
applied to the manufacture of drinking vessels; and although presented only
as summary sketches, they effectively demonstrate a zonation of techno-
logical sophistication and a progressive northwards spread of technical
capability. These patterns are useful both as illustrations of the socio-
economic context of European metalworking, and as a means of defining
possible areas of origin for the often enigmatic and unaccompanied
examples of Bronze Age goldwork. They provide a necessary background to
the interpretation of the Treasure of Vulchetrun (or at least a part of it) and
the other recently discovered pieces related to it that form the subject of this
chapter (see now also Vulpe and Mihailescu-Birliba 1985).
    The use both of copper and gold has a long history in Europe before the
beginning of the Bronze Age. Although the manufacture of sheet bronze did
not appear in temperate Europe until the Late Bronze Age in the later second
millennium, beaten goldwork was already present in the Copper Age and
was extensively represented by the time of the Varna cemetery (c.4500 BC),
even in quite large pieces. Significantly, however, it was not made into
vessels, although it was in fact applied in powdered form as a paint in the
manner of contemporary graphite-painting on large, open bowls. Sheet-
metal vessels first appeared in southern Europe at the same time as the first
evidence for the production of wine in the Early Bronze Age, as part of the
life-style of a new elite.
    The initial use of sheet-metal for vessels probably began with gold and
silver in Anatolia or the northern Levant, represented in the fourth millen-
nium BC by the bowl from a tomb at Tell Farah North, Israel; and expertise
in decorated metalwork was undoubtedly promoted in the urban craft


                                          432




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                     THE         CONTEXT                OF       VULCHETRUN


centres of fourth-millennium Mesopotamia in the Uruk period, even though
examples of the products are rare, in the absence of rich graves (for a
peripheral exception see Maikop in the northern Caucasus: Chapter 17).
The technique was used to make spouted bowls (e.g. at Tepe Gawra) in the
later Protoliterate period, although the first extensive sample of the products
of this technology in Mesopotamia comes from Early Dynastic tombs such
as the royal cemetery at Ur. By this time the technology was also represented
in adjacent areas, for instance at Alaca Htiyiik and Troy where both gold,
silver and copper-alloy sheet-metalwork occur. Such products were at this
date closely related to the existence of craft workshops in palaces or early
urban centres, which were also capable of using other advanced gold-
working techniques such as filigree or granulation. Beaten gold and silver
vessels slowly made their appearance among the 'barbarian' societies of
temperate Europe during the second millennium, but it was another eight
hundred years before their Late Bronze Age successors acquired the tech-
niques of sheet bronzework for vessels and armour, which had continued to
be restricted to the palace workshops of the Aegean.
   This disparity reflects two factors. In the first place, there is the tech-
nological aspect: the malleability of gold makes the manufacture of sheet
and the raising of vessel shapes much easier than with bronze, whose brittle-
ness requires constant annealing. Secondly the attractiveness, incorrupti-
bility and scarceness of gold made it a natural first choice of a restricted elite,
perhaps anxious that their sumptuary prerogative should not be diluted
by the greater availability of comparable forms in baser metal. A similar
sequence can be seen underlying the succession from precious metal to
bronze coinages in the first millennium BC, and a similar principle is evident

        ATLANTIC
          .. .   EUROPE
                 „ .     „          CENTRAL EUROPE          CARPATHIAN BASIN     AEGEAN AREA        EAST MEDITERRANEAN       KESOPOTAMIA 5 IRAN
       (Britain, Brittany)          (Rhine, Danube)         (5 Lower Danube)    (Greece,W.Turkey)   (incl. Anatolia)          (incl. Caucasus)


         || ATLANTIC LBA1|^|LATE_URNFIELD||                                    -»|[ GEOMETRIC*!

                                        t                                            1
                                  ' " " • " " I -                              UTE       »    „
         | ATLANTIC EBA~]<-- ^ f U M U L U s V          | VULCHETRUN           MYCENAE SHAFT GRAVEsl

                     '                                  ,      t                      t_
                                 UNEtICE^ CUPS <•     I OTOMANI      — ( 2 ) — j W   CRETE*



                     (BEAKER)*       BEGLE ITKERAMI K< - NAGYREV



                                                                                                                         || UR   [[MAIKOPj




                 »       Transmission of techniques                        m") skeuomorphic strap-handles,
                                                                                                                            T . GAWRAj
                 >       Probable transmission of techniques
                                                                                omphalos bases
                 >       Stylistic influence
                                                                           ^ ^ simple pold cups
       II TROY|           Precious metal and copper alloy vessels          ®   accuratelv centred
                                                                               vessels-, conical rivets
       | OTOMANI1         Precious metal vessels only
                                                                           ^ ^ sheet bronze-working
         BADEN           Skeuomorphs of metal vessels in pottery
       (BEAKER)          Other drinking vessel
                         (Dates in calibrated C14 years BC)


17.1 The spread of technologies of sheet-metal vessels.


                                                                      433




                                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

               METAL     VESSELS     IN   BRONZE     AGE     EUROPE:


in the trend from highly decorated, individual weapons to more uniform,
mass-produced ones within the Bronze Age itself.
   The technological history of Europe (Figure 17.1) during this period
thus reflects the social background of a rising, and broadening, elite that set
and maintained its style by reference to more sophisticated Mediterranean
neighbours, from whom it occasionally imported finished models and ab-
sorbed techniques. These styles were set by wine-drinking, semi-urbanised
communities in the Aegean (which were themselves on the fringe of more
sophisticated societies in the Near East). Unable to import the substance,
since wine was difficult to transport in bulk with Bronze Age organisation
and technological capacities, the inhabitants of temperate Europe attempted
to imitate the style; and many rustic brews must have been drunk from gold
and silver vessels originally inspired by wine.
   The technological and cultural history of metal vessels in Bronze Age
Europe and the Near East can best be summarised in a series of maps,
sketching the variety of regional traditions from the rare surviving examples
of metal vessels, and from their skeuomorphic echoes in pottery.

Stage I: 3500-2000 BC (Figure 17.2)
During the later fourth and third millennia the only area of Europe to manu-
facture metal vessels was the Aegean, which lay at the western end of a belt
of urbanising societies in contact with Mesopotamia. The Ur royal graves
illustrate the skill of metropolitan craftsmen, while neighbouring areas show
distinctive styles: decorated with animal figures in the Caucasus and Iran,
or with plentiful channelling and fluting in central Anatolia - as shown both
by the gold vessels of Alaca Hiiyiik and the Early Bronze Age pottery of
Beycesultan, whose contrast with the preceding Late Chalcolithic 4 wares
is marked by the appearance of thin, brilliantly polished and often fluted
fabrics, indicating a close dependence on metal models. Egypt's skill in sheet
goldwork (even gold leaf) is well known, though surprisingly few gold
vessels have escaped the tomb-robbers to place alongside the plentiful
copper examples from royal and aristocratic tombs. (For examples of Near
Eastern metalwork see illustrations in Piggott 1961.)
    These areas shared a common basic technology that was capable of
producing sheet-metal, gold, silver and copper-alloy vessels (though some of
the last were still produced by solid-casting). The westernmost assemblage
demonstrating the whole of this range of competence is that represented
by the seventeen vessels (two-thirds of silver, the rest either of electrum, or
copper alloy) from Treasures A, B and s from Troy II, and other hoards from
the Troad (Schmidt 1902; Bittel 1959); but precious metal vessels were also
made on the other side of the Aegean, under strong west-Anatolian influ-
ence. Examples include gold vessels in the local 'sauceboat' shape, that were
probably made in craft workshops attached to fortified centres such as
Lerna, as well as small silver bowls in the Cyclades, and the possibly


                                          434




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       THE   CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN




17.2 Map of metal-vessel style zones, 3500-2000 BC: (1) Mesopotamian classic;
(2) Iranian figured; (3) central Anatolian channelled; (4) Egyptian sheet-goldwork
and bronze vessels; (5) Aegean plain; (6) Baden culture (pottery skeuomorphs).
There are other pottery skeuomorphs in the Levant, (a) boundaries of style-zones;
(b) finds of metal vessels; (c) style-zones defined on metallic skeuomorphs; (d) finds
of metallic skeuomorphs; (e) imports (metal vessel finds or skeuomorphs); ( f ) the
limit of sheet-metalworking in copper alloys; (g) sheet-metal finds other than
vessels.
imported gold bowls from Euboia (Renfrew 1972; Buchholz and
Karageorghis nos 1072-82). Even so, Helladic goldwork was simpler than
that from western Anatolia: the sauceboats have riveted strap-handles
rather than tubular ones like the two-handled cups (depata) from Troy
(Childe 1924).
   The appearance of tubular spouts on the pottery 'teapot' vessels from
Early Minoan Crete (Figure 17.3) is very suggestive of metal prototypes
(known in silver from the Levant in the next period) which may have been
in bronze or more likely in precious metal (Evans 1921, 79-82). The Cretan
case resembles that of the Levant itself in this period, when metal types can
be inferred from the pottery but are not so far represented by finds of metal
objects. More generalised skeuomorphs of metal features occur in northern
Greece and as far north as the Carpathian Basin. High-flung strap-handles
and omphalos bases (Figure 17.4) are characteristic of the Ezero and Baden
cultures (Kalicz 1963), which also have pottery examples of the suspension-
vase known in silver from the Troy treasure. Since there are no 'proto-
palaces' of the Lerna type in this area, it is unlikely that metal prototypes
would have been locally manufactured: probably, rare examples circulated


                                         435




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                METAL    VESSELS     IN   BRONZE     AGE     EUROPE:




173 Pottery and metalwork: above, Early Minoan 'teapot3 from Vasilike, Crete;
below, early first-millennium BC bronze spouted vessels from Luristan: the tubular
construction of the spout is characteristic of the metal form and skeuomorphic in
pottery (Ashmolean Museum); [new photographs].

from further south. This is also likely to be the explanation for the very rare
metal-derived shapes in pottery from TRB and related contexts further north,
in Bavaria at Lengfeld-Alkofen and, more surprisingly, at Oldendorf (Kr.
Luneburg) in northern Germany (Sprockhoff 1952; Milojcic 1953: see
Figure 7.3). These postulated examples of metal vessels circulating outside
their zone of manufacture would interestingly prefigure the route over


                                          436




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     THE    CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN




Museum); [new drawing].



which techniques of local production were to spread in the following
millennium.

Stage II: 2000-1300 BC (Figure 17.5)
This span of time encompasses a series of changes, which for convenience
have been conflated within a single map. The undoubted presence of
precious metal vessels in the Near East is only sparsely represented in the
archaeological record, mainly because of the rarity of ostentatious royal
tombs. However, the geographically marginal site of Trialeti in the Caucasus
(some of whose tombs date back to the previous millennium) shows the
complexity that goldwork could attain (Schaeffer 1948, figs 288-92), and
the numbers of bronze vessels from humbler tombs in the Luristan region by
the end of the period show that they were no longer confined to a restricted
elite. Although whole areas (including potentially very important ones like
western Anatolia) are still definable only through pottery skeuomorphs,
royal and aristocratic tombs in the Aegean and the Levant provide good
examples of contemporary products in the east Mediterranean.
    Among the earliest are the royal tombs at Byblos (Schaeffer 1948, fig.
63), with silver vessels - including a teapot - that resemble the massive silver
treasure from a temple context at Tod in upper Egypt, datable to c.1900 BC
(Bisson de la Roque et al. 1953). This silverwork is either Levantine or -
conceivably - Cretan, where local production of silver vessels is shown by
the crinkly kantharos from Gournia and from skeuomorphic representation
in Kamares ware (Evans 1921,191-3). Cretan goldwork in a similar style is
illustrated by the vessels of the 'Aigina' treasure, probably from northern
Crete (Higgins 1979), while further connections between Byblos and the
Aegean are demonstrated by the occurrence in both areas of a type of
carinated, two-handled cauldron (Schaeffer 1948, fig. 78; cf. Catling 1964,


                                         437




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

               METAL     VESSELS     IN   BRONZE     AGE     EUROPE:




17.5 Map of metal-vessel style zones, 2000-1300 BC: (1) Near Eastern figured;
(2) Aegean-related gold- and silver-work in the east Mediterranean; (3) west
Anatolian (pottery skeuomorphs); (4) Cretan crinkly; (5) Mycenaean; (6) Balkan
(pottery skeuomorphs); (7) west-Pontic zone of Vulchetrun-related vessels;
(8) Otomani goldwork; (9) Unetice (pottery skeuomorphs); (10) west European
EBA gold and silver cups. (Symbols as in Fig. 17.2)


fig. 18, 5). These examples illustrate the increasing links between various
parts of the east Mediterranean.
   For the Aegean Late Bronze Age (Davis 1977) the best sample comes
from the sixteenth-century Shaft-Graves at Mycenae, which contain gold
vessels in both the Cretan tradition (cf. the cups from Vaphio) and in simpler
shapes in the tradition of Middle Helladic pottery (e.g. the simple two-
handled cups). The development of this school of metalworking can be
followed at nearby Dendra where a tholos and chamber-tombs of the
fourteenth century have produced technically more advanced pieces, giving
evidence both of lathe-finishing in the manufacture of bowls, and of the
application to vessels of the kinds of black inlay previously used on weapon-
blades (Buchholz and Karageorghis 1973, no. 1108, cf. 1684). Bronzework
is particularly plentiful at this time, both on the mainland and in Crete
(Matthaus 1980), where a good example of a set of personal drinking
equipment comes from the warrior-burial in tomb 14 at Zapher Papoura
(Buchholz and Karageorghis 1973, fig. 33).
   It is to this period that a bronze cup said to have been found at Dohnsen
north of Hannover (Sprockhoff 1961) can be a -ributed; and a possible


                                          438




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    THE    CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN




indication of a somewhat earlier metal vessel import from the Aegean is the
pottery pillar-handle (like those on the Vaphio cups) from Nienhagen in
Saxony (Gimbutas 1965, 58). While some doubt must attach to both of
these pieces (Harding 1985, 108), there is nothing inherently improbable in
such rare long-distance imports, which are paralleled in the previous period
at Oldendorf and by many instances in the first millennium.
   In any case, the local production of precious metal (but not bronze)
vessels had already begun in central and western Europe. The earliest are the
gold vessels of the Hajdusamson metalworking phase of the Otomani
culture in the Carpathian Basin, dating to c.1800 BC and preceding the
Shaft-Grave period in Greece. The Otomani area provided an advanced
economic context (though not a palatial one), with its stone-built hillforts,
skilful gold- and bronzework, and even experimental ironworking (Vladar
1973). Four one-handled gold cups or bowls, found in Co. Bihar, Hungary
in 1922, have vertical channelling, and one has incised compass-based orna-
ment of the kind known from contemporary bronzework (Mozsolics 1968,
Tafeln 4-10; Figure 17.6). (Forms with elaborate toreutic shapes are sug-
gested by contemporary pottery copies: Figure 17.7.) Probably slightly later
is the example from Biia (Magyarbenye) with repousse bosses and con-
centric circles, and incised lines of dots (Moszolics 1968, Tafel 12). Like the
Bihar examples, the handles are formed of one piece with the rim of the
vessel, and are not attached at their lower end. The double-spiral terminals
of the two handles of the Biia vessel resemble gold bracelets of c.1600-1400
BC from Hungary. Probably of similar date is a hoard of sheet-gold orna-
ments from §mig (Somogyom) (Mozsolics 1968, Tafeln 13-16) associated
with part of a globular bronze bowl with a distinctive flat, outwards-rolled
rim. As virtually the only sheet-bronze vessel in Europe before the Urnfield
period, this bowl is likely to represent an import, even though it has no
obvious correspondence with contemporary Aegean types and may well be
an import from the Caucasus or Anatolia.


                                       439




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

               METAL     VESSELS     IN   BRONZE      AGE    EUROPE:




17.7 Pottery cup, Otomani culture, probably Berettyo JJjfalu, Hungary
(Ashmolean Museum); [new drawing].

   The area between the Carpathian Basin and the Aegean was probably
capable of producing gold vessels by at least the middle of the second
millennium, and metallic 'kantharos' shapes in pottery (distantly related to
Anatolian Middle Bronze Age and Middle Helladic ones, though not wheel-
made) strongly hint at their presence (Bona 1975). These shapes, especially
the pottery of the Monteoru culture, provide the best analogies for the
simpler pieces in the Vulchetrun treasure and related recent finds from
Radeni and Kryzovlin that are discussed below (Vulpe and Mihailescu-
Birliba 1985). If Vulchetrun is not a unity, as we suggest, then there is no
difficulty in assigning these pieces to such a horizon. It would be later than
the Bihar vessels but perhaps overlapping with the later products of the
Otomani tradition. A postulated contemporaneity with the goldwork of the
Shaft-Grave period would accord well with the generalised similarities
between these pieces and the kantharoi from grave IV of circle A and the one
from Kalamata in Messenia (Buchholz and Karageorghis 1973, no. 1086;
Hartmann 1982, no. 4367; Figure 17.8). The gold vessels of the Vulchetrun
group in the lower Danube and west Pontic area, with their riveted handles,
are more confident and sophisticated pieces than the Otomani examples;
and some contacts between goldsmiths working in the lower Danube and


                                          440




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      THE    CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN




Sherratt 1987e].

those of the Late Bronze Age Aegean or western Anatolia is clearly shown
by the Per§inari dagger, with its close analogies to the sword from Shaft-
Grave delta of Circle B. The possibility of similar overseas connections with
Anatolia is hinted at by the crinkly kantharos shapes in pottery, recalling the
Shaft-Grave and Cretan examples in silver and marble, which may have
a common background in Anatolian metalwork (as Childe suggested in
1956).
   The next area with plentiful evidence of gold and silver vessels is western
Europe, with its small, handled cups with carinated or sinuous profile. Their
distribution ranges from Rillaton and Cuxwold in Britain to Eschenz in
Switzerland (Gerloff 1975; Bill and Kinnes 1975; Taylor 1980), and they
date to the period 1800-1400 BC. Although not directly evidenced in the
Unetice and Tumulus cultures that lay between here and the Otomani
examples, the characteristic (Jnetice pottery cup with its sharp carination
and concave upper section is closely paralleled by the gold cup from
Fritzdorf in the Rhineland (von Uslar 1955), which may well have travelled
there from the CJnetice area. The small gold and silver cups which are typical
of later Breton and Wessex tumuli are echoed in amber and shale examples
(Gerloff 1975), and in Denmark in the tree-trunk coffin burials there
are small wooden cups ornamented with tin nails (e.g. Glob 1970; the
associated horn spoons recall the sheet-gold example associated with the
Ploumilliau gold cup: Eluere 1982). The two Breton silver examples, St
Adrien and St Fiacre (Briard 1978), are notable as the first silver vessels
known outside the Aegean. These small cups, in very diverse materials and
occurring over a very wide area, are nevertheless remarkably uniform in
conception; and the same idea was occasionally translated into pottery, as
in the case of the Scottish handled 'food vessel5 from Balcuick.
   This evidence demonstrates a chronological cline in the spread of
precious metal vessel production: crudely - Troy, Otomani, Wessex. In each
case the idea of metal vessels was added to a local competence in the
working of gold sheet (Copper Age in central Europe, Beaker in the west),
and a local repertoire of prestige drinking vessels in pottery. In south-east
Europe rather larger and more sophisticated gold vessels were produced


                                         441




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                METAL     VESSELS     IN   BRONZE     AGE     EUROPE:




17.9 Map of metal-vessel style zones, 1300-850 BC: (1) Near Eastern goldwork
(Urartian-Assyrian-Baby Ionian); (2) Egyptian gold and silver vessels in oriental
style; (3) Cypro-Levantine (bronzes and pottery skeuomorphs); (4) Urnfield
goldwork. (Symbols as in Fig. 17.2)
than in the north-west. The capacity to produce gold and silver vessels was
not, however, paralleled by an ability to produce bronze ones, even though
smaller pieces of sheet bronzework were used for ornaments in all these
areas. The production of gold and silver vessels in this period thus seems to
have devolved from a skill available only in palace workshops and craft
centres to one more widely available to barbarian elites. Its spread took the
form of successive steps, with each new area taking a general model from its
predecessor but creating its own local form, often widely shared among
neighbouring elites. (These metal forms probably explain some of the more
widespread forms in pottery.) Although there are possible examples of indi-
vidual vessels travelling along the northwards axis from the Aegean, the
process of technological spread owed nothing to Mycenaean imports; it
began before the Mycenaean period and was to continue after it. Only the
typology of certain pieces of goldwork in the lower Danube area suggests
some kind of contact, probably during the Shaft-Grave period.

Stage III: 1300-850 BC (Figure 17.9)
This period corresponds to a time of fundamental transition in the economic
and social life of Europe and the Near East, as well as a major technological
shift from bronze to iron in the southern part of the area. The new pattern
well reflects the radical nature of these changes. Very little goldwork, and

                                           442




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     THE    CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN


no gold or silver vessels, are known from the Aegeo-Anatolian area where
Mycenaean and Hittite civilisation collapsed and in which Geometric
Greece and Phrygian Anatolia were emerging. This is consistent with the
brown-painted, basket-like ornament on shapes which only indirectly reflect
metal forms. Somewhat greater continuity in elite craftsmanship is probable
in the Cypro-Levantine area (especially in the production of Egyptianising
bronze tripods in Cyprus: Catling 1964 - though his dates are compressed:
see Matthaus 1985), but precious metalwork is only well demonstrated in
Egypt and northern Iran. In Egypt the important hoard dated by inscriptions
to the late XlXth Dynasty from Tell Basta (ancient Bubastis) includes a
silver jug with gold theriomorphic handles which strikingly anticipate
Achaemenid forms (Simpson 1959). Further east, the undoubted wealth of
the Assyrian, Urartian and Babylonian areas is best exemplified archae-
ologically from the site of Hasanlu in Iran, though otherwise known from
representations in Assyrian reliefs. (Many of these features were to spread
westwards with the orientalising movement in the eighth and seventh
centuries.) Goldwork from the Marlik Tepe tombs included gold beakers
with repousse animal friezes (somewhat in the manner of the Ishtar Gate at
Babylon) showing the links between Achaemenid metalwork and earlier
Mesopotamian and Iranian traditions, and the continuity of (presumably)
Bactrian gold sources. Bronze objects, including vessels, are known from
this time in enormous numbers from looted Luristan tombs. The lack of
precious metalwork in the Aegean/Anatolian area is striking, but the
continuing production of sheet bronzework there indicates that metalsmiths
were restricted by supplies of precious metal rather than by any lack of skill:
and if gold or silver vessels were produced, they were too valuable to con-
sign to the ground. Even the Gordion tombs are remarkable for their
emphasis on bronzework alone, much of it of the highest order.
   In temperate Europe quite a different situation obtained. Metalwork,
both in bronze and gold, greatly expanded in the Late Bronze Age -
especially in the Urnfield area of central Europe. Here several hoards of gold
vessels are known (as well as more extraordinary sheet-gold creations, like
the golden 'hats' of Schifferstadt and Ezelsdorf (which may actually be hats:
Menghin and Schauer 1977) and for the first time bronze vessels made their
appearance outside the Aegean. The technology of sheet bronzework is
demonstrated by two sets of items from chieftains' graves: handled cups,
and sheet-armour cuirasses (Sprockhoff 1930; Childe 1949; von Merhart
1969; Piggott 1959). By 1000 BC there was a full array of buckets, bowls
and sieves, as well as the remarkable wheeled cauldrons (Piggott 1983).
   Although the precise dating is disputed, this new technology appeared in
Europe not at the peak of Mycenaean power but during and after the collapse
of the palaces, in the later LH IIIB and IIIc periods. It is tempting to suggest
that large-scale bronze sheetworking had been virtually a palace monopoly,
and that the new conditions allowed experienced craftsmen to work for


                                        443




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

               METAL    VESSELS      IN   BRONZE     AGE    EUROPE:


other patrons (not necessarily the richest) - especially further north where
opportunities were expanding (Sandars 1983). (At the same time, tech-
niques of solid-casting of swords and spearheads went south, to appear in
the Aegean.) A major school of sheet-bronzeworking grew up in the long
pre-eminent Carpathian area, whose products were widely distributed,
going north as far as Denmark. A characteristic product (that seems to have
taken the place of the large, two-handled bowl of Vulchetrun type as the
container at the symposium), was the biconical bronze 'amphora' (von
Merhart 1969, Tafel 48) that is echoed in pottery as the Villanovan urn. The
continuing vitality of central European metallurgy, especially sheet bronze-
work like armour and vessels, contributed to the revival of these skills in
Greece and Italy during the early first millennium.
   Beyond the Urnfield area, in Atlantic Europe and Scandinavia, the
traditions of cast bronzework continued, and were carried to new heights
in the creation of 'belt-boxes' (Hangebecken), lurer, or Irish horns. Sheet-
bronzeworking was slower to penetrate, though it eventually spread from
central Europe to start a local tradition of buckets and patch-built cauldrons
(Hawkes and Smith 1957; Gerloff 1975). The only bronze cups known from
the early first millennium in the British Isles, however, are cast ones (e.g.
Welby) and despite the craftsmanship attested by the Mold gold cape or the
abundance of Irish gold ornaments, there are no gold cups. Sheet-bronze
cups were used in Denmark from the equivalent of the early Urnfield period
(Thrane 1962). Even in Denmark the famous gold cups from the
Mariesminde Mose hoard were probably imported from northern Germany,
and only the handles added locally. Horns were probably the main osten-
tatious drinking vessels, and occasionally occur in Danish treetrunk-coffin
burials; and they are known from the early Iron Age in central Europe by
their bronze or gold mounts.


T H E CONTEXT OF THE VULCHETRUN A-TYPE VESSELS
The Vulchetrun hoard came to light in 1924 near the village in Pleven
district, N. Bulgaria, after which it is named.1 It was not recovered under
scientific conditions and part of it was dispersed on discovery. Of fourteen
objects which were documented, thirteen arrived at the archaeological
museum in Sofia. At least three of these remaining objects are incomplete.
Only five of the objects from the hoard are of importance in this discussion
- five vessels which appear to be elements of a drinking set (illustrated on
p. 373 above); it will be necessary to justify the treatment of these separately
from the other objects which form part of the hoard in its present state.
    That the Vulchetrun hoard does not constitute a unity in either the tech-
nological, chronological or cultural sense of the word has already been
argued by one of us (Taylor 1985, 131; 1986). The hoard is listed in Table
17.1: objects Vx-V5 are grouped as Vulchetrun 'A', the rest as 'B'.2 The

                                          444




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                        THE   CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN


fourteenth object reported at the time of the discovery can be given the
number V14; it may well have been the pair to one of the objects V 7 -V n if
their function as cymbals is accepted (Minchev, pers. comm.). The obvious
incongruousness of the forms and implied functions of the objects in the
hoard immediately suggests that it represents a hotch-potch of objects
hastily deposited at a time when some of them may already have been
antique. It is not just on the basis of the various forms and implied functions
that the objects can be separated, rather it is pre-eminently in terms of tech-
niques and materials that a primary assemblage 'Vulchetrun A' can be
distinguished from the remaining, and apparently later, set of material
designated 'Vulchetrun B\ Vulchetrun B may itself be of heterogeneous
origin and display various phases of construction.

Table 17A     The Vulchetrun Hoard.
VULCHETRUN A
Vj         : a large double-handled bowl; gold (c.10% Ag) (Inv. No. 3192)
V2         : a large single-handled vessel; gold (Inv. No. 3193)
V3-V5      : three small single-handled cups; gold (Inv. Nos 3194, 3195, 3204)
VULCHETRUN B
V6         : a curious 'triple vessel' consisting of three tear-drop shaped bowls
             of gold, connected by tubing and a trident construction of electrum
             (Inv. No. 3203)
V 7 -V n   : five small 'lids', two of which have an onion-shaped central boss
             surviving (Inv. No. 3198, 3199) and three of which have sections
             broken away and missing; (c.20% Ag) (Inv. Nos 3200, 3201, 3202);
             gold
V12, V13   : two large 'lids', both with onion-shaped central bosses; gold, decorated
             with silver (Inv. Nos 3196, 3197)

   On the basis of appearance alone, the objects, when viewed under
uniform lighting conditions, seem to be made up of three different golds.
The vessels Vj-V^ appear to have the most 'neutral' gold colour with no de-
tectable variation among them, whilst the 'lids' V7-V13 are uniformly greener
or more 'brassy'; the three teardrop-shaped dishes of the triple vessel V6 are
redder or more 'coppery'.
   It is not only on grounds of a proposed variation in the materials used for
different parts of the hoard that its basic disunity is proposed, however, but
also from the evidence of different manufacturing technique. The five vessels
Vj-V5 are constructed in hammered gold plate, raised into open forms and
finished with repousse work. Their handles are joined back to their bodies
with conical-headed rivets. These techniques demonstrate a fundamental
dissimilarity between these vessels and the rest of the hoard, which are of
much more complex construction: V6, for instance, is joined with solder to
a cire perdue cast electrum trident; V7-V13 display complex polymetallism,
being constructed of gold over cast bronze, and the two larger examples


                                          445




                    This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                     All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

               METAL     VESSELS     IN   BRONZE     AGE     EUROPE:


V12-V13 have been pattern-silvered within zones delimited by punched lines.3
It is clear from this appraisal that the objects V6-V13 display quite different
and much more complex metal-working techniques than Vj-Vj. We suggest
that manufacture within an urban context is likely for these complex
objects. The closest parallel for the 'lids' seems to support this - a gold and
silver banded 'lid' with a pomegranate-shaped central boss from Karmir
Blur, Urartu, which carries an inscription dating it to the eighth century BC.4
A similar date could be proposed for the triple vessel.
    Essentially, the dating and provenance of V6 to V13 need not concern us in
this discussion as, whatever their origin, they clearly distinguish themselves
from Vulchetrun A in terms of shape, function, fabric and construction: on
the one hand we have complex polymetallism with casting, soldering and
bonding, whilst on the other hand we have five pure sheet-gold vessels, ham-
mered and riveted. Further, within the last five years, two new discoveries of
sheet-gold vessels have been published which display the same technology
and a range of similar forms. These represent the first true parallels to the
Vulchetrun A drinking set to appear so far. They are the vessel found near
Kryzhovlin in the Ukranian S. S. R. (Dzis-Rayko and Chernyakov 1981) and
the five vessels found near Radeni in the Neamf district of Romania (Revista
Muzeelor 1981 (8); see now Vulpe and Mihailescu-Birliba 1985). Figure
17.5 shows the distribution of the three findspots. We shall discuss each set
of material in turn.


VULCHETRUN A
The assemblage put forward as Vulchetrun A comprises the five vessels
Vj-V5. They are made of gold of a similar colour, hammer-worked from
sheet into open forms. The strap-handles are in all cases integral, rising from
the lip in 'high-handle' form and curving back down onto the outside of the
vessel to be held in place by three gold rivets apiece. In our illustrations
(Figure 17.10, and p. 373 above) the handles of the large vessel Va have been
reconstructed to what is considered to be their original height. The hoard
was recovered in a crumpled state and only partial restoration has taken
place; compare the photograph of the hoard as discovered (Mikov 1958,
pi. 1) and as it is presently displayed (Venedikov and Gerassimov 1975,
pi. 33). It seems sensible to assume that the form of the double handles
originally followed that of the less damaged vessel V2. This fits with the
proposed reconstructions of the Kryzhovlin and Radeni vessels (see below).
Vessel Vj weighs about 4.395kg; a rough volumetric calculation suggests
that it could have conveniently held between 7 and 8 litres of liquid. Vessel
V2 weighs 0.919kg. Vessels V3, V4 and V5, the three small cups, are nearly
identical in shape and size and their rivets are made as smaller versions of
the rivets on the two larger vessels; they weigh 123 :m each. The cups would
have held about 0.2 litres of liquid, according tc >w full they were. This


                                          446




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      THE    CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN




17.10 Gold vessels (to scale): (1) Vulchetrun; (2) Kryzhovlin; (3)-(5) Radeni;
(6) Mycenae, Shaft-Grave IV.

falls somewhere between two of the modern European standard wine
measures - the glass, at between 0.115 and 0.125 litres, and the German
'Viertel' or quarter-litre glass (0.250 litre). The cups stand upright only
when filled and would presumably have to have been hung up when not in
use. On the inner surface of all three cups there is a small indentation; it
occurs in the centre of the base and seems to have been caused by a tool with
a compass-like point. It is not visible on the outside and is probably an index
of a particular production method in which either the tool or the vessel was
rotated to enable the vessel to be formed symmetrically.
   All five of the vessels are decorated. The body of V1 is plain with a distinct


                                         447




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

               METAL    VESSELS     IN   BRONZE     AGE    EUROPE:


shoulder two-thirds of the way up. The handles are decorated in five parallel
bands or ridges, pressed up out of the thick gold sheet. The central three
bands link to form what Venedikov and Gerassimov have termed a 'fish-tail'
terminus to either end to the handle (1975,351). The central band, or spine,
is patterned with diagonal slashes which appear to have been excised with
a sharp graving tool,5 the two edges of the handle are decorated with the
same diagonal pattern but in much narrower bands, and probably punched.
Vessel V2 is decorated in exactly the same way, although lacking a shoulder.
The three vessels V3, V4 and V5 are decorated in a slightly different manner
to the two large vessels. There are only three raised bands on the handles -
the central band with diagonal slashes, with the outer bands, forming the
edges, merely punch-dotted. The same 'fish-tail' termination is present,
except that on the inside the ends, after dividing, become a continuous
repousse band around the vessel rim; immediately below this are two further
bands so that three bands in all define the rim of each cup.
   The bases of all five vessels have standing surfaces formed by regular
upraised circular bands. On both and V2 there are two such raised bands,
organised concentrically (Mikov 1958, figs V and VIII). The small cups V 3 -
V5 have a flattened basal plane with a single raised ring on which they stand
(Mikov 1958, fig. XI).


KRYZHOVLIN
The Kryzhovlin bowl (Figure 17.10, 2) was discovered by chance in the
Balta region, north of Odessa. No associated finds were recorded. It was
published by Dzis-Rayko and Chernyakov in 1981 under the title 'A gold
bowl of Vulchetrun type from the north-west Pontic region'. It weighs
765.59gm; its maximum diameter is 17.9cm. The handles of the vessel have
undecorated 'fish-tail' termini (similar though not identical to Vulchetrun
Va) which were originally held in place on both sides with four rivets apiece;
these rivets are rounded on their outer faces and hammered down against
the inner surface of the vessel. Like Va the bowl has a distinct raised base.
On Kryzhovlin this consists of two concentric rings beaten down to form a
standing plane between which six rivets have been hammered (Dzis-Rayko
and Chernyakov 1981, 153, fig. 3:3). A rough volumetric calculation sug-
gests that the vessel could once have held around 2 to 2.5 litres of liquid.


RADENI
Information concerning a hoard of badly damaged vessels from near the
village of Radeni in Romanian Moldavia (Figure 17.10, 3-5) has been slow
to emerge since its accidental discovery during farm work in 1965 or 1966
(Vulpe and Mihailescu-Birliba 1985, 47). Three vessels reached Piatra
Neamj museum in 1977 and appeared on the cover of Revista Muzeelor


                                         448




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       THE   CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN


1981 (8) but with little documentation. A fourth vessel passed, by way of
a jeweller in Oradea, Transylvania, into the collection of the National
Museum in Bucharest in 1971. A fifth passed from private hands into the
Romanian National Bank between 1979 and 1980. It seems that the hoard
had consisted of as many as eight small gold vessels which had been
hung from a larger two-handled vessel by means of (Pgold) wire (Vulpe and
Mihailescu-Birliba 1985, 48). The five vessels, R F - R 5 , which can be
documented are listed in Table 17.2.

Table 17.2 The Radeni Hoard.
Rj (Figure 17.10, 5) Piatra Neam{ Inv. No. 5548: a two-handled gold vessel with
   distinct shoulder and decorative engraving on the handles; weight 458.6gm; the
   strap-handles are integral, rising from the rim to be fixed back against the body
   using two rivets apiece. The base is formed by two concentric rings with six
   rivets hammered flat between them, very similar to the base of the Kryzhovlin
   vessel.
R2 Piatra Neamj Inv. No. 5549: a two-handled gold vessel with distinct shoulder
   and 'fish tail' decoration; weight 243.10gm; the strap-handles are integral, two
   rivets apiece; the base appears to be defined by a single raised ring but without
   rivets.
R3 (Figure 17.10, 3) Piatra Neamj Inv. No. 5550: a single-handled gold vessel with
   distinct shoulder and 'fish tail' decoration; weight 203.7gm; the handle is in-
   tegral, with two rivets; there is a distinct circular pressed-out base (see Vulpe
   and Mihailescu-Birliba 1985, 52 and Abbildung 5:le).
R4 (Figure 17.10, 4) National Museum, Bucharest Inv. Nos B 32/1-9: (frag-
   mentary) a two-handled gold vessel, similar to R 2 , with 'fish tail' decoration;
   weight of fragments 198.17gm; two rivets per handle.
R5 Romanian National Bank, Bucharest: (five fragments) a gold vessel with either
   one or two handles, integral with the rim and fixed with a row of three rivets;
   'fish tail' termini to the handle(s) are clearly visible; weight of fragments
   158.5gm.

The five vessels appear like a set of miniature variations on the Vulchetrun
Vj type, with high strap-handles and conical-ended rivets. A rough volu-
metric calculation suggests that they could have held between 0.2 and 0.25
litres, a little more than the three cups V3-V5. They seem to have been con-
structed from at least two types of sheet; Vulpe and Mihailescu-Birliba note
that Rj and R 5 appear to be much 'redder5 than the other vessels.
    The vessels from Vulchetrun, Kryzhovlin and Radeni display a large
number of shared traits. Despite their different sizes, they have forms and
decorations which appear as variations on a theme. They were all con-
structed from sheet-gold and using similar workshop techniques. They
occur in the extra-Carpathian zone which links the Steppe to the Lower
Danube Basin (Figure 17.5, zone 7), but, given their close similarity, the


                                         449




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

               METAL    VESSELS     IN   BRONZE      AGE    EUROPE:


distances between their respective findspots is remarkable - as the crow flies,
about 250km between Radeni and Kryzhovlin, about 400km between
Radeni and Vulchetrun and about 650km between Kryzhovlin and
Vulchetrun.
   It seems reasonable that a similar date should be sought for the pro-
duction of all of the vessels; however, the fact that no associated material
was documented at any of the three findspots which might have helped in
suggesting a date (for the depositions at least), makes this endeavour a hard
one.6 The history of scholarship concerning Vulchetrun is long and complex
(see Bonev 1977). During the last sixty years various datings ranging from
the late third millennium BC to AD 700 have been put forward. Because
the hoard has been considered a unity, the postulated dates have had to
accommodate both components. Furthermore, no close parallels were
known until recently for any of the objects in the hoard; thus specialists
tended to ascribe the 'treasure' to the period with which they were most
familiar.
   The most favoured time-bracket has always been between the thirteenth
century BC and the eighth century BC. We hope to demonstrate here that this
is absolutely the least likely period within the entire date range in which
to countenance the production of gold vessels of the type described. We
consider that the distinction of more than one techno-cultural complex
within the Vulchetrun hoard marks a major step forward in the attempt to
understand the material. Ridding ourselves of the 'lids' with their bizarre
technology and unknown function immediately removes all the arguments
for dating the Vulchetrun A component on the basis of the curvilinear
meanders on the 'lids' (general parallels for which can be found in many
periods - they formed the basis of Filov and Kazarov's medieval ascription).
Arguments based on the form of the bronze components to the 'lids' (Mikov
1958; Venedikov and Gerassimov 1975,27f., pi. 36; Bonev 1984, figs 8-11;
Taylor 1986, fig. 1) are also spurious, as these are both incomplete and of
a very different form to that supposed by most authors.
   Given the lack of associated material at Kryzhovlin and Radeni, and
the problematic material 'associated' with Vulchetrun A, we are left with
four indirect means of proposing a cultural and chronological context for
the phenomenon of the Vulchetrun A-type vessels. These are contextual
analysis, formal analysis, functional analysis and technological analysis.
   The absence of material associated with the gold vessels itself suggests
a certain depositional and cultural mode. All the finds were uncovered in
a crumpled state (at Radeni apparently deliberately crushed); none of the
finds was part of a burial; likewise none was found within, or in any close
association with, any known prehistoric settlement. Although, strictly, the
Vulchetrun hoard must be ruled out of this discussion (having argued above
that the vessels in it were incorporated into a secondary deposition), the
finds from Radeni give enough support to the idea that the original eight


                                         450




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      THE   CONTEXT       OF   VULCHETRUN


small vessels there may have formed part of a hoard in which a large two-
handled vessel of Vj type may have been the centrepiece. Such deposition of
drinking equipment seems to have been widespread during the period after
2000 BC in Europe (Figure 17.5) with a number of hoards from the Otomani
area (zone 8) and individual pieces in central western Europe (zone 10).
After 1300 BC no such depositions are known from south-east Europe, the
Aegean or Anatolia (Figure 17.9) until the appearance of the Kazicheni gold
vessel ('Sofia treasure') in the eighth or seventh century BC. Indeed, the lack
of goldwork from eastern Europe at a time when it is plentifully represented
in the Urnfield area further west (e.g. Menghin and Schauer 1977) suggests
that alluvial gold in the Carpathian area may have been coming to an end
after three thousand years of exploitation from the Copper Age onwards.
Later goldwork of the Classical and Hellenistic periods was mostly made
from mined gold, probably from the area of Mount Pangaion where ancient
authors describe it (see Unger and Schiitz 1982).
   In the absence of datable contexts for finds of gold vessels of Vulchetrun
A-type, further clues may be sought in the local pottery shapes. Double-
handled vessels resembling the Vulchetrun large vessel (Vx), with two high
strap-handles rising from the rim and joining at the shoulder, are found in a
broad arc of related cultures stretching from the Balkans to the North Pontic
area, and including the Tei, Monteoru and Costisa cultures. Particularly
close parallels occur in the Classic phase of the Monteoru culture (1800-
1500 BC) - notable also for the abundance of small sheet-goldwork in the
form of hair-rings (Zaharia 1959). The parallels extend to the presence of
a median ridge along the strap-handles in the manner of the Vulchetrun,
Radeni and Kryzhovlin examples (e.g. Gimbutas 1965, fig. 152, 2). Even in
pottery, such vessels were valuable and significant enough to accompany
individuals to their graves, as in cemetery 4 at Sarata-Monteoru itself (ibid.,
fig. 153).
   From the point of view of function, the Vulchetrun A-Kryzhovlin-
Radeni group fits very well into the Bronze Age 'symposium' category. We
have already outlined the form taken by the development of this elite custom
or pastime in the commentary on the maps (above). If we consider these
finds as the remains of elite drinking sets, then we can imagine them
originally consisting of a central, communal, liquid-holding vessel -
Vulchetrun V p Kryzhovlin and the inferred Vj-type vessel from Radeni - for
use with a number of individual drinking cups holding roughly the same
volume as a modern large wine glass - Vulchetrun V3-V5 and Radeni R j - R ^ .
In such chance finds it is by no means unreasonable to postulate similar
small drinking cups for use with the Kryzhovlin vessel. The vessel V2 prob-
ably represents an elaboration on the basic drinking ceremony (perhaps like
the later role of the rhyton in relation to the crater and phiale, or as a 'loving
cup' for communal use). It is interesting to note that the small vessels from
the Radeni hoard were apparently discovered hanging with wire from the


                                        451




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

               METAL    VESSELS     IN   BRONZE      AGE    EUROPE:


now missing larger vessel, as the balance of the Vulchetrun A drinking cups
(referred to above) suggests that they too would have to have been hung
from something if they were not to roll around and become damaged; the
central vessel Vt would present the ideal choice. Pingel has calculated that
Vx would have weighed around 15kg when full and therefore would have
been kept in a fixed position (1982,176).
   The analysis of depositional context, form and function do no more than
suggest a general milieu for the production and use of drinking vessels of
the Vulchetrun A-type. We have suggested that the period from 2000-1300
BC is the only viable one in which to place them. Within this long period,
however, it is only technological analysis that can tie down the date of
production further.
   We will attempt to argue for a date between 1600 and 1400 BC for the
vessels of the Vulchetrun-A-Kryzhovlin-Radeni group. The Vulchetrun A-
type vessels display a technology which, although practised locally, owes
much to the type of metalworking known from the Mycenaean Shaft-Grave
and Palace periods; therefore they must date to the period in which contact
between the Aegean and those areas around the Black Sea where they were
made was at its height.7
   The techniques with which we are dealing are much more sophisticated
than those of the native Otomani goldworking tradition, and bear little
direct debt to it. They might well be seen as in response to the influence
of Trojan or Mycenaean contacts with the Black Sea coastlands. It is in
the Shaft-Grave period that these stylistic links are most obvious, as long
recognised in the compass-decorated bonework (mostly horse-gear) with a
Carpathian background, and more demonstrably in the occurrence of Baltic
amber in Greece - though this followed an Italian rather than a Balkan route
(Harding 1984, 79f; Bouzek 1985). Metals may have been the motive for
such contacts (a trade perhaps later marked by the copper ox-hide ingots
off the Gulf of Burgas and inland, and the double axes of apparently
Mycenaean type from Bulgaria, Romania and the Ukraine (Panayotov
1980; Buchholz 1983), since Carpatho-Balkan copper and Bohemian tin
was potentially available to Trojan or early Mycenaean traders. The influ-
ence of such contacts on local goldworking traditions is best exemplified in
the Perginari dagger with its Shaft-Grave parallels (e.g. circle B grave Delta),
and the nearby Macin gold daggers, from the Lower Danube Basin (Figure
 17.5; and see Gimbutas 1965, pi. 8b, 1; Mozsolics 1965/66, Tafel 1, 1 and
2). These imply a much closer relationship during the sixteenth century BC
between these areas than possible imports in other areas (e.g. Dohnsen) can
suggest.
  It is in this context that the Vulchetrun A-type vessels should be viewed.
We suggest that the following developments took place in south-east Euro-
pean metal vessel production as a result of the influence of palace work-
shops (in terms either of emulation following imported models or of the

                                         452




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    THE   CONTEXT        OF   VULCHETRUN


actual movement of craftsmen). None of the following traits is characteristic
of the Otomani sheet-gold vessel horizons, but all of them are found in
Aegaeo-Anatolian (including Cretan-Mycenaean) metalworking and in the
Vulchetrun-A-Kryzhovlin-Radeni group:
   1. The raising of sheet vessels with regular circular cross-section in the
      horizontal plane: this is lacking in the early second-millennium gold
      vessels of the Otomani group, and was achieved - perhaps inde-
      pendently - in the Atlantic Early Bronze Age (Fritzdorf, Rillaton) at a
      date approximately contemporary with the Shaft-Grave goldwork
      and the suggested date of Vulchetrun A.
   2. The sharp shouldering or carination of the vessel body: again
      apparently developed independently in the west (Fritzdorf), it is un-
      known in the Otomani group. The shoulder, which brings the vessel
      over into a closed form, is much more difficult to achieve while re-
      taining a regular horizontal section, than it is when raising an open
      shape.
   3. The use of the classic 'kantharos' form with two strap-handles: this
      form, which probably originated in Anatolia or Crete (Gournia; and
      the imported silver kantharoi from Tod, dating to c.2000 BC; Davis
       1977, figs 52 and 53) is well known in the Mycenaean world. The
      example from Mycenae Shaft-Grave IV is illustrated for comparative
      purposes here (fig. 4:6); it is similar in scale to the Radeni and
      Kryzhovlin vessels, but the shoulder is set much lower. The twin-
      handled bowls in the Otomani region may owe something to early
      Cretan types, but if so then they have not retained the shoulders or
      riveted-back handles and are unlikely to have served as a starting-
      point for the Vulchetrun A-type vessels.
   4. Concentric ring bases and raised circular bases: these are typical of
      early Cypro-Levantine production (Tod, Ain Samieh) and are charac-
      teristic of all Cretan-Mycenaean non-footed sheet-metal vessels.
      The slightly raised sub-circular bases which occur on some Otomani
      vessels (Bihar) might be related, but the competent concentric basal
      rings of the Vulchetrun A-type vessels seem unlikely to represent
      a development from these; rather, they are more likely to follow
      Aegean models directly. Compare the raised base of Radeni R 3 (Vulpe
      and Mihailescu-Birliba 1985, fig. 5:ld, le) with Cretan-Mycenaean
      examples.
   5. The use of high strap-handles and conical rivets: nearly all the handles
      of the Mycenaean metal vessels are attached at both ends, using rivets;
      only a few of the 'teacups' have handles which are integral with the
      rim at one end (e.g. Ayios Ioannis). Neither riveting nor high strap-
      handles are used at all in the Otomani goldwork; while in the west the
      separately made handles are held in place both top and bottom by flat,
      rhomboidal, 'washer-rivets' which are a feature peculiar to this group.


                                       453




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                METAL     VESSELS     IN   BRONZE     AGE    EUROPE:


    If taken together, these traits suggest that there was an important link
between the production of the Aegean workshops and the Vulchetrun
A-Kryzhovlin-Radeni group. These similarities effectively rule out a pre-
Mycenaean date (cf. Pingel 1982). There is only one important divergence
from the tradition represented at Mycenae. As mentioned above, few
Mycenaean vessels have integral handles, and those that do are not of the
kantharos type which, we suggested, provided the basic model for the Wx
type. The vessels of the Hajdusamson period (2000-1800 BC) all have such
integral handles, joined at the rim and open at the bottom. Because of the
strong general influence of early Mycenaean techniques and overall lack
of similarity with the Otomani tradition, the Vulchetrun A-type vessels are
clearly of Mycenaean date; nevertheless, the integral handles may indeed
reflect continuation of this single feature from Otomani goldwork.
    Vulpe and Mihailescu-Birliba suggest that the Radeni and Kryzhovlin
vessels were made in the same workshop (1985, 57) but this is perhaps to
over-interpret their clear similarity as a group. The differences among the
Vulchetrun A-type vessels, with rivets from two to four per handle, sizes
from fractions of litres to several litres, and the various ways in which the
'fish tail' motifs have been rendered, all suggest a common style rather than
the production of a single atelier. The very fact that, after appearing to be
unique for so many years, Vulchetrun now has parallels, should suggest
both that more vessels are to be found and that more vessels have been
found during the period of 3500 years or so since the deposition of such
hoards. The full documentation of eleven vessels from three widely dis-
persed findspots, unmarked by any burial monument, in three separate
countries after so long a period seems to provide ample grounds for the be-
lief that many more existed, probably with a sequence of internal develop-
ments.
    These considerations require there to be a zone of common contact
around the western margin of the Black Sea over which a common form of
luxury symposium set was in use, and that this zone was in contact with the
Aegean world. This is exactly what Dzis-Rayko and Chernyakov feel to be
a prerequisite for the production of their bowl (1981, 157f) and believe it
to exist between the fifteenth and thirteenth centuries BC. This is indeed
a possibility. We believe, however, that the vessels should date a little earlier,
to the sixteenth to fifteenth centuries BC, because this is the period of most
obvious Mycenaean influence (Perjinari) and because of the continuation of
the Otomani goldsmithing tradition of raising the handles directly from the
up.
   In conclusion, the arguments presented for the various technical and
chronological phases in the production of sheet-metal vessels from 3000 to
850 BC lead to a much clearer understanding of the place of the Vulchetrun
vessels and their relatives within a broader European p a r < The view that
such vessels were used for the presentation and distrii     m of alcoholic


                                           454




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         THE   CONTEXT        OF   VULCHETRUN


drinks in a formalised social context sheds light on the function of many
types of ceramic vessels which survive from areas and periods when precious
metal has failed, for one reason or another, to be well represented in the
archaeological record. From 3000 BC down to the end of the Aegean palaces
we can see how important the axial position of western Anatolia, Greece
and the Mediterranean islands was in mediating the transmission of tech-
niques and fashions often originating in the urban centres of the Near East.
It is the effective collapse of this network which divided gold and silver
vessel-working into isolated oriental and occidental schools.
   It is unnecessary for present purposes to pursue this story in subsequent
periods: the effect of the Mediterranean revival and the orientalising move-
ment, the spread of further types of Mediterranean buckets, amphorae
and jugs along the central European axis (e.g. Stjernquist 1967; Schaaff and
Taylor 1975; Werner 1954; Eggers 1951), and the arrival of wine itself
through the agency of the Greeks and Romans. The theme is a continuing
one. Whether the vessels of Vulchetrun held wine or mead, beer or koumish,
they were part of an aristocratic 'golden age' of alcoholic hospitality.
   The goldwork of the Vulchetrun group would thus represent a metal-
working tradition influenced by the advanced workshop practices of the
Aegean palaces, and perhaps acting as intermediary between these and
the more distant workshops of temperate Europe. Such contacts between
the west Pontic area and Mycenaean Greece did not outlast the Mycenaean
period itself; but they interestingly prefigure the future pattern of Archaic
and Classical Greek colonisation and its introduction of the set of vessels
which were to characterise the second golden age of Thrace, that of
Panagyurishte.


NOTES

1. Vulchetrun is romanised from the village name B'bJIHHTFbH following Venedikov and
   Gerassimov's 1975 English transliteration. Other romanisations in the literature include
   VBLCl TRBN (Ebert), Vulchi Trun (Hoddinott), Valcitran (Matthaus) and V'lci-Tr'n
   (Harding).
2. Observations carried out by T. E Taylor in May 1985 with the permission and guidance
   of the Antiquities department. We would particularly like to thank Prof. Venedikov and
   Dr Lazov for their help.
3. These punch-marks are made by a different tool from those on V3-V5.
4. This inscription is of the King Argishti I who came to the throne in the second quarter of
   the eighth century BC (Piotrovsky 1959, pi. 42). Although not argued in detail here, a re-
   ferral of V7-V13 to an urban and possibly Urartian production context seems to us to be
   reasonable; their incorporation and deposition with a set of locally made antique drinking
   vessels does not seem inherently unlikely. Filov and Kazarov's medieval ascription (cited
   Wilke 1925) is also worthy of consideration in this respect. The incorporation of a chance
   discovery of gold vessels (Vulchetrun A) into a later church treasure (Vulchetrun B) is an
   attractive scenario.
5. These are dissimilar in detail to those on V12 and V13. Both the tool and the technique
   differ.


                                            455




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                  METAL     VESSELS      IN   BRONZE     AGE     EUROPE:

6. None of the finds was excavated scientifically, and important material may have gone
   unrecognised and/or missing.
7. The Troy II treasures form the best source for third-millennium metal vessels in the
   Aegean; the Mycenae Shaft-Graves the best for the second millennium. Both were
   probably typical of both sides of the Aegean in their respective periods and it would
   be a mistake to attribute similarities specifically to either.




                                              456




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:28:16 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                         17
          Troy, Maikop, Altyn Depe:
          Early Bronze Age Urbanism
               and its Periphery
                                     (1991)


T h e early history of the Old World was centred upon the Near East: a
unique conjunction of environments created by the intersection of the Arid
Zone and the chain of recent mountains which runs from the Alps to the
Himalayas. The complex geography of this region, with its intimate mixture
of mountains, deserts and oases, contrasts with the more uniform zones
which surround it - forest, steppe and desert. It was in the Near East that
farming began, that irrigation and plough agriculture developed, and in
which urban civilisation appeared. The northern boundary of this nuclear
zone is interrupted by the Black Sea and the Caspian, so that three land
bridges mark the points of contact between the Near Eastern core area
and the northern zones: western Anatolia, the Caucasus, and Turkmenia.
Anatolia is the point of contact with forested Europe, the Caucasus
overlooks the steppes, and Turkmenia the desert. Each of these has played
a special historical role, on the frontier of Near Eastern farming and
urbanism.
   Three famous sites mark these meeting-points in the fourth and third


This chapter was written for a conference at Novorossiysk, where the northern
flanks of the Caucasus meet the Black Sea, on the subject of the Maikop princely
burials - the easternmost phenomena discussed in Childe's Dawn. Participants
then travelled to St Petersburg to view the material in the Hermitage: thirty-two
surprisingly comfortable hours by train. Culturally; this area forms a bridge be-
tween Greater Mesopotamia and the steppes (just as Troy and Anatolia do with
the Balkans); and it provides an opportunity to relate the well-understood Tripole
sequence of painted pottery styles - perhaps the longest and most finely-divided
such sequence in prehistory - to the uncertainties of the Near Eastern sequence as
urbanism crystallised and colonial contacts were set up for the first time. Thanks
are due to Professor V. M. Masson, the excavator of Altyn Depe, who organised
the conference; and to Dr Roger Moorey, Donald Matthews and Professor Michael
Roaf for their Mesopotamian insights.


                                        457




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       TROY,    MAIKOP,       ALTYN    DEPE:


millennia BC, when urban civilisations first had contacts with their northern
neighbours: Troy, Maikop and Altyn Depe. Each of them marks the edge of
the area of cultural and technological sophistication shown, for instance, by
elite craft production of metal vessels, complex jewellery and lost-wax cast-
ing, or by the production of wheelmade pottery. Beyond them lay simpler
societies - whether in Bulgaria, where precious-metal vessels were imitated
in hand-made pottery by Early Bronze Age farmers, who could reproduce
the new design of bronze axes using two-piece moulds, but not the more
advanced skills of palace metalsmiths; on the Pontic steppes, where
emerging pastoral tribes adopted the use of wheeled vehicles in a distinctive
new culture; or in the deserts of the Kyzyl Kum, where a foraging existence
continued relatively unchanged. At each of these points there was contact
and interaction with northern neighbours: but each marked a boundary.
Each of these sites, therefore, sits on the frontier between socially more
complex societies, with dense local populations already organised in
hierarchical forms and linked by long-distance trade, and an outer periphery
of less complex societies which were still 'tribal' in their organisation,
technology and attitudes to wealth. Each of these sites, moreover, has
provided a unique archaeological treasure-house of urban craft skills, in
the hoards of objects from Troy II, the wealth of the Maikop and
Novosvobodnaya burials, and the priestly quarter of Altyn Depe. Such
frontier sites have therefore revealed aspects of elite culture which are often
unmatched by contemporary sites in the urban heartlands of Mesopotamia.
    From this point of view, therefore, these sites are very similar; but in their
concrete aspects they are very different. Troy is a stronghold destroyed by
fire, preserving its metal finds by chance. Altyn Depe is an urban settlement,
whose wealth was concentrated in its religious complex: a massive mud-
brick temple. Maikop is not even a settlement, but a spectacularly rich
group of tombs, the only deliberate deposit of material wealth. In this
respect it is the first of a long line of 'barbarian' societies which have
flourished on the edges of urban civilisations, and are characterised (like the
Scythians in the same area in the first millennium) by the ostentatious
display of material goods in the context of burial. If these are 'complex
societies', they are all complex in different ways; and by comparing and
contrasting, we can sharpen the concept.


U R B A N CORES AND HIGHLAND PERIPHERIES
The common background to all of these sites, however, was the new scale of
urban production, trade and transport which developed in the fourth and
third millennia BC. The dense mass of consumers in hierarchically organised
societies, concentrated in the alluvial basins and sustained by irrigation
farming, made possible a division of labour in which raw materials were
moved over long distances to supply urban manufacturers and craft centres.

                                        458




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

         EARLY    BRONZE     AGE    URBANISM       AND    ITS   PERIPHERY


River transport was fundamental in moving bulk products, but these
arteries were linked to overland routes (using newly domesticated transport
animals such as the donkey and camel) which could carry high-value
materials over long distances.
   In the fourth millennium the urban heartlands were confined to a
relatively restricted area of Sumer and Elam, but in the third millennium
a number of different core areas appeared, with competition for access
to routes and resources. The fourth-millennium situation is especially
interesting, however, since there are fewer analogies for this situation in later
history: a single dominant core area with long feeder routes reaching widely
into surrounding territories. During this time (Late Uruk), a set of colonies
(like Habuba Kabira and Jebel Aruda on the Euphrates in Syria) were
established on the main riverine transport routes at points where they
articulated with overland routes reaching deep into the highlands (Algaze
 1989). The ramifications spread out as far as the Levant (perceptible in
Gerzean Egypt, the Nagada II period), and also in eastern Anatolia, for
instance in the Keban region (Frangipane et al. 1993). Another linked
region, with evidence of writing, seals and trading activity, was Godin Tepe
in Kermanshah on the Hamadan route to the plateau, and so to the Anarak
copper sources and lapis lazuli supplies from Badakhshan (Young 1986).
This is a truly vast area, already interacting over almost the whole range of
the Bronze Age world system: but it was a relatively simple structure with
only one major core area, albeit divided into many independent political
units.
   By the early third millennium, the proto-Elamite area centred on Susa
was already competing, and controlling not only the Zagros but a further
set of overland routes across the Persian Plateau, with tablets in its own
writing system from Hissar, Tepe Yahya and Shah-i-Sokhta. These areas
developed their own manufacturing capacity, in lapis lazuli, chlorite and
steatite; and it was in this context that sites like Altyn Depe achieved
prominence perhaps as a supplier of turquoise. Sumer in the Early Dynastic
period received these materials and products by, sea along the Gulf, and
obtained its copper from Oman. By the mid-third millennium, new polities
were also developing on the western supply routes at key points such as
Ebla, with their own hinterlands in Anatolia (at sites like the yet unlocated
Purushanda). This demand led to the development of urban centres in
Anatolia, as far west as the Aegean coasts. Akkadian Mesopotamia con-
tinued to look west - in the famous campaigns to Cedar Forest and Silver
Mountain - and also by sea to the newer civilisation of the Indus, which
channelled highland materials through its own territory (Marfoe 1987).
These maritime links became increasingly important, and at the end of the
third millennium led to the renewed importance of southern Mesopotamia
in the Ur III period. Such, in crude outline (Figure 18.1), is the economic
history of the period under consideration.


                                        459




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

           4000 - 3500 BC         ^       /       1           ^                           3500-3000 BC                      /         )                   ^
           T                .           /^v      i        J \             THE FORMATION                                     7            lfm                  —COLONIAL EXPANSION
                                                                                     >> P,p 8 '»».s                              N. t<^      \       | T         IN MESOPOTAMIA
                    \      P               ^ v            1   i            °F A C O R E




                                                                                                                                                                                            H
                                                                                                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                                                                            *

           3000 - 2500 BC                             ^       ^                 2500 - 2000BC                      K       , /           >                ^                                 2
               v.                       J L/     \)               —EXPANSION ON THE                                                                                                         >
                    Y'-»        »'««/                     f >                     V.
                                                                      PERSIAN PLATEAU                                       y         \                  fU   —      MARITIME LINKS:
                                                                                         c.ucomb^B'K"                  J            yWv              r             FJ?0A# m£ DANUBE         *
                                                                                        \**r                                      VP . ?             1/           \ TO THE INDUS            o
o\
©                                                                                                                                                                                           >
                                                                                                                                                                                            r1
                                                                                          «;                                         {           \                       (HX                *H
                                                                                                             V
                                                                                                    (imuittn j \                                                         1 (CIVILIZATION]   z
                                                                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                                                                       uf                   m
                                                                                                                                                                                            M




     18.1 Summary maps of Near Eastern culture history by successive half-millennia, 4000-2000 BC: (a) early fourth millennium -
     regional integration; (b) later fourth millennium - first cities and Uruk colonial settlements; (c) early third millennium - colonial
     settlements on the Iranian plateau, and expansion of Transcaucasian influence; (d) proliferation of secondary states and their
     temporary incorporation in the Akkadian Empire (clusters of secondary states in the Levant and central Anatolia labelled after
     the military propaganda of Sargon of Agade!). Boundaries are schematic.

         EARLY   BRONZE      AGE   URBANISM        AND   ITS   PERIPHERY


   Where, then, do our sites fit into it? At the western end, the spectacular
finds at Troy belong to the later third millennium, when Syria was an
important consuming area in its own right. Out east, the high point of
Turkmenian prosperity was the urban period of Namazga V in the later
third millennium, when it was also part of a network of secondary states
including Harappan India. What about Maikop?


T H E CONTEXT OF MAIKOP
The traditional dating of the Maikop complex, suggested by lessen, placed
it c.2500-2400 BC, at a time which would broadly correspond to the
context of Troy II and Altyn Depe, and thus to a developed stage of the
Near Eastern economic system. This would provide some obvious analogies
for vessels of precious metal, which are known from sites in Iran and
Afghanistan. An obvious starting point for such comparisons is the
Asterabad treasure, discovered in the 1840s at the site now known as
Tureng Tepe on the south-east Caspian (published in the English journal
Archaeologia in 1844 and never seen since), which contained not only silver
and gold vessels but also copper objects such as a transverse axe-adze,
bident, and poker-butt spearhead with analogies in the Maikop complex.
The assemblage also contained objects like an alabaster vase (known from
examples in sites like Shahdad), metalwork such as 'trumpets' and spouted
jars like those from the hill of treasures in Tepe Hissar III, and an icon-
ography on the metal vessels which would connect them with later third-
millennium products of Bactrian or neo-Sumerian workshops. Other similar
'treasures' have appeared in recent years: the Kosh Tepe/Fullol hoard, re-
covered in Kabul market, with metal vases decorated with Namazga V
motifs; the Quetta hoard, again with precious metal vessels, a bull's head
like Altyn Depe, and again the alabaster vessels like Shahdad. All of these
are closely related to the intensive trade in lapis lazuli across the Persian
Plateau (Maxwell-Hyslop 1982; Amiet 1986). The date of these various
hoards seems to cluster in the Ur III period, shortly before 2000 BC. At first
glance, therefore, it is tempting to relate the florescence of Maikop to an
advanced stage of Near Eastern economic development, roughly coeval with
Altyn Depe and slightly later than Troy II.
    However, as Andreeva has already indicated (1977; 1979), the Maikop
finds do not belong to this period. The best analogies for the most distinctive
features, the iconography of the silver vessels and the gold bull figures, are
to be found in the art of the Late Uruk period, at least a millennium earlier.
(See Figure 18.2 and accompanying note.) This would also agree with other
evidence: ceramic parallels in the F phase of the Amuq sequence, the hoard
of poker-butt spearheads (and solid-hilted swords) recovered from level VI A
at Arslantepe near Malatya (Frangipane and Palmieri 1983), as well as the
parallels for the Krasnogvardeskoe cylinder-seal (Nekhaev 1986) in Late


                                       461




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

18.2 Comparative cultural and stratigraphic sequences from east-central Europe, the steppes, the Caucasus and Greater Mesopotamia, on
a calibrated radiocarbon timescale. Note that the Gawra sequence might be relatively older than indicated here (M. Roaf, pers. comm.).
The relative sequences in the Balkan, steppe, Caucasian and Near Eastern regions have been plotted according to a calibrated radiocarbon
chronology. Individual sequences have been compiled, with minor modifications, from Dergachev and Manzura, Trifonov, and Vertesalji,
to whom I should record my thanks and apologies. (Note that other interpretations of the Gawra sequence would place it earlier, taking
levels XII and below back to cUbaid.) The aim of the exercise is to demonstrate that accepted parallelisms are perfectly compatible with
a calibrated radiocarbon chronology, provided it is consistently applied. Traditional chronologies for the Near East have been based on
historical sources for the third millennium, with speculative dates for earlier units such as Jemdet Nasr and Uruk. However, it is now in-
creasingly recognised (Algaze 1989; Hassan and Robinson 1987; Nissen 1987; Oates 1987; Vertesalji 1987; 1988; Young 1986; Weiss
1986) that these periods can only be dated by radiocarbon, and that such dates - fewer in number than for comparable phases in pre-
historic Europe - require calibration. One implication of this is the much greater length of time required for Uruk: dates even for terminal
c
  Ubaid indicate that this period lasts only into the mid-fifth millennium. Early Uruk may well begin before 4000 BC; Late Uruk before
3500 BC. Many more samples are required to make these estimates more precise. Nevertheless, there is no conflict between these dates and
calibrated radiocarbon dating of the Tripole-Cucuteni sequence; and the Caucasian cultures fit well between the two. What is perhaps
alarming are the great spans of time now occupied by these units, and how limited is our sample of archaeological material from this time;
but this is a fact which must now be faced.

                      TROY,    MAIKOP,        ALTYN    DEPE:


Uruk cylinder seals (though probably not with the stamp-seals with similar
motifs from Tepe Gawra, which are probably rather older). These indi-
cations are unanimous in placing the Maikop complex in a much earlier
cultural context, and thus in the formative initial phase of Near Eastern
urban economies and trading networks - a conclusion that was already
hinted at in 1920 by Rostovtzeff.
   The absence of comparable metal vessels from Mesopotamia itself at this
period can be attributed to the lack of aristocratic tombs before the Royal
Cemetery at Ur in the Early Dynastic III period. For this reason there are no
vessels of precious metal which can provide a direct comparison, although
the rich iconography of contemporary seals and sealings provides a wealth
of detailed analogies. In this respect, the situation closely resembles that
of the Scythian tombs three millennia later, which have yielded examples of
craftsmanship in precious metal which are unknown from classical Greece
itself. Nevertheless, there are many points of comparison between the
Maikop vessels and Late Uruk representational art as preserved especially
on seals and on other objects of stone: animal scenes without human figures,
especially rows of beasts, sometimes with mixtures of different species. In
matters of detail, it is easy to find points of comparison for bulls, lions,
boars, caprids, vegetation; and the style and treatment are closely similar,
e.g. the bulls' horns, tails and hooves, and the pig's bifurcate tail (Figure
18.3). As well as metropolitan examples, we can find good comparisons on
impressions and sealings from the 'colonial' sites such as Habuba Kabira
and Godin Tepe. Nevertheless, the mountains on the Maikop vessels, and
the portrayal of horses, argue against the importation of these vessels from
Mesopotamia, and indicate the existence of local workshops (either in the
northern Caucasus or perhaps Transcaucasia) which were capable of
producing such advanced craft metalwork, and absorbing elements of
metropolitan iconography (and perhaps of religious belief).
   This conclusion is of major historical importance, both in the pattern of
inter-regional connections and in the social and cultural history of the
period: for Maikop appears as the world's first 'barbarian' society, generated
on the fringe of the area of initial urban expansion, and preserving in its
ostentatious tombs a sample of the kind of elite equipment so far unknown
from the urban heartlands at this time. The Caucasus was involved right
from the beginning in the process of urban expansion in the Uruk period
and the social changes consequent upon it. Moreover, the mountain chief-
doms of the northern Caucasus played an important role in transmitting
elements of culture and technology to the steppe region, leading to the
genesis of the Pit-Grave complex which fundamentally affected societies
further west. The Maikop region thus forms a crucial link between the
historical events of the Near East and the slower transformation of pre-
historic Europe.
   The concentration of rich tombs in a relatively limited period confirms

                                        464




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                    10                                       11
18.3 The Maikop style and its Uruk background: (1) and (2), transcribed scenes
from the two figured silver vessels from the Maikop royal tomb; (3)-(ll), icon-
ological analogies in greater Mesopotamia. These include both Late Uruk sealings
from 'colonial' sites - (3) Nineveh, (4) Habuba Kabira, (S)-(9) Godin Tepe - and
also later parallels (10) and (11) on a silver vessel from Early Dynastic Ur (after
Rostovtseff, Collon, Young, Muller-Karpe).

                                         465




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      TROY,     MAIKOP,      ALTYN     DEPE:


the impression that these political developments were a temporary phase in
the historical situation, and the absence of tin alloys in this region in the
third millennium (when they had come into widespread use in the Near
East) suggests that no long-term economic articulation took place. The
picture that emerges, therefore, is of the Caucasus as a peripheral region
rather suddenly penetrated by outside influences - most probably motivated
by the desire for precious metals - and not thereafter closely involved in the
international trading system which grew up and circulated high-value
materials such as lapis lazuli and precious metals among the major urban
centres of the Bronze Age world. Like the Shaft-Graves of Mycenae, it had
a burst of imported wealth; but unlike them, it did not develop into a
palatial bureaucracy.


DIFFERENT SORTS OF PERIPHERY: DEFINITIONS
AND COMPARISONS
The terms 'core' and 'periphery' can be used in a variety of situations. In
a very general way, we may contrast the Neolithic societies of south-east
Europe using painted pottery with the simpler Neolithic societies of the
north-west, which were both later in adopting agriculture and simpler in
their economic organisation. In this sense, Europe had an 'inner' and an
'outer' zonation from the beginning. On the other hand, in describing the
industrial world, economic historians use the words in a more technical
sense, to contrast manufacturing areas with suppliers of food or raw
materials. Here there is a structural relationship between the two areas,
which are inter-dependent zones of the same economic system (Kohl 1989).
What sort of contrasts can we draw for the Ancient World?
   It is clear that certain elements of advanced technology were able to
spread from the urban area of the Bronze Age world into agrarian societies
beyond: wheeled vehicles are the classic example, as well as alloyed copper
metallurgy with the use of the bivalve mould. On the other hand certain
advanced technologies remained limited to urban contexts: either because
their production needed craft skills, like the metal vessels and jewellery of
the Troy treasure, or because they represented economies of scale - for
instance the use of the potters' wheel in the mass production of ceramics.
Technologies which required large investments, such as the construction of
sailing ships, or the production of oil and wine on a large scale, were
therefore restricted to urban economies. Other features which distinguished
'urban' from 'barbarian' economies were the use of precious metals as a
medium of exchange in standardised equivalents, as opposed to the
circulation of copper artefacts and their dedication in votive hoards. Only
the more advanced economies were capable of organising long-distance
trade for the purpose of sustaining manufacturing industries.
  Within the Near Eastern zone, a characteristic sequence can be recog-

                                       466




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

         EARLY    BRONZE      AGE    URBANISM       AND    ITS   PERIPHERY


nised in which areas that were at first only important as suppliers of raw
materials to the urban heartlands developed their own social hierarchies,
belief-systems and manufacturing capacity, to become independent core
areas or 'secondary states'. Syria or highland Iran are good examples of this
process. The formation of such secondary cores required certain pre-
conditions, such as an appropriate position within the network of economic
relations, access to raw materials for manufacture, and outlets through
adequate transport systems to export their goods. The Aegean demonstrates
a process of increasing integration with such an international system during
the Bronze Age, when it was successively promoted from being a supplier
of silver to an independent producer of textiles, wine and olive oil in bulk
shipments from the Cretan and Greek mainland palaces to the east
Mediterranean.
    In Balkan and Carpathian Europe, however, this economic linkage did
not occur. The impact of Early Bronze Age craft centres in western Anatolia
can be traced in the Baden, Cernavoda III and Ezero cultures, where it is
especially marked in the pottery, which has new, 'Anatolian' types such as
drinking vessels in metallic shapes. These new features are found, together
with paired cattle or representations of wheeled vehicles, in 'elite' graves
in cemeteries such as Budakalasz or Alsonemedi. A selective integration
of exotic features formed the basis of an economically independent Late
Copper Age/Bronze Age culture. This contrasts with the Aegean during the
same period, where very specific supply routes, probably related to silver,
replicated Anatolian complexity on a small scale on the opposite side of the
Aegean: sites like Lerna, with bastion fortifications, central buildings, craft
workshops, seals, and soon with wheelmade pottery. The Aegean became
proto-urban, climaxing in the Minoan palaces and secondary state
formation.
    By way of complete contrast, we may turn to Bronze Age Turkmenia with
its highly urban, irrigation-based, temple centres like Altyn Depe (Masson
1976), which had continuing economic relations with neighbouring
Kel'teminar groups in the Kyzyl Kum, where (as Vinogradov's work has
shown: Tosi 1974) turquoise was actually mined and traded southwards.
What is striking in this case is the lack even of any cultural influence on a
neighbouring supply area at a much lower level of economic and cultural
development: Kel'teminar remained a dispersed hunting and foraging
economy, collecting and mining the turquoise on a seasonal basis. One is
reminded of the south-east Asian forest hunters who supplied camphor to
the Chinese in the historic period. There was no cultural convergence
between urban economies and their suppliers, as there was on the north-
west frontier of Bronze Age urbanism; when Kel'teminar populations were
ultimately subsumed into a wider cultural grouping, it was with the ex-
panding Andronovo culture complex of the steppes (Tazabag'yab variant)
rather than by being incorporated in the urban networks of the south.


                                        467




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       TROY,    MAIKOP,       ALTYN    DEPE:




18.4 Map of the major cultural regions in the later fourth millennium BC: (A) Late
Uruk (plotted from the distribution of bevel-rim bowls); (B) the Kura-Arax culture
(after Munchaev); (C) the Maikop complex; (D) the central Anatolian EBA culture
area (after Mellaart).

T H E ROLE OF THE CAUCASUS IN THE
EARLY BRONZE AGE
Having surveyed both its historical context and some comparative
examples, we may now return to consider the nature of the Maikop
phenomenon. It is no surprise that major new developments should occur
at the time of Late Uruk expansion, with trade networks which were
capable of moving high-value materials like lapis lazuli from Badakhshan to
Egypt, and feeding the growing economies of lowland Mesopotamia. The
founding of deliberate colonial settlements on the upper Euphrates and the
Great Khorasan Road is reflected in the occurrence of typical Late Uruk
bevel-rim bowls both in the Keban region (Arslantepe, Tepecik: Frangipane
and Palmieri 1983) and in north-west Iran (Tepe Qabrestan). Both routes
gave access to Transcaucasia, either via Erzurum or through Azerbaizhan.
Discoveries by I. G. Narimanov at Leila Tepe on the Karabagh steppe may
demonstrate the importance of the latter route (Kohl in Algaze 1989, 593);
though both are likely to have been important in the introduction of new
technologies and ideas. (See Figure 18.4.)
   The result of these contacts was to transform the Eneolithic cultures of
Transcaucasia into a successful and independent bloc of highland peoples,
the Kura-Arax culture, which resisted incorporation into lowland polities
but absorbed many of the characteristics of contemporary urban civi-


                                        468




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

         EARLY    BRONZE     AGE    URBANISM       AND    ITS   PERIPHERY


lisation. The prominence of wheeled vehicles in the archaeological record of
this and neighbouring areas suggests that animal traction and the adoption
of plough agriculture was the subsistence basis for this florescence; the
elaboration of domestic hearth structures and the absence of specialised
temple buildings suggests that this did not reproduce a classic, lowland
'urban' pattern; but the occurrence of advanced metallurgy and wheelmade
pottery argues for some degree of economic specialisation and elite culture.
The richness of metal sources in this area offers an explanation for the
wealth of the region, as well as its role in the exchange of domestic animals
and plants which was a feature of this period (horse, donkey, Pcamel, vine).
Difficulties of transport prevented this area from following a comparable
path of development to that which took place in the Aegean, or even in
central Anatolia; a powerful state did not develop until the first millennium
(Urartu), although the Kura-Arax culture did spread during the later part of
the Early Bronze Age into both highland Iran and down to the Levant
(Khirbet Kerak complex) - perhaps in part as a result of the breakdown of
more complex economic and social organisation in those regions.
    There is abundant evidence of the penetration at an early stage of
elements of Kura-Arax culture through the main passes in the Great
Caucasus into the upper Terek headwaters from its northern focus in the
Kvemo Kartli area. The ecological contrast between the northern and
southern slopes would have provided an incentive for the exchange of local
products (e.g. horses: see Chapter 7). This penetration must be accounted
the primary stimulus in the transformation of north Caucasian Eneolithic
groups, and the consequent spread of advanced features from the south.
However, the settlement pattern and social organisation of this region
started from a completely different base, since local groups formed part of
the Circumpontic steppe network with links to Eneolithic cultures on the
Volga, Don and Dnepr. A basic feature of this region was the elaboration of
funerary monuments rather than settlement sites as focal points in the social
landscape - a common feature of the breakup of the primary Neolithic
village community in many areas of Europe at this time. The feature which
distinguishes the Maikop complex, therefore, is the occurrence of elements
of elite culture in kurgan burials, which are especially richly furnished in the
Kuban region with its metal sources and wide steppe hinterland. Its location
allowed it to absorb features of ultimately urban origin, and to develop its
own leading position in relation to steppe neighbours. This provided both
a channel whereby metallurgy and animal traction was transmitted north-
wards, and provided a model for emerging steppe elites.
   The northern Caucasus thus maintained its independence from the Kura-
Arax bloc to the south, and became instead an independent core area in
relation to the steppes. One reason for this is the plentiful occurrence of
a variety of metal sources in the southern Caucasus: there was no incentive
for southern traders to penetrate further to gain additional supplies in the


                                        469




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      TROY,    MAIKOP,       ALTYN     DEPE:


north Caucasus (while horses came to be supplied from the western end
of the Black Sea: see Chapter 7). Instead, Caucasian metal replaced Balkan-
Carpathian metal supplies in the steppe region, and the Caucasian copper-
working tradition (using two-piece moulds and arsenical alloying) exerted a
technological influence on the development of south-east European metal-
working across a chain of steppe cultures (Chernykh 1983). Until this time,
the northern Caucasus was effectively part of the steppe zone of prehistoric
Europe. Its culture, in the Early and Middle Bronze Age, is characterised by
the elaboration of specific cultural features, such as metal or stone battle
axes, hammer-head pins and dress ornaments, smoking rituals (perhaps in-
volving cannabis, burnt in a kurilnitsa) and wagon burials in kurgans, which
link the northern Caucasus and the steppes into a single cultural zone, and
differentiate it from Transcaucasia.
   The early part of this transformation coincided with the arrival of
Anatolian influence in south-east Europe, and the emergence of the Ezero-
Cernavoda III-Boleraz complex, which independently introduced wheeled
vehicles and metal-influenced pottery drinking-vessels to this region. At the
same time the Tripole culture, maintaining a more traditional culture, broke
up into regional groupings under the influence of its neighbours. These
developments are discussed in other chapters in this volume: but these
western groups also contributed to the emerging steppe complex, before
being in turn influenced by the spread of the Pit-Grave culture. Some aspects
of these interchanges may have been important in the differentiation of the
Novosvobodnaya group, although parallel causes (such as the influence of
metal types on dark burnished pottery) and local traditions (cist burial)
should not be neglected.
   The Maikop phenomenon, therefore, marks a crucial formative stage in
the emergence of an independent northern focus and way of life. It indicates
an early impact from the south, and an important role in transmitting
secondary farming to the steppes, and it is the beginning of a metallurgical
tradition which was to act as a model for the Balkans and the Urals. It may
also have been an intermediary in providing northern special products to its
southern neighbours, just as Scandinavia was linked to central Germany
from the Bronze Age to the Roman period; but it was never an integral part
of Near Eastern trading networks on a large scale. It was not, therefore, to
be a focus of political development or a proto-state. No doubt the northern
Caucasus, with its variety of metal sources, was to be as diverse ethnically
and politically in prehistory as it has been in more recent times. Complex,
yes: but not a complex society in the sense of Troy or Altyn Depe.




                                       470




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:29:20 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                         17
 The Archaeology of Indo-European:
        An Alternative View
                     (with E. S. Sherratt)
                                     (1988)

T h e study of linguistic prehistory is an important but inherently frustrating
exercise: linguistic evidence is by definition the product of later, literate
cultures, while languages have no direct correlates in the record of pre-
historic archaeology. Any attempt at writing the prehistory of languages
must therefore attempt to build a bridge between the detailed, technical
reconstruction of linguistic relationships on the one hand and more general-
ised, archaeologically-based models of cultural change on the other. By
extrapolating each of these incomplete sources of evidence onto a problem
of common interest, we may hope to define patterns which are compatible
both with linguistic and archaeological arguments.
   In conducting such an exercise, however, the properties of the different
types of evidence have to be borne firmly in mind. There are unlikely to be
any simple equations between the entities used by linguists and pre-
historians, not least because of the differences in timescale involved. The
advantage of archaeology is that it can range much further backwards in
time to address questions not yet asked by linguists; while linguistic


Before 1987, it was commonly assumed that Indo-European languages had spread',
perhaps by small migrations, around 3000 BC; most prehistoric archaeologists
simply avoided the problem. In 1987-8, they spoke of little else. The book which
broke the silence, and which put what Jim Mallory called 'a pigeon among the
cats', was Colin Renfrew's Language and Archaeology with its assertion that the
Neolithic colonists of Europe spoke (proto-)Indo-European languages. The
authors of this piece had respectively reviewed this volume and Jim Mallory's
In Search of the Indo-Europeans (AGS in Current Anthropology 1988; ESS in
Antiquaries Journal 1989), and together wrote this alternative scenario for an
Antiquity special section. Both authors agree on the importance of socio-linguistic
models of convergence; ESS (as a trained linguist) is perhaps more sceptical as to
whether the question of Tndo-European origins' is a scientifically soluble problem
or a myth of Romantic-period Europe.


                                        471




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                THE   ARCHAEOLOGY          OF   INDO-EUROPEAN:


arguments may force on the attention of archaeologists some features of
later periods which prehistorians are prone to ignore.
   Thus archaeologists may justifiably point out that the 'billiard ball'
model used for instance by Gamkrelidze and Ivanov (1985b), which
assumes that early Indo-European languages were originally placed in a
tight cluster that was then scattered across the map to their present
positions, is incompatible with a modern view of European prehistory
which sees large, stable cultural groupings evolving in situ for many
millennia. On the other hand, such phylogenetic models derived from
linguistic comparison cannot simply be scaled up by archaeologists to cover
a greater time depth, since the very definition of a proto-Indo-European
entity is based on surviving languages and historical evidence and may only
be valid for a relatively late point in time.
   This short chapter, stimulated by Colin Renfrew's pioneering essay
in relating modern archaeology to linguistics (1987), attempts to define
possible phases in the evolution of Indo-European, and to suggest models
appropriate to the different stages of this process.

Since we can only know languages which were spoken in recent times or
which were written down by already complex societies, it is clear that much
of the previously existing diversity of languages must be missing from our
sample. This includes not only entire language-groups overlaid by dispersals
such as that of Indo-European, but also languages within Indo-European (or
even whole branches of it) which have not been written down or given rise
to living successors. In addition, the time-depth for which relationships can
be reconstructed from surviving and historically documented languages
must have a limit. As languages drift apart and differentiate from a common
ancestor, they must inevitably pass a point beyond which their common
origin is no longer evident in terms of their taxonomic similarity (either
lexical or structural) or in regular phonetic and semantic correspondences.
Because of the absence of a 'fossil record', the relationships which are easiest
to reconstruct from comparative study of surviving specimens are those
resulting from relatively recent divergence. For both these reasons, language
trees may be misleading models with which to approach 'deep' prehistory,
since they inevitably give prominence to the products of recent differ-
entiation and dispersal at the expense of older events.
   A further problem is that the process of linguistic reconstruction,
focusing back on postulated common ancestral forms, inevitably produces
a model that emphasises divergence as the principal form of language
change - even though convergence may be an equally common
phenomenon. It would be misleading, therefore, to see the 'family tree'
structure as any simple representation of the historical process: it can only
be a partial model. It could be argued that convergence, by processes such
as pidginisation or creolisation, would become an increasingly important


                                         472




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                           AN   ALTERNATIVE         VIEW


feature of language change in the historical circumstances of increasing
inter-regional trade which characterises the Bronze Age.
   All these points can be summarised in the observation that linguistic
comparison is intended to throw light on the relationships between known
languages; it cannot reconstruct the totality of an earlier linguistic situation,
and in any case linguistic relationships differentially preserve more in-
formation about recent events than more ancient ones. These points have
long been recognised by linguists (e.g. Robins 1964, 323).
   Archaeology has the advantage of being able to work forwards rather
than backwards. We can therefore set out certain expectations about the
long-term context of linguistic change, and see at what point they meet the
retrospective models produced by linguistic comparison.
   The emergence of relatively discrete linguistic communities may well be
a fairly recent feature of human evolution, perhaps specifically associated
with Homo sapiens sapiens; though even Upper Palaeolithic 'languages'
may rather have taken the form of open dialectal chains in which each com-
munity could understand the speech of its near neighbours but not more
distant ones. The beginning of farming is likely to have had a significant
effect on the form of linguistic patterning, as a more dense network of
sedentary communities gave rise to more circumscribed language groups
than were previously prevalent. It is therefore at this point that the develop-
ment of distinct language families of the sort known in historic times is most
likely to have taken place.1
   The patterns of language distribution resulting from the spread of farm-
ing would then have depended on the balance between two processes:
'demic diffusion' and indigenous adoption. At one extreme, where the
spread of farming was associated with the expansion of a particular popu-
lation group, a pattern of linguistic dispersal would result - an initially more
uniform pattern, breaking down with time into more differentiated but
related languages. At the other extreme, however, where farming spread
through its adoption by existing native populations, no transfer of language
need have been involved. A pattern of increased diversity, resulting from the
crystallisation of local dialects into separate languages, might be expected.2
   The pattern of uniform linguistic dispersal would have predominated
wherever farming carried human populations into new environments; either
empty areas (as in the Pacific) or into new zones within already occupied
areas (as in western Asia and sub-Saharan Africa). Such a pattern could also
be generated by secondary expansions associated with the spread of special-
ised forms of farming into hitherto under-utilised environments, such as
pastoralism (as in central Asia or North Africa).
   After the establishment of farming populations, regional patterns would
again have depended on the balance between opposing tendencies: the
continuing differentiation following initial dispersal, and integration
resulting from the needs of trade and political expansion. The patterns of


                                        473




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                THE   ARCHAEOLOGY          OF   INDO-EUROPEAN:


phylogenetic relationship deduced from linguistic comparison could in
theory relate to any of the mechanisms which produced uniformity followed
by differentiation; though in practice it is the latest one which is likely to
produce the dominant surviving pattern in a given region.

We may now attempt to apply these arguments to prehistoric Europe. Here
both modes of agricultural spread seem to be represented: demic diffusion
by the Balkan Neolithic and its central European Bandkeramik extension;
the adoption of farming by the west Mediterranean Cardial Ware group and
most of the cultures in Atlantic Europe and the North European Plain. In
the light of the principles discussed above, and by analogy with the ethno-
graphic examples, there would have been considerable continuity in western
and northern Europe; while the spread of early farmers belonging to the
Bandkeramik complex in central Europe could well have been associated
with a 'Polynesian' pattern of initial linguistic uniformity, followed by frag-
mentation. These central European Neolithic languages are likely to have
belonged to a larger family, including for instance the contemporary
languages spoken in the Balkans and Anatolia.
    However, given the early date of the agricultural dispersal in Europe, it is
most unlikely that this language group would have survived in recognisable
form down to historical times, and the resemblance between any surviving
members of this group would be radically different from the very specific
correspondences between existing languages of the Indo-European group.
There is thus no reason to equate the initial spread of farming with the
phenomenon reconstructed by linguists on the basis of comparisons be-
tween them, and indeed there are specific reasons why this is improbable.3
This does not rule out some deeper affinity between Neolithic Balkan
languages and historical Indo-European ones (cf. Diakonov 1985): but it
implies that there are other events which must be invoked in order to explain
the historical pattern of languages - there is no simple answer to the puzzle.
    At the other end of the prehistoric timescale, however, there are some
very plausible correspondences which can be postulated (e.g. Clarke 1965,
fig. 73) between the expansion of members of the Late Bronze Age 'Urnfield'
group (c.1400-700 BC) and the spread of Italic and Celtic languages (and
others which have not survived as spoken languages). This would imply the
continuing existence at this time in western Europe of other language
groups: perhaps the descendants of indigenous (non-Indo-European) Meso-
lithic and western Neolithic languages, or perhaps branches of Indo-
European now extinct. Yet such a late extension of the Indo-European area
into western Europe could only have been the final stage of the story: Indo-
European languages are known to have been spoken in Anatolia at least a
thousand years earlier, and there must have been important intervening
steps in the spread of this group, perhaps associated with the massive east-
wards expansion which carried Indo-European languages to India. It is im-


                                        474




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                           AN   ALTERNATIVE         VIEW


portant, therefore, to look more closely at eastern Europe and the role of the
steppes.
    The farming systems of the early Neolithic were very limited in character
by comparison with those of later prehistory: cultivation systems were based
on the hoe rather than the plough, animals were exploited primarily for
meat rather than for secondary products, and transport animals and the
 associated technology of wheeled vehicles were not yet used (see Section III).
The extent to which dry areas could be utilised was thus severely limited.
During the fourth and third millennia BC, however, a second generation of
farming technologies appeared in the Near East and surrounding areas,
leading to greater opportunities for mobile forms of exploitation such as
pastoralism. This revolutionised the scope of farming economies in western
Eurasia, and provides an economic context for a post-Neolithic spread of
Indo-European languages.
    This is most evident in the east, where an important consequence of these
innovations was the extensive occupation of the Eurasian steppe and semi-
desert areas, using horses, camels and vehicles as well as new breeds of
wool-bearing sheep and perhaps also the light plough. Although this must
not be confused with the emergence of true nomadic pastoralism, which was
a feature of the first millennium BC, it resulted in an eastwards movement
of population across the central Asian steppes, and links as far as China
(reflected in the transmission of wheeled vehicles) by the second millennium
BC. This infilling of the steppe zone (represented archaeologically by the
spread of the Pit-Grave and Andronovo cultures of the third and second
millennia BC) can be associated primarily with the spread of eastern Indo-
European languages - the Indo-Iranian or 'Aryan' group which gave the
Indo-European family as a whole its impressive territorial extent.4
    During the later first millennium BC, however, this eastwards pattern of
flow was reversed, as groups speaking Turco-Tartar languages spread west-
wards to take over the steppe areas previously dominated by Indo-
Europeans. This historical picture has lent plausibility to the idea that the
steppes were the original homeland of common Indo-European, and thus
the source of western (i.e. European) as well as eastern Indo-European
languages.
   This idea, which has a long history in Romantic conceptions of pre-
history (Bernal 1987, chapter 5), has been given its clearest archaeological
expression in recent times by Marija Gimbutas (e.g. 1961, map 9) who sees
a westwards incursion of proto-Indo-Europeans from a homeland beyond
the Volga as the beginning of the process of expansion across the Pontic
Steppes and into Europe.
   A modified version of this idea, based on the importance of the horse and
its domestication by fourth-millennium groups north of the Black Sea
(Mallory 1976; 1977; Telegin 1986; Anthony 1986), offers an intermediate
position. This envisages a spread of Indo-European languages both east and


                                       475




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                THE   ARCHAEOLOGY          OF   INDO-EUROPEAN:


west from the North Pontic area, associated with the spread of the horse.
It is not clear, however, whether this offers an adequate explanation for the
appearance of Indo-European languages in Greece, and in Anatolia where
Indo-European languages are first evidenced. Since the economic changes of
the fourth millennium affected a much wider area of the Old World, it may
well be that the steppes provide an important component of the story, but
not the whole answer.
    The earliest recorded Indo-European languages are the second-
millennium Anatolian ones, Hittite, Luwian and Palaic.5 These form a
separate sub-group within the Indo-European family which may have a
collateral rather than directly ancestral relationship with other branches of
Indo-European, and is not easily derived from these other groups. The
already differentiated nature of these three recorded languages implies some
greater time-depth to the existence of this group, and Gamkrelidze and
Ivanov (1985a, 14) have adduced technical arguments such as correspon-
dences with neighbouring Semitic and Kartvelian (Caucasian) languages to
argue for a long-standing geographical proximity. They thus argue that
Anatolia itself should be considered as a primary part of the Indo-European
area: though they are reduced to some implausible long-distance folk move-
ments around the Aral Sea in order to relate the Anatolian languages to
other members of the Indo-European family.
    While there is no necessary reason why Indo-European languages should
be earliest in the area where they were first recorded (since this relates to the
spread of writing systems from Mesopotamia), it would be wrong to over-
look the possibility that this may, indeed, be the case. Given the important
role which Anatolia has played in relation to adjacent areas of south-east
Europe, Colin Renfrew is right to explore the significance of this area in the
origin of Indo-European languages as a whole (Renfrew 1987). While the
evidence of Hattic suggests that their presence in eastern Anatolia does not
long predate the second millennium, it is entirely possible that western and
central Anatolia may have formed part of the early area of distribution of
ancestral Indo-European.

We are thus presented with not one but several puzzles, converging on the
area around the Black Sea: Anatolia, the Balkans and the Pontic Steppes.
Was Anatolia the centre of ancestral Indo-European languages? What was
the relationship between these and the languages of the Balkan Neolithic?
What relationship did they have with the languages which spread eastwards
across the steppes in the third millennium? At what point can one postu-
late the unity of Indo-European speech reconstructed by comparative
linguistics?
   It is important at this stage to go beyond conventional definitions in order
to provide a common vocabulary between linguists and archaeologists.
Within a historical timescale we are justified in speaking of Indo-European


                                        476




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                           AN   ALTERNATIVE         VIEW


languages. Moving into later prehistory, we may adopt the linguists'
convention of using an asterisk to indicate reconstructed forms based on
rules derived from surviving evidence: hence *proto-Indo-European (*PIE)
to describe the common language reconstructed as underlying known
examples of the family. Moving further back in time, one can postulate an
ancestral language or group of languages which ultimately gave rise to *PIE
and its successors (and no doubt to others now extinct). Although beyond
the limits of reconstruction, its existence is a logical necessity; and we may
recognise its hypothetical status by a double asterisk - hence **pre-proto-
Indo-European (* * PPIE ).
   We can now reformulate our questions in terms of a series of stages.
Where did **PPIE emerge, and what was its connection with the origins of
farming; where did *PIE appear, and what was responsible for its dispersal;
and when did IE languages finally attain their present limits of distribution?
   It would clearly be optimistic to attempt to answer even one of these, but
there may be some advantage to tackling the group of questions as a whole.
The solutions proposed below represent a scenario (or, if you like, a 'just so'
story) of how the various components may fit together. They are presented
in the form of three hypotheses.

1. The nuclear region of western Old World farming, the Near East, was
large and internally diverse; and it gave rise to population expansion in
several directions (Sherratt 1980, fig. 15.5). It is unlikely, therefore, that this
dispersal was associated with the spread of a single language group, 6 and
it probably gave rise to several major language families on the basis of
ancestral groups situated around the edge of the nuclear region. The result-
ing pattern (Figure 19.1a) would have resembled the petals of a flower,
radiating from the area where farming began.
   Since literacy came early to this part of the world, it is likely that many
of the language groups represented in this process lasted long enough to be
represented in the historical record. Candidates would include the Indo-
European, Afroasiatic, Caucasian, 7 and (perhaps) Dravidian language
families. Each of these achieved a wide distribution and are represented by
many individual successor languages, and it is logical to postulate that their
**pre-proto-forms achieved prominence as a result of the primary spread of
farming.
   Since each of them would have undergone expansion at the same time,
their main direction of propagation was outwards - away from the core area
of farming. 8 (This reverses older assumptions by which Indo-Europeans
traditionally came off steppes and Semites emerged from deserts.) The
ancestors of the Caucasian languages found their exit blocked by the
mountains and steppe belt beyond, but those ancestral to the Indo-European
family were able to penetrate beyond Anatolia to the Balkans and central
Europe before meeting the resistance of native peoples in western and


                                        477




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                THE   ARCHAEOLOGY          OF   INDO-EUROPEAN:


northern Europe. Together, these Anatolian and Balkan languages would
constitute the **PPIE group, predating the period of *PIE unity.9 This stage
is represented on the first map of Figure 19.2.

2. As noted previously, many hypotheses concerning *PIE origins converge
on the Black Sea area, postulating a homeland in Anatolia (Gamkrelidze and
Ivanov), the Balkans (Diakonov) or the steppes (Gimbutas). May all contain
some element of truth?
   The problem is essentially a topological one: how to generate a spatial
pattern which is congruent both with the reconstructed relationships of the
Indo-European family tree and also with the major cultural areas recognised
by archaeology. Each of the models listed above can cope with one major
branch of Indo-European but has difficulty with the others. A comprehen-
sive model requires another flower-like pattern, with a common centre but
scope for expansion in different directions. The epicentre of this nuclear
region would lie in the Black Sea.
   This difficulty becomes less insuperable if considered in the light of
mechanisms of linguistic convergence. One of the phenomena noted by
linguists in areas such as the Caribbean or Melanesia is the formation of
pidgins and Creoles in connection with the growth of trading networks,
especially those based on coastal contacts. If we postulate a coastal koine
around the shores of the Black Sea (and perhaps also the Aegean - the
'international spirit of the EBA': Renfrew 1967) in the third millennium,
bringing together elements from **PPIE languages already existing in
Anatolia and perhaps in the Balkans and west Pontic area, these require-
ments are fulfilled. After all, boats - both large and small - are attested in
the protolexicon as well as horses and carts, and the wealth of Troy II indi-
cates the potential scale of trading activity at this time. The actual area of
this 'homeland' would not be large, but its circumference was considerable:
enough to establish a wide range of potential contacts in many directions
(Figure 19.1b). This stage is represented in the second map of Figure 19.2.




19.1 Models of three stages of Indo-European expansion, based on the spatial
arrangements of major language groups. Each expansion coincided with major
economic and social changes. (A) represents the formation of four major language-
families as a result of the expansion from different ancestral speech-communities
within the nuclear area of Old World farming (interrupted circle); 1 represents
 * *pre-proto-Indo-European. (B) represents the expansion and differentiation of
different groups of Indo-European languages around the Black Sea: (1) Anatolian;
(2) hypothetical circum-Pontic *proto-Indo-European; (3) earlier European
languages derived from **PPIE; (4) *proto-Greek; (5) central European - ancestral
to groups shown in (C); (6) north European - ancestral to Germanic, Baltic and
Slav; (7) *proto-Indo-Iranian. (C) represents the expansion and differentiation of
the central European group associated with Late Bronze Age Urnfields and with
movement into Anatolia.




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                THE   ARCHAEOLOGY          OF   INDO-EUROPEAN:




19.2 Reconstructed distributions of the constituent groupings of Indo-European
languages over four millennia (calibrated radiocarbon chronology). The bound-
aries are conventional. Stages in the differentiation of neighbouring language
families are also shown. (See note 4 for Tocharian.)




                                        480




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                          AN   ALTERNATIVE         VIEW


3. In thinking about the further propagation of Indo-European languages,
the descendants of * P I E , it is important to bear in mind the potential com-
plexity of factors operating in later prehistory. One of these is undoubtedly
migration, even though it is unlikely to be the dominant mechanism that
was once imagined. As an archaeological example, one might cite the west-
ward penetration of Pit-Grave groups from the Pontic Steppes into dry areas
of Romania and Hungary (Ecsedy 1979), and compare it with the south-
ward penetration of Athabascan speakers in the dry areas of North
America, taking the Navajo and Apache to the Southwest.
   Trade is another, and perhaps more fundamental, factor. Just as Neolithic
trade patterns took the form of multiple step, 'down the line' exchanges, so
Bronze Age trade patterns show an increasing emphasis on directional trade
(Figure 19.3). Whereas the former can be handled (as in highland New
Guinea) through the use of bilingual speakers at each step in the chain, more
direct forms of contact and trade increasingly require a common language.
The spread of features of secondary farming like woolly sheep or horses
would have involved the transmission of items of valuable livestock from
one end of Europe to the other. The growth of the pastoral sector would in
itself have provided opportunities for the monopolistic control of animal
herds, potentially giving an advantage to particular ethnic groups in a way
comparable to that involved in the spread offish-weirsand Salish languages
on the intermontane plateau of the American Northwest (Nelson 1973).
Metals were increasingly traded in the form of prestige objects during the
period in question; while less tangible influences may be discerned in the
spread of cult practices involving alcohol or cannabis (Chapters 15 and 16).
Each of these could have been accompanied by new forms of language,
perhaps initially a special-purpose trade or elite language, used specifically
in communicating within the context of extra-territorial exchanges.
   The spread of Indo-European languages from a postulated Circumpontic
area of * P I E would have involved all of these mechanisms, although in
different contexts. The eastern wing of Indo-Iranian languages would have
spread by expansion into a relatively empty zone.10 Within Europe three
main zones of development could be envisaged. In the south, *proto-Greek
would have evolved in the context of EBA maritime contacts with north-west
Anatolia which brought advanced metallurgy and Anatolian pottery forms
to eastern Greece. In the centre, along the main Danube/Rhine axis in the
area of the Baden culture, there would have developed a branch of central
European languages ancestral to those which differentiated in the Urnfield
period - Celtic, Italic, Illyrian, Thracian and Phrygian. Along the North
European Plain a continuum of languages ancestral to Slav, Baltic and
Germanic would have evolved in the context of the cultural contacts indi-
cated by the distribution of Globular Amphora and Corded Ware elements.
These processes are represented by the second and third maps of Figure
19.2, which should be compared with Figure 19.1b. With the exception of

                                       481




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                 THE     ARCHAEOLOGY               OF   INDO-EUROPEAN:



   T H E 'NEOLITHIC' PATTERN




                                                                          Down the line'
                                                                            trade.




                    ^ Bilingual ism


                                                   Typical artefact
                                                   distribution
                                                   e.g. stone axes.

                                origit


   T H E ' B R O N Z E AGE'     PATTERN



            A   Y        6                c Xy                        E
                                                                           Directional
                                                                              trade-
                 t r a d e               l o n g    u a g         e
       v*                                                             w




                                  Typical artefact distribution
                                     e.g. bronze swords.


                              W ? J m n m m T n T m f f / / / /'h.m
                     origin


19.3 Contrasting patterns of language and trade. Above, trade chain in many
short steps, accomplished by bilingualism (e.g. New Guinea, Neolithic Europe).
Below, directional trade necessitating a special trade language (e.g. Bronze Age
Europe and the Near East).




                                               482




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                           AN   ALTERNATIVE         VIEW


the eastern group, none of these should be envisaged as a simple equation
between languages and archaeological cultures, resulting from a straight-
forward migration in the old-fashioned sense: but each represents an axis of
demonstrable cultural contact at the period in question. Moreover, this
pattern is congruent with the major expectations derived from comparative
linguistics.

These postulated stages of development take the story down to the threshold
of historical times, when linguistic distributions can be reconstructed with
greater certainty (fourth map of Figure 19.2). Besides the continuing ex-
pansion of Indo-Iranian languages, the most notable feature is the further
spread of languages from the central European zone, caused by Urnfield
expansion and the contemporary recession and political collapse in the east
Mediterranean. Thus Celtic11 and Italic languages would have reached their
historical positions at approximately the same time as Phrygian replaced the
earlier, Anatolian languages in what is now western Turkey (Figure 19.1c).
This phase marks the last major expansion of Indo-European languages
before the great imperial conquests of the Achaemenid Persians, which
began another chapter of the Indo-European story.
   The attainment of a continuous distribution of Indo-European languages
from Ireland to India in the first millennium BC created a continuum of
related 'barbarian' societies across the Eurasian landmass, marked by
several common features such as horse-gear and weaponry, aspects of
funerary practice like wagon burial, and the influence of animal-style art. In
the period before this continuity was severed by the arrival on the steppes of
Turco-Tartar peoples from further east, there would have been the oppor-
tunity for the transmission across this area of myths and religious motifs as
well as features of material culture. It may be this period, rather than the
time of proto-Indo-European unity, that is tantalisingly reflected in the
evidence of comparative Indo-European mythology.12

Any attempt to grapple with a problem as intractable as that of Indo-
European origins must essentially be an essay in controlled speculation.
Nevertheless, it is permissible to describe some possible processes which fit
with our current understanding of prehistoric cultural and social change.
   An important part of this exercise is to go beyond the raw material of
immediate observation to infer missing categories of evidence. Since many
languages remain only as peripheral survivals,13 afirststep is to fill in a more
realistic estimate of their original distributions. We may then go on to make
allowance for extinct forms, and for ancestral groups beyond the limits of
our direct evidence. In carrying out this exercise in relation to the evolution
of Indo-European, we have set out a multi-stage model which takes account
of the main currents of economic and social change in later prehistory as we
perceive them (Figure 19.4).


                                        483




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   THE      ARCHAEOLOGY          OF    INDO-EUROPEAN:

-RT
 BC




                                                              INDO I R A N I A N     J
                                                                LANGUAGES
 2000'


 3000

                   *    -    *
 4000'                           I      I
                   ? * * PRE- PROTO-
                            INDO-EUROPEAN                        NON- INDO-
 5000                       FARMING LANGUAGES                   EUROPEAN
                                                                FARMING LANGUAGES
                                        (Primary                (Semitic, H u m a n ,
 6000                                       •farming             Dravidioin)
         PRE-FARMING                         expansion)
         LANGUAGES                                                             I     I
 7000                                                                    I     I     I
              survival
                                                                       PRE-FARMING
              extinction (or survival
              as substrates)                                           LANGUAGES
 8000                                                                    I     I     I

19.4 Summary diagram of the major phases of Indo-European expansion in
prehistory, showing recorded languages and inferred ancestral groups and extinct
branches. The diagram extends from NW Europe (left) to central and s Asia (right).

   The reconstruction which we propose implies a relatively slow rate of
spread over a period of 6000 years, made up of several advances into new
areas which coincide with periods of economic innovation and consequent
opportunities for expansion. It consists of successive overlays of new
generations of Indo-European languages in radial patterns from a series of
nuclear zones, moving outwards from an original centre, and reflecting
the continuing importance of the Near East as a source of economic and
cultural change. Such a sketch can only present a caricature of the com-
plexities of the real process: but it may nevertheless be helpful as a first step
in the controlled comparison of models of linguistic prehistory.

NOTES

 1. Thus it may not be profitable to extend any kind of phylogenetic model much further
    back than c.10,000 BP, or to talk of a single 'common ancestor' for groups such as Indo-
    European and Afroasiatic.
 2. The classic examples of a successful marriage between linguistics and archaeology are
    the dispersals of the Polynesian and Bantu language families. The reasons for this are
    twofold: first, the predominance in both cases of demic diffusion; and secondly the
    relatively recent date at which the dispersals occurred, so that the linguistic relationships
    are still clearly evident. It is instructive to compare these examples with the case of
    Melanesia, where agriculture appeared much earlier (as long ago as it did in Europe),


                                              484




                       This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                               AN   ALTERNATIVE          VIEW

    and where adoption probably predominated over demic diffusion. Although the pattern
    is perhaps exaggerated by the rugged terrain, New Guinea is notorious for its extreme
    linguistic diversity. There is no reason why this pattern should not be equally character-
    istic of Neolithic societies in other parts of the world, wherever these conditions applied.
 3. These arise from the pattern of inter-relationships generated by this assumption (Renfrew
    1987, fig. 7.7), which would predict a close genetic resemblance between Greek and
    Italian, for instance, or between the Slav and Indo-Iranian groups. This is not the case.
 4. A complicating factor is the existence of Tocharian in Sinkiang. Two solutions are
    possible. One would see Tocharian as representative of the earliest phase of Indo-
    European steppe expansion, before the emergence of Indo-Iranian and its interaction with
    European neighbours (reflected for instance in satemisation): this is the option shown on
    the maps of Fig. 19.2. The alternative, and perhaps preferable, view is that it is a much
    later language connected with trade along the Silk Route - since the first written evidence
    is known from the first millennium AD. It might thus be considered as a Creole.
 5. Later ones, such as Phrygian and Armenian, are more recent and can be related to the
    period of expansion represented by the Urnfield phenomenon; their spread into Anatolia
    would have prefigured the Celtic expansion which brought Galatian.
 6. This observation is likely to be a general one, since the world's major language groups do
    not show the simple, concentric patterns of distribution which such an equation would
    predict. The largest areas of linguistic uniformity, in Polynesia and sub-Saharan Africa,
    resulted from unidirectional expansion on the margins of a nuclear area.
 7. The Caucasus is a complex refuge area with many different languages. Armenian is a
    branch of Indo-European (see n.5). The Caucasian languages proper form two groups,
    North Caucasian and South Caucasian, of which the former appears to be a descendant
    of Urartian and ultimately of Hurrian, which occupied a larger area in eastern Anatolia
    and Syria; the latter may be indigenous.
 8. A more specific version of the hypothesis might envisage the Levant as the origin of the
    Afroasiatic family, north Syria/north Mesopotamia as the origin of the branch of
    Caucasian which gave rise ultimately to Hurrian and so to Urartian and Kartvelian,
    central and western Anatolia as the origin of the Indo-European family, and south-west
    Iran as the origin of the Dravidian family. While hypothetical, these equations are not
    entirely speculative, and deserve to be evaluated against competing hypotheses (cf.
    Mellaart 1975, ch. 11).
 9. This might include the language later written in Crete in Linear A, and also the pre-Greek
    language whose toponyms survive in Greece and the Balkans.
10. The spread of Pit-Graves into Romania and Hungary would on this hypothesis represent
    a westward incursion of speakers of Indo-Iranian languages, prefiguring the later
    Scythian expansion into the same areas.
11. Perhaps in places (e.g. the British Isles) overlying extinct branches of northern zone Indo-
    European, if these had spread further in association with Bell-Beaker contacts. Since any
    such Beaker-related IE language would have had affinities with Germanic and the other
    northern zone languages, it cannot have been an early form of Celtic, whose affinities lie
    rather with Italic and the languages of the central European zone.
12. This would be the explanation for the common features described by Dumezil. It would
    be no accident, therefore, that Greece - no longer a member of this barbarian community
    - should be 'an embarrassing exception to the tripartite division of functions' (Kirk 1970,
    210).
13. An obvious example is the 'Celtic fringe', or the survival of Romance languages
    (Romanian and Vlach) in south-east Europe. Other mountain relicts would include
    Illyrian, and the various Caucasian languages; while on a larger scale Iranian might be
    seen as a montane survival from a larger original area on the steppes.




                                             485




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:30:19 UTC
                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                             Section           VI

       A      CONVERSATION
              WITH C H I L D E




    <

   Childe at the UISPP conference at Zurich, 1950, in Schaffhausen Museum
 with (left to right) Dame Kathleen Kenyon and Professors Richard Atkinson,
Robert J. Braidwood, Stuart Piggott, Grahame Clark and Christopher Hawkes
                   (photograph from Professor Stuart Piggott).




  Now I confess that my whole account may prove to be erroneous;
   my formulae may be inadequate; my interpretations are perhaps
    ill-founded; my chronological framework - and without such
          one cannot speak of conjunctures - is frankly shaky.
             Yet I submit the result was worth publishing.
                                                     V. G O R D O N   CHILDE   (1957)




                This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:31:27 UTC
                                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       CONVERSATION           WITH    CHILDE


 lhe archaeological generation of which I form part can be justly proud of
having helped to fill in a major missing element of the evidence of European
prehistory with which Childe worked: the regional analysis of patterns on
the ground, distilled from the much more abundant evidence of post-war
fieldwork and excavation, which took place on a scale undreamed of before.
It is not surprising that geography seemed to be a paradigm-discipline in this
enterprise, even though that subject has now suffered a sharp decline in
general academic esteem, especially in the USA. The need to build ecological
and demographic realities into archaeological models of the past was one
which it shared with contemporary history and other social sciences, and led
to notable advances in understanding. In European prehistory, for instance,
the altered conception of early farming - from rootless slash-and-burn
Wanderbauerntum to a horticulture with a long-lasting commitment to
particular places - represented a notable advance on Childe's under-
standing.
    Nevertheless, there was a price to pay: too great an attention to the forces
of production led to a neglect of the forces of consumption: here Childe's
Marxism and New (Processual) Archaeology shared a common blind spot.
Stuart Piggott's sensitivity to the nuances of style in elite ostentation,
for instance in matters of transport (1992), well illustrate this missing
dimension; and it is the most positive contribution of Post-Processual
Archaeology to have drawn attention to this aspect of the importance of the
materiality of culture. While social evolution is difficult to demonstrate,
cultural evolution is plain to see; and rather than seeking abstract and
untestable social formulations of the nature of change, it may be more
profitable to theorise the cultural record itself. (These thoughts, moreover,
have now occurred to social anthropologists, too, making possible a degree
of theoretical convergence.) Materiality, however, does not imply mere
materialism, for material creations only make sense in the context of the
social and the cognitive. Recognition of this fact helps to revive two aspects
of Childe's account which had been neglected in the enthusiasm for local
factors of demography, ecology and agrarian productivity: the diffusion of
desirable forms of consumption (literal or metaphorical), and the cultural
phenomena of substitution and skeuomorphism to which it gives rise.
    By making use of these insights, it should be possible to combine the best
of both approaches, and to overcome the dialectical conflicts built into the
'alternation of generations' between Enlightenment and Romantic models
outlined in Section I; and in so doing it may be possible to retrieve a sense
of overall direction and 'grand narrative', of the kind which I attempted to
specify in my David Clarke Memorial Lecture for 1995 (Sherratt 1995b).
Shorn of the Eurocentric bias which has so far accompanied all accounts
of 'the rise of the West', such a grand narrative is no longer an account of
the inevitability of European progress. Rather, it chronicles how, for a brief
period following the discovery of the New World, the Atlantic coastlands


                                        488




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:31:27 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      CONVERSATION           WITH    CHILDE


acquired a centrality which made them masters of the global economy; a
centrality, however, which they are now in the process of losing to the lands
of the Far East and the Pacific Rim. Yet this shift in perspective brings
Childe's question once more to the fore (Rowlands 1994). What was the
origin of Europe's conception of liberty and freedom? Were these merely
stages in the final disembedding of the economy from social constraints;
or are they a precious inheritance to be preserved, as economic dominance
shifts to a new continental configuration? The answers to these questions
require an archaeological perspective, which arises from, and gives meaning
to, our everyday preoccupations with stones and potsherds.




                                       489




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:31:27 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                         20
                       Gordon Childe:
                       Right or Wrong?
                                      (1995)

Every prehistoric archaeologist has to come to terms with Childe.1 The
European prehistorian feels the need to measure his or her ideas against a
classic like the Dawn of Civilisation, to see how far we have progressed;
even prehistorians in areas outside Europe need to look back to the earlier
phases of their discipline, which began in Europe, and in which Childe's
synthesis forms a milestone. Nor (I think) is this just a matter of national,
or at least anglophone, pride: even those continental scholars who regard
modern British scholarship with suspicion can agree that Childe was a figure
of European stature. Indeed, his chief critics are themselves English or
English-speaking: from his own literary executor, Grahame Clark (1976:
accusing him of being misled by Marx), to Colin Renfrew (1973: revolution-
ising his chronology) or to any aspiring young graduate student wanting to
patronise an older and better exponent of his craft (e.g. Sherratt 1972,477;
Chapter 2). At the centenary of his birth, when most intellectuals are being
subjected to revisionist critiques (or at least to scandalous revelations about
their private lives), Childe remains a revered ancestor to a wide variety of
schools of archaeology - many of which (like diffusionists, processualists,
and post-processualists) are quite incompatible with one another, and
indeed are mutually hostile.


The 1990s have seen no diminution of interest in Gordon Childe: a special issue of
Australian Archaeology No. 30 in 1991 (including Sherratt 1991), an important
conference in Melbourne (Gathercole, Irving and Melleuish 1995) and a London
meeting (Harris 1994) all threw fresh light on his politics, early career and
relations with Soviet archaeology. Yet this same half-decade saw the effective
collapse of Marxism as the official political philosophy of a large part of Eurasia.
When my old friend and fellow Childe-enthusiast Jacek Lech asked me to write
something for a Polish conference on the contribution of Childe, these thoughts
underlay what I wrote.


                                         490




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:31:27 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                RIGHT      OR   WRONG ?


    With such a reputation, not just within the subject but also outside it
(since Childe is one of the few 'intellectual' archaeologists whose name is
familiar beyond the discipline), it is often surprising to present-day students
that his work now seems so old-fashioned. As a figure who achieved his
major responsibility (the Directorship of the Loftdon University Institute
of Archaeology) in the post-war era, and is still remembered - with great
affection - by an active generation of pupils, he might be considered as
a near-contemporary, marking the beginning of a 'modern' approach to
prehistory. Yet much of his writing seems in many ways to be closer to the
nineteenth rather than the twentieth century: his grand themes, archaic
terminology (who dares talk of 'savages' nowadays?), his studied ignorance
of the New World, curious ragbag anthropology with its stereotypes like the
'primitive metalsmith' - all these have an oddly antiquated ring.
    In part, this is because the whole subject of prehistory is itself so young.
As a product of Enlightenment rationalism, Romantic enthusiasm for exotic
origins, and scientific Positivism with its belief in the value of observation
and classification, it needed all these movements to create the kind of subject
which exists today; and its scope and methods only became clearly recog-
nised by some time around 1865, along with its name. For this chrono-
logical reason, prehistoric archaeology is 'out of phase' with other
humanistic disciplines, and still enjoying its childhood (and juvenile tan-
trums) well into the twentieth century. It is easy to forget how recently we
have acquired some quite fundamental information about the prehistoric
past - like the use of the plough in the Neolithic - or how recently so much
of our information (for instance about ecology and settlement patterns) has
accumulated. To take an example: Childe's account of the Neolithic Rev-
olution was written (like the classic Enlightenment evolutionary narratives
of the eighteenth century) essentially from first principles, and without much
real archaeology to put to it: the1 discovery of a pre-pottery Neolithic, at
places like Jericho, came as a disturbing surprise. Whereas history and phil-
ology have been 'tempered' and matured by many changes of intellectual
climate, archaeology is simultaneously acquiring both intellectual maturity
and basic observations: 'learning on the job', as we might say. As a subject,
it is still very much a teenager, with adult methods but immature ideas and
emotions with which to approach its new-found wealth of observations.
Childe helped to take archaeology out of its childhood - it makes a good
pun in English, and one that was not neglected by Childe himself! - but now
himself looks Childeish. It is a mark of how rapidly archaeology has
progressed, by comparison with other historical disciplines, that something
written in the 1950s now seems quite so outdated. So the conundrum of
Childe is how he manages to be, at one and the same time, such a chrono-
logical zone-fossil for a past epoch in European prehistoriography and yet
also a positive inspiration for a wide range of present-day workers in the
field. The answer that I would like to suggest is that he first identified some


                                            491




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                  GORDON         CHILDE:


of the fundamental structures of prehistory by using the evidence of archae-
ology. Like some early scientist with a new optical instrument, he first put
names and definitions to what can be observed in prehistory, and described
what we can still recognise in the record. The details multiply and change,
but the structures survive, even when the interpretation changes. Some
aspects of Childe's vision were personal idiosyncracies; some were the
inevitable perceptions of the time; but above all these temporary aspects
there stands his recognition of the essential outlines of prehistory, in a way
that continues to be clarified by new information. Ifindthis reassuring: it is
a demonstration that the past is real, and not just a fluctuating fantasy
which projects contemporary dreams and desires on to something essen-
tially unknowable; though it is also something whose significance changes
with successive generations and new angles of vision. Childe remains
fascinating because his perceptions are at once so familiar and so strange.
   To recognise his enduring contribution, it is therefore essential to
recognise those aspects of his imagination which were time-bound and
idiosyncratic. First, the personal aspect. It is not necessary to be an amateur
psychologist to discern the powerful influence of his father, Stephen Childe:
not by imitation, but by reaction. Stephen Childe was an Anglican clergy-
man, of catholic (ritualistic) tendency not greatly tempered by humanity
(Green 1981, 6-7). His congregation, at least, did not like him; and his son
must surely have found him as oppressive in childhood as he did when,
visiting his paternal home as an adult, he was not allowed to smoke his pipe.
His defences to this treatment were brilliance and radicalism. Not dissi-
pating his efforts in mere socialising (at which he had limited skills), he
concentrated a powerful intelligence on proving himself outstanding as an
academic. At the same time, he devoted himself, as soon as he had left home,
to radical and idealistic causes which questioned the basis of his family's
relatively privileged background. (His Marxism was, in a sense, a substitute
for his lost Anglican Christianity.) To a generation which takes youthful
revolt as a token of normality, this may seem nothing strange: in a British
colony at the time of World War I, however, it took the courage of con-
viction. Recent research on Childe's early political career in Australia has
revealed a picture that seems strikingly reminiscent of totalitarian regimes in
the Europe of more recent years: secret censorship and political persecution,
including debarment and dismissal from teaching positions (Mulvaney
1994). Childe hammered out his idealistic philosophy from experience and
opposition, not from the comfort of an armchair.
    This oppositional attitude persisted throughout his life, even through
the time when he was a recognised international leader in his subject -
chosen, for example, to represent prehistoric archaeology among the sixty
scholars selected to address the Conference of Arts and Sciences organised
by Harvard University to celebrate its Tercentenary in 1936. As a Marxist
and communist sympathiser (though not a party member), Childe had

                                            492




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                RIGHT      OR    WRONG ?


difficulties in the USA after World War II, in the era of McCarthyism: it is
salutary to be reminded that intellectual intolerance (and a specific hostility
to evolutionism and prehistory) has been an occasional characteristic of
the 'land of the free', even as Morgan and Engels became the orthodoxy of
the opposing power-bloc in the other hemisphere. Politicians recognise the
importance of prehistory, which is why we must never let them take it out
of the hands of an international and critical community of scholars. In
Childe's case, this experience had the somewhat unexpected consequence
of revealing with what affection he was regarded by his staff: 'when
McCarthyism was rife in America ... the staff [of the Institute of Archae-
ology] all came to the conclusion that if there was any backlash on the
Director, we would all go to jail with him': Rachel Maxwell-Hyslop, 1994.
From an impeccably upper middle-class establishment, this was com-
mitment indeed.
   This personal and political background had two consequences for
Childe's prehistory, one good and one bad (as far as archaeology was con-
cerned). The first was a vision of social change which was to inform and
underlie his writing of prehistory, giving it shape and relevance (Rowlands
1994). It was Childe's opposition to the inwardness of White Australia and
the New Protectionism that later informed his search for a social dynamic
in diffusionism, interchange and hybridisation: themes that constantly recur
in his prehistoriography, and which have lost none of their relevance today.
This goes a long way to explaining why Childe's vision has continued to
occupy the attention of succeeding generations. It is a feature of Childe's
writing that it combined an unsurpassed mastery of arcane detail (expressed
in now legendary footnotes) with a sweep that is often described as
Hegelian; and most particularly in a sustained commitment to making the
often unpromising raw material of prehistory say something that is
important about society. Criticisms of his work often focus upon the gap
between these achievements: the lack of explicit methodologies and case
studies that could convert a vision into working theories. It is important also
to recognise the moral imperatives behind his writing, and his often
metaphorical treatment of the subjects which he brought to prominence.
The way that metal production in Bronze Age Europe escaped from the
political control of courts and temples, which had characterised its develop-
ment in the Near East, was not so much a narrow technological history as
an attempt to translate Hegelian concerns with the origin of Western
freedoms into the subject matter of prehistoric archaeology. Childe took
archaeology seriously, because it mattered.
   On the other hand, Childe's view of the prehistoric past was distorted by
these experiences in what may be considered a negative way. Rationalism is
easily combined with anti-clericalism; and reacting against an oppressive,
Anglo-Catholic fatherfiguredid not make Childe sympathetic to religion, or
subtle in his interpretation of it. He was, in short, against it. While I have no

                                            493




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                  GORDON        CHILDE:


moral objection to this view (though I do not share it), it cannot            o
be an advantage in interpreting either the recent or the distant p          ad
especially not the cultures of theocentric Sumer in the Uruk pt. a, or
megalithic Pomerania. For Childe, religion was an incubus (or possibly even
a succubus): a diversion of energy into a vain and fruitless activity that was
essentially parasitic upon society. Religion was a dead hand upon develop-
ment, a social pathology preventing progress - almost a disease. While he
was sensitive to the nuances of secular symbolism (for instance the signifi-
cance of buried grave-wealth), the social importance of religion, and hence
the organisational (and thus local) role of megaliths, for instance, was
neglected: he therefore saw megalithism as spreading like a contagious epi-
demic along the seashore of Atlantic Europe, rather than springing up as
an expression of indigenous values among Mesolithic groups faced with
longhouse-building Danubian newcomers. On a larger scale, he missed the
long-term significance of the repeated shifts from communal to individual,
Wertrationalitat to Zweckrationalitat, manifested in Uruk to Early
Dynastic, TRB to Corded Ware, Bronze Age palatial civilisation to Iron Age
mercantile city states in the east Mediterranean, communism to capitalism
- in which his sympathies would not necessarily have been unidirectional.
Childe's accounts need rewriting to give a more sympathetic and under-
standing (though still critical) role to religion - one of the most enduring, if
constantly changing, modes of social integration. (Marxism is, after all, one
of the great heretical movements of Christianity, with its own established
churches and schisms.)
    A second 'blind spot' was warfare (Flannery 1994). Again, not perhaps
surprising in a pacifist and member of the No-conscription Fellowship
(whilst a student at Oxford), and in an intellectual both temperamentally
and philosophically opposed to war; but, as with anti-clericalism, perhaps
an unhelpful sentiment in understanding the motivations and concerns of
the Early Dynastic rulers of Mesopotamia or Egypt, or the nature of early
states in general. His dislike of conflict extended to the internal divisions
within society. Unlike his contemporaries in the CP Historians Group or
Past and Present board (like Rodney Hilton, Christopher Hill, or Eric
Hobsbawm), his models of social progress were consensual rather than
conflictual. (Often, it was just religion that seems to have held things up!)
Perhaps not surprisingly for a person of such likeable and unworldly views,
he was an appallingly incompetent administrator; which is one reason why
his successor as Director of the Institute was chosen for administrative
ability rather than any intellectual spark. It is an experience from which that
institution is only just recovering. Administrators can be hired; intellectuals
like Childe are irreplaceable.
    Childe's third 'blind spot' was luxury: pleasure in consumption. Not that
he was personally frugal - he was known to enjoy champagne (reputedly in
 pints) in his London club, the Athenaeum - but because he disapproved of

                                            494




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                RIGHT      OR     WRONG ?


ostentation. This was a natural consequence both of his personality and his
political philosophy, and fits with the attitudes discussed above. Like anti-
clericalism and anti-war sentiments, hostility to ostentatious consumption
forms part of a tradition of popular protest and radical rationalism in Euro-
pean culture (that goes back at least to the Anabaptists of Miinster and
beyond), which received more general acceptance in the French Revolution
and the Enlightenment reaction to Baroque. Radicalism often carries with
it a streak of puritanism, that is part of the natural rhetoric of social protest,
and which has a certain tendency to present a moralistic view of history: for
instance to interpret the past in terms of the present, and both in terms of
rather puritan ideas of what is believed to be important in life. In the case of
nineteenth-century philosophies which reflected the experience of the In-
dustrial Revolution, like Marxism, the result has often tended towards a
somewhat mechanistic materialism, a tendency to reduce things to calories
in the belief that the bread is more essential than the butter; a trend still
perpetuated in the 'cultural materialism' so dominant in American anthro-
pology.2 This attitude has only recently been questioned, as part of the post-
modernist critique; and it is not surprising, therefore, that despite Childe's
sophistication, he tended to share its assumptions. One of these was the
emphasis on production rather than consumption,3 and thus a stress on
technology as instrumental rather than expressive - each step was an
advance in the 'conquest' of 'nature', an instrument of domination rather
than something to be enjoyed in itself. This rather stern moral attitude
would condemn 'magic' as false consciousness, but approve of increased
efficiency in changing the world; yet to approach prehistoric societies in this
way is to espouse a naive anthropology, in the same way as neglecting
religion.
    Childe's explanations, therefore, tended to concern means rather than
ends, mechanisms rather than motivations. His explanation for the Urban
Revolution, for instance, was couched in terms of 'inventions' (plough, cart,
sailing-boat, metallurgy), rather than in examining the contexts in which
these innovations appeared, and the contemporary problems to which they
might have been solutions. In the same way, he saw the need to import stone
and metal resources to the alluvium, and the interactive growth of popu-
lation and irrigation, largely in terms of the efficiency of subsistence
farming. The achievement of a 'surplus', leading to the emergence of greater
social and cultural complexity, was thus an accident rather than an
objective. Childe's distrust of luxuries - it fits with the rather puritan streak
in both Protestant rationalism and Marxism - helps to explain his emphasis
on basic production rather than long-distance trade as the main determinant
of economic growth. Yet it is the cultural significance of such exotic luxuries
(embodying all the social propensities for ostentation and conspicuous
consumption that Childe found so objectionable in his contemporaries) that
is much discussed by anthropologists nowadays, in a way that his stark


                                            495




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                  GORDON        CHILDE:


dichotomy of 'luxuries' versus 'necessities' would not allow. Interestingly,
it is the same deficiency that has been identified in the work of Immanuel
Wallerstein on the medieval and early modern world-economy: and it is a
general point of criticism of Childe's work to which I shall return.
    Having paraded his deficiencies, to the extent that the reader might
conclude that 'Childe was wrong', I want now strongly to assert the con-
trary viewpoint, that 'Childe was gloriously right'. I want to do so by dis-
cussing an aspect of my own work; and this involves situating my academic
life in the rhythms of intellectual development since Childe. Childe was
unique among his contemporaries, at least in Britain, in having a social
model behind his interpretations. Others, like Grahame Clark, emphasised
environmental reconstruction; but that was not a dynamic view, and cer-
tainly not a social dynamic. The rest were largely historicist in interpretation
- a word I use to characterise the attitude summed up in the preface (dated
1936) to H. A. L. Fisher's History of Europe: 'Others, wiser and more
learned than myself, claim to have discerned in history a plot, a rhythm, a
predetermined pattern. Such harmonies are concealed from me ... I can see
only... the play of the contingent and the unforeseen.' (I quote from memory:
it was our major history textbook at school.) Childe was a generalist and
used models - even if to prove the uniqueness of the West, and to assert the
culturally specific nature of human achievement ('Man makes himself'). It
was intellectually subtle, but practically sui generis as a point of view even
in history, and certainly within a lowbrow subject like archaeology.4
    In the 1960s, and coming to prominence a decade after Childe's death,
was the diverse series of movements together termed the 'New Archae-
ology'. Some were more subtle than others (notably that of my teacher
David Clarke at Cambridge): but all had as common elements an emphasis
on ecology and a more deterministic outlook than that of Childe. For
American New Archaeology in particular,5 the dynamic of cultural change
was population growth; the mechanism was endogenous advance or
adaptation rather than 'outside intervention' - all changes were local
changes, and ultimately concerned with calories. ('Extrasystemic inputs'
were mainly climatic perturbations.) In short, it was evolutionary rather
than historical; its major metaphor was 'thresholds of change': continuous
growth in one variable (usually population, or the ratio of population to
resources) reached a point at which systemic change and restructuring was
necessary. Each of these thresholds was a miniature revolution, but also a
local manifestation of some more general change of category - from bands,
to tribes to chiefdoms, or some such succession. The Enlightenment mission
of New Archaeology was to clarify these categories. Noting a very wide-
spread horizon of change across prehistoric Europe in 3500 BC, coincident
more or less with the onset of urbanisation in Late Uruk Mesopotamia, I
postulated a revolution. Its most tangible characteristic was its association
with the first evidence for the plough and wheeled vehicles; but this was


                                            496




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                               RIGHT       OR    WRONG ?


quickly followed by the first evidence for wool and the spread of the dom-
esticated horse beyond the steppes. In the Near East, this period saw the
domestication of the ass and the camel. Innovations in animal husbandry
were paralleled by changes in plant husbandry, such as the domestication of
tree-crops. All these added up, in my opinion, to a shift from the primary
product yielded by livestock - meat - to the various secondary products:
traction, use as a pack- or ridden animal, wool (and probably milk, too,
with the suggestion that the whole thing was made possible by the evolution
of lactose tolerance). In temperate areas it was made possible by growing
deforestation, creating grazing; in steppe areas it opened up otherwise
unusable pasturelands to exploitation; but its heartlands were the open
areas of the Near East, where the potential of animal domestication was first
realised. Hence the Secondary Products Revolution, a second generation of
innovations in agriculture which made possible the settlement of new areas
and the formation of new types of economy such as specialised pastoralism
(Chapter 6).
   Not a bad generalisation, but note how it was conceptualised: as an eco-
logical threshold, concerned with animal management, which made farming
more efficient at supporting a growing population. This reading of the
record tended to do two things. Thefirstwas to assume that logically related
features - like milking and wool-using - would probably occur together, and
was thus to align a rather varied range of phenomena into a single horizon.
The second was to 'edit out' other contemporary phenomena (not con-
cerned with animal rearing) which might have been combined in a different
configuration: for instance in a 'transport revolution' involving cart, trans-
port animals and boats with sails. The 'Secondary Products Revolution' was
presented, therefore, as a biological and deterministic change rather than as
a historical event; and the model was seen by some readers (because of
one of the diagrams rather than the text) as beginning with population
growth. Indeed, some revisionist (or rather, fundamentalist) critics of my
presentation (Chapman 1983; Barker 1985) took it further: whereas from
the beginning I had stressed its restricted Near Eastern origins and con-
sequent spread to Europe, these commentators were happy to imagine use
of the plough and woolly breeds of sheep apparently appearing spontane-
ously, wherever they were necessary because of pressure on resources.
(Incidentally, they also attributed transhumant pastoralism not to a special-
ised exchange economy, but to a continuity from Palaeolithic hunting
patterns.) This accommodation to the fashionable 'continuity + threshold'
model, and complete rejection of anything that smacked of diffusionism,
stretched economic and environmental determinism to the limits of their
credibility, and beyond. In reaction, I emphasised the parallelism of the
Secondary Products Revolution with the Neolithic Revolution itself: the
conjunction and explosive dispersal of several different elements, each with
an older history in different parts of the Near East (Chapter 7). Thus while


                                           497




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                  GORDON          CHILDE:


individual elements might have older origins, it was the conjunction that
provided the revolutionary effect.
   But what was the revolution? It was, in fact, nothing other than Gordon
Childe's Urban Revolution, perceived in terms of its spin-off and effects on
outer, still prehistoric, Eurasia. Not to have seen it in this way from the
beginning was excusable on my part, however, since Childe himself missed
the major linking element: the plough, which in his writings he assumed to
be a Bronze Age introduction in Europe. Yet he had worked out (and be-
queathed to Stuart Piggott as a topic on which to write a classic book:
1983), a chronology for the spread of wheeled vehicles, involving a Meso-
potamian beginning and an impact on south-east Europe with the Baden
culture. With the current evidence of Neolithic plough-marks, putting the
two elements (plough and cart) together as a 'yoked traction complex'
becomes a particularly compelling model. This would have begun within the
Taurus-Zagros arc, and only broken out of it at the time of Uruk colonial
expansion in the mid-fourth millennium BC.6 The Urban Revolution was
thus the crucial agent of integration and dispersal, and crucially affected
contemporary Europe at the same time as it transformed the Near East - as
Childe quite correctly claimed. His perception of the structure of the long-
term history of the Old World was in the long run to prove more plausible
than the views of his ecologically better-informed critics. There is no doubt
in my mind that the plough was 'diffused', in the sense that Childe gave to
the word, and did not just magically appear whenever population passed a
particular density threshold.7
   What about his other classic examples of 'diffused' technologies? One of
the realisations since his death has been the age and duration of the south-
east European Copper Age, and the degree to which it developed in isolation
from Near Eastern models (Renfrew 1969). This might seem to displace
metallurgy from the role that he assigned to it, as an ultimate consequence
of the Urban Revolution. Yet recent work at Troy and in south-east
Hungary have suggested, within the context of a calibrated radiocarbon
chronology, that the spread of tin bronze and the specific types associated
with it (and also other technologies such as faience) came about as a result
of contacts up the Danube around 2500 BC (summarised in Sherratt 1993b,
22f); and this in turn would lie behind the florescence of Aunjetitz
metallurgy. It was arguably at this point that bronze became a useful metal,
rather than simply a spectacular substitute for stone, as unalloyed copper
had been. On this basis, Childe's interpretation might be summarised as
'right model, wrong evidence'! It was not copper metallurgy itself which
followed his pattern, for copper-working had spread much earlier, but
advanced forms of copper-alloy metallurgy which fit perfectly with his pre-
dictions. Copper Age metallurgy was playful by comparison (look at Varna
and Nahal Mishmar), but Bronze Age metallurgy with its consistent suites
of weapons was a serious international business.


                                            498




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                RIGHT       OR    WRONG ?


   In the same way, we may see the beginnings of the Baden culture itself
as an earlier episode of such spin-off. I have suggested that the pottery
container-forms which characterise that culture, such as handled jugs
and cups, reflect the spread of an elite consumption of alcoholic drinks,
originally from precious metal sets of serving-vessels, and beginning among
urban elites in the Near East. Echoes of these practices would lie behind the
subsequent importance of drinking vessels in the Corded Ware and Bell-
Beaker complexes in northern and western Europe. These examples shift the
emphasis from 'technology' to 'consumption habits'. The 'irradiation of
barbarian Europe' (in Childe's famous phrase, caricaturing his own position
- which lacked this sensitivity to consumption) took the form of acquiring
new habits and lifestyles, new modes of ostentation and new media in which
to create and in which to trade. These elements of style were at least as
important (and often provided the motivation for) improvements in the
efficiency of subsistence practices. The wagon, and even the plough (which
often substitutes for it on Italian statue-menhirs: Figure 6.3) were prestige
possessions and symbols of power, as were the first woollen clothes and
metal weapons. Thus although the structure of Childe's model of the re-
lationship between Europe and the Near East was correct, its nuances and
'feel' are somehow misleading. The innovations which spread were not
practical improvements for everybody, which were immediately applied in
workshops throughout the continent; more often, they were the rare and
exotic tastes of the elite. History was less moral than he imagined.
   What is becoming clear (to me, at any rate) is that there were many
successive episodes of cultural transmission to Europe from the Near East,
from the spread of the Neolithic to the arrival of Christianity: but these need
to be grouped and classified by the social relations involved in the trans-
mission. Some were the product of intimate trading relations; others were
simply the gradual adoption of practices from further south. Childe's
accounts tended to stress the former mechanism: his descriptions of the
European Bronze Age suggest that the circulation of bronze objects in
temperate Europe, and the progress in opening up new sources of metal, was
'rooted in the Aegean market' (Childe 1958, 166). In fact, his descriptions
of Bronze Age Europe (as opposed to his descriptions of the Bronze Age of
the Near East) increasingly appear to be anachronistic projections of a situ-
ation which only occurred in the first millennium BC: the colonisation of the
west Mediterranean by Greeks and Phoenicians, and active commercial in-
volvement north of the Alps, even the travelling smith. (In interpreting
bronze hoards, his rationalism and anti-clericalism again led him astray:
whereas he saw them as the stock-in-trade of a travelling smith, hidden for
protection, we would now recognise a large number of them as votive
offerings, transactions with the gods.) In short: Childe seems to have
conflated the very different sets of conditions which existed in the late
Neolithic/Copper Age, Bronze Age and Iron Age into effectively a single


                                            499




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                 GORDON        CHILDE:


model of culture-contact, usually involving fac >-face relations and direct
travel. His models need to be loosened up, elaborated, and made more
specific to a whole range of very different conditions.
    And so here I come to a remarkable paradox. Childe, who was by
profession a European prehistorian, seems to have been consistently right
about the Near East - although often quite wrong about Europe: megalithic
missionaries, wandering bronzesmiths, even the whole chronology of the
Neolithic and earlier Bronze Age.8 Moreover, although within European
prehistory his major field of research was Neolithic and Bronze Age, his
detailed models often have more relevance to the Iron Age, about which he
wrote very little.
    Some clues to this paradox have been mentioned above: his highly
literate, middle-class, urban background; his university training (classics);
his antipathy to religion - which arguably is the most essential element in
understanding the past. Childe did not really understand or empathise with
the primitive: he came to Europe from Australia precisely to discover how
such savagery had been left behind, and how civilisation had dawned. His
views of the earlier stages of prehistory (although technically excellent when
discussing relative chronologies and archaeological stratigraphies) are,
really, a bit of a caricature.9 One feels that, had Childe been asked (not un-
reasonably, as a native Australian) about savages he had known, he might
well have replied in the famous words of Sir James Frazer: 'Heaven forbid!';
for Childe, like Frazer, believed in the same progressive sequence of magic,
then religion, then science. Childe's sympathies with prehistoric societies
grew progressively with increasing complexity: fundamentally out of touch,
in many ways, with the Palaeolithic and Neolithic; better in the Bronze Age
(at least in the more civilised parts); most accurate in the period he knew
best, the classical world of the first millennium BC. In fact, however, most
of European prehistory consists of societies for which models derived from
the Greeks and Phoenicians are fundamentally misleading (for surely those
'megalithic missionaries' in Childe's mind were Neolithic Phoenicians).10
Whether or not it was accidental, his chronology compressed (as we now
know) those bits of prehistory with which he was least sympathetic, and
magnified the rest as a percentage of the whole. Thus time seemed to pass
more quickly than it had done in prehistoric reality, and was made to appear
more event-like than the slow, long-term processes that he was really study-
ing - and more like the rapid changes of the period in which he was trained.
In this respect, processualist archaeologists have made a genuine improve-
ment in the interpretation of prehistoric Europe, going far beyond Childe;
and it is this aspect which is perhaps the most important implication of the
'radiocarbon revolution': the slowness of change in Neolithic and earlier
Bronze Age Europe, by comparison with the kaleidoscopic changes en-
visaged by Childe, Milojcic, or Miiller-Karpe.11 What at first seemed to
archaeologists to be like events v. ere in reality slow transformations.


                                            500




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                               RIGHT      OR     WRONG ?


   Part of the problem in Childe's conceptualisation of the Neolithic was
precisely his rather literal and rationalist interpretation of technology. He
separated science sharply from what he thought of as mumbo-jumbo: one
was effective in changing the world, the other was mere illusion that was
best discarded in the long term - error to be purified and burnt out.12 An axe
was an instrument for chopping down trees: any further cosmological or
sexual symbolism it might have, and any social obligations which it might
embody, were irrelevant to its 'real' purpose. Ornamentation and display
were frivolous epiphenomena: 'the objects of Stone Age trade were always
luxuries - if not merely shells or similar ornaments at least things that men
could easily have done without' (Childe 1951, 35). This is not merely his
puritan streak, but the voice of a man who does not himself indulge in the
social display of ornaments and the symbols of wealth, and disapproves of
those that do. It is not a good basis for understanding Neolithic motivations
and the nature of Neolithic trade.13
    Interestingly, the same prejudice is shared by one of the most influential
and widely quoted left-wing theoreticians of world trade, Immanuel
Wallerstein: 'long-distance trade was a trade in luxuries ... which depended
on the political indulgence of the wealthy... not really what we mean today
by trade' (1974, 41f); again, the puritanism so often associated with radical
critique. But as Jane Schneider has brilliantly pointed out (1977), this is
thoroughly to misunderstand the nature of the pre-capitalist world, where
the trade in 'useless luxuries' (like gold!) was often the major incentive for
inter-regional relationships and the channel by which other commodities,
ideas and techniques came to move. Such materials and contacts are as
fundamental to an understanding of the evolution of the world economy as
the inner meanings and symbolism of materials are to understanding the
Stone Age trade in flint axes and shell ornaments. Wallerstein only allows
the capitalist world-system to come into existence in the sixteenth century
AD, with bulk exchanges of grain for manufactured goods; Childe saw it
already in the sixteenth century BC, with Mycenaean entrepreneurship in the
Alpine region: both operate with similar definitions but make arbitrary
choices of threshold, early or late, within a continuous story.
   What is missing in this debate is a terminology that recognises the
different degrees of intervention between the 'inner' and 'outer' parts of the
process: the core areas of change and the surrounding areas which are trans-
formed in the process, and thus in turn affect the environment of the core
itself. Following a suggestion of Jane Schneider (1977,21), I have suggested
a terminological distinction between periphery and margin (Sherratt 1993a;
1993b; 1994). In the classic definition of a periphery, there is a com-
plementary (and exploitative) relationship whereby the periphery yields
up its raw materials and imports the core's manufactures14 - while trying,
through import substitution, to rid itself of such dependency and become a
core itself. (A process often resisted by the core, which may use imperial


                                           501




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                 GORDON          CHILDE:


expansion to prevent it.) Crudely adapting this definition to the ancient
world, the 'core' represents already urban societies ('civilisations'), and the
periphery represents the ring of chiefdoms which supply them and have a
continuing relationship with them ('barbarians', like those directly in touch
with the Phoenician and Greek colonies around the shores of the first-
millennium Mediterranean). These latter societies are thus typically tran-
sitional between prehistoric illiteracy and urban literacy. The Hallstatt
phenomenon would be a good example from prehistoric Europe; and the
occurrence of Prunkgraber with southern imports is a convenient archae-
ological clue to the existence of such a situation (Mycenae Shaft-Graves,
Thracian tumuli). But because of this transitional character, such societies
form only small segments of the archaeological record; they are sandwiched
between longer periods of preceding prehistory (which they typically bring
to a close) and succeeding history. So for much longer periods than these
phases of direct interaction, European societies have been indirectly affected
by their civilised southern neighbours: and it is a mistake (as in the case of
the supposed 'Mycenaean horizon' in Bronze Age Europe) to conceive of
this in the same way as the emergence of barbarian societies in the Iron Age.
Hence the usefulness of the term margin: precisely the element which is
missing in Childe's models, but which encompasses at least three millennia
of later European prehistory.
    Within this sequence, bulk exchanges and direct commercial engagement
with the 'civilised' world are fairly late features of European prehistory: in
the Bronze Age affecting only Greece and perhaps peninsular Italy, and only
reaching trans-Alpine Europe slowly in the Iron Age. Before that, it was the
indirect ideological and technological influence (the two are not really
opposites, but complements!) that penetrated into the temperate parts of the
continent, carried often in quest of things which were remote, valuable and
useless - like gold and amber - and bringing knowledge of new luxuries -
like alcohol, wool and bronze. All this is far from a puritan view of progress,
and man's enhanced mastery over the environment. The slow transform-
ation of European culture and society can be crudely broken down into
millennial phases. From 3500-2500 BC, innovations of general desirability
spread across Europe over a broad front, creating new and enlarged cultural
units: Baden, Pit-Grave, Globular Amphorae, Corded Ware, Bell-Beaker.
Then from 2500-1500 BC, as bronze came to be used universally across
Mediterranean and temperate Europe as a medium of exchange, more
specific pathways and routes of trade emerged; while cultures themselves
became both more uniform in essentials (bronze weapons and associated
technologies) but more distinctive in idiosyncratic ways. From 1500-500
BC, Europe went from a peak of indirect exchanges with the Mediterranean,
through a fundamental transition from bronze to iron (and thus a differen-
tiation of currency-metal from utilitarian metal) that brought partial
collapse to the urban world, before renewed expansion on a yet larger scale


                                            502




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                RIGHT      oR    WRONG ?


brought more intimate interaction between north and south, between
temperate Europe and the Mediterranean. Only in the latter half of the third
of these millennial phases do many of Childe's models even begin to work;
and before that time, it is necessary to invent15 an anthropology which is
capable of understanding Europe's extinct cultures: but the effects of Near
Eastern innovations were no less real for being transmitted indirectly.
   What was so powerful that it was capable of causing this extended
transformation in the continent of Europe? It was the qualitatively different
nature of urban economies, and the contrast with surrounding non-urban
ones, which created the conditions for such a patterning of spatial relation-
ships. What is evident from archaeology is that the Urban Revolution pro-
duced more complex economic structures, not just in local terms (cities
and their hinterlands) but in regional and global terms as well, because
civilisations depended fundamentally on their barbarian peripheries, and
together came to affect all the world's remaining populations; just as, four
millennia previously, the appearance of farming in the same nuclear area
had irrevocably altered the future history of Europe's hunting and gathering
populations. It was these two revolutions which compare with the Industrial
Revolution as the great turning points in the history of the human species;
and it is to Gordon Childe that we owe their explicit recognition and the
exploration of their conceptual consequences. It is tempting, then, to com-
pare the continuing significance of these revolutions with those canonised by
Karl Marx. With hindsight, the transitions from antiquity to feudalism and
from feudalism to capitalism appear not as global shifts but as local episodes
in the fortunes of Europe, created by shifts in the world-system from the
Mediterranean to the Indian Ocean, and back to the Atlantic; transitions
whose consequence was magnified in Marxian theory by their identification
as precursors to the great future transition to socialism. Their revolutionary
character, then, was established only through a retrospective eschatology.
Childe was probably nearer the mark, in believing that aspects of capitalistic
behaviour go back to the Bronze Age; though any starting-point is arbitrary,
and the Stone Age would probably be more realistic. What is misleading
is to associate capitalism with rationalism: its commodities are surely as
fetishised as were Neolithic stone axes. It is a false perception of the past to
make it the antithesis of the present, or to make the present the antithesis of
the past. It is not in some intangible essence like 'rationality' or 'capitalism'
that the answer to world history lies, but in the concrete transformations
identified by Childe. Yet it would be equally misleading to mistake con-
creteness for mere materiality. The Neolithic and Urban Revolutions were,
indeed, demographic and calorific thresholds: but they were also revolutions
in cultural memory (houses, tombs, wall-paintings, writing), in which the
material was merely a token for the ideal. It is the challenge to post-Childean
archaeology, as to post-Marxist philosophy in general, to overcome the
radical rhetoric of its intellectual origins and to paint a more nuanced


                                            503




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                    GORDON          CHILDE:


picture: an account of material change that is not materialist in a re-
ductionist way, and encompasses religious sacrifice as much as improve-
ments in productivity. Consumption is always communication, not just the
satisfaction of bodily needs.
   Within the same structure, therefore, the interpretation can alter. Childe
had a pioneer's clarity of vision: it is his sense of structure which can still
inspire us as we continue to accumulate the detail. Today, however, we both
know more and understand more than Childe could have done; and we no
longer read him for revelation, as if he were a prophet rather than a fallible
scientist. It is a hagiographic convention to ask what a great man would
make of developments since his death: and Childe has already been invoked
in this capacity - 'if Childe were alive today' (Trigger 1982). But he is not;
he was a creature of his times, and should be celebrated as such. He will,
however - like his mentor Marx - always be present, in ghostly form, for a
dialogue with his pupils and successors: in Childe's case, likeable as well as
stimulating, and still, perhaps, with carefully calculated eccentricities to
startle the unprepared.

NOTES

 1. Some of the thoughts in this essay were provoked by the publication of the 1992 London
    conference on Childe, published as Harris 1994, and reviewed by myself in the TLS,
    October 1995.
 2. And in the assumption that there is a global food crisis in relation to present and pro-
    jected population levels. There isn't: only a stark choice between growing food or cash-
    crops, for luxury consumption. It is humankind's desire for the latter, not simply its need
    for the former that is the problem.
 3. Perhaps it is just our different standpoints in the economic cycle that make us today see
    the problem differently from Childe: whether we see the ability to produce or the desire
    to consume as the more problematic. In times of poverty, production is the problem: in
    times of boom, the need to stimulate consumption. It is important to recognise to what
    extent our perceptions mirror the experience of our own times!
 4. Childe's problem was that, as archaeology's lone intellectual, he didn't have anyone to
    talk to. His fellow historians on the CP Historians Group had such radically different
    ideas and timescales: Childe, remember, saw the origins of capitalism in the Bronze Age,
    the others took it as axiomatic that it began in the sixteenth century AD! Archaeologists
    and historians of the 1950s did not talk in terms of models, except in terms of Marxism,
    which was one of the few forms of historical generalisation. The patrician Grahame
    Clark, who might have been most sympathetic to such model-building, was certainly
    no Marxist (even though, in his own way, quite a rebel - and even known as 'corduroy
    Clark' whilst a graduate student, in reference to his informal style of dress: pers. comm.
    from the late Glyn Daniel). One reason why the New Archaeology really was so rev-
    olutionary was that it made explicit comparison and generalisation respectable. In
    Childe's day, that just wasn't done, at least in the humanities - which is why he generally
    didn't do it, and why it is such hard work trying to sort out what explicit models he
    actually held.
 5. Reflected at Cambridge, England in the school of Eric Higgs (the 'palaeoeconomists')
    rather than David Clarke.
 6.1 do not accept the single Grn- radiocarbon date of 3620 ± 60 bc for Sarnowo as
    providing an estimate of the age of the ploughmarks under the barrow there.


                                              504




                                 This content downloaded from
               128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                  RIGHT      OR     WRONG ?

 7. Even though it should be added (in fairness) that this latter model may be appropriate for
    certain innovations like irrigation, in appropriate climatic conditions.
 8. He consciously chose a short chronology (see Childe 1938), in the light of his views on
    diffusion, rather than simply failed to anticipate a timescale that was ultimately revealed
    by dendrochronology and calibrated radiocarbon.
 9. Though it should be remembered quite what a revelation was the Man the Hunter
    conference (Lee and de Vore 1968), with its combination of archaeologists and anthro-
    pologists. Many stereotypes died at that conference, perhaps the most important one
    being that hunters have no spare time to build higher culture. Quite to the contrary: it
    is farmers and townsmen who work longer and longer hours.
10. Many of Childe's attitudes to European prehistory can be summarised in terms of the
    following equations:
    1. Neolithic = oriental = religion = bad
    2. Bronze Age = western = capitalism = good.
11. 'Prehistory' is, in this sense, different from 'history': though not in an etiological sense -
    that prehistory is 'determined' by process, but history is 'made' by individuals and events.
12. His famous example (1956,171) was making a side-scraper: probably it was supposed to
    be done at full moon after fasting, imprecation and sacrifice; but all these aspects were
    irrelevant to its usefulness. Not merely were they (fortunately) lost to the archaeological
    record, but they were ultimately lost to the cumulative tradition of technology: 'futile
    accessories, expressive of ideological delusions ... Error expunged, knowledge stands out
    all the clearer     The vehemence of Childe's imagery on this topic is reminiscent of
    Carlyle's description of the Puritan government of England under Cromwell, when 'great
    quantities of dross and crypto-poisonous matter' were burnt out to secure her future pro-
    gress (History of Frederick II of Prussia, 1, 1872, 188f). There is a Protestant rectitude
    about both attitudes, which expresses itself in hostility to ritual: arguably the single most
    important aspect of most anthropological descriptions.
13. It is notable that Childe, despite his antipodean origins, made very little reference to the
    ethnography of New Guinea, which in the last 20 years has been the richest source of
    models for Neolithic life in Europe. This betrays a rather narrow, and perhaps even
    insecure, Eurocentrism.
14. Note that this definition would make the USSR economically a periphery, not a core,
    despite its political might and superpower status. The latter was achieved by massively
    extending its own sub-periphery, and spending a large proportion of its income on
    armaments. The fact that the attempt failed in the long run suggests that such economic
    'laws' are ultimately determinant; but the fact that it succeeded for so long before
    collapsing is a warning not to be deterministic about applying them. As a realistic
    generalisation, one might assert that theocratic (whether Marxist or Islamic) command
    economies in the twentieth century are more likely to occupy peripheral rather than core
    positions.
15. 'Invent', because it cannot be studied directly, only reconstructed from two imperfect
    analogies: the European 'peasant' cultures of much later times, and the pre-urban
    societies of non-European parts of the world.




                                              505




                                 This content downloaded from
               128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:32:52 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

