  Socio-economic and Demographic
 Models for Later Prehistoric Europe
                                    (1972)

Until recently there was at least a measure of general agreement among
European prehistorians on the aims of archaeology and the appropriate
framework for its interpretation. The most explicit statements of these aims
and methods are to be found in the writings of V. G. Childe, in his series of
syntheses of European prehistory from 1925 onwards, and in various later
works devoted specifically to methodology (Childe 1925; 1956). Childe's
approach was based on three related concepts: the 'stages of culture' classi-
fication of Morgan and Engels, the key role of technology in relation to
these, and a model of technological change which assumed that innovation
was a characteristic of specific types of society. From this point of view, the
progress of European societies depended on their proximity to Near Eastern
civilisation through the mediation of the 'secondary civilisations' of the
Mediterranean, themselves only made possible by the 'Urban Revolution' in
the Orient. Thus the whole process depended ultimately on one or two
unique events - the achievement of a regular surplus by irrigation agri-
culture in the alluvial valleys of the Nile and the Tigris-Euphrates.
   Both the theoretical basis of this, and the usefulness of these ideas in
interpreting the evidence now available, have been questioned. In particular,
on the theoretical side, it has become clear that more consideration must be
given to factors which in the archaeological record are less obvious than
technological change. The use of economic concepts such as 'surplus' cannot

This was written while I was a graduate student at Peterhouse with David Clarke,
for his book Models in Archaeology. It was a heady time, when someone in their
mid-twenties was invited to contribute in this way to a major publication. I had
just returned from excavating in Turkey, at Can Hasan with David French and
Sebastian Payne, and was sharing a house with Robin Dennell. The extracts
reproduced here have been chosen to convey the excitement of exploring
a whole range of neighbouring disciplines for their relevance to archaeology,
and the delight at finding principles and processes of human ecology.

                                        70




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    FOR   LATER     PREHISTORIC        EUROPE


be separated from demographic questions, such as why this was not ab-
sorbed by population increase, or whether the productivity of Meso-
potamian agriculture really was inherently greater than contemporary
European systems. The role of technology must be assessed in the light of its
relation to specific agricultural and economic systems, as it is only in re-
lation to these that the significance of particular innovations can be judged.


RESOURCES AND POTENTIAL FOR GROWTH
Economic expansion, far from being a characteristic of all societies, is a
rather exceptional occurrence. Small-scale economies appear to be charac-
terised both by low levels of labour input and low population densities, even
though human populations possess the ability to make use of a great range
of food resources. The small fraction of these exploited at any one time
makes the use of calculations based on 'carrying capacity' a dangerous pro-
cedure. The only alternative is a detailed reconstruction of prehistoric
economies based upon evidence of food remains, technology and site
locations.
    One of the most important factors to be taken into account is the
fluctuation in the abundance of available resources. Not merely must
population levels be adjusted to the season of greatest scarcity in the year,
but the economic strategy must minimise the effects of differences in
yield from year to year. The effects of such fluctuations, however, can be
cushioned by reliance on a combination of resources which assures the
highest return under the most adverse conditions. This is particularly
important in determining the balance between animal and plant foods, and
accounts for the heavy emphasis on pastoralism in arid regions (Deschler
1965). Although animal resources are less productive than plant ones, being
one step higher in the food chain, they possess the advantage of mobility, so
that scattered flushes of vegetation in areas of variable rainfall, which are
too erratic to be predicted and thus used for cereal growing, can be used to
support moving herds. Even where the rainfall is more regular, but the area
is still subject to droughts, the use of plant foods such as cereals still needs
to be supplemented by a strong pastoral component, in case of crop failure.
The types of social organisation typical of such economies embody further
security precautions, based on the circulation of animals on loan.
    In less marginal areas, however, such considerations are not so important
in determining economic strategies and population levels. In particular,
there seem to be a number of stable patterns of small-scale exploitation. The
lack of complex techniques for storage, for instance, or for intensive forms
of cropping, places limits on the development of increasingly productive
ways of utilising many types of resources. Although shellfish may be con-
veniently gathered from beds exposed intertidally or in shallow water, any
more intensive method would involve a 'leap' in technological capacity,

                                         71




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

             SOCIO-ECONOMIC         AND    DEMOGRAPHIC          MODELS


including for instance the construction of large-scale dams, cages, etc.
Similarly, the most productive method of exploiting an ungulate population
is by a ranching technique, in which large numbers of animals are raised to
a uniform age at which the gain in meat weight begins to be offset by the
continuing cost of providing grazing or fodder. In small-scale exploitation,
however, this is impossible: what is required is a regular supply of daily
food, which is best supplied by live animal products (blood, milk, etc.) if this
is possible, or by occasional culling.
    While an increase in yield is therefore possible, it is unlikely to be
attempted by most groups practising small-scale economies. Only where
there is a set of relatively simple transition possibilities, based upon a series
of small modifications to an existing system, are changes likely to occur.
Given the tendency of societies to 'fight to stay the same' (Schon 1971, 32),
by resisting innovations that would cause large-scale restructuring of estab-
lished patterns, such possibilities are limited in occurrence, and are con-
ceivable (a) only with resources with a high potential for expansion
(elasticity), and (b) with resource systems including complementary re-
sources which allow the problems created by the development of one
element in the resource system to be overcome by the provision of - for
example - a secure if low-yielding supply of food in case of the failure of the
main element.
    One of the most striking contrasts in patterns of growth is that between
cereal-based economies, and those based on animal resources such as ungu-
lates or shellfish. The root of the contrast lies in the relative elasticity of the
resources. With an ungulate population, cropping above a certain per-
centage of the population will impair the ability of the herd to reproduce
itself. The size of the total population can only be raised by drastic changes
in the structure of the ecosystem. With cereals, on the other hand, by
relatively small changes in the structure of the ecosystem - shifting plants
with an annual habit into niches occupied by plants more successful in com-
petition - the yield of useful products can be greatly increased. Moreover,
there is a more or less direct relationship between labour input and return:
clearance and sowing of small additional areas produces an immediate effect
in terms of increased output. Similarly, even relatively minor advances in
technology may have the effect of greatly increasing yield, both by allowing
more efficient cultivation methods and by making possible the use of hither-
to unused types of land.
    The significance of the Neolithic Revolution lies in the almost continuous
growth possible in cereal-based economies, and the increasing degree of
interference with the ecosystem that it entails. The domestication of animals
such as sheep provided a resource compatible with a sedentary pattern of
exploitation in a system in which settlements needed to be located for access
to cereal-growing soils, and provided not only additional protein but also
security in case of crop failure. Patterns of animal exploitation were thus

                                          72




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    FOR   LATER     PREHISTORIC        EUROPE


adjusted to complement an increased reliance on plant food. Despite the
difficulties involved in actually identifying 'domesticated' animals (Higgs
and Jarman 1969), the need for greater control over movement, breeding,
etc., in this situation is clear, and the distinction between agricultural and
'hunter-gatherer' economies remains valid.
   Patterns of growth in agricultural economies are thus closely related to
the amounts and distributions of fertile land, which affect both the capacity
for further expansion and the kinds of more intensive exploitation that can
be developed. In areas of heavy leaching such as the tropics, the potential for
growth with a pre-industrial technology is much smaller than in temperate
areas, even though in almost every zone there are alluvial soils whose
concentration of minerals and water retentive capacity makes them first-
class agricultural land. The capacity for further expansion thus depends
ultimately on the availability of 'middle range' soils which allow expansion
to continue when the first-class ones are filled to capacity. A second factor is
present in some areas where a diversity of different zones adjoin (or are
connected by easy transport links) and the integration of zones of specialised
production is possible through reciprocal redistribution and exchange net-
works.
   The phrase 'the colonisation of Europe' has often been used by historians
(e.g. Koebner 1966) to describe the extension of settlement in the Middle
Ages into hitherto uncultivated areas. Yet this marginal infilling is but the
final phase of a continuous process with its beginning in the Early Neolithic.
The demographic crises of the later Middle Ages reflect the increased diffi-
culty with which the extension of the margin of cultivation could be carried
out. In many documented instances, population was very close to the
ceiling. As Postan and Titow (1959) noted for the estates of the bishopric of
Winchester in the thirteenth century, poor harvests were directly reflected in
mortality figures. Wrigley (1962) has suggested that the ceiling imposed by
competing uses for available land caused a recession until the bottleneck
was broken by technical innovation - in this case the development of
machines based on coal and iron rather than wood. This was an essential
element in a solution involving radical changes in settlement location, land
tenure and more intensive systems of agrarian production, complemented
by the growth of an imperialist colonial system based on the export of
specialist manufactured products and the importation of food and raw
materials.

Systems of land use
The economies of prehistoric Europe and the Near East thus belong to a
class of economies characterised by the possibility of more or less con-
tinuous expansion. It might be expected from this that the economic, social
and technological developments that characterise the post-Neolithic
sequence could be explained in terms of this process of growth, and that the

                                        73




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

            SOCIO-ECONOMIC          AND    DEMOGRAPHIC          MODELS


different patterns that characterise the Near East, the Mediterranean and
inland Europe could be related to the geographical background - the dis-
tribution of soils, raw materials and transport routes.
   An important set of information for the analysis of subsistence agri-
culture is the labour requirements of the various crops. As there is great
variation in these, and as societies are generally unwilling to work harder
than is necessary, certain resources possess clear advantages for populations
of a given size. Thus it has already been noted that hunter-gatherer groups
expend relatively little effort on subsistence in comparison with agricultur-
alists. The same contrast is true for the various stages of agricultural intensi-
fication.
   An increase in output can be achieved by two means: either by an increase
in the area of land utilised or by intensification - the more productive use of
land already cropped. Both require changes in technology and both have
implications for social organisation, but intensification makes special de-
mands on labour input. Expansion in a given system proceeds by a balance
between the two processes related to the opportunities of an individual en-
vironment; but before introducing a spatial element into the model, some
characteristics of the intensification process should be noted.
   The most thorough discussion of this problem is by Boserup (1965). She
points out that with a small population, the most economic agricultural
system in terms of labour input is an extensive one, based on swidden (slash-
and-burn) cultivation with a simple technology. Intensification is measured
by the increased frequency of cropping of a given area, with a consequent
shortening of fallow periods. This process has several implications. In the
first place little preparation of the soil is necessary for long fallow systems,
where cropping is for short periods only and it is not necessary to maintain
fertility by manuring during this period, nor even worthwhile clearing tree
stumps. In consequence, the use of the plough is unnecessary and the culti-
vated plot is abandoned when weeds begin to compete seriously with crops
or when the nutrients released by burning off the forest are exhausted. For
short fallow systems, however, both manuring and ploughing become neces-
sary, as the land is cropped beyond the point at which initial fertility begins
to decline, and fallowing is only long enough to allow the growth of grass,
presenting problems in tillage. Further intensification, allowing even multi-
cropping, depends on the introduction of techniques such as irrigation or
terracing involving heavy capital investment.
    In an extensive agricultural system, a relatively small labour input
is sufficient to produce a good crop. As hoeing and weeding take a large
amount of labour time, any increase in these is particularly important in this
respect. It is these elements that become increasingly necessary with intensi-
fication. In addition, yields are likely to fall somewhat even with manuring.
With plough agriculture, considerations of scale are critical - draught
animals must be fed and sufficient beasts are required for manuring to make


                                          74




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    FOR   LATER     PREHISTORIC        EUROPE


cultivation profitable. In consequence of these, one of the corollaries of
intensification is an actual fall in output per man hour. Since labour is in any
case low in extensive systems, this is still a possibility, but intensification
does imply longer working hours if output is to be increased. Intensification
is thus not likely to be undertaken except in a situation where the popu-
lation cannot be supported by existing systems of cultivation and until other
possibilities have been exhausted - or would themselves involve a com-
parable increase in effort.
    Boserup's scheme is artificial to the extent that it neglects local soil
variation and presents only an economic analysis of the factors involved in
intensification. In the analysis of the agricultural development of a specific
area, the range of available land types and their distribution must be an
important element. The soils determine the degree to which intensification
can proceed with a pre-industrial technology without causing permanent
damage. Many tropical soils are easily overcropped, and in consequence the
widespread occurrence of extensive systems can be seen in part as due to
this. In other areas, however, extensive systems occur on land that would
sustain a shorter fallow period: here land is simply abundant in relation to
population and there is no need for a system involving higher labour input.
    On the basis of African evidence, Allan (1965) has produced a sixfold
land classification based on the ratio of crop time to fallow time. Although
based on the use of the soils, for the long-settled agricultural areas there is
a strong correlation between this and inherent fertility characteristics. An
important distinction can be drawn, for example, between permanent
cultivation soils, and others that require a longer fallow period. The latter
range through semi-permanent cultivation, recurrent cultivation, shifting
cultivation, and partial cultivation to wholly uncultivable soils, requiring
progressively longer fallow periods. Although Boserup's model does not
admit the existence of ceilings determined by soil type, it is clear that with a
pre-industrial technology they must exist. Certainly the more fertile areas
could formerly have been cultivated on an extensive system: but as popu-
lation grew, intensification proceeded only as far as the nature of the soil
allowed without artificial fertilisers.
   With a small initial population, the richest soils will be settled first,
especially permanent cultivation soils if they are available. The growth of
population leads to the spread of settlement to poorer and more difficult
soils, first on an extensive basis and then on to as intensive a system as the
soil will permit. As the good soils are filled up, a choice will open as to
whether local intensification or extension of the margin of cultivation is
more attractive. This depends on the character and availability of the
remaining land - whether it is only slightly less fertile than that already
cultivated, or much poorer - and thus on the relative cost-effectiveness of
the two possibilities.1
   The interrelatedness of different aspects of production introduces

                                        75




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

            SOCIO-ECONOMIC          AND    DEMOGRAPHIC                MODELS


                                                                                                FRUIT

                                                             HEATH                             "| KUTS |
                                                            PASTURE
                                                            COMMONS




                                                                                                VINES

                                                         STUBBLE GRAZING
                                                         (CLEAN FALLOWS)

                                                     _ _ J LIGHT JPLOUGH)
                                                     MANURING OF ARABLE, FRUITS i
                                                                                               U
                                                                        |    VINES
                                                                          ARABLE PR<

                                                                        nr
                                                                        SEED FOR CONSUMPTION
                                                                         JL

                                               Hnrrr                  CARBOHYDRATES


                                                      CLOTHING   J
                                                              PROTEIN



2.1 Diagram of the relationships between (a) north European and (b)
Mediterranean agrarian systems in the medieval period. In the former (here
diagrammed as a two-course rotation), arable and pastoral elements are closely
interlinked; in the latter they have greater independence (after C. T. Smith).
constraints on the range of possibilities for expansion. A series of well-
documented examples is provided by the farming systems of medieval
Europe (see especially Slicher van Bath 1963, 9-18; Smith 1967,191-256).
In an intensive system of north European kind, where manure is utilised and
the animals are overwintered largely on special crops and by products of
cereal farming (stubble, chaff, etc.), the animal component has to be ex-
tended at the same time as the cereal element, and the balance between the
two is closely defined. The network of rights over stubble grazing was there-
fore an important element in assuring maximum utilisation of animal
fodder. Figure 2.1a shows the connections between various parts of the
system. By contrast, the Mediterranean areas of Europe are characterised by
a system where different elements could be developed independently; large
areas of upland unsuitable for cereal growing encouraged the use of trans-
humance, while some lowland areas provided suitable places for fruit grow-
ing, often with small-scale irrigation (see Figures 2.1b, 2.2).
   For a given set of resources, and techniques for cropping them, there are
optimum sizes and locations for settlement units. Regularities in settlement
pattern represent the end result of decisions based on the need to minimise
unproductive travelling time and the costs of bulk transport; thus locational
decisions can be modelled in the same way as decisions on crop strategy.
As transport technology, exploitation pattern or social organisation
changes, so the factors affecting site location will alter. Stable patterns of
locational preference are thus valuable evidence for reconstructing these.
   The potential for growth in a particular area and its pattern of develop-
ment are determined in the first place by the range of soil types and their
distribution. For the analysis of specific situations, therefore, a spatial model

                                          76




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    FOR   LATER     PREHISTORIC        EUROPE




2.2 South-east Europe showing routes used in transhumance in recent times
(after Cvijic).

is essential, and data on archaeological site locations offer one of the easiest
methods of testing predictions derived from these. Over the last fifty years a
great mass of data on archaeological distributions has been collected, some
of it of outstanding quality and scholarship. Small-scale distribution maps
were not greatly used by Childe, and it is this lack of contact with the
pattern of prehistoric settlement 'on the ground', in a regional setting, that
is the root of the inadequacy of much of his models today. It is not neces-
sarily possible, however, to compare one kind of distribution map with
another, especially when maps of different periods may be constructed in
terms of different features - settlement sites, burials, stray finds of various
types, etc. What must be compared are the inferred systems of land use
deduced from various kinds of map, in conjunction with the analysis of food
remains from settlement sites.


T H E CHARACTER OF EARLY NEOLITHIC SETTLEMENT
The change to an economy based on planted cereals and pulses and the
adjustment of complementary exploitation and settlement patterns, despite
the slowness with which the various elements of this strategy were

                                         77




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

            SOCIO-ECONOMIC         AND    DEMOGRAPHIC          MODELS


integrated, marks a significant transition to new patterns of demographic
and economic growth for which Childe's description of a 'Neolithic
Revolution' is not inappropriate. In Europe particularly, the introduction of
new plant staples produced a sharply defined economic shift in areas of high
agricultural potential, even though this had no immediate effect in areas
where the exploitation of animal populations continued to be superior to
primitive farming.
   The restricted range of environments suitable for early farming systems
has not been sufficiently emphasised in discussions of the spread of agri-
culture, and in particular the significance of soil fertility and moisture
content in determining the pattern of occupation. Although the striking
correlation between Neolithic settlement and loess soils in central Europe
has been the subject of comment since Buttler, this phenomenon of close
association with particular soil types is not limited to the Danube region
but is a general feature of the initial agricultural colonisation of Europe.
A characteristic of early cereal assemblages from Neolithic sites in the Near
East is the presence of seeds of Scirpus, indicating a very moist immediate
environment for cereal cultivation. This evidence is supported by the strong
pattern of association between early village sites and permanent cultivation
soils near springs, and especially near the backswamps of large lakes or the
fringes of old lake basins (cf. Allan 1970). This strongly suggests that an
economic yield from cereal cultivation was generally possible only where
a sufficient area of such soils was available, and that the recent geological
history of the relevant areas should provide significant predictions about the
kinds of area where early Neolithic sites are likely to be found.
   Central Turkey and the areas of historic Macedonia and Thrace form an
ancient crystalline massif against which later sedimentary rocks were in-
tensively folded during the Tertiary mountain building phase, forming
chains to the north and south of the original massif. The downfaulted areas
of this were for a time occupied by arms of the sea, during which shallow
water limestones were deposited in the Tertiary period. The inland basins
were then cut off from the sea by further uplifting, and became freshwater
lakes - or in some cases saltwater lakes in the case of internal drainage
basins, e.g. Tuzgolii in central Anatolia. The levels of these lakes seem to
have fluctuated considerably in the course of the Pleistocene, related to
changes in temperature and humidity. In general the rise in temperature
during interglacial phases would have increased evaporation (Butzer 1970),
and a postglacial recession of lake levels has been documented in Anatolia
(Cohen and Erol 1969; Cohen 1970) and in the Dead Sea Rift (Vita-Finzi
1969). Similar phenomena are likely to have occurred in the large flat basins
of Thessaly and central Bulgaria, and in a multitude of small lakes in the
Balkans and Anatolia.
   The relationship between the areas of fine alluvium and backswamp soils
produced by the Late Glacial recession in lake levels, and the pattern of early

                                         78




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                           FOR   LATER        PREHISTORIC             EUROPE




       & 9 S < 1 Terrace     [ [ [ \ \ Marl               Upland      [ g T

                       Backswamp              Sandridge   I" ' .' •

2.3 The distribution of known prehistoric sites in the Cumra region of south-
central Turkey (between Konya and Karaman), after field-survey by Dr D. H.
French (1970), with soil boundaries after Driessen and de Meester: (a) seventh
millennium BC; (b) sixth millennium BC; (c) fifth millennium BC; (d) fourth
millennium BC [from Sherratt 1973, with dates corrected],

settlement, has so far been intensively investigated only in Anatolia (Cohen
1970; French 1970). In the Konya plain, Neolithic settlement seems to be
closely associated with backswamp soils, which, unlike the other soil types
also associated with the receding lake such as marls, are not subject to
strong seasonal desiccation. Although located for access to such backswamp
soils, the settlements themselves are typically sited on the edges of alluvial
fans which provide raised areas less liable to be flooded. The site of £atal
Hiiyiik, for example, occupies a highly favourable position on a spur where
the fan seems to have broken through a sandspit representing an old shore-
line, and the site has ready access to backswamp soils on three sides (Figure
2.3, top left).
   One piece of evidence which suggests that such areas were strongly pre-
ferred in spite of other disadvantages is the apparent incidence of malaria,
for example at £atal Hiiyiik and at Nea Nikomedia in a low-lying part of
Greek Macedonia. Angel (1968) has suggested that the incidence of porotic
hyperostosis in skeletal material from these two sites is associated with a
form of anaemia conferring resistance to this disease. Certainly the tectonic
basins of Macedonia occupied by the remnants of Pleistocene lakes were
until recently highly malarial, as the French and British forces discovered in
1916-18 (see Naval Intelligence Handbooks: Greece, vol. I, 272).

                                                    79




                      This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

            SOCIO-ECONOMIC          AND   DEMOGRAPHIC          MODELS


    TWO basic reasons lie behind this pattern of land occupation. First,
with low population densities, the model put forward in previous sections
suggests that there would be a strong selection for permanent cultivation
soils, and that excess population would move to other areas of similarly
high-yielding soil before tackling poorer-quality land or changing to a more
intensive system of exploitation. Secondly, in dry Mediterranean climates
frequent ploughing of land is necessary to prevent run-off and to encourage
moisture absorption in order to produce an adequate crop on land where
groundwater is not near to the surface (Clark 1952,100; Stevens 1966, 93).
It is most unlikely that the earliest agricultural communities in the Near East
and south-east Europe used the plough, in view of Boserup's arguments
summarised above. Instead, the initial stage of agricultural development
seems to be characterised by a pattern of rapid spread with relatively low
population densities, settlement systems being restricted to small areas of
land of high agricultural potential, with specialised satellites.
    This pattern of settlement has important implications for reconstructions
of the types of social regulation and mechanisms for the distribution of
goods, as well as being the unstable initial state of a system with great
potential for change.


INTERNAL EXPANSION IN ENEOLITHIC AND
B R O N Z E A G E EUROPE
While there was still an adjacent expanding frontier allowing surplus popu-
lation to emigrate, population levels in a given area would have remained
low. In south-east Europe the association of settlement with marshy areas
and the consequent prevalence of malaria would in any case have checked
growth to some extent. However, over a long time the build-up of popu-
lation continued, and resulted in changes in economy, settlement pattern
and social structure.
    Of particular significance is the point at which permanent settlement
began to be extended beyond the range of soils typical of the initial
settlement of the area. In the Konya plain third-millennium settlements are
found for the first time, in any number, on the drier terraces above the plain;
doubling the number of sites known from the previous millennium. In the
Balkans a shift in the preferred location of settlement occurs, typified by
sites on defended promontories on the edge of the basins. In Czechoslo-
vakia, similar hilltop settlements are found extending up the valleys from
the fertile Bohemian 'heartland'. In the north European plain, settlement
extends onto the sandy heathlands previously avoided.2 These movements
are not closely synchronous even within individual regions, but they repre-
sent critical points in a common process at work over the whole area.
    The process of agricultural expansion carried with it implications for
social organisation. One aspect of this was the competition for colonisable

                                          80




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    FOR   LATER     PREHISTORIC        EUROPE


land distributed between the existing centres of population, reflected both in
the selection of defensive locations and the development of effective metal
weapons as opposed to small copper knives. Another was the occupation of
a more diverse range of environments than the initial optimal ones, and the
increased necessity for the redistribution of basic products. Even though
some of the forested sandy soils taken into cultivation would originally have
carried brown earths suitable for cereal cultivation, the agricultural use of
these would rapidly encourage podsolisation and reduce their value as
arable. In this situation redistributive centres, even if only seasonal markets
or fairs under the auspices or protection of a local chief, would take on
increasing significance. The role of metal, increasingly a strategic raw
material, would in these circumstances have been important in securing low-
land cereal products, while the emergence of distributional centres and local
chieftains made possible the exchange of specialised materials and objects
between centres. In a similar way textiles - evidenced from the increased
numbers and size of sheep in the Bronze Age of south-east Europe and from
the appearance of loom weights and fittings - would have been an important
medium of exchange.

URBANISATION AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
In Neolithic and Bronze Age Europe, the relationship between population
and food supply can be expressed schematically as in Figure 2.3a (although
the actual course of the curve will of course be far from regular). The culti-
vated area increases as population grows, and production rises with it. Year-
to-year fluctuations produce a temporary surplus in good years: this is the
normal surplus of subsistence agriculture (Figure 2.3b; cf. Allan 1965).
There is little or no large-scale distribution of food over any distance, since
all sites are growing similar crops.
    By the later fourth millennium, however, certain communities in the Near
East had initiated a new pattern of exchanges between regions, notably
between the alluvial river-basins and their hinterlands. Such institution-
alised exchange introduced a new factor of production for manufacture. A
system involving urbanism necessitates the production of a standard surplus
(Figure 2.4a) by means of additional labour input, in which one region
exports specialised manufactured products (often textiles) in return for
grain and raw materials. Since the increase in grain production requires
considerable additional labour input, it is likely that some element of co-
ercion is needed to initiate an exchange system of this kind, even though the
system may then be maintained by local elites - the main consumers of
luxury products (Figure 2.5). The process of demographic and economic
expansion thus has sociological implications which are essential to the
general problem of growth, and particularly to the question of regulation of
production and exchange. As the maintenance of an agriculturally non-


                                        81




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

            SOCIO-ECONOMIC         AND    DEMOGRAPHIC          MODELS


                                food
                               SUPPLY




2.4 Surplus as the relationship between population and food supply: (a) the
normal surplus - the fluctuating yearly excess over subsistence requirements,
and (b) the standard surplus, a regularly achieved production for exchange,
requiring additional labour input.

productive class requires more work from those directly involved in agri-
culture, the development of social stratification can be seen as one of a range
of increasingly high-cost solutions to the problem of supporting further
growth, and the rarity of such systems in the course of human development
is therefore scarcely surprising.
    A true urban system, in which the central places are also centres of
population and have facilities for continuous storage and manufacturing,
is typical of state organisation with bulk interregional exchange. The actual
size of such 'cities', however, is a local problem, depending on the con-
centration of agricultural population. Where only a small agricultural
community is resident, these may more aptly be described as palace or
ceremonial centres. In Mesopotamia, by contrast, such centres seem often to
have been surrounded by a zone empty of villages (Adams 1970), implying
that the land was worked by labour from the city, and the difference in size
between central and non-central places is largely related to settlement

                                         82




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    FOR   LATER    PREHISTORIC         EUROPE


Political                                 Politically administered external trade
centre —
(king)                                                  with foreigners
Elite



Villages                                                External trade a t the local
or tribal •
segments                                                 level: I market or gift trad'e

2.5 Socio-economic transactions in the primitive economy, within a centralised
system of political authority (from Dalton 1969).

nucleation and concentration of population for defence. In other environ-
ments, however, this may not be a rational pattern of population distri-
bution. The true 'urban' functions of such sites are represented by the
magazines, storage areas, administrative and religious 'core', and specialist
manufacturing workshops. (The existence of a network of small 'market
towns' is related to the degree to which the villages themselves consume
specialist products, and such forms may be typical of a later phase either
than fairs or urban centres as defined above.)
   With the development of social differentiation and centres of power, new
phenomena emerge as it becomes possible for innovations to appeal to
sectional interests and emerging elites. Even more striking are the results of
changes in the communication infrastructure of societies with a need to find
external markets and sources of supply. With the growing disparity between
'advanced' and 'underdeveloped' countries, centre/periphery diffusion
systems (Schon 1971, ch. 4) become increasingly common and the scale of
their effects becomes increasingly wide. Even so, however, such effects are
largely limited to the areas in which they have a direct economic interest,
and large areas - even adjacent to the colonising country - may remain
relatively uninfluenced if they are outside this sphere of interest. The state
seems to be closely related to the degree in which long-distance bulk
exchange of products is critical to the functioning of the economy, and
typically state organisation begins at nodal points and extends along the
routes of trade (cf. Morton-Williams 1969). Historical geographers (e.g.
Deutsch 1953; East 1968; Whittlesey 1944) have elaborated models of the
genesis of states, which are in fact applicable, with modification, to less
centralised systems.3 State systems exist to cope with large-scale flows of
products; thus phenomena of this kind seem to be behind the growth of
large oppida in southern Britain in the later pre-Roman Iron Age with the
exports recorded by Strabo, a process of local development stimulated by,
and progressively amalgamated into, the formal network of an expanding
empire. This example illustrates the 'multiplier effect' (Hamilton 1967), by
which nodal areas propagate their organisation outwards.


                                        83




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

              SOCIO-ECONOMIC            AND    DEMOGRAPHIC           MODELS


CONCLUSION
The arguments set out in this paper are intended as much to indicate the
range of evidence that must be considered in interpreting prehistoric cultural
development as to advocate the use of specific models. Without an under-
lying framework of assumptions about the role of factors such as population
growth, there is no possibility of relating different aspects of prehistoric
culture to each other and producing a convincing explanation for the
contrasts in development between different areas. Only with this framework
in mind can relevant models be selected for specific problems.


NOTES

1. Many of the types of choice made by subsistence farmers in assessing the cost-effectiveness
   of various types of exploitation are conveniently expressed as programming models (e.g.
   linear programming, integer programming, etc.). These are techniques for finding the
   optimum allocation of labour on different resources with different degrees of productivity
   to give a maximum yield, and they make it possible to work out mathematically a solution
   found in practice only by trial and error (Joy 1967).
2. Most useful here is Mathiassen's careful study (1948) of the distribution of prehistoric
   finds in Jutland. The comparison of evidence from different classes of objects and
   monuments produces an interesting and highly significant pattern related to the three
   major facies of the Riss and Wiirm moraine landscape - hill sand, heath sand and clay.
   At the risk of oversimplification, it is almost possible to see a reflection of Thomsen's
   Three Age System* in the successive occupation phases of these soil types: Neolithic
   settlement is concentrated largely on the more fertile hill sand; the late Neolithic Corded
   Ware period sees the occupation of the poorer heath sand areas, and this pattern persists
   until the occupation of clay areas in Iron Age times.
3. Useful here is the distinction used by human geographers concerned with the genesis of
   states (e.g. East 1968) between 'core' and 'peripheral' areas.




                                              84




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:06:41 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                              3
          Water, Soil and Seasonality
          in Early Cereal Cultivation
                                     '     (1980)

T h e purpose of this paper is to review current ideas of agricultural develop-
ment in the sub-tropical and temperate parts of the western Old World and
to suggest that the small scale and restricted extent of early cultivation
systems gave them a unique character which has not been generally appreci-
ated. Recent studies of prehistoric settlement in the western Old World have
shown the basic role of soil moisture in early cultivation, and the association
of such sites with riverine and springside locations. The beginning of such a
cropping system marked a significant departure from earlier forms of cereal
exploitation in the natural habitat zone, and may have involved a difference
in growth cycle from that of the wild forms. The kind of cultivation which
can be reconstructed as the earliest stage of agriculture is best described as
a form of fixed plot horticulture dependent on ground- and surface-water,
which differentiated in succeeding millennia into various forms of dry
farming and irrigation agriculture. The former path involved the develop-
ment of cultivation techniques suitable for interfluvial areas, including
plough cultivation and swiddening; while the latter involved increasing
degrees of water management to enlarge the area suitable for intensive
cultivation.
   Because the evidence for early cultivation systems is so varied in character

The ideas of the previous chapter suggested that early farming, usually thought
of as shifting cultivation, had been fundamentally misunderstood. This paper -
written by invitation for a World Archaeology special volume on water manage-
ment - was an attempt to outline a systematic alternative: that agriculture had
begun as a transition from wild cereal populations to floodplain cultivation, and
that such horticulture was the primary form of farming. It was actually written
after Chapter 6, though published before it - in the same year as the Cambridge
Encyclopedia of Archaeology, where I used its conclusions in my chapters. It was
fuelled by comments from Jim Lewthwaite, Neil Roberts, Joan Oates and David
HartW. ;


                                             85




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      WATER,       SOIL    AND      SEASONALITY


and the arguments often speculative, three aspects will be considered
separately rather than treated in strict chronological or regional order. After
a short discussion of current schemes of agricultural development, the
problem is approached first from the settlement evidence, and then from the
viewpoint of crop ecology, before discussing the development of methods of
water-management. The final section sets these observations in a wider
context.


T H E CHARACTER OF EARLY CULTIVATION SYSTEMS
Recent discussions of agricultural development, notably those of Boserup
(1965), Wolf (1966) and Sanders and Price (1968), have stressed the tran-
sition from extensive to intensive forms of land-use. A major theme of this
analysis is the move from long-fallow systems, often involving 'slash-and-
burn' or swidden farming, to more intensive cultivation with shorter fallows
made possible by labour-intensive techniques such as manuring and irri-
gation. Such transitions have been studied notably in south-east Asia
(Geertz 1963) and in tropical Africa (Allan 1965). In applying these ideas to
archaeological material, swiddening has usually been seen as the 'primeval'
system, and assumed to be typical of the earliest farming groups. This idea
has a long history in Europe, where early Neolithic groups have often been
assumed to be 'slash-and-burn' cultivators (e.g. Clark 1952, 93). Yet the
very fact that swiddening is still widespread in many areas and was only
superseded in other areas in historical times should itself argue caution in
using this as a model for the systems which were in existence six thousand
years before.
    A further argument against seeing swidden cultivation as a feature of
great antiquity, especially in temperate environments, is its restriction in
recent times to the most marginal European habitats, usually under conifer-
ous forest. Its use is known mainly from the Boreal forest areas, for instance
in Finland (Sigaut 1975), or else from upland areas of coniferous forest in
central Europe such as the Carpathians (Lewicka 1972). In these areas it
occurs on soils so marginal that they were not cultivated before the Middle
Ages, as can be seen from the distribution of Late-Medieval clearance-names
(Smith 1967, 133). It could plausibly be argued, therefore, that far from
being a 'primeval' agrarian system, swidden agriculture was a characteristic
of the most recent phase of the internal colonisation of Europe, when settle-
ment spread to the least fertile soils which could not withstand any other
form of cultivation.
    While this phase may be more significant in the tropics, where low-
quality soils form a greater proportion of the landscape, the same arguments
apply: it is likely that the starting point of the Boserup scheme represents an
already developed system of cultivation which is no model for the earliest
farming systems.

                                             86




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       IN   EARLY     CEREAL        CULTIVATION


INFERENCE FROM PREHISTORIC SETTLEMENT PATTERNS

The above arguments receive further support from examination of the
archaeological evidence. The most striking feature of early farming settle-
ment is its restricted distribution. By comparison with the proportion of the
landscape under cultivation today, only a small fraction was used by early
agriculturalists. In the Near East this proportion has grown much larger
by the third millennium BC; but in Europe it did not attain anything like its
present spread until the first millennium BC or even the Christian era, and
the process of infilling continued well into the Middle Ages.
   Not only was the distribution of sites in the earlier phases restricted, it
was highly selective; and there are consistent patterns of association with
certain environments and situations. Alluvial, lake-edge and other locations
with high groundwater are characteristic of the Neolithic both in the near
East and in southern Europe (Allan 1972; Sherratt 1973).
   In the earliest stage of farming villages, many important sites like Jericho
and Mureybit fall outside the zone of possible dry-farming altogether.
Indeed, when evidence of cereal crops was first found at these sites it was
commonly assumed that the grain must have been traded from better-
watered hill-country nearby, or else that the climate must have undergone
radical alteration. What all such sites possess, however, are abundant
supplies of localised surface- or ground-water, such as the seepage area and
spring of Ain es Sultan at Jericho or the seasonal wadis and perennially
damp Euphrates floodplain at Mureybit. Similar observations apply to
the more developed phase represented at Beidha, Tell Abu Hureyra and
Bouqras, where local concentrations of surface-water permitted a limited
cultivation on suitable fine-grained alluvial soils, especially at wadi-mouths.
   The late glacial fall in lake-levels provided suitable terrain on the former
lake-margins in many parts of the east Mediterranean. In Anatolia, the
earlier Neolithic sites of the Konya Plain, including £atal Hiiyiik, cluster in
the backswamp region where rivers spread out in the otherwise arid plain;
while further west the fluctuating lakes in the upland basins of Pisdia are
ringed with sites like Hacilar and Suberde. Early sites in Greece and the
Balkans are concentrated in areas of high water-table in the tectonic basins,
either by springs at the valley-edge, by stream confluences, or on lower
terraces by rivers and seasonally-enlarged lakes. In central Europe, early
agricultural settlements occur on levees in the Middle Danube and Tisza
floodplains, and by rivers and streams within the loess area. All of these
locations give access to hydromorphic soils, and avoid the drier interfluves.
Contrary to expectations generated by the model of 'shifting cultivation',
such sites are usually long-lived, lasting for hundreds or even thousands of
years in some cases. This is as true for Bandkeramik sites in north-west and
central Europe as it is for the early tells of the Near East. Moreover, they
often represent surprisingly large communities; sites like Jericho and C^atal

                                             87




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       WATER,       SOIL    AND     SEASONALITY


Hiiyiik are only the most spectacular examples of a general phenomenon.
Clusters of agricultural settlement were often widely scattered, but within
them population was locally concentrated around critical resources such as
fine-grained, well-watered soils.
   The implication of all this is that early agriculturalists occupied only a
narrow zone of maximum productivity, in an essentially small-scale though
locally intensive system of cultivation. In places this was capable of support-
ing nucleated communities, though in others produced a pattern of hamlets
following the exploited zone. This zone of high water-table was of import-
ance not only for cereal-growing but for a variety of resources, including
water itself, fish and freshwater mussels, and the range of plant and animal
species characteristic of the unusual conditions of the alluvium - in the Near
East the game and exploitable perennials of wet conditions, and in Europe
the species which could flourish only in the more open conditions where the
Atlantic forests were interrupted by wet ground (Clarke 1976). In a sense,
therefore, 'Mesolithic' and 'Neolithic' adaptations were parallel rather than
successive: the main difference was the possibilities of expansion inherent in
systems using cereals (Sherratt 1972, 491).
   The characteristics of initial farming systems in Europe are best
demonstrated by comparison with the patterns which emerged in succeeding
millennia. The results of intensive regional surveys indicate the major
changes which took place in the fourth and third millennia BC. A classic
study of this kind is the work of Janusz Kruk and his associates in the loess-
covered uplands of Little Poland (Kruk 1973). Here the restricted catch-
ments of early Neolithic sites in the river valleys are a clear indication of the
focus of interest in this zone, in striking contrast to the pattern which
succeeded it in the later fourth and third millennia BC. Kruk notes the
restriction of the earliest (early fifth millennium BC) agricultural sites to the
lower parts of the valley slopes, immediately overlooking the floodplain -
a pattern which continued down to the early fourth millennium, with some
expansion to similar positions in small side-valleys. The main change
occurred in the fourth millennium with the TRB culture, when there was
a shift of activity to the interfluves and sites were located on higher ground
above the valleys.
   Kruk uses these regularities to reconstruct the economy of the initial
settlers (255): 'Because of the limited size of the zone where the activities of
the Danubian [fifth millennium BC] people were concentrated, the regular
use of burning economy seems virtually impossible. The characteristic con-
centration of settlements within relatively limited areas also seems to speak
against this possibility. Any extensive use of burning as a farming system
would involve also the interfluve ... However, the higher landscape zone was
not systematically exploited by the Danubian people.' Instead, 'it is possible
to assume with a fair amount of certainty that amongst the Danubian people
the plant cultivation was closely linked with the lowest-lying parts of the


                                             88




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       IN   EARLY      CEREAL       CULTIVATION


ground. Natural conditions of this zone, notably the considerable humidity
of soils and their productivity, favoured near larger settlements ... were
worked by hand ... Owing to the high and durable edaphic potential of the
soils that covered this zone it was possible to use the same portion of land
continuously even without fertilizing it.' Such a pattern, with its small
amount of forest-clearance and restricted possibilities for grazing, would
fit the lack of stone tools suitable for woodcutting and the suggestions of
stalled livestock in these early contexts.
    There is accumulating evidence (Chapter 6) that the late fourth and early
third millennia BC saw the widespread introduction of the plough, and that
the extension of cultivation and shift in the focus of settlement to the drier
interfluves was associated with plough-cultivation, extensive clearance and
increased quantities of livestock. Such observations can be made in most
parts of Europe. Their significance for our present purpose, however, is to
suggest some important characteristics of the preceding regime. A common
feature of early agrarian systems in the western Old World is their spatial
restriction and concentration on limited alluvial zones. Soil moisture was
evidently a critical feature of their cultivation system, and ground-water
as significant as rainfall in the growth of crops. Such environments,
while limited in extent, offered unusually high productivity and allowed
considerable continuity of cultivation and, in some areas, notable con-
centrations of population. Such a reconstruction prompts some further
speculations about the nature and origins of this type of cultivation.


CEREAL SEASONALITY AND GROWING-CONDITIONS
Wild cereals belong to the group of grasses which have adapted to strong
seasonal stress by an annual habit and the development of food-storage in
the seed. This allows succeeding generations to 'recolonise' seasonally bare
habitats by rapid growth with the onset of rain. Wild wheats and barleys
occur as members of open communities, particularly on limestone or basalt
slopes and plateaux in the submediterranean park-forest belt. Their mech-
anism of dispersal is a simple one, in which the spike shatters when the seeds
are ripe and they fall to the ground near the parent plant, where the sharp
spikelet helps implantation in cracks in the soil. The time of ripening and
localised area of dispersal prevent them from taking advantage of otherwise
suitable habitats, for instance on seasonally open areas of alluvium. They
thus grow mainly on dry hillslopes during the period of winter rainfall and
ripen around May, with some variation according to altitude (Zohary
1969).
   Under these dry upland conditions, their growing season is spread over
nine months. Such a long period is not, however, a physiological necessity:
wheat can be grown in only three months (90-100 days) in appropriate
conditions, as it was in certain places in antiquity. Such three-month wheat

                                             89




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      WATER,        SOIL   AND      SEASONALITY


is often called spring wheat, since it grows between March and May.1 The
principal sort of wheat grown in Europe and North America at the present
day, however, is winter wheat which is sown in the autumn and harvested
in summer. This has a higher and more stable yield than spring wheats
(Klages 1949, 345). In most areas of Europe this type of wheat actually
requires exposure to cold weather (vernalisation), though this is not so in
the Mediterranean. At the present time, spring-sown wheat with a three-
month growing season is only grown in any quantity on the northern
margin of cultivation where the winter climate is too harsh.
    Spring-grown wheat was, however, known in the Ancient World in the
Mediterranean. Semple (1932, 382) describes the hard, heavy spring wheats
as being typical of limited areas of southern Europe, by comparison with the
soft, light grains which were then preferred for food. 'The heavy Boeotian
wheat was doubtless spring-sown, as it is today, on the margin of the Lake
Copais basin as the winter floodwaters gradually receded and Lake Copais
contracted. The rich lacustrine soil and high water-table explained the
superior quality of the grain.' The rapid growth of this crop, which did not
have to rely on winter rainfall, was possible in the conditions of high
ground-water which existed in restricted areas near to bodies of water,
especially those subject to marked seasonal changes of volume.
    It is tempting to ask whether the system documented for the Copais basin
is not a relic of a much more widespread method of cultivation, that was
typical of the pre-plough agriculture of southern and eastern Europe and the
Near East. Is this not, in fact, the surface groundwater-based cultivation-
system inferred from the settlement evidence in the preceding section? Such
a form of cultivation would take advantage of the short period of optimum
water-availability between winter floods and summer desiccation, allowing
the three months' growing in spring which is necessary for a crop. Since less
soil preparation is needed with this system than in one using rainwater, and
little forest-clearance would be required, this pattern would make sense with
low population levels and a simple technology.
    This model suggests that the critical innovation in the cultivation of
cereals was their transfer from dry environments with a rain-fed, winter,
growth pattern to alluvial, lake-edge, riverine or springside locations in
which an accelerated (spring) growth cycle was possible. The wild cereals
themselves were precluded by their simple dispersal mechanism from
colonising such habitats without human aid. The cultivation of crops in
damp conditions is indicated by the presence of Scirpus seeds in early cereal
samples (Flannery 1969, 81), and such deliberate sowing in areas away from
their natural habitats was a necessary precondition (along with the use of
the sickle for reaping) for the selection of tough-rachis forms, since the
naturally-dispersed forms would always predominate in self-seeded popu-
lations. The early cultivation of cereals in such habitats was thus a quantum
change from other forms of tending and exploitation, in that it operated in


                                             90




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       IN   EARLY     CEREAL        CULTIVATION


effect as a new means of dispersal. It thus opened up a new range of highly
productive habitats for the species concerned without involving the massive
restructuring of the ecosystem which became necessary in later agriculture;
and it involved only a change in the growing-season. A minimum of culti-
vation, and no clearance of climax forest would have been necessary; and
moreover this system had the potential to spread very widely beyond the
natural habitat zone of the wild cereals, wherever such alluvial niches were
to be found.
   The term 'dry-farming', which is often used to describe the phase of culti-
vation before the development of formal canal-irrigation, is thus misleading:
indeed, in the model suggested here, 'dry' (rainfall-dependent) farming was
a specialised development parallel to that of irrigation itself. A small-scale
horticulture adapted to riverine and lacustrine conditions explains the
pattern of early Neolithic distribution in which even restricted areas of fine-
grained water-retentive soils were sought for settlement. With initially low
population levels, the still relatively sparse settlements could be supported
from very limited patches of suitable soil, which could sustain even quite
large villages. Such soils tend often to be neglected at the present day be-
cause of their small extent, their unsuitability for the cultivation of winter
cereals, and their equally important role in providing spring grazing where
large numbers of animals are kept and where much of the rest of the land-
scape is under cultivation.
   The technology which such a horticultural system would require is of the
simplest. In most cases major forest-clearance would not be needed. The
seed would be broadcast, and relatively little weeding would be necessary.
Virtually no preparation of the soil would be required, which in many cases
would hardly rank even as hoe- or digging-stick cultivation. Where soils are
subject to winter flooding and summer desiccation, the deep cracking caused
by drying-out would provide natural aeration and make them practically
self-cultivating. The labour-costs would thus have been trivial by com-
parison with later forms of agriculture, especially with the major forest-
clearance required by interfluvial expansion in third-millennium Europe
which is reflected in the emergence of effective axes and the widespread
trade in stone for these tools (Sherratt 1976, 563-7). Such early horti-
cultural systems would always have been spatially restricted, however, with
locally high population levels but wide intervening uncultivated areas and
with little potential for local growth without radical changes in technique.
The main pattern of growth would be first by rapid budding-off and export
of population, followed by expansion to smaller and smaller patches of the
appropriate high-yielding soils within the occupied area. This is precisely the
picture which emerges from studies such as those of Kruk (1973: see also
Sherratt 1972, 517, 524).
   The rapidity of early agricultural dispersal was not due to shifting culti-
vation, but to the pattern of restricted (and often linear) habitats suitable for

                                             91




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       WATER,       SOIL    AND     SEASONALITY


initial farming practices. The spread of cultivation in similar habitats would
have allowed a dispersal through a variety of environmental zones with
minimal adaptation. It has, for instance, been suggested (Butzer 1972, 580)
that the penetration of inland Europe would have involved a major shift
from winter-grown crops in the Mediterranean to spring-grown crops in the
temperate zone. If both were essentially spring-grown, then no such radical
change in the growth period would have been necessary, other than a slight
adjustment in the time of sowing.
    Developments beyond this initial stage of cultivation involved adaptation
to drier habitats which required more soil preparation and the use of fallow-
ing or systematic rotation. Such techniques are likely to have emerged in
areas where forest-clearance was not necessary. One of the first major steps
in this direction was the extensive appearance of sites on the deep brown
soils of the moist steppes of northern Assyria in the sixth millennium BC
(Oates 1980). Such cultivation would require extensive soil preparation
with the hoe, a fallow of one to four years and probably the development of
new strains of cereals as cultivation moved out of the zone of abundant
ground- and surface-water. Rainfall-dependent growth would have necessi-
tated a winter growing season, at least for the wheats, and it is likely that
there was a return to the pattern of seasonality characteristic of the wild
cereals. Such a move would favour the use of barley, as well as bread-wheat
(Triticum aestivum) - the 'soft, light grain' which replaced the older and
harder forms.
    The additional labour required for soil preparation under these circum-
stances would have given a powerful incentive to the development of new
techniques. As cattle were common domestic animals on these lowland sites,
it is possible that the plough came into use in this area by the fifth millen-
nium, even though it is only definitely attested from the fourth millennium
in southern Mesopotamia (Sherratt 1980). This could be used to pulverise
the soil to prevent loss of moisture through capillary action (Clark 1952,
100; Stevens 1966, 93). Only at this stage would the characteristic pattern
of 'dry farming' have emerged. While the extension of interfluvial culti-
vation in the Mediterranean would have required a winter growing-season,
in temperate Europe the higher spring rainfall would have allowed the
continuation of a spring-growth pattern (Figure 3.1). The major role played
by barley in late Neolithic and Bronze Age agriculture argues in favour of
a spring growing-season, as cultivation proliferated on sandy or other light
soils which warm up rapidly in spring. The frequency of millet (Panicum
and Setaria) in these contexts in southern Europe (Hartanyi and Novaki
1975) also supports this suggestion. Spring-grown crops would leave a
greater area for winter grazing, important in Bronze Age stock economies.
    The first definite indication of winter-grown crops in northern Europe is
the spread of spelt in the first millennium BC (Applebaum 1954, 104). By
this time it is likely that winter varieties of the other wheat species had also

                                             92




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      IN   EARLY      CEREAL         CULTIVATION




                                                             TEMPERATE            EUROPE


                                                           THIRD AND SECOND MILLENNIUM


                                                         spring cereals            light soils




                                                                                   light plough




                                                               FIRST MILLENNIUM


                                                         winter cereals            heavier soils




                                                                                   heavier plough
                                    Winter growth
                                    Spring growth
®                                                    ©
3.1 The seasonality of cereal-growing: (a) the spread of farming to Europe from
the Near East and the postulated shift from spring-grown to winter-grown cereals;
(b) growing-periods in relation to rainfall seasonality; and to flood regimes in the
major river-valleys; (c) implications of the shift from spring- to winter-grown
cereals in temperate Europe: an expansion of livestock-keeping (especially sheep
for wool) was a related development [(c) added from Sherratt, 1980, unpublished].




                                                93




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      WATER,       SOIL    AND      SEASONALITY


emerged, involving the evolution of vernalisation mechanisms. This was the
point at which the primitive original wheats such as emmer would have been
increasingly replaced in Europe by hexaploid species better able to with-
stand the cold, and barley became relatively less important. Rye also became
more common in eastern and central Europe, after a long period of sporadic
occurrence as a weed (Jankuhn 1969, 220). Spring-grown crops cultivated
with the ard would have survived on the northern margins where the winter
was too harsh for the longer growth-cycle. The pressure of grazing caused
by winter sowing could have been alleviated by the provision of hay, which
would have been increasingly important for the keeping of livestock.
   At this point also cultivation began to spread to heavier soils, and more
robust and ultimately sod-turning ploughs developed (Figure 3.2). This was
important in autumn ploughing, to form clods which would prevent the
formation of soil-caps and pans over winter, unlike the spring ploughing
where a fine tilth is required. The use of iron for plough-shares also pro-
duced a more effective instrument for land-breaking, especially on clays.
(Iron shares appeared in the Near East in the early first millennium BC, in
central Europe at the end of the first millennium BC, and in northern Europe
in the later first millennium AD.) A probable consequence of these changes,
and especially (as Susan Limbrey has pointed out) the existence of open
ploughed fields at the time of maximum winter rainfall, would have been the
massive increase in soil erosion indicated in the extensive accumulation of
valley alluvium in temperate Europe. The cropping-system which came into
use at this time would be essentially the same as that already in use in the
Mediterranean, with a two-course rotation of alternate winter crops and
fallow. This persisted until the later first millennium AD, when it was re-
placed in parts of temperate Europe by the three-course system in which a
further field of spring-grown crops - oats (for horses), barley and legumes -
was added, which suited the developing needs of animal husbandry (White
1962, 69). The fully-developed pre-industrial agricultural system of
northern Europe was by this stage able to sustain comparable population
levels to the intensive, though necessarily more restricted, irrigation-based
systems of the Near East, and it was associated with the large-scale urban-
isation of temperate Europe.


DEVELOPED SURFACE-WATER AGRICULTURE:
IRRIGATION
During the time that these developments in rain-fed farming were taking
place in Europe, a succession of irrigation-based systems had appeared in
various parts of the Near East. It is commonly assumed that irrigation
represented a major departure from earlier agricultural systems, involving
radical changes in technique. In the perspective adopted here, however, it
can be seen as an artificial extension of the conditions which characterised

                                             94




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     IN   EARLY      CEREAL        CULTIVATION




the earliest forms of cultivation. A much more continuous pattern of
development, by small additional inputs of labour and capital, can thus be
postulated (Figure 3.3).
   The earliest forms of irrigation are likely to be small-scale water-
spreading involving minimum amounts of investment in new facilities. Such
are indeed possible in pre-agricultural contexts, as with the Owen's Valley
Paiute who divert streams to water patches of self-propagating wild plants
(Steward 1929). Similar practices may have been employed from the
beginning in locations like that of Jericho. Without modifying the natural
drainage by channels, cultivation may also make use of the sheet-flow of

                                            95




                              This content downloaded from
            128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       WATER,      SOIL    AND      SEASONALITY




3.3 The differentiation of Old World farming systems: from simple floodwater
farming to plough agriculture and irrigation.


floodwaters. This system provided the basis of agriculture among some
groups of Pueblo Indians of the south-west of the United States, where the
rainfall is too slight to grow crops. As water seasonally overflows from high
ground, however, cultivation is possible either at the sides of valleys below
escarpments or on alluvial fans at the mouths of gullies (arroyos), or else on
the valley floor itself where streams overflow their floodplains (Bryan 1929,
445). Such floodwater farming supported communities of the Hopi and
neighbouring Indian groups, and was a determining factor in the location of
such villages, which might have a population of several hundred. This
method of cultivation, however, requires undissected valley-floors and is
very vulnerable to gullying in periods of stream-incision (Cooke and Reeves
1976). Vita-Finzi has suggested that suitable conditions for this kind of
cultivation obtained in parts of Jordan in the early Holocene during the
deposition of the Hasa formation (1969, 32).
   The earliest demonstrated examples of channel-irrigation in the Near
East are related to the braided streams which flow down alluvial fans on the
margins of the semi-arid basins. Cutting transverse trenches to carry the
water to a wider area is a simple but effective way of using the gradient to
maintain an adequate supply to the fields, either from floodwater or peren-
nial flow. Such a system has been documented at Choga Mami near Mandali
in Iraq and dated to the Samarran culture in the sixth millennium BC (Oates
and Oates 1976). This form of irrigation is typical of the Early Chalcolithic

                                             96




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       IN   EARLY     CEREAL        CULTIVATION


period in the Near East, when it was also employed on the fringes of the
Zagros and of the Kopet Dagh in Turkmenia. In the latter area it sustained
the settlements of the Geoksyur culture (Lisitslna 1969). It may also have
been used in Anatolia at this time, for instance at sites in comparable
positions in the Konya plain (French 1970; Sherratt 1973).
    This system is well adapted to the margins of lowland areas fed by
streams from nearby better-watered mountains. Similar techniques may
have been employed in other areas of low rainfall such as southern Spain
by the third millennium BC (Schiile 1967). They are, however, vulnerable to
erosion producing channel incision and gully formation. Major extensions
of the cultivated area by these methods, moreover, are difficult to obtain and
require more complex engineering and higher investment. The system of
underground channels or qanats in Iran and adjacent areas (e.g. the falaj
system of Oman) carrying ground-water from valley-edge fans, represents
a further attempt to extend these types of water-sources from the first
millennium BC onwards (Stronach 1980).
    In more marginal environments it was sometimes possible to make use of
ephemeral run-off and wadi-flow by the use of dams or small channels. In
Baluchistan and southern Arabia, where brief periods of stream-flow result
from melting snow in the mountains, the water and fertile suspended silts
were trapped by boulder-walls (gabarbands) across narrow valleys to allow
the growth of a spring wheat-crop (Raikes 1965; Leshnik 1973, 67). A
somewhat more sophisticated channel-based system dating to the fifth
millennium BC has been found in association with the major Late Chalco-
lithic settlement at Jawa in the basalt region in the arid zone of Jordan
(Roberts 1977). Here, three systems of channels were used to tap the short-
lived winter surplus, both by gravity flow from the main wadi and by
collecting local runoff, and these were used to supply both fields and
cisterns. Comparable systems supported the Bronze Age towns of Palestine,
and highly sophisticated methods for utilising runoff were developed in
the Levant and western Arabia in the first millennium BC (Evenari et al.
1971).
    The greatest opportunities for the extension of cultivation by irrigation,
however, lay in riverine environments, especially the major alluvial valleys
situated in arid plains but fed by exotic water, like those of the Tigris/
Euphrates, Indus and Nile. Despite the environmental similarities of these
three basins and the hydraulic civilisations which they produced, however,
there are significant differences between them. Most important is the timing
of their flood-periods (Figure 3.1). The Indus and Nile both have an
essentially autumn inundation, allowing crops to be sown as the waters
retreat in time for a winter growing-season, but the Tigris and Euphrates are
characterised by inconvenient spring floods.
    In the Indus basin, on the south-eastern edge of the distribution of the
west Asiatic cereals, crops such as wheat and barley with a winter/spring

                                             97




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      WATER,       SOIL    AND      SEASONALITY


growth cycle (rabi crops) could be grown in the dry winter season only
in low-lying areas where they could make use of residual soil moisture
from the autumn flood and monsoonal rains (Lambrick 1964, 75). Alluvial
silts along the rivers thus provided the basis for Harappan agriculture.
Cultivable land could be easily extended by simple methods of inundation
irrigation (sailaba), especially along inlets and creeks or on the inner sides
of river-meanders (Leshnik 1973, 73). 'Thus the whole operation involves
an absolute minimum of skill, labour and aid of implements' (Lambrick
1964, 76), and this limited but productive land could support the develop-
ment of Harappan cities even before the introduction of the complementary
summer/autumn (kharif) crops such as sorghum.
    The Nile, flowing in a more narrowly-defined trench, allowed cultivation
of the flood-deposited silts in a series of basins formed by old levees, in
which the autumn floods provided natural irrigation for cereals sown as the
waters receded by November (Butzer 1976). Simple techniques for retaining
the water and increasing the watered area were in use by the third
millennium BC, involving the breaching of levees and the canalisation of
floodwater by digging overflow channels and constructing dikes. The proto-
dynastic 'King Scorpion' macehead shows a ritual scene of this kind (p. 67).
More labour-intensive methods of actually raising water from its lower,
summer levels began by the mid-second millennium with the use of the
shaduf (pole and bucket lever), and larger-scale operations were only
initiated in the later first millennium BC. In consequence, summer-grown
crops were not cultivated before the second or first millennium.
    The growth of irrigation systems in the Mesopotamian lowlands has been
extensively investigated in recent years (Adams 1974; Gibson 1974; Oates
and Oates 1976). The Tigris and Euphrates differ from the Nile and Indus
in that their floods, related to snow-melt in the mountains, occur towards
the end of the winter growing-season, in April and May. It was thus the
perennial flow which was most useful, with floodwater often presenting a
problem of dispersal: what started as irrigation had to continue as drainage
and crop-protection. Because the rivers deposit large quantities of silt and
build up high levees, they actually run above the level of the surrounding
plain. It is a relatively simple matter to spread water through breaches in
these levees; though this water had then to be dispersed through a system of
anastomosing channels. Early settlement 'followed the numerous small,
meandering stream distributaries found on any unmodified alluvial plain.
Lengthy, branching canal networks are not in evidence, and cultivation
seemingly was confined to narrow bands along natural levee backslopes and
to favourably situated margins of seasonally filled depressions' (Adams
 1974, 2). Mesopotamian irrigation was an extensive system in the sense
that it required an alternate fallow to restore the water-table and prevent
salination, and that there was more potentially irrigable land than could
 easily be managed without major investment in flood-control. Indeed, the


                                             98




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       IN   EARLY     CEREAL        CULTIVATION


onset of local salination forced periodic shifts. The fallow and intervening
areas allowed a symbiotic pastoralism which was essential to a full ex-
ploitation of the region.
    These observations apply to lower Mesopotamia - the 'River Plain' of
Buringh (1957). The development of irrigation on the Assyrian Steppe was
a later feature, because the entrenched character of the rivers necessitated
the use of lifting-devices rather than a simple use of gravity-flow. The shaduf
(used in lower Mesopotamia for watering the levees) was one answer to this
problem, and it was in use by the early-second millennium BC (Drower
1954), though only in a limited area adjacent to the major rivers.
    In each of these major alluvial basins, the Nile, Indus and Tigris/
Euphrates, there is evidence for the use of the plough (technically the ard
or scratch-plough) from an early stage in the development of lowland
irrigation: in Mesopotamia at least by the fourth millennium and in the
others by the third millennium (Chapter 6). It seems that this instrument
was an integral part of these extensive lowland cultivation systems, and
perhaps a precondition for their development.
    The construction of major artificial watercourses in Mesopotamia dates
to the Sassanian period (Adams 1965), when long branching canals argue
a significant degree of central control and investment, and are part of the
general pattern of intensified inputs of capital and labour and the more
elaborate construction typical of all forms of irrigation from the first
millennium BC onwards. This was the period in which summer-grown crops
such as rice and sesame were introduced from further east. Intensive irri-
gation led in many areas to substantially higher population densities and an
extension of the areas under state control. Many of the features stressed by
Wittfogel (1957) as associated with irrigation agriculture may thus be more
characteristic of these Iron Age developments than of preceding systems,
which were often village-based and local in management.
    The growth of irrigation thus followed a natural progression from the
earliest surface- and groundwater-based systems through an increasing
management of sources of surface-water and its distribution to suitable
locations. The earlier forms required only a small input of effort in pro-
pitious circumstances, and involved little co-operation beyond individual
communities. As with south-east Asian systems, even quite complex arrange-
ments could grow by quite small increments of household investment
in each generation (cf. Leach 1959). Small-scale hydroagriculture (in
Wittfogel's term) was a widespread though sporadic feature of cultivation in
the semi-arid and arid zones from the Mediterranean to central Asia in the
third and second millennia BC. Larger-scale projects involving higher invest-
ment and wider co-operation were needed to increase the area served by
these limited systems, and these did not emerge until the growth of imperial
power and investment in rural development by landlords and urban
capitalists, especially from the first millennium BC onwards.

                                             99




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       WATER,      SOIL    AND      SEASONALITY


COMPARISON
Starting from similar initial conditions, therefore, cultivation systems in the
Near East and Europe became increasingly differentiated as they exploited
more fully the particular characteristics of the two regions. In the sub-
tropical zone, where lack of water was the main constraint, large areas of
alluvium could be brought into cultivation by irrigation, to support sub-
stantial local populations from an early date. In the temperate zone, the
most significant agricultural resource was the reservoir of nutrients stored
as soil-colloids which could be released by forest-clearance and ploughing.
The wide areas of productive forest soils postponed the need for intensive
methods of cultivation; though, once introduced, these could support higher
overall densities of settlement. In northern Europe the scratch-plough
evolved into a heavier and more deeply-penetrating instrument for use on
heavy soils whose thick sod required turning to aerate and drain. What had
originally developed as a response to the lack of water had become a method
of dealing with its over-abundance.
   By contrast to the ecosystems of the subtropical and temperate areas,
those of the humid tropics are characterised by rapid oxidation and strong
leaching: nutrients are stored in standing vegetation rather than in the soil.
While significant areas of alluvial and volcanic soils can support permanent
cropping, the much greater areas of interfluvial terrain necessitate short
periods of cultivation and long fallows. Nutrients can be released from
standing vegetation by combustion, used up by crops in a few years, and the
plot returned to forest. More permanent cultivation can only be imposed on
such soils by large-scale investment of capital and labour. South-east Asian
terracing systems with padi-farming are a specialised development of this
kind, using flowing water to carry nutrients not available in the soil (Geertz
1963).
   The kinds of transition to more intensive systems studied by development
economists such as Boserup, therefore, are only partly analogous to the
kinds of change inferred in subtropical and temperate regions, and in any
case represent a relatively late phase of land-use even in the tropics. Recent
research has increasingly emphasised that the earlier stages of tropical
cultivation were characterised by systems of fixed-plot horticulture (Harris
1973, 399-402); while ecological arguments and archaeological evidence
from several parts of the world have emphasised the importance of low-
lying, alluvial areas in early cultivation.
   In south-east Asia, rice began as a palustrian species, adapted to semi-
aquatic habitats, as did taro. Dry rice, suitable for interfluvial cultivation,
was a secondary development. Gorman (1977) has postulated an initial
stage of inundation-cultivation in piedmont regions, lasting down to c.2000
BC, followed by an extension of irrigation-systems in the open alluvial
plains, with iron and plough-cultivation (using the water-buffalo) spreading


                                            100




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         IN   EARLY      CEREAL       CULTIVATION


in this context in the first millennium BC. Extensive swiddening could be
a relatively recent development, as drought-resistant strains of rice allowed
a spread to the hills in the first millennium AD.
   In Africa, where agriculture developed at a later date than the other areas
considered here, the situation is less well understood. Nevertheless, Harlan
(1975, 197) has pointed out the importance of fluctuating shallow lakes
in the Sahel region of West Africa where many of the indigenous cultigens
emerged, which would have been suitable for decrue cultivation on moist
soil as the floodwaters subsided.
   In Mesoamerica (Price 1971) the present importance of swidden con-
trasts with the types of cultivation inferred for prehistoric and early historic
times. Early crops in the dry tropical zone of Mexico were cultivated by
floodwater along barrancas (wadis). In the Valley of Oaxaca, one of the
most intensively-investigated areas, initial cultivation was confined to the
alluvial zone with a high water-table, and extended over a limited area by
pot-irrigation from wells. In the Late Formative period, settlement spread to
the piedmont zone where water from springs could be directed by canals to
terraced fields, as in the fossilised system at Hierve el Agua (Kirkby 1973).
In the Valley of Mexico, canal irrigation supported the growth of Classic
Teotihuacan, while intensive chinampa (wet-garden) cultivation sustained
Postclassic Tenochtitlan. In the Maya area of the humid tropical lowlands,
the supposition that swiddening formed the basis of sites like Tikal has
been replaced by a recognition of the importance of shallow lakes (bajos)
exploited by canals and raised fields as well as a variety of other water-
spreading devices (Harris 1978), and the situation is more complex than
was previously imagined. In coastal Peru, floodwater farming on the coast
was replaced by limited canal-irrigation in inland valleys, and in turn suc-
ceeded by larger-scale canal irrigation on the arid coastal plain (Moseley
1974). All these examples show a direct transition from floodwater-
cultivation to canal-based systems, with extensive cultivation as a later,
marginal development.
   Behind the regional variations, therefore, underlying similarities in the
development of agricultural systems are becoming evident. They emphasise
the importance of an often protracted initial phase of small-scale surface-
and groundwater-based horticulture, which ultimately differentiated into
hydraulic and rainfed systems of both extensive and intensive kinds.

NOTE

1. The term 'spring wheat' is used in a special sense by plant geneticists, to describe any
   wheat which lacks a vernalisation requirement, including winter-grown varieties in the
   Mediterranean and Near East. I am grateful to E G. H. Lupton of the Plant Breeding
   Institute, Cambridge, for this and other observations.




                                              101




                                 This content downloaded from
               128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:07:49 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

   Resources, Technology and Trade:
     An Essay on Early European
              Metallurgy
                                     (1976)

Early European metallurgy has been a topic of debate since the beginning
of the study of prehistory. As a fundamental division in the Three-age
framework and a crucial contribution to chronology through typological
sequences, it was a focus of interest from the mid-nineteenth century on-
wards. More recently, the application of rapid techniques of micro-analysis
has provided a massive body of quantitative data on the composition of
early metal objects and new opportunities for interpretation, while the large
body of surviving material continues to offer itself as a major source of in-
formation - not only about chronology but also about the way of life of
Copper and Bronze Age communities.
   The abundance of copper and bronze objects from these periods leaves
no doubt about their importance in the prehistoric economy, and the
reasons for growth in the use of metal are clearly essential in this case to our
understanding of economic change in primitive society. The process usually
invoked to explain the spread of metallurgy is one of discovery, followed by
diffusion of knowledge about the techniques involved, leading to a wide-
spread use of metal because of its superiority for manufacturing tools and
weapons. The change in technology would thus have led to a breakdown of
economic self-sufficiency, and a consequent reliance on trade as a funda-

This chapter was written as a tribute to J. G. D. Clark, Disney Professor of
Archaeology at Cambridge and subsequently Master of Peterhouse. (Sir Grahame
died in 1995.) It contrasts the metallurgy of the Early Bronze Age with that of the
preceding Copper Age, and suggests that the latter differed in no fundamental way
from the sophisticated uses and trade in stone achieved in the Neolithic. Grahame
Clark had himself illuminated the European stone axe trade by comparison with
Australian ethnography, and this paper followed Colin Renfrew's example in
applying the anthropological economics of M. D. Sahlins to early metalworking.
(See also Chapter 12 for flint exchange-networks in Neolithic and Copper Age
Hungary.) The illustrations are notable as experiments in graphical presentation.

                                         102




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

             AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY


mental mechanism. At the same time, increasing productivity of agriculture
would have begun to produce a surplus that served both to finance this
increased scale of trading activity and to support the specialists concerned.
   In its original conception (Childe 1958), this model sought to connect the
appearance of metallurgy in Europe with the activities of prospectors from
urban societies (in the Near East) whose concentration of capital had
fostered the growth of the industry. More recently the reappraisal of Euro-
pean chronologies has suggested a more active role for south-east Europe,
and attention has turned to the background of technological skills in high-
temperature firing available to Neolithic bakers and potters (Renfrew
1969). But, whatever the circumstances of discovery, emphasis still rests on
metallurgical knowledge as the key factor in the explanation with the
assumption that, once discovered, metal became common because of its self-
evident usefulness or inherent attractiveness. Both in Childe's account of this
process (1956,115-20) and in Renfrew's discussion (1972, 308,483) of the
growth of metallurgy in the Aegean, economic change is seen as the result
of technological change, both through increased efficiency and through its
stimulation of 'new needs'.
   It may be doubted, however, whether the advantages conferred by a
knowledge of the technical processes of metalworking could by themselves
have had such far-reaching effects. Early metal tools were not, in practice,
more efficient than stone ones, nor are early metal weapons likely to have
been decisive in battle. Are there, then, less obvious reasons why a relatively
rare raw material such as copper should have achieved so wide a circulation in
the third and second millennia? And was this circulation different, in scale
or character, from existing networks distributing materials such as fine stone?
   The inevitable bias given by a material subject-matter often leads the
archaeologist to a view of prehistory in which technology appears as the
main element of progress. On the other hand, Professor Clark (1965) has
stressed the need to come to terms with the social role of material objects,
and to treat prehistoric societies in a total ecological context. From this
standpoint, it may be possible to reach a view of the artefactual evidence
that relates it to long-term processes of economic and social change, rather
than treating technology as an independent sector producing revolutionary
repercussions throughout society.

' S T O N E A G E ECONOMICS'
A key issue in this discussion is the contrast often drawn between the relative
self-sufficiency of Neolithic life and the variety of raw materials required
for the more complex technical processes of the Bronze Age. If there is a
difference in trading activity between the two periods, however, it cannot be
summarised as simply as this. Even in the Neolithic there were inherent
limitations on self-sufficiency.

                                         103




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                RESOURCES,        TECHNOLOGY         AND    TRADE:


   This point soon becomes evident from a consideration of site locations.
The distribution of a population dependent on agriculture is determined
largely by the soils on which its crops are grown, the most suitable zones for
cultivation being naturally those with deep soil and an abundant water-
supply. In order to make use of these locations, however, another set of
resources is required - hard stone for tools, for example, or supplies of salt
to offset dietary deficiency. By and large, such resources occur in different
environments, and only a limited number of agricultural settlements have
direct access to them. For instance, a distribution such as that of the early
Neolithic Bandkeramik in central Europe (Clark 1952, fig. 45), with its
concentration on open loess-covered plains, implies a constant import of
materials from sources peripheral to the main concentration of population.
   In any case, there are good reasons why, in small-scale societies, indi-
vidual settlements and clusters of villages should not be isolated from wider
contacts. Single units of settlement are naturally vulnerable to the possibility
of local disaster, whether due to poor harvest or disease. A continuous ex-
change of population from village to village creates a network of relation-
ships that can distribute inequalities in local production and provide a wider
pool of assistance. As a background to the distribution of rarer materials,
a continuous movement of personnel and subsistence products between
villages must be envisaged. It is this network which provides the basic
carrier for the kinds of material that survive archaeologically in Neolithic
contexts.
   An important effect of this is the pattern of 'random walk' followed by
individual objects in the course of such exchanges. Although there may be a
general direction of drift in one class of material as it moves towards an area
of scarcity, there is a large number of jumps between the source and the
ultimate area of consumption. This lack of a direct link between producers
and consumers at some distance from the source implies a strong spatial
limit on effective demand with this kind of system. A distribution channel
for a particular material is thus likely to have the following structure:
1. Source: not necessarily in an area of agricultural production, though
   accessible from it. Activities: unearthing of material, preliminary re-
   duction of bulk.
2. Production zone: settlements concerned in the active exploitation of the
   material. Activities: working up into an exchangeable form.
3. Direct contact zone: area of settlements linked directly to production
   zone by face-to-face contact. Effective supply as result of close kinship
   links.
4. Indirect supply zone: area of settlements without direct access to the
   production zone, receiving supplies through intermediaries.
Anthropologists have stressed the basic contrast between the mechanisms
connecting zones (3) and (4) with their supplies. Sahlins (1965) has noted

                                         104




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

             AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY


the way in which exchanges with close kinsmen, who may be expected to
provide assistance, are less concerned with material equivalence than those
that take place across tribal boundaries, where a more direct return is
sought. Brookfield and Hart (1971, 315), discussing Melanesian evidence,
have drawn the contrast between transfer, where goods are easily balanced
by services, and trade, where goods are rarely exchanged for non-material
favours. Rappaport (1968,106) has suggested that production will be sensi-
tive to demand from within the area of direct contact, but not outside it. In
a situation where each village is producing a similar range of subsistence
goods, there will be an especially sharp division between those able to
supply food and services direct to the producers and those beyond this
range. Only in the case of particularly important materials is this friction
overcome, by the exchange of high-value objects between certain individuals
in different local groups (Sherratt 1972, 506).
    This lack of direct articulation between supply and demand must have
been a characteristic limitation on Neolithic economies, as Rappaport
points out for the primitive farming groups of the New Guinea highlands.
The problem is to avoid a situation in which an extensively needed com-
modity is under-exploited because of the lack of items to exchange for it.
In overcoming this, the circulation of non-utilitarian goods plays a vital role
in mobilising demand. Items of adornment or display that are exchangeable
for essential commodities, and can themselves be accumulated, encourage
continuity in the production of basic materials even when local needs are
filled. They thus act as a kind of 'fly-wheel' for the whole system.
    Not only do items not directly concerned with subsistence activities
contribute to the maintenance of the system, but essential commodities,
such as fine stone, also have non-material functions. Speaking again of the
New Guinea highlands, Strathern notes that 'in their area of production
axes circulate as items of exchange value, in ceremonial exchange, death
compensation, bride-wealth, payments in the settlement of disputes, and
they had a similar role in the Enga area' where they were distributed. While
ordinary working axes may be given in these contexts, particularly large and
fine specimens are considered appropriate for ceremonial and bride-wealth
presentations, and in the case quoted by Chappell (1966, 98) these may be
up to five times the size of working axes. (Such an axe 30cm in length would
require about three weeks' work in grinding.)
    The goods in circulation thus carry important symbolic values in a way
that is often explicitly organised. Commodities may be accumulated and
exchanged in specified quantities for particular situations such as marriage
alliances. Such artefacts are not generally exchangeable, as with a true
currency, but act as 'standardised entitlements to a series of social pre-
rogatives' (Douglas 1967, 135).
    The wider effects of this social aspect of material goods are twofold. In
the first place, the system is continuously generating demand both for the

                                         105




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                RESOURCES,       TECHNOLOGY         AND    TRADE:


commodities with direct symbolic value and for those exchangeable with
them, thus helping to overcome the limitations on supplies of useful
materials that arise from the lack of direct articulation between producers
and consumers. The use of necessary items, such as axes, in ceremonial
contexts also ensures a reservoir of raw material in case of shortage. In the
second place, by linking the movement of goods with the distribution of
marriage partners, the system contributes to demographic equilibrium by
adjusting the spatial distribution of women and goods (Rappaport 1968,
108-9).
    This tentative sketch of the working of a simple economic system is
a starting point for the analysis of the prehistoric European situation. In
opposition to the idea that 'a Stone Age community was, at least potentially,
self-sufficing' and that 'the objects of Stone Age trade were always luxuries
... at least things that men could have done without' (Childe 1951, 35), it
suggests that continuous circulation was a basic pre-condition of such
societies, extending even beyond simple material needs.
    To be fully satisfactory, however, something beyond a static model is
necessary if it is to cope with the evident changes within the prehistoric
economy. In the first place, changes occur as new sources of raw materials
are discovered and old ones are exhausted. Such changes are especially likely
as the area under exploitation itself expands and peripheral groups come
into contact with a wider environment. Secondly, any growth in population
will also increase effective demand, making worthwhile intensification in the
effort involved in unearthing raw materials and the development of larger-
scale operations. Perhaps even more important are changes in the sphere
of subsistence economy underlying the patterns of distribution in rarer
materials. Once again, ethnography provides a clue to the processes in-
volved.
    Coastal Melanesia, in particular, shows a high development of long-
distance trading links, some of them of extraordinary complexity. For some
of the groups involved, participation in these networks is essential, not only
at the level of raw materials but also in terms of basic subsistence products.
Hogbin (1951) quotes examples from the Huon Gulf of New Guinea where
groups survived only by producing pottery and importing food-stuffs, and
Malinowski noted the division, within the Trobriand Islands, between the
richer agricultural part and the poorer areas of the interior that manufacture
wooden dishes, baskets and pots to exchange with it for food. In these cases,
the occupation of such poorer areas is possibly only because of a continuing
output of non-subsistence products. One consequence of the extension of
settlement to marginal environments is the need for a class of products that
stimulate the mobility of subsistence goods. Brookfield and Hart (1971,
320-32), in a stimulating discussion of the problem, interpret the complex
cycles of inter-island exchange in Melanesia       part of a 'flywheel' mech-
anism to keep products on the move and s:           articulate several kinds of


                                        106




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

              AN   ESSAY       ON   EARLY        EUROPEAN             METALLURGY


                                                  trob    rianos




               SOUTH PAPUAN COAST

         1   CONUSARMSHELLS         7 ARMBANDS ANO PAINT           - A N T I CLOCKWISE KULA
         2
             SPONPYLUS NECKLACES    B BOWLS ANO BASKETS, - • C L O C K W I S E     KULA
         3   RAW GREENSTONE           CARVED WARE        «—»NON-KULA

         *   GREENSTONE AXES        9   CANOES                 •    PLACE OF ORIGIN

         5   QUARTZ SAND            10 SAGO                    O     DESTINATION
         6   POTTERY                11 TUBERS, COCONUTS        (    ENTRY TO KULA
                                    12 POTTERY CLAY            X    EXIT FROM KULA

4.1 A reconstruction of the flow of products around the kula ring: from Brookfield
and Hart (1971).

specialisation within the chain (see Figure 4.1). Such regional differentiation
allows areas of lower subsistence potential to survive alongside better-
endowed ones. Indeed, the fact that transactions still occur in a series of
individual jumps means that opportunities open up for middleman trading,
and some areas well connected in the network can survive even without
specialist products of their own (e.g. Siassi).
   In contrast to the relatively simple situation postulated above for the
Bandkeramiky with its concentration on a single productive zone and
occasional expeditions for raw materials outside this, the colonisation of a
wide range of landscapes leads to a situation in which various groups are
actively pumping rarer materials and products into the system. The contrast

                                                 107




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                RESOURCES,       TECHNOLOGY         AND    TRADE:


stems, not from a disparity in technology and raw material requirements but
from the difference in settlement ecology between the two cases.
   One further feature of the Melanesian case may be mentioned - the social
mechanisms involved. The actual operation of the trading process is in the
hands of individuals: participation in the network depends on the ability to
create stocks of trade articles and to manipulate social and ceremonial
relationships:
  Leadership and the political structure of groups are not set apart from the
  sphere of commerce; the rewards of the successful entrepreneur are the
  highest rewards of power and prestige which the society has to offer;
  he cannot dominate the political situation without first dominating the
  market ... This kind of fluidity is not a matter of individuals moving up
  and down rapidly from one recognized position to another. It is much
  more an instability in the relationship of actual positions, since each
  outstanding leader creates his own leadership. (Douglas 1967,125)
   In such systems, which have come to be known as 'big man' systems
(Sahlins 1963), richer individuals provide nodes of concentration for
circulating goods, without a rigidly hierarchical social structure divided on
class lines. The accumulation of subsistence products is a temporary matter,
and the climb to prestige is expressed in possession of the items of display,
such as valued ornaments, which act as indicators or 'counters' of success.
Although the majority of transactions is concerned with subsistence
products, the system runs on the movement of symbolic items and these
provide a material reading of varying status positions. This situation, one of
regional economic differentiation articulated by individuals in small com-
munities, must have been the condition of much of later prehistoric Europe
before the emergence of urban centres. How far are such processes reflected
in the artefactual record?


T H E MOVEMENT OF MATERIALS IN NEOLITHIC EUROPE
The patterns of movement, even in inorganic raw materials, are a field of
research hardly yet systematically explored, but some idea of the scale
involved can be gained from the major commodities often recognised and
from the few areas where detailed studies have been made.
   The Neolithic economy required both the cutting and scraping tools for
fine work that had been essential to previous hunting economies, and a
range of more massive implements for forest clearance and the manufacture
of wooden tools. Higher population densities, moreover, demanded a much
greater bulk of raw materials. For heavy axes and chisels, either large blocks
of flint were necessary or else crystalline massive rocks, mostly of highland
occurrence. These included ancient sedimentary rocks such as greywackes;
igneous rocks either formed at great depth, such as diorite, or nearer the

                                        108




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

             AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY


surface, such as dolerite; and direct volcanic products, such as lavas (e.g.
andesite and trachyte); or consolidated fall-out products (tuffs), and meta-
morphosed forms of these and other rocks such as amphibolite or schist.
The more deeply formed varieties have larger crystals and are hard to flake,
while those more rapidly cooled are more likely to approach flint in their
flaking properties. Apart from flints and cherts, almost all of the rocks used
for heavy tools occur in regions of low agricultural potential, either in
ancient massifs or more recently up-thrust blocks.
    In different areas, the distribution of agricultural land might be adjacent
to such regions or far removed. In the Balkans, with tectonic basins sur-
rounded by highland areas, there were many local sources of such rocks in
the crystalline massif and volcanic deposits in the Tertiary fold-chains
(Sherratt 1972, 518). In addition, siltstones and cherts were used from later
sedimentary deposits, while the extensive Cretaceous deposits of north-west
Bulgaria provided large quantities of the characteristic brown flint that had
been exploited since the Palaeolithic.
    The same pattern, on a larger scale, is represented in the Carpathian
Basin. Surrounded on all sides by young fold-mountains with local volcanic
activity, the basin itself consists of two parts: in the western area of Trans-
danubia, flint and chert, along with hard intrusive rocks, occur in the
Mesozoic formations of the Bakony mountains; but to the east of the
Danube neither these nor massive rocks are locally available, and an area of
around 50,000 sq. km provides only river-pebbles. This deficiency is com-
pensated for by the richness of the surrounding mountains in raw materials
and their direct river links with the Danube Basin. To the north, the volcanic
range of the Matra-Biikk-Zemplen mountains could provide not only
trachyte and related rocks for heavier tools but also, in the parts near Tokaj,
bombs of obsidian: to the east, Transylvania offered a variety of eruptive
rocks within easy access of the plains. Obsidian, as in the Near East, was
particularly widely traded.
    In the loess plains sought by early agriculturalists further north, inorganic
raw materials again came mostly from areas peripheral to the main con-
centrations of population. Around the clusters of Bandkeramik settlement,
sources of hard rocks were plentiful, for instance, in the ancient massif of
Bohemia, at various points along the Rhine rift and the Middle Rhine high-
lands, and in the central German highlands. There was no useful obsidian in
these areas, but cherts from pre-Cretaceous rocks were available, and on the
edge of the North European Plain the Bandkeramik spread as far as the
flint sources in the Low Countries and Little Poland. Local exchange cycles
brought these different sources into relationship: for instance, hard volcanic
rocks, such as trachyte, tephrite and basalt from the Koblenz region, moved
in the reverse direction to the flint of the Belgian Hesbaye; while the occur-
rence of import sherds shows how important were the major rivers in
articulating such systems (Clark 1952, 251). The recently investigated site

                                         109




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                 RESOURCES,      TECHNOLOGY         AND    TRADE:




(selection).

at Miiddersheim indicated a supply distance for stone of up to 10km for
bulky sandstone objects, 30-40km for basalt, and up to 70km for flint.
   As new regions were explored, fresh sources were discovered, and par-
ticularly desirable raw materials achieved a circulation over hundreds of
kilometres. The results of petrographic studies in the British Isles show how
a primary use of local sources was supplemented by the products of distant
factories as the network of inter-regional relations grew. Thus, in south-
western Britain, early sites show a dominance of Cornish products, with
Welsh and north-west British materials appearing in this area in large
numbers in the Middle Neolithic. Less attractive products continued to be
worked on a small scale and locally distributed: the Mynydd Rhiw quarry
site (Houlder 1961) with an associated flint assemblage implies no more
than small-scale seasonal exploitation in times of slack agricultural work, in
which the winning of raw materials could be combined with hunting forays.
On the other hand, it is clear that more highly organised production was
becoming profitable for the commodities widely in demand.
   The later-fourth and third millennia in many parts of Europe saw this
rationalisation and intensification of production on a large scale (see Figure
4.2). The honey-coloured flint of Bulgaria achieved a wide distribution
within the Balkans, up to the north of the Black Sea, and into the southern
half of the Carpathian Basin. Obsidian continued to be traded in large
quantities, and is found on a very high proportion of the sites of this period,
both within the Carpathians and beyond, especially in southern Poland.


                                        110




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

AN   ESSAY   ON   EARLY     EUROPEAN        METALLURGY




                            111




     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                RESOURCES,       TECHNOLOGY         AND     TRADE:




           DISTANCE     FROM      SOURCE
4.4 The distance from source of finds made from two varieties of flint: Krzemionki
banded flint and Grand Pressigny honey-coloured flint.

This last area seems to have had - at least in certain phases such as Early
Lengyel - a particularly intense exchange with the area of north Hungary
and Slovakia just across the mountains, reflecting the complementary
character of resources on either side. Going south to balance the obsidian
were flint and, probably, salt as well: there are salt-pans from mid-fourth-
millennium Lengyel contexts near Krakow in Little Poland (Jodlowski
1971). Supplies of flint became particularly important as settlement in-
creased in the North European Plain from TRB times onwards, for although
flint was widely scattered in glacial deposits, it was mostly of poor quality,
due to frost cracking. As in north-west Bulgaria, large-scale working and
trading took place in response to demand from neighbouring areas lacking,
or with inferior, raw materials.
   To the west, areas of good flint potential occurred widely in France and
the Low Countries within the Cretaceous deposits between the Seine and the
Maas; but to the north and east, such sources were more scattered, occur-
ring in north Jutland, Scania, the island of Riigen, south Poland and further
east in Wolhynia. Among the south Polish sources, various characteristic
types can be distinguished (Sulimirski 1960), mainly from the Upper Vistula
region. These include the chocolate-coloured Upper Astartian flint from
the Swi^tokrzyskie (Holy Cross) mountains; Lower Astartian banded
flint from Krzemionki, used for axes; greyish, white-speckled Turonian
flint from Swieciechow, used for blades; and a banded Jurassic chert from
near Krakow. (Krema, incidentally, is a common Slav place-name element
meaning 'flint'; e.g. Kremikovci, Bulgaria.) Attempts have been made to


                                        112




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

             AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY




4.5 The differential dispersal of three types of product from the same source: data
from Sulimirski (1960) [corrected].


map the distribution of these types of flint from visual identifications. The
Swieciechow variety shows a restricted local circulation but the banded
Krzemionki variety was exported in bulk, especially to the Middle Vistula/
Notec/Middle Warta area, and examples are known from beyond the
Carpathians in Slovakia (see Figure 4.3).
   Such distributions can be summarised as curves showing the percentages
of objects at given distances from the source (see Figure 4.4). Half of the
known finds of Swieciechow flint lie within 100km of the source, while for
the banded flint 50 per cent are within 300km, and 75 per cent within
350km. Finds of both types are mainly of third-millennium date, though
both start in the later-fourth millennium. Something of the same order of
magnitude would hold for the other wide-traded commodities shown in
Figure 4.2. An interesting feature of the Riigen flint distribution (see Figure
4.5) is the way different products have a characteristic range of distri-
butions.
   Of the western sources, the most easily recognisable and widely-traded
variety is the well-known iron-rich flint of Grand Pressigny, used in the later-
third millennium for large blades hafted as daggers (see below). This shows
a distribution on a similar scale to that of the banded flint, with 50 per cent
within 250km and 75 per cent within 350km, despite the fact that stray
finds occasionally occur up to 800km away. An analysis of the direction of

                                         113




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                         RESOURCES,        TECHNOLOGY            AND   TRADE:

            %
           1 oo
                     N W                                                        SE
           9 0   -

           80 -
                                                        hr
           70    -

           60    -                   <S>
           50    -

           40    -

           3 0   -                            £                         1 ^
           20 -

           10 -                              1
                                                             I
           0                     i           i-              i          i
                     R                                       B                   W
4.6 Approximate percentages of finds of three types of flint in a SE-NW transect
across Poland. Each division represents a 100 km2 sample cell: R, B and w mark
the positions of the sources. Calculated from maps in Sulimirski (I960).

movement (Figure 4.7) indicates three major components: up-river, down-
river, and across-country north-eastward. The distribution map shows that
the down-river component splits at the coast to go either to Brittany or to
the Gironde - in neither case more than 200-300km by sea. The largest
component is the overland route to centres of population on the Loire and
the Seine, and beyond into the Low Countries. Finds become noticeably
more scattered on this axis beyond the 350km limit. It is an indication of the
special desirability of this material that its main axis of movement should be
into areas with local supplies of good flint.
   Although there are several sources of bias and inaccuracy in the maps
used above, they do give some idea of the scale of later Neolithic trade.
While many products were of merely local significance, demand was
sufficient to move large volumes of particularly desirable goods over several
hundred kilometres. While the banded flint went mainly to a single cultural
area, the Grand Pressigny distribution is significantly inter-cultural. Both
show the 'pull' of nearby population clusters, but spread beyond these to
remoter areas. (Compare, for instance, the banded-flint distribution map
with the one of Globular Amphora culture settlements in Wislanski 1970,
fig. 56.)
   Trading systems on this scale clearly required a considerable quantity of
raw material, and a particular expression of the expansion in demand, by
the later-fourth millennium and after, is the development of large-scale
mining for various materials. Small operations had been undertaken even in
Upper Palaeolithic times, as is shown by the two-metre deep pits for colour-
ing material at Lovas in western Hungary. Such workings must have become
very common in the Neolithic and, undoubtedly, many more sites remain to
be discovered. Typical, for instance, are the two- to three-metre horizontal
'drifts' for jasper in the hard Jura limestone of the Isteiner Klotz, north
of Basle (Schmid 1952), the mass of small shafts for limnoquartzite near
Miskolc, in north-west Hungary, and the network of three-metre deep


                                                  114




                         This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                          All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

             AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY




4.7 The distribution of products of Grand Pressigny flint, analysed by direction
of movement. The black inner zone of the orientation diagram (top right) includes
finds within 200km, the hatched outer zone coversfindsbeyond this (cf. Figure 4.4).

channels following vertical flint boundaries at Siimeg, in western Hungary
(Vertes 1964). All these are probably of third-millennium date, and the last
one certainly so. Somewhat larger are the series of shafts for Jurassic chert
(radiolarite) at Mauern, near Vienna, some of which reach eight metres in
depth and have lateral galleries (Kirnbauer 1958). With the widespread
shallow workings alongside, these would have yielded around 1000 tonnes
of usable stone, perhaps at the rate of a few tonnes per year. The workings
seem to belong to a Lengyel culture local group, and this material was
widely used between the Alps and the Danube. That such efforts were not
restricted to mining stone is shown by the extensive system of underground
galleries at Suplja Stena, near Belgrade, for the extraction of cinnabarite (red
mercuric sulphide), used as a paint. The galleries are definitely dated by finds
of Baden pottery to the mid-third millennium, but finds of cinnabarite at the
nearby tell of Vinca suggest an earlier beginning (Milojcic 1943).
   None of these, however, compares with the scale of flint-mining in
northern Europe, where shafts were sunk through the relatively soft chalk
to up to fifteen metres in depth, with lateral galleries following the hori-
zontal seams. These are found in all the areas where flint could be won direct
from the chalk, and range in date from early third-millennium examples,
such as the Hov mine in Jutland producing thin-butted axes, to early

                                         115




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                RESOURCES,       TECHNOLOGY         AND    TRADE:


second-millennium ones like the Aalborg mine 80km away, producing
especially daggers and sickles (Becker 1959). Where flint was widely avail-
able within a region, activity was not concentrated in one place: where
opportunities were rarer, very large operations took place. The extensive use
and limited natural occurrence of banded flint is reflected in the scale of
mines at Krzemionki Opatowskie, where between 700 and 1000 shafts,
some as much as 11m deep, are known in a rather barren area some 10km
away from the nearest centres of settlement, where the working-up took
place. Such an industrial scale of production (in the Krzemionki case
perhaps twice that of Grimes Graves in East Anglia), as much as the
wide distribution of the products, indicates the organisation that underlies
such a pattern, in which at least groups of villages were gaining special
advantages from their nearness to raw materials.
    The large volume of material required in northern Europe is partly re-
lated to the size of woodworking tools. There is a general decrease in the size
of axes further south, where small quadrangular or shoe-last forms were
most usually mounted in antler sleeves. In addition, the very large size of
some northern examples suggests that the contrast may be exaggerated by
non-utilitarian factors. In the New Guinea case mentioned in an earlier sec-
tion, the ceremonial axes are clearly distinguished by their size, being over
25cm in length as opposed to the working axes, which are generally less
than 15cm. Thin-butted axes in Scandinavia and north Germany occasion-
ally occur up to over 40cm in length, weighing around 4kg, clearly in excess
of ergonomic requirements. In northern Europe, the large axe had a sym-
bolic role beyond its immediate technical function, and is notable as one of
the few representational elements in Megalithic art. Large ceremonial forms,
if that is what they are, certainly travelled over long distances; the far-flung
Langdale axe from Langwood Fen, in Cambridgeshire, is 28cm long (Fell
1964) and it would be interesting to discover whether the larger forms gen-
erally moved further than the smaller 'working' forms. The existence of a
complete spectrum from simple working tools to purely symbolic forms is
impressively demonstrated by the larger and finer jadeite examples, where
use in ceremonial presentations was a sufficiently powerful motive to
necessitate the exploitation of a specific raw material - though this explicit
differentiation between tool and symbol may be a fairly late feature. The
aesthetic qualities of Langdale tuff and banded flint may, in a similar way,
have contributed to their major distributions, and the cross-cutting charac-
ter of the British stone axe distributions (Clark 1965, fig. 1) indicates how
one rock was traded against another.
    Besides axes that are simply a variation of working forms in a different
size or material, other forms appeared in the Late Neolithic that are linked
to status through their use as weapons. This is most clearly seen south of the
Carpathians, as early as the mid-fourth millennium, where working axes are
rather small and axes over 10-15cm in length are almost entirely shaft-hole


                                        116




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

             AN   ESSAY ON E A R L Y E U R O P E A N       METALLURGY




                  HI
                  in                                             ft
Bach square represents
one burial: not all
                                           20
grave-goods shown.
                                           15

                                           10

                                           5




                    children           AGE AT                   children
                   (unsexed)           DEATH                   (unsexed)

          N I T R A CEMETERY                         TISZAPOLGAR- BASATANYA
                  dandkeramik                          Period ][ (Bodrogkenesztur)


              KEY TO SYMBOLS :                  £      Copper bracelet
              |   Schuhleistenkeil              II     Copper awl
             ® Spondy/us ornament                    I Copper pin
              f   ShaFthole axe                 i     Bone awl
              |   Copper dagger                 ~~    Limestone beads

4.8 The association of grave-goods by age and sex; a comparison of sixth- and later
fifth-millennium examples. Data from Pavuk (1972) and Bognar-Kutzian (1963).

forms and best described as 'battle-axes', since they are clearly intended for
fighting or display rather than more mundane tasks. Such stone battle-axes
occur in the north from TRB times onwards, becoming increasingly elaborate
and distinctive. These axes seem to belong to a stage in the development of
a more explicit symbolism of social status, the extension of a phenomenon
traceable from the Early Neolithic. The occurrence of various items as
common grave-goods allows some observations to be made on this process.
An interesting feature of certain classes of artefact is their association with
a specific sex and age-range (see Figure 4.8), suggesting that their possession
was limited to individuals of a particular status - even if items such as axes
could, no doubt, be borrowed by younger men for specific tasks. Such a
social dimension of utilitarian objects is well known in anthropological
literature, and it is likely that the exchanges that distributed objects such as
axes took place only between men of comparable rank.
    In the Nitra cemetery example, Spondylus ornaments reinforce the
pattern of axe distribution: in other contemporary cases further north, how-
ever, they occupy a converse position, associated with female and juvenile
burials (Pavuk 1972; Kahlke 1954). A particularly elaborate Bandkeramik


                                         117




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                RESOURCES,        TECHNOLOGY         AND     TRADE:


female inhumation grave at Erfurt (Inventaria Archaeologica D 85), for
example, had eighteen beads and eleven pendants of this shell at the neck,
two discs on the breast, and a ring on each upper arm.
   Besides the shaft-hole axe, another personal weapon that began to
achieve a widespread symbolic significance was the dagger. As early as the
fourth millennium in Bodrogkeresztur contexts (Bognar-Kutzian 1963, 318
'Group 1'), large dagger-blades of up to 18cm in length often accompany
male burials. This is another feature that was greatly emphasised in the third
millennium of northern Europe. It is significant that one of the most ex-
tensively traded materials of the time should be the Grand Pressigny flint,
whose characteristic cores were carefully prepared to produce especially
long blades, at great cost in flint. Some of the most extensively developed
systems of distribution in these stone-using communities were, thus, those
connected with status items.
   The development of a range of 'socio-technic5 items, such as the battle-
axe, was a characteristic feature of the artefactual history of the later fourth
and third millennia, both north and south of the Carpathians and,
as Tabaczynski has said (1972, 59), should be considered 'nicht nur
als Ausdruck der Verbreitung neuer Ideen ... sondern auch als eine
archaeologischer Hinweis auf die fortschreitende gesellschaftliche
Aufgliederung'. The evidence of stonework thus shows a growing scale of
trade during the Neolithic, not only in essential products but also in in-
creasing flows of symbolic artefacts. The rise in demand for essentials relates
directly to the growth of population, but the indirect results of this are also
of importance for the movement of materials in general. From the cultural
and environmental uniformity of the earliest Neolithic, expansion and
differentiation produced a mosaic of regional groupings and economic
zones of great complexity, ranging from farmers on the rich loess-lands or
more pastoral groups in sandy areas, to the specialised fishing villages of the
Rzucewo culture on the sandspits of the Vistula estuary. The opportunity for
fruitful exchange between these groups was thus much greater than in the
situation of initial colonisation. The basic exchange channels could usefully
carry a much greater volume of subsistence products and, with them, other
material items to balance and regulate the flow. The significance of material
counters in such situations has been emphasised by Vayda (1966) in dis-
cussing the Pomo Indians of central California, where shell beads were ex-
changed for food between communities concentrating on different staple
foods that were in surplus at different seasons. Beads accumulated from
a fish surplus, for instance, could be exchanged later with the donor com-
munity for inland products, when these in turn were in surplus.
   The actual distribution of population on the ground also encouraged
and necessitated contact. While Early Neolithic groups in central Europe
showed a strong orientation towards the river network and flood-plain
edge, the spread of settlement to drier interfluvial regions implied more

                                         118




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

             AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY


frequent face-to-face contact between clusters of villages, and a more richly
networked overall pattern (Krtik 1973). With more extensive grazing, the
maintenance of a wide set of relationships with surrounding communities
was not merely possible but essential to a smooth running of the system.
Indeed, the widespread distribution of certain ceramic styles, such as the
bell-beaker complex, indicates the growing intensity of inter-regional con-
tacts. All these factors promoted an increased turnover in goods, a general
quickening in local transactions that increased the power of such networks
to carry rarer materials. Such traded items served to emphasise the rank and
authority of those who could obtain them.


T H E ROLE OF COPPER
To understand the part that copper played in these developments, the
distribution and character of its sources must first be appreciated. In the first
place, copper ores are - like many of the types of harder stone used for axes
- basically of highland occurrence, being 'concentrated in areas of structural
complexity and igneous activity' (Park and Macdiarmid 1970). Such de-
posits are commonly formed by hydrothermal injection in periods of
tectonic movement, when hot solutions from deep-lying magma chambers
penetrate upwards into favourable structural and lithological environments.
Many such deposits were formed, for instance, during the Alpine mountain-
building phase, and such ores are widespread in the Tertiary fold-chains of
southern Europe (Sherratt 1972, 518). Somewhat different ore-complexes,
formed at deeper levels, are found in the ancient crystalline massifs such as
Bohemia or the Rhodope block: these may also contain copper, often lead,
and occasionally tin.
   A further factor of importance is the degree to which secondary changes
have occurred as a result of weathering. Where an ore vein reaches the
surface, a characteristic sequence of 'weathering horizons' develops, as a
result of the leaching downwards of impurities. At the top is a zone of pure
(native) copper, stable because of a thin surface coating of oxide. Below this
develop successively zones of oxide and carbonate ores (see Table 4.1 for
common minerals) and, below this, a zone of enrichment where impurities
accumulate at the water-table. While the higher ore minerals are mostly
bright^ coloured, those of the enrichment zone are characteristically grey
and are collectively referred to by the German miners' term of Fahlerz-
These are sulphide ores, containing also appreciable quantities of arsenic,
antimony, often silver and sometimes lead. (Depending on whether arsenic
or antimony dominates, these form crystals of the minerals tennantite and
tetrahedrite respectively - though owing to chemical replacement within the
same crystal structure, tetrahedrite-type crystals may represent either com-
pound: this is important in linking ores with analysed objects.) Finally,
below these secondary products, lies the zone of original unaltered sulphide

                                         119




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                 RESOURCES,                       TECHNOLOGY                 AND     TRADE:


                                   Age of ore deposits



                                                                                            IT ?
                                                                                         51iSSliiS
                                                                                              U?.
                                                                                              fsl w
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                      fi
                                                                                                     -c t
                                                                                                            C

                                                                                                         m \MjiU
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                 • i l l ? ! 1 = 142sm l i i l i . i J l i l i l i
                                                                                        1
      Ore Type            Chemical Formula                        A pproximate
                                                                  Cu Content
                                                                                 Ssal i            Si
Pure Copper
   Native Copper
Copper  Oxides
   Tenorite                                        black
   Cuprite
Copper   Carbonates

   Malachite
Capper Silicate
   Crysocola
    (Kupferpeckerx)
'h'akleri'
   Tennantite             Cu) As S).«              grey              55%
   Tetrahcdrite           Cuj Sb Sj^               rey               55%
   Enargite               Cuj As S4                «rey              50%
   Buurnonite             Pb Cu Sb Sj              grey
Copper   Sulphides
    Covelina (Kupferindig) CuS                                       65%
    Chalcocite (Kupferglam) C C S                                    50%
    Bornite (Buntkupferz) uUJ Fe S«                       k*         65%
                                                                     35%
    Chalcopyrile (Kupferkiet) Cu Fe S,
Copper/Arsenic
   'Whitneyile'               Cu As               reddish-white
    lomeykite                 Cuj As              grey-white
    Alfodonite                                    grey-white
    Pseudo malachite          2Cu As 0«.2Cu (Oil)}green
Pure Arsenic
    Native Arsenic            As
Arsenic Oxide
    Arse oolite
Arsenic Sulphides
    Orpiroent                 As, S}
    Realgar                   As, S,              red
                              FeS As

Table 4.1 Selected occurrences of various copper ores in Romania: data from
Radulescu and Dumitrescu (1966). [The age of the metallogenesis will be reflected
in lead-isotope values.]

ore, usually chalcopyrite. Secondary sulphides not containing iron may also
occur higher up in the series. All sulphide ores require an additional roasting
process before smelting, to get rid of the sulphur; and, in addition, the iron-
containing pyrite ores present problems with slag. The common secondary ores
all have a much higher copper content than the unaltered primary deposits.
    The formation of secondary minerals is not inevitable, and ores in
different areas show this to varying degrees. In the Alps, for example,
unaltered sulphide ores are usual; while in the Carpathians and the Balkans
large deposits of secondary minerals were formed, including native copper.
Various factors (Pittioni 1957, 8-9) affected this and, in particular,
the effects of glaciation in the Alps, in contrast with the more continuous
conditions of development further south. As Pittioni (1957, 10) re-
marks, 'die kulturgeschichtliche Bedeutung dieser lagerstattenkundlich-
klimageschichtlichen Feststellungen kann nicht eindringlich genug betont
werden'. The most important factor in the early development of copper
metallurgy was the availability of a well-developed series of ores from the
pure native form, through the easily smelted oxide and carbonate forms,
down to enriched and, finally, unaltered sulphides; and, above all, the
occurrence of such deposits in locations not too distantly removed from the

                                                                            120




                                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

            AN   ESSAY    O N EARLY           EUROPEAN               METALLURGY




                         native   oxide and    nat., ox. a c a r s
                                  carbonate     witvi pahlerz.
 SEC
   O NDAR
        Y
 ORES OF COPPER
 IN ROMANIA -
                            i         b I

4.9 Relative accessibility of copper ores in Romania as indicated by the heights
above sea level of different sources. Data from Radulescu and Dumitrescu (1966).
early centres of population. In the Balkans and the fringes of the Carpathian
Basin especially - as indeed in other centres of early development such as
Anatolia and Spain - the exploration of nearby upland regions brought agri-
cultural populations, familiar with the controlled use of heat in firing pot-
tery, into early contact with the brightly-coloured secondary ores of copper.
   Some idea of the overall distribution of copper ores within the Carpatho-
Balkan and Dinaric chains is given in Figure 4.15. Within this, however,
there are important differences in accessibility, and these seem to have been
major controlling factors in the development of local metallurgy. An attempt
has been made in Figure 4.9 to give a visual impression of the variety within
Romania. Two major groupings suggest themselves - a north-east group
to the east of Baia Mare, and a south-west group from the Iron Gates to the
Munjii Metalici where the densest concentrations occur. The altitudes of
these two groups indicate that the latter are much more accessible, and the
distribution of copper artefacts (see Figure 4.10) strengthens the impression
that these were, in fact, important sources in the fourth and third millennia
(see below). The less accessible sources of the north-east group sustained the
second florescence of Carpathian copper metallurgy, in the early Bronze Age
(Otomani culture).
   A similar situation obtained in parts of Bulgaria. Figure 4.11 shows the
position of sources exploited in the later fourth millennium (Chernykh

                                              121




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

               RESOURCES,       TECHNOLOGY         AND    TRADE:




                                                            \   • SECONDARY ORES
                                                                       OF COPPER
                                                                « COPPER AXES & AOZES




 ROMANIA :
 COPPER ORES
 & PR ODUC
         TS

4.10 The distribution of copper axes of the fifth and fourth millennia in Romania,
compared with potential ore-sources. Data from Vulpe (1973), Maczek et al. (1953).




4.11 Settlement and resources in part of central Bulgaria during the Copper Age:
Karanovo and adjacent copper mines in use at the time.

                                       122




                This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

            AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY




4.12 The spread of settlement in thefifthmillennium in the region around Sabac,
Serbia. (Sites marked 'Vinca* include also ones with Lengyel affinities.)

1972; also below), in relation to the area of dense prehistoric settlement
around Stara Zagora, where a series of important sites, including Azmak
and Karanovo, occur along the spring-line at the edge of the basin. In this
region, occupied from Early Neolithic times in the later sixth millennium,
metal ores as well as hard stone sources occur within 5-1 Okm of long-lived
tell settlements.
   In addition to areas that had this intimate association from such an early
date, expansion of settlement brought about similar conditions over a wider
area. One example will suffice to illustrate what must have been a wide-
spread process. The Tertiary limestones of Serbia were extensively colonised
in the Vinca period (Sherratt 1972, 531). In the area around Sabac shown
in Figure 4.12, Starcevo occupation of the sixth millennium concentrates

                                        123




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                RESOURCES,       TECHNOLOGY          AND    TRADE:




4.13 A schematic attempt to illustrate the extension of upland settlement in the
Alps as indicated by archaeological finds; compiled from various sources. [Dates
corrected; the location of Copper Age €Iceman' from the Hauslabjoch has been
added as a square symbol.]
along the Sava; but, in the course of the fifth millennium, settlement pushed
into the fringes of the uplands. Copper ores are known, not from the lime-
stone area itself, but from the older rocks behind it, for instance at Tekeris
(Maczek et al. 1953). Such deposits would again have been within a
5-1 Okm range from the nearest settlements.
   These three situations may be contrasted with the spread of settlement
into those regions of the Alps where metal ores occur. In the Miihlbach-
Bischofshofen area near Salzburg, for instance, which was the scene of ex-
tensive mining and smelting activity in the second millennium, the ores lie
between 1000 and 1500 metres above sea level. This is comparable with the
group in north-east Romania, and such areas would have seen little human
activity before the Bronze Age. Initial Neolithic settlement concentrated on
the loess lowlands (see Figure 4.13), spreading in the fourth and early third
millennia into the lake districts of the Alpine foreland, and only in the
second millennium, with the development of transhumance, were the high
pastures systematically used (Pittioni 1973). As the copper deposits in this
area were, in any case, mainly sulphide ores requiring a longer roasting pro-
cess, it is not surprising that Alpine ores did not figure largely in the Copper
Age.
   In the case of Bulgaria, therefore, with ores that must have been known
as curiosities for a millennium before copper-working began, a limiting
factor in terms of technology can, indeed, be inferred. The transition from

                                         124




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

             AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY


                                                                                       (hundreds)




4.14 The succession of Copper Age shafthole-axe types in Balkan-Carpathian
Europe, roughly from SE to NW as new sources were opened up (for selected spatial
distributions, see following figure); [from Sherratt 1976a].

light-coloured painted pottery fired in an oxidising atmosphere to the dark-
coloured reduced wares that became fashionable in south-east Europe and
Anatolia in the later fifth millennium probably indicates the critical change
involved. The Macedno-Bulgarian region, therefore, where settlement be-
gan as early as the sixth millennium in a landscape in which fertile alluvial
basins lay scattered among mountains rich in stone and metal, was an area
where resources waited for an appropriate technology; but outside this,
factors of location and, ultimately, of ore-type were more critical. For re-
sources requiring considerable labour to extract and process them at source,
it is unlikely that extensive exploitation could take place within a primitive
farming context unless these activities could be integrated within a yearly
subsistence cycle. Only where settlement was nearby, or when seasonal
movements of stock took men as a matter of routine into the area of
occurrence, could such a process begin.
    The earliest use of copper is, in fact, very hard to determine, as the kinds
of small object made in the experimental stages are rarely found except by
careful sieving of excavated deposits. For this reason, the date of the earliest
metallurgy is likely, in many areas, to be pushed further back than current
evidence allows. In south-east Europe, well-associated finds of beads, prob-
ably made from native copper, from the Boian culture cemetery of Cernica
(Cantacuzino and Morinz 1963) give a terminus ante quern in the earlier
fourth millennium, while a find of a copper awl has been claimed in a fifth-
millennium Cri§ context, though this is disputed. The earliest well-dated
heavy objects probably made from smelted copper occur early in the second
half of the fourth millennium, when the simpler forms of flat and shaft-hole
axes make their appearance, along with arm-rings and bracelets.
    The typological sequence of copper shaft-hole axes, beginning with

                                         125




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                 RESOURCES,       TECHNOLOGY         AND    TRADE:


simple axe-hammers that were a direct translation of contemporary stone
forms, is now well known (Bognar-Kutzian 1963; schubert 1965 inter alia).
See Figure 4.14. Some of the earliest associated finds are the three examples
from different houses in the early Gumelnija settlement at Hotnica in
Bulgaria, of the so-called Vidra type (Bognar-Kutzian 1972,144). The Vidra
form is typical of the area covered by the Gumelnija culture in Bulgaria and
south Romania. A local form of flat axe has a complementary distribution
(see Figure 4.15). Only slightly later are the finds from the Tibava cemetery
(Siska 1964), not far from the copper sources of east Slovakia. Here, from
a sample of forty-one excavated graves, come seven examples of the Coka
and Plocnik types (Figure 4.15). Although these forms are known from a
wider area at this time, it is significant that they occur in graves only in this
immediate region, which would correspond to zone (2) of the distribution
model set out earlier. The metalliferous area of eastern Slovakia was, in any
case, already an important supply-area for andesite and obsidian (lumps of
which occur in contemporary graves at Lucky in this region), and an
intermediary in the transmission of brown translucent chert and Wolhynian
flint (also in graves, at Tibava: Andel 1961). The copper industry at this
stage was thus ancillary to the distribution of a wide range of raw materials,
some of which were economically much more important.
   With the widespread occurrence of mining for various rocks in mind, it
is no surprise that the exploitation of copper should also involve mining
activity as early as the fourth millennium. It can plausibly be related to the
larger volumes of material required for heavy objects such as axe-hammers,
and was probably an essential part of the process of collecting the raw
material for smelting, rather than simply hammering small amounts of
native copper. As with the stone-quarries, therefore, many more sites must
remain to be recognised. The earliest confirmed traces of mining are the six
shafts from Rudna Glava near Bor - an important copper-producing area
down to the present day - where the Carpathian/Balkan arc swings through
north-east Yugoslavia (Jovanovic 1971). These shafts are sloping funnels,
varying from two metres to half-a-metre in diameter, following the ore
veins. One shaft had an access platform partly revetted by a dry-stone wall,
and the shafts extend beyond the two to three metres to which they were
explored. Fragments of pottery and a 'cult-vessel' (lamp?) datable to the
beginning of the Vinca-Plocnik phase of the early or mid-fourth millennium,
were found in association with this site (Figure 16.1).
    The Bulgarian sites near Stara Zagora, noted above and shown on Figure
4.11, have also yielded traces of mining (Chernykh and Radunceva 1972).
Pottery of Copper Age and Early Bronze Age types has been found in associ-
ation at the site of Aibunar, though the mine at Hristene, which has a
wide funnel entrance and a shaft nearly 25m in depth, may belong to a later
period. Other traces of prehistoric mining activity have been discovered at
Spania Dolina, near Banska Bistrica in western Slovakia (Tocik and ladar

                                         126




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

            AN   ESSAY   ON   EARLY     EUROPEAN       METALLURGY




4.1 S The distribution of various types of copper axe in Romania during the fifth
and fourth millennia. Heavy lines enclose SO per cent of the finds of a given type
in the country. Data from Vulpe (1973).

1971), identified by large stone hammers grooved for withy hafts of a kind
known elsewhere in Bronze Age contexts. (See map for these sites: Figure
4.16.)
   The scale of copper-working and trading grew appreciably, towards the
end of the fourth millennium and at the beginning of the third. Typo-
logically, this is indicated by the appearance of larger and more elaborate
forms of axe-hammers, usually formed by flattening and fanning out the

                                        127




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

shown by spatial proximity linkage [joining findspots at successive distance-
thresholds - more accurate than a grid isopleth]; dark masses indicate dense
clusters. Data from Schubert (1965). Below: the distribution of copper ores (dots)
and known prehistoric mines (circles); large circles indicate a 200km radius around
the most important sources. Source data from Maczek et al. (1954).

                                        128




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

             AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN       METALLURGY


'hammer' end: Figure 4.14. In some cases this method was used to produce
an actual working edge, and thus an axe-adze (e.g. Jaszladany type); in
others, it simply produced a more elaborate terminal (e.g. Mezokeresztes
type). Some examples of the latter - a local development in the upper Tisza
area - are up to 32cm in length, indicating the abundance of copper supplies
available. These developments took place in the Carpathian Basin rather
than in the Balkans, where supplies seem to have been less plentiful and
simpler forms continued. The Jaszladany type is by far the commonest and
most widespread of the stray finds (Figure 4 . 1 5 ) , as well as being put into
graves in the consuming area (zone 3) in the eastern Carpathian Basin.
It was probably produced at a number of centres. Despite the large amounts
of metal in circulation, however, there is no reason to believe that the trading
mechanisms that distributed them were any more sophisticated than those
involved in carrying stone supplies further north. The distribution map
(Figure 4.16) for copper axes shows a concentration largely within the
Carpathian Basin, and this pattern can be accounted for as the output of
a number of sources on its edge whose scale of production was well below
that documented for banded flint, for instance. While the use of copper
added another new and desirable raw material, it caused no revolution in
the sphere of trade.
   The development of copper-working in the later fourth and third mil-
lennia was the result of the availability of easily-smelted ores in locations
already well known. The numerous analyses of hammer-axes, adze-axes and
flat copper axes from this period (Patay et al. 1963; Junghans et al. 1968)
show a consistent pattern almost without impurities, except for traces of
silver. This would be compatible with the use either of native, oxide or
carbonate ores, but it is likely that the bulk of copper came from the widely
distributed (Table 4.1) ores, malachite and azurite, pieces of which have
been found on a number of sites in Yugoslavia (e.g. Fafos: Jovanovic 1 9 7 1 ) .
Over a wide area, from Macedonia and Bulgaria in the south to Slovakia in
the north, the extensive deposits of ores of this kind allowed a simple metal-
lurgy to flourish on an impressive scale. Although smelting was probably
confined to areas immediately adjacent to the sources, re-melting probably
took place over a wider area, and large objects traded outwards from the
sources would, no doubt, at some stage have been broken down, as occasion
demanded, into a multitude of smaller forms. No specialised ingots of
comparable size are known. The processes involved in the manufacture of
finished products are of a simple kind, involving only a one-piece open
mould and a good deal of hammering (Coghlan 1 9 6 1 ; Charles 1 9 6 9 ) .
   There is some evidence, even from the fourth millennium, of the pro-
duction of arsenical alloys. One of the Tibava hammer-axes (SAM N O . 3 3 5 4 )
contains 1.15 per cent of arsenic, and sporadic values of up to 4 per cent
occur in objects from the later Copper Age. Such occurrences in no way
imply the kind of regular trade in additives suggested by consistently high

                                         129




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                 RESOURCES,       TECHNOLOGY         AND    TRADE:


tin values in the Bronze Age. As can be seen from Table 4.1, native arsenic
and its oxides and sulphides occur commonly in association with the kinds
of copper deposit under discussion. Indeed, the green pseudo-malachite
mineral with a high arsenic content, similar in appearance to the pure
copper carbonate, is occasionally found, and could well have been added
quite accidentally. It is also, of course, likely that the effects of adding associ-
ated arsenic minerals came to be appreciated and, with the development of
closed-mould casting in the later third millennium (see below), the use of
this additive became standard practice in south-east Europe (Chernykh
1971) and the Aegean (Charles 1967), where tin supplies were sporadic.
   The ores that sustained the output of massive copper axes were naturally
limited in extent, and there are indications that by the later third millennium
they were in short supply. Copper axes were no longer put in graves, and
settlement finds are few. Some continuity was maintained in the north-west
part of the basin where axes are found occasionally in Baden contexts in
Austria and in Slovakia, and pieces of sheet metal were put in graves.
Significantly, one or two pieces from this period are of Fahlerz, and while
small amounts of purer copper ore remained (probably in relatively in-
accessible areas) to be used sporadically for the next half-millennium, its
main phase of use was over. The final stages of the third millennium marked
a time of scarcity and experiment.
   A curious situation then came about: at a time when raw-material sup-
plies in the Carpathian Basin were short, contacts across the Pontic steppes
with the Caucasian school of metallurgy (Chernykh 1966) introduced a new
range of forms, such as the single-bladed axe (Mozsolics 1967), associated
with the technique of closed casting in a two-piece mould. At the same time,
local copper-working began over a much wider area of central and north-
west Europe. This occurred in areas metallurgically entirely distinct: lacking
extensive deposits of purer secondary ores, their industries developed on the
basis of a supply of Fahlerz copper.
   By the beginning of the second millennium, therefore, especially in
Bohemia and central Germany but also further west, a second florescence of
copper-using was under way. It is this 'Fahlerz boom' which has marked the
Early Bronze Age of central Europe in general, and the Aunjetitz culture in
particular, as a phenomenon of special interest to the prehistorian (Childe
1957). Based initially on open-mould casting, this central European school
later followed the Carpathian Basin in adopting the two-piece mould, at
the same time taking local tin as a standard additive to improve closed
castings in the same way that arsenic was adopted in the Balkans.
   Spectographic analysis, of little use in identifying specific sources for the
purer metals of the Copper Age, has proved of great value in distinguishing
several varieties of Fahlerz (Otto and Witter 1952; Junghans et al. 1960;
1968). The assemblages of the central European Early Bronze Age are
dominated by a limited number of groups, chiefly CA' or Singen metal and

                                         130




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

             AN   ESSAY   ON   EARLY     EUROPEAN        METALLURGY


the so-called Qsenhalsring metal (Waterbolk and Butler 1965). Neither can
be definitely attributed to a specific source: 'A' metal probably covers several
sources including, possibly, some in the Harz mountains; but Osenhalsring
metal shows a significant geographical patterning. Its concentration on the
Upper Danube and in Moravia has been related both to a Slovakian and
to an Alpine origin (Neuninger and Pittioni 1963; Bath-Bilkova 1973) but,
whichever is correct, two features stand out - the large quantities that occur
as ingots in hoards, and the contrast between the frequency of these in
Moravia and the trickle of this metal that reached the Carpathian Basin.
Only appreciably later did a local Fahlerz (FA/B or 'Otomani metal') become
widespread in the Basin and allow a full expression of the forms that had
developed there in the period of intervening scarcity (Schubert and Schubert
1967).
   What, then, was the social and historical significance of these changes in
the availability of metal, and how do these relate to the questions set out in
the opening section? In the first place, the development of a technology of
copper-smelting from the purer secondary ores had few wider effects upon
contemporary society. It was a local expression of processes widespread in
Later Neolithic Europe - the exploration of the landscape, an intensified
exploitation of raw materials, and a limited widening of trade networks. It
added a new prestige material that was used in much the same way as stone
and shell elsewhere. The earliest hammer-axes are a direct translation of the
stone forms elsewhere called 'battle-axes', and are clearly the equivalents
of these as deposits in graves. It was used for daggers - in phase II of the
Tiszapolgar cemetery associated with somewhat younger adult males than
the shaft-hole axes (Figure 4.8) - in place of stone blades, and it was used
for armbands and beads in place of shell. Its importance was largely
symbolic: the medium was the message.
   The spread of metal-using further north in the second millennium was
equally associated primarily with prestige uses. Again, the axe - in this case,
the local flat form rather than a shaft-hole type - and the dagger were among
the first applications, along with ornaments and the pins that were at this
time becoming fashionable in place of buttons. There are, however, new
features that are of significance for the social structure of the Bronze Age
proper. The rich grave of Thun-Renzenbiihl in Switzerland (Figure 4.17;
Strahm 1972) epitomises both old and new features. Axe and dagger retain
their symbolic role, reinforced by a headband and belt-terminal which them-
selves have antecedents in the later Copper Age. Cloak-pins of specific
regional types no doubt proclaim local loyalties, but the six neck-rings intro-
duce a new element of special importance. Such neck-rings (Qsenhalsringe)
were evidently both traded as ingots and worn as ornaments. They occur in
hoards of up to 600 (Schubert 1966) and are clearly counters as much as
symbols of individual authority. In the Copper Age, groups of more than
two or three axes found together are rare, and the 'hoard' of thirteen flat


                                         131




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                RESOURCES,      TECHNOLOGY         AND     TRADE:




axes from the Plocnik settlement is unique. This is consistent with their
inferred use as indicators of ascribed status. With the Osenhalsringe we
have for the first time an element of accumulation, the achieved position of
a 'big man' superadded to other inequalities. Contemporary with the
Osenhalsringe are the massive axe-hoards of the Saale region, such as that
of Grobers-Bennewitz, with 300 flanged axes, or the Dieskau II hoard in-
cluding also daggers and halberds (Brunn 1959). Such collections are typical
of the mixture of ingot-counters and display equipment that dominates
European Bronze Age hoards down to the occurrence of industrial collec-
tions ('smiths' hoards') which mark the system of rapid recycling necessary
when bronze was used as a workaday material (Rowlands 1971).
   It is unlikely that the goods that survive archaeologically moved in
isolation: the greater concentration of metal in the Early Bronze Age, which
for the first time saw the extensive import of metal objects to large areas,
such as Denmark and north Germany, without local resources, must indi-
cate also a greater mobility in other commodities, probably including sub-

                                       132




                This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

            AN   ESSAY    ON   EARLY    EUROPEAN        METALLURGY


sistence products and textiles. The greater mobility offered by extensive
transhumance and seafaring, the widespread use of the horse, all helped to
make possible a wider network of exchange and trade. In the Aegean, the
sudden flowering of inter-regional contacts in the later third millennium
(Renfrew 1967) surely indicates the beginning of the type of complex
maritime exchange-cycles so familiar to ethnographers (Figure 4.1).
   The division of prehistory into Stone, Bronze and Iron Ages has had a
remarkably long life since the scheme was first put forward in 1832. Seen as
symptomatic of underlying ecological and social changes, rather than simply
as a technological advance, the beginning of the Bronze Age retains its
significance as a critical point in European development.




                                       133




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Thu, 27 Aug 2020 06:23:16 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                          5
