      Neolithic Exchange Systems in
      Central Europe, 6000-3500 BC
                                     (1987)

T h e results of identification programmes dealing with flint, hard rocks
and obsidian have long since exploded the idea that the Neolithic period
was characterised by self-sufficiency and an absence of trade (Chapter 4;
Willms 1982). Exploration of the range of items traded by Neolithic com-
munities has revealed a bewildering diversity of exchange systems covering
impressive distances and often involving large volumes of material. At the
same time, the application of radiocarbon chronologies and acceptance of
the implications of recalibration have emphasised just how large a span of
time we are dealing with - something like 4000 years between the intro-
duction of agriculture and the regular use of tin-bronze in central Europe.
It would thus be quite false to try and force the evidence for traded materials
into a single model of 'Neolithic trade': the diversity of evidence truly
reflects the major contrasts that must have existed in social and economic
organisation during these millennia.
   The large, relatively uniform alluvial plain of eastern Hungary provides
a natural laboratory for the study of lithic exchange systems, being prac-
tically devoid of stone resources but surrounded by mountain and piedmont
areas with a wealth of stones (including obsidian) and metal ores. The flint
and chert sources of Hungary are described elsewhere [Biro 1988; cf. also
Kaczanowska 1985]: in general they are of rather poor quality by com-

Tbe very different patterns of settlement and social organisation defined in
previous chapters for the three millennia following the introduction of farming
have correspondingly contrasting patterns in the circulation of material goods:
broadly; the frugality of a pioneer phase, the bulk circulation of materials in the
mature Neolithic, and the appearance of conspicuously exotic types of flint in the
Copper Age. This account of materials collected as part of the British-Hungarian
project was made possible by raw material identifications undertaken by Mrs C.
Takacs-Btro of the Hungarian Geological Institute, and first presented at the
Fourth International Flint Symposium in Brighton, 1983.


                                        320




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                  IN   CENTRAL     EUROPE,      6 0 0 0 - 3 5 0 0   BC


parison with siliceous materials from Jurassic and Cretaceous deposits
north of the Carpathians. The acquisition of cutting materials of any kind
thus required special procurement, while the acquisition of high-quality
materials for specific purposes involved particular effort. The sequence of
stone sources used in this area is thus an effective index of changing needs
and the scale of the sustaining area upon which local communities were able
to draw. That this area was able to acquire stone at all is significant; that it
did so in certain periods in enormous quantities or from great distances is
particularly interesting. However, these patterns only make sense when seen
in the context of complementary flows of other materials and the social
setting in which they took place. (For discussion see Chapter 10.)
    The proportions of various types of flaked stone materials at three
neighbouring sites of the period under consideration in Co. Bekes, eastern
Hungary is given in Figure 12.2. These assemblages are characteristic of
their respective periods, and similar observations (though not cast in quan-
titative form) have been made on other contemporary sites in this region.
The assemblages represent three distinctive systems: an early, pioneer phase
following the first introduction of agriculture; a phase of regional inter-
action in the Late Neolithic; and a phase of inter-regional exchange in the
Early Copper Age.


T H E PIONEER PHASE
The quantities of chipped stone material found on early Neolithic sites in the
centre of the Plain are not large, and the pieces themselves are generally
small. Partly worked cores were imported, but these and their debitage are
rare and good flint was carefully conserved - in one case the flakes and
debris from a knapping operation were carefully collected and stored in a
vessel (Kaczanowska, Kozlowski and Makkay 1981). At first, stone supplies
came mainly from the south; but as agricultural communities reached the
obsidian sources of the Zemplen mountains in the north, this material came
into widespread use. At Mehtelek, a site of the Szatmar group near Szatmar
(Satu Mare) on the Hungarian-Romanian border, it formed up to 80 per
cent of the chipped stone, the remainder being a great variety of other
stones. It was traded both to surrounding Mesolithic groups in Moravia
and Little Poland (Kalicz and Makkay 1977b, 17) and southwards to
the agricultural communities of the Plain. At one of these, the site of
Rehely-Diilo (Koros culture), some 170km from the sources, it was the
dominant material (Figure 12.2). The rest of the assemblage was made of
small quantities of less useful jasper, probably from river pebbles. Supplies
of obsidian were limited and perhaps sporadic. There was great variability
in the size of blades, and extensive reworking shows an intensive utilisation
of the material available.



                                        321




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    NEOLITHIC        EXCHANGE        SYSTEMS




REGIONAL INTERACTION
Within a few hundred years, however, this situation had been transformed:
by c.5000 BC large, prosperous lowland sites had established intensive
relations with an expanding periphery that was actively supplying quantities
of desirable rocks from the highland fringe. The amounts of material
recovered from settlements of this period are impressive: surface investi-
gations at the Late Neolithic site of Sarto (Szalkahat and Tisza cultures), a
settlement some 500m in diameter, have yielded over fifty greenstone axes
and more than 45kg of grinding stones, for instance (Figures 12.3,12.4). The


                                        322




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                  IN   CENTRAL      EUROPE,     6 0 0 0 - 3 5 0 0   BC




                                                                         <S

                                                                               .ov
                                                r
i„ KJO
                                                       1             1

                                                    POHALOM
                                                    Early Copper Age




% too-

                                                       SARTO
                                                      Late Neolithic




%   100

    50 -



                                               REHELY DULO
                                                      Early Neolithic
    60-

    50-

    40-




12.2 Changing proportions of imported materials on three sites in the centre of
the Great Hungarian Plain from 6000 to 4000 BC. The histograms give the
percentages by weight of different raw materials in the flaked stone assemblages
from three adjacent sites, representing the Koros, Tisza and Tiszapolgar periods
respectively. Note that this diagram shows only relative proportions: the absolute
quantity of obsidian, for instance, greatly expands in the Late Neolithic, and falls
away again in the Early Copper Age.




                                         323




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     NEOLITHIC       EXCHANGE        SYSTEMS




   mm
12.3 Types of imported materials at Sarto (Devavanya parish, Co. Bekes) in the
Late Neolithic (Szakalhat and Tisza periods): axes of volcanic and metamorphic
rocks, including trapezoid (left) and shoelast (right) forms.




12.4 As 12.3: saddle quern (length: 37.5cm; weight: 8.73kg).


flaked stone assemblage is dominated by large quantities of limnic hydro-
quartzite, imported in the form of tabular pre-cores weighing up to 1.35kg
(Figure 12.5). It is not a high-quality material, but its usage was prodigal -
large cores and quantities of debitage are found in abundance, as well as
tools such as knives, scrapers and sickles (Figure 12.6). Supplies were clearly
plentiful and reliable. Jasper was also used in small amounts, but more
significant is the sporadic appearance of small quantities of longer-distance
imports such as the type of flint found in the Mecsek mountains of south-
west Hungary, and of the radiolarite which occurs at a number of sources
on the southern fringes of the Carpathians and which was exploited by
Lengyel groups in western Hungary, Austria and Slovakia (see Chapter


                                        324




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                 IN   CENTRAL     EUROPE,      6 0 0 0 - 3 5 0 0   BC




12.6 As 12.3: hydroquartzite cores and core-trimming flakes (top), blades (middle)
and scrapers (below) - one blade with sickle-gloss.



                                       325




                This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     NEOLITHIC       EXCHANGE         SYSTEMS




12.7 As 12.3: obsidian cores and core-trimming flakes (top), blades (middle) and
scrapers (below).

4). Obsidian, although proportionally far less than the abundant hydro-
quartzite, was nevertheless available in large quantities: it occurs as large
cores, little smaller than the 'bombs' (ejecta) of the original raw material,
and as regular blades, implements and debitage (Figure 12.7). With the
obsidian at this site should also be mentioned a number of sherds of the fine,
decorated Biikk pottery which was made in the areas around the obsidian
sources to the north (Figure 12.8).
    Sites such as Sarto, which are conspicuous for their size and wealth,
probably represent the upper tier of a settlement hierarchy, being sur-
rounded by smaller settlements (Makkay 1982; Chapter 11). The major
sites occur at something like 30km intervals, and are located at points along
the major rivers (notably the Koros and lower Tisza), which must have
played a major role in the distribution of such items. However, within these
sites there is remarkably little evidence for social differentiation in the form
of rich households or well-equipped graves, or of material items distinctive
of an elite. Nevertheless, imported materials came in regular flows: their
movement was well organised and not just a sporadic windfall.
   Where were these materials coming from? Figure 12.9 represents a first
attempt to define the supply radii for some of them. Two areas in particular

                                        326




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   IN   CENTRAL     EUROPE,      6 0 0 0 - 3 5 0 0   BC




                                                                lll^ifi
            l«!i              31    41 ' Si            ' ?1     Si    9
                                                                     HO
12.8 As 12.3: sherds of imported fine pottery of the Biikk culture, incised and
incrusted with red paint.



stand out: first the edges of the Bihar Massif, to the east, along the upper
reaches of the various branches of the Koros River in Romania; and
secondly the north Hungarian mountains, linked either along the Tisza and
lower Koros or more directly along the flood-course of the Hortobagy. Both
areas are known as sources of cherts. Com§a (1967; 1976) has described
sources for cherts widely used in Neolithic times in the region of Crisana (fir
Valley), at Iozagel (on the White Koros) and in the Banat (Poiana Ruscai
mountains near Bega), while small shafts for limnic hydroquartzite are
known near Miskolc in north-east Hungary (Vertes 1964, 210). Axes of
volcanic and metamorphic rocks could have either a northern or an eastern
origin, but in the days before wheeled vehicles and pack animals the bulky
products like grinding-stones are likely to have been transported directly by
boat from the nearest eastern source. Direct access at certain seasons is a
possibility here, though the distances are impressive: 100km or more.
   Higher-value items - obsidian and decorated pottery - came from the
north over a slightly longer distance. Their bulk was smaller, but in the case
of pottery more fragile. The northern mountains form an interesting study
of the relationship between settlement and the exploitation of raw materials
(Figure 12.10). The mountains fall into three blocks: Matra, Biikk and

                                         327




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     NEOLITHIC       EXCHANGE         SYSTEMS




12.9 Supply distances for the major classes of lithic material at Sarto in the Late
Neolithic, c.SOOO BC.

Zemplen. The Biikk, in the middle, is the exception - it is limestone, and has
plentiful caves. Zemplen, on the other hand, is volcanic and metamorphic,
supplying a variety of rocks of which the most important was obsidian.
Other siliceous rocks also occur there. Two main sources of obsidian have
been distinguished analytically (Williams-Thorpe 1978; Williams-Thorpe et
al. 1984): one, which was the major supplier throughout prehistory, and the

                                         328




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                 IN   CENTRAL     EUROPE,      6 0 0 0 - 3 5 0 0   BC




sole Carpathian source for most of it, is just over the Czech border at
Seleska (Szolloske), in a fairly low-lying position. But just at the period
under discussion, smaller secondary sources within the Zemplen mountains
were opened up and specialised workshop settlements with hoards and
production-debris are known from the valleys leading down from them
(Figure 12.10, detail map). What is even more remarkable is the extent of


                                        329




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     NEOLITHIC       EXCHANGE        SYSTEMS


settlement in the Biikk mountains themselves. Occupation traces occur up
to 900m above sea level in the limestone caves that are famous for their
Palaeolithic assemblages. This upland occupation lasted only for a short
time from c.5000-4800 BC, and much of the area was then abandoned. The
sites seem to be tied in with the extensive trading opportunities of the
period. Remains from the caves show traces of hunting, sheep herding, and
evidence for pottery-making, as well as hoards both of axes and blades
(Lichardus 1974). It seems that, as well as being concerned with the direct
exploitation of sources in the Zemplen and nearby, these groups were also
acting as middlemen in the dispersal of this range of materials and were
also perhaps engaged in forms of secondary specialisation such as the manu-
facture of specially fine pottery or the transhumant movement of sheep. The
most easily recognisable product, obsidian, found its way 400km down
river to Transylvania and Jugoslavia, and also (along with some pottery)
across the Carpathians for 200km into Little Poland.
   The pattern of trade, then, was one of intensive localised movement of
highland products to adjacent lowlands, with one or two more special items
moving from one side of the Basin to the other, and occasionally just into
the area over the mountains from important sources. The asymmetry of this
reconstruction, in which durable items of many kinds were moving into the
Plain, strongly suggests the counter-movement of some balancing exportable
commodity, of which cattle is the most probable (Chapter 10). The cultural
pattern at this period is one of fragmentation, with a multitude of small
groupings defined by their fine pottery, suggesting a rather localised scale of
interaction in which middleman positions could be exploited, since there
was no elite participation in longer-distance trade by which intervening
areas could be bypassed. This, then, is what I have defined as a regional
network, and marks the first climax of trade activity within the Carpathian
Basin.


INTER-REGIONAL EXCHANGE
We now move to a very different situation. This is defined in the Hungarian
sequence as the beginning of the Copper Age (c.4500 BC), although
populations in surrounding areas were still stone-using and indeed in Poland
this period saw the development of open shaft-mining and specialist flint-
workshops. Technological labels - Neolithic, Eneolithic or Copper Age - are
less important than the recognition that a major change had occurred in
social organisation and the character of trade.
   In the examples presented here, this period is represented by the Early
Copper Age site of Pohalom (Tiszapolgar culture). The absolute quantities
are no longer as impressive as those of the preceding period, and the sites
have no obvious hierarchy; but the component of long-distance imports is
substantial. Hydroquartzite continues as an everyday material for small


                                        330




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                  IN   CENTRAL     EUROPE,      6 0 0 0 - 3 5 0 0   BC


cutting tools, and obsidian is also present; there are also significant numbers
of pieces of Mecsek flint and radiolarite. But almost half of the chipped
stone industry, including the larger and longer blades, is made of a Creta-
ceous flint which has been identified as coming from deposits in Wolhynia
(the region east of L'vov on the upper Dnestr: Kaczanowska 1981; 1985).
This was capable of being made into the longer blades which were thought
particularly desirable (see below). Such supplies were obtained on a regular
basis for some hundreds of years: Wolhynian flint makes up to 60 per cent
of assemblages of the succeeding Bodrogkeresztur period (c.3900 BC).


DISCUSSION
The three types of exchange systems characterised above form only a part
of the history of trade in lithic materials, which continued to circulate along-
side copper for a further 1000 years. This latter period saw the development
of the Sumeg flint mines in western Hungary and the major development
of bulk production and distribution in the flint-mining areas of the North
European Plain (Lech 1987; Schild 1987). The enlarged scale of flint pro-
duction must be related to the increasing population and accelerated rate of
forest clearance linked to the introduction of plough agriculture and more
extensive types of farming (Kruk 1980; Chapter 6).
    In northern Europe the need for stone axes in forest clearance was
marked by the development of effective upright axes with a long cutting
edge and rectangular cross-section (Montelius' 'thin-butted' and 'thick-
butted' types) that have no counterparts further south. These were produced
in very large quantities from mined flint. However, towards the end of the
third millennium there was a shift in north European flint production away
from axes and towards large cutting implements - especially daggers
but also knives and sickles. This is associated with the very widespread
distribution of specialised products such as the daggers of Grand Pressigny
flint, whose use as equipment for warrior males shows continuity with the
first copper daggers in north-west Europe, as demonstrated by Beaker grave-
goods in the Netherlands (Lanting, Mook and van der Waals 1973, 45). In
some respects, therefore, this change in northern Europe recapitulates the
type of transition described here for central Europe about 1000 years earlier.
The mass circulation of everyday items gave way to a concentration on
specific exotic materials and types with a more explicit symbolism of social
status. It is significant that the regular use of copper occurs in this context
in both areas. Materials such as obsidian seem to have been incapable of
carrying such a message: as with Spondylus shell, its main period of use
occurs in earlier Neolithic contexts at a lower level of social differentiation.
    The interpretation of studies of lithic material sources thus inevitably
leads not only to a consideration of the other items circulating in exchange
networks, but also to attempts at evaluating the social significance of the


                                        331




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    NEOLITHIC       EXCHANGE        SYSTEMS


materials in question and how they were manipulated by the individuals
concerned (Douglas and Isherwood 1980). The complementary evidence
from settlements and graves provides a starting-point for the analysis of
how such commodities were used by Neolithic populations. The study of
lithic artefacts thus remains a challenging area of archaeological research,
but one which cannot be isolated from more general consideration of the
archaeological record, and indeed of ethnography as well.




                                        332




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:10:09 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                         13
         The Genesis of Megaliths:
        Monumentality, Ethnicity and
            Social Complexity in
        Neolithic North-West Europe
                                     (1990)

                    Houses for the living,
                    Dolmens for the dead:
                    Are these distinctions 'on the ground'
                    Or only 'in the head'?
                    And whose head is it anyway:
                    The 'writer' of the 'text' -
                    Or just the archaeologist's
                    Who stumbled on it next?
                    I'll break my skull on megaliths
                    And join the pile of bones;
                    And then perhaps I'll empathise
                    With builders of the stones.
                                               (Old folk song)

MLonumental architecture was one of Gordon Childe's ten criteria of urban
civilisation; and monument building is still employed by evolutionary
archaeologists as an important index of social complexity. It is misleading,

On the western and northern edges of the central European loess corridor; lying
next to the sea, a very different pattern of Neolithic land-occupation occurred
from that in Hungary - inscribing the landscape not with settlements but tombs.
Chapter 5 suggested that the answer lay in a fusion between Mesolithic indigenes
and incoming Neolithic groups; this chapter; written for a World Archaeology
special issue on monumentally, describes the physical setting and chronology of
the process. The account was much influenced by the work of Richard Bradley
(who solicited it) and Ian Hodder. It demonstrates that local manifestations can
only be understood in the context of interactions over very large areas; and it
shows how a setting within such large physical and cultural structures influences
the 'personality3 of a region.


                                         333




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      THE    GENESIS     OF    MEGALITHS:


however, to approach all monumentality with the same model in mind.
Although megalithic monuments were constructed for two millennia in
Atlantic Europe, they belong to a relatively early phase of the development
of farming economies there. Unlike the architectural achievements of early
Mesopotamia or Mesoamerica, they were the products of societies able to
mobilise relatively unskilled labour rather than specialist craftsmanship;
and their experiments, while impressive, gave rise to no wider architectural
tradition. They thus belong more to the spread of farming than to the onset
of urbanism.
    In Childe's view, the whole European megalithic phenomenon was itself
an indirect reflection of contemporary oriental civilisation, carried as part of
a mortuary cult by seaborne missionaries along the Atlantic coastlands.
While radiocarbon chronologies have severed this diffusionist link, mega-
lithic monuments still retain some of the glamour of this earlier association;
they have thus been treated as indicative of new forms of social organis-
ation, or indications of territorial consciousness as the result of a shortage
of land (Renfrew 1976; Chapman 1981; Hodder 1984). In consequence
they have continued to be seen as something additional to the processes
leading to the appearance of farming in north-west Europe, marking out
their users as in some sense more 'advanced' than their neighbours. It would
be a mistake, however, to draw too sharp a line between early constructions
in earth and stone and the substantial timber buildings of contemporary
Neolithic groups in central Europe; or to see the effort devoted to 'religious'
structures as fundamentally different in character from that devoted to
'domestic' structures elsewhere. By considering the genesis of megalithic
monuments in this wider context, I hope to avoid the teleological overtones
of an evolutionary view which sees them simply as a stage in the rise of
social complexity, emerging as a local response to problems of population
pressure. Instead of examining their evolutionary credentials, therefore, this
paper explores the initial role of monuments in the spread of farming to the
outer parts of Europe.
    The areas under consideration here - western France, Britain, northern
Germany, northern Poland, and southern Scandinavia - form an arc around
the central European loess belt along which farming spread from 5500 BC
onwards, and to which it was initially confined. In each of these areas, dense
hunting and fishing (Mesolithic) populations existed for a long period after
the arrival of the first farming groups on the loess. It will be argued that this
relationship was critical in explaining the beginnings of monumentality in
each area; and the argument will be pursued in greater detail in relation to
western France and the North European Plain.
    It is useful to divide European earthen and megalithic burial monuments
into two major cycles: the first, which is that considered here, lasted from
c.4500 to 3500 BC; the second, which I prefer to distinguish by the term
'neo-megalithic', began c.3500 and lasted in some areas down to 2500 or


                                        334




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    NEOLITHIC       NORTH-WEST          EUROPE


even 2000 BC. These two cycles were different in character, those of the
second cycle being associated with use of plough agriculture and rather
different types of settlement pattern, as well as with the spread of mega-
lithism to new areas. In the following sketch I shall deal only with the first
cycle, and attempt to defend the view that the variety of early monumental
forms was an essential part of the interaction between natives and new-
comers, and was not due to more generalised factors such as a scarcity of
land.


EARLY FARMING AND THE CREATION OF COMMUNITY
The spread of farming to Europe took two forms. In the Balkans and central
Europe, the 'west Asiatic package' was imported wholesale, with cereal
farming (horticulture), livestock keeping, pottery, and villages of substantial
houses. This pattern spread, largely through migration, along the central
European loess corridor. In the central and west Mediterranean, a second
pattern prevailed: cereals were less important, and there was initially no
radical alteration of settlement patterns or replacement of population.
Individual elements of the farming technocomplex were selectively inte-
grated within an existing way of life. This latter pattern was also typical of
the later spread of farming among 'sub-Neolithic' groups in the far north
and east of Europe.
   Around the margins of the area occupied by immigrant farmers in central
Europe, a more complex set of interactions between incoming and native
groups took place, associated with the transfer not just of the more easily
transmissible features such as pottery and livestock, but of cereal cultivation
as well. In the circum-Alpine area, the nucleated village pattern was trans-
ferred to native groups around the margins of morainic lakes, to produce the
characteristic pattern of 'lake-villages'. Here the spread of horticulture to a
new ecological setting was directly associated with a pattern of village life
and its community structure. On the western and northern margins, how-
ever, this simple correlation did not occur. The spread of cereal cultivation
was associated, not with substantial timber villages, but with what can be
considered as their monumental surrogates: mounds and megaliths. This
pattern should thus be seen as the first stage in the transformation of
indigenous foragers into indigenous farmers; and monumental tombs
appear to have been an essential element in that transformation.
   This interpretation of the role of the first monuments in north-west
Europe rests on two arguments. The first is inductive: the mutually exclusive
occurrence of substantial villages and non-domestic ('funerary') structures
in the archaeological record of Neolithic Europe. The second is deductive:
the need for an organisational framework (involving both material culture
and social relations) appropriate to the new requirements of cereal
cultivation.


                                        335




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       THE    GENESIS     OF   MEGALITHS:


   The first point is very widely applicable to the study of Neolithic (and
earlier Bronze Age) settlement patterns: indeed, it is almost an axiom of
archaeological research that substantial settlement traces and funerary
monuments seem mutually exclusive (e.g. Kowalczyk 1970, 161 on TRB
Poland; Scarre 1983,330 on later Neolithic southern France). A comparison
of Neolithic north-west Europe with the central European loess zone is
especially instructive. The absence of burial monuments in central Europe is
not due simply to the lack of stone in this area. While both cemeteries and
earth-built structures such as enclosures are not uncommon features in
Neolithic central Europe, their combination in the form of monumental
burials scarcely exists. Instead, substantial settlements fill the archaeological
record. In western Europe, conversely, the burial monuments are often all
that we have in the absence of intensive survey or lucky accident; especially
in the earlier period, settlement traces are scattered and unimpressive. This
marked contrast is not accidental: it corresponds to a fundamental
difference in the structure of settlement. Whereas the village was the basic
settlement unit and primary community of Neolithic central Europe
(whether in the form of a Balkan tell or a looser aggregation of substantial
timber longhouses in the loess zone), early Neolithic settlement in western
Europe was insubstantial and dispersed. The element of permanence seems
to have been provided not by the settlements themselves, but by monu-
mental tombs and enclosures.
   The second point explains why such monumentality was necessary. The
requirements of cereal cultivation would have necessitated a more radical
social reorganisation of hunting and foraging communities than the
keeping of small quantities of domestic livestock. It required a continuing
commitment to particular places, and to a social and ecological trans-
formation of the landscape. Larger labour teams (of perhaps twenty to fifty
men) would be required for certain operations in the farming cycle, and
cultivation required constant hoeing and weeding. These placed a premium
on the recruitment of a labour force, and thus on control both of female
labour and female reproductive capacity. In place of the demographic flux
characteristic of foraging societies, it was necessary to create stable lineages
whose depth could provide a dependable pool of labour through the
widened cone of kinship. In the immigrant Neolithic societies of central
Europe, this continuity was assured through the existence of the village
community as a residential unit, cross-cut by family ties and made up of
individual households occupying substantial longhouses, whose con-
struction (like forest clearing and harvesting) involved the co-operation of
several households. To reproduce this social mechanism in the absence of
large, stable residential units required the invention of some equivalent
ritual mark of continuity and common descent. The monumental tomb was
the surrogate for the living village (Sherratt 1984, 129; Hodder 1984, 54):
a permanent house and household of the dead amongst the insubstantial


                                         336




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   NEOLITHIC       NORTH-WEST          EUROPE


huts scattered within its territory. Often reconstructed and enlarged, such
monuments served their communities for many generations: as the burial
places of founding ancestors, as communal ossuaries, and as a continuing
focus for ritual.
   The adoption of monumental tombs seems thus to be characteristic of
areas which were already fairly densely occupied by Mesolithic groups, who
adopted Neolithic horticulture on the central European model, but who
did not not take over the village-based settlement pattern with which it
had previously been associated. Instead, tombs formed the basis for their
symbolic construction of community (cf. Cohen 1985). It can thus be argued
that these tombs, like the architectural elaboration and permanence of
Bandkeramik and tell settlements, were as basic a feature of early cereal
cultivation as the hoe and the axe: the material infrastructure of the
organisation of labour was as crucial in the establishment of horticulture as
the more obvious elements of technology (Thomas 1988). Moreover, the
advantages of this form of organisation were not limited to the cultivation
of cereals; and once established, could be applied to other modes of sub-
sistence (such as marine fishing) where the recruitment of a more extensive
labour force gave a competitive advantage.


MEGALITHIC MORPHOLOGY AND ITS DEVELOPMENT IN
NORTH-WEST EUROPE
In many parts of northern and western Europe, a general sequence of
structural types may be observed (sometimes even within the same
monument); and since it occurs in widely separated areas at different times,
it seems to be a general trend rather than evidence of direct contact. The
earliest forms of burial monument are frequently long mounds of earth and
timber, often trapezoidal in shape. Stone then replaces timber for revetments
and internal structures, still often in long mounds; round forms then become
more frequent, and the chambers increase in size. These phases may overlap,
or occur in spatially discrete areas, and there is no simple succession: types
may continue to co-exist and be consciously elaborated in opposition to
each other, older forms may be revived or accommodated to new ones; so
that individual cases must therefore be explained in their context. Yet there
is an underlying regularity, which demands explanation.
    From the perspective indicated above, it is significant that the sequence
begins with monuments that have explicit similarities with contemporary
houses in the loess belt, and then progressively diverges from this pattern.
Following an idea of Gordon Childe (1949) and suggestions by Stuart
Piggott in relation to unchambered long-barrows (1966), this argument has
been persuasively developed by Ian Hodder (1984), who points out the
many analogies between the houses of the later Bandkeramik tradition and
the first monumental tombs of the western and northern Neolithic, from the


                                       337




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      THE    GENESIS     OF    MEGALITHS:


middle Vistula to the Charente. In the metaphor of the longhouse, therefore,
a diverse array of cultures in western and northern Europe would have
symbolised their adoption not only of a new mode of subsistence but the
organisation necessary to sustain it.
    The transformation of these timber surrogates into stone was a con-
sequence both of the local occurrence of stone in the new territories beyond
the loesslands, and of the need for more permanent monuments (just as
the church in a medieval village was often the only building of stone). More-
over, the use of extravagantly large stones ('megaliths' sensu stricto) in their
construction suggests a further element. In a society where labour was the
most important commodity, moving large stones symbolised the size of
the workforce which could be assembled at any one time - an epideictic
demonstration of demographic strength and co-ordinated effort. The
monuments developed a meaning in their own right, as well as an inherited
typological continuity from their skeuomorphic origins. These construc-
tional changes in early monuments were also accompanied by an
enlargement of their use. Early long-mounds often cover individuals (who
probably represent members of founding lineages rather than 'chiefs');
chambered megalithic tombs received greater numbers of individual
remains (and often operated as a 'bone bank' in the wider circulation of
human relics); and many of these 'tombs' continued to receive offerings and
act as foci for non-monumental burials long after they themselves ceased to
be used for interment.
    It would be wrong, however, to see these changes simply as a linear
sequence or as a prescriptive necessity. The longhouse model, already
monumentalised, was apparently the common stimulus to megalithism in
each of the areas concerned; but due weight must also be given to the role
of indigenous inhabitants in this process, for this is basic to the overall
distributional argument (which must also take into account areas such as
Iberia, remote from the central European loesslands), and to the strong local
continuity generally evident between Mesoliths and megaliths. Detailed
local distributional studies can here suggest an answer, for there is often a
spatial contrast between the first long, unchambered forms on the one hand,
and the round or chambered forms on the other. The former often avoid
Mesolithic concentrations, the latter often coincide with them (see detailed
examples below). It looks as if the early long forms, with a central European
background, provoked a conscious reaction from native groups, perhaps
associated with a different conceptual or cosmological framework. Some
elements of megalithic design, such as the round mounds and chambers,
may therefore be an indigenous contribution to the process - an idea that
goes back at least to Montelius (1899, 41-6). If the chambers and circular
forms reflect native house-types or concepts of space, the proliferation
of such types would mark the widespread adoption of monumentality and
 its associated social structures by indigenous communities; and various


                                         338




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    NEOLITHIC       NORTH-WEST          EUROPE


degrees of fusion or incorporation of one group by the other might then
occur.
    This reconstruction implies the participation of both incoming and native
elements in the process by which agriculture reached the outer parts of
northern and western Europe, and the monumentalism which accompanied
it. The model could apply equally to western France, the British Isles, and
the North European Plain and Scandinavia - all of which combined
substantial indigenous populations with potential contacts to adjacent parts
of the loesslands. Their similarities of sequence would in this view result
from a common background and similar influences, rather than from any
coastwise contacts as were envisaged in the traditional picture. That these
remarkably parallel developments took place independently in each area is
indicated by the fact that while monumentality in western France began
c.4600 BC, it only appeared in Denmark c.3800 BC. While the situation in
Britain is less clearly established (and will not be discussed here), a date of
c.4200-4000 BC is a plausible estimate. The process of expansion would
thus have occurred in a clockwise progression, successively but indepen-
dently, in three separate areas around the north-west margins of the loess.


THE GENESIS OF MEGALITHS: FRANCE
One recent revelation of French archaeology has been the extent of
Impressed Ware influence from the west Mediterranean (Joussaume 1986),
which by the later sixth millennium reached west-central France as far north
as the Vendee and along the northern margins of the Massif Central (Figure
13.1). Although this has led some (west!) French archaeologists to assert its
importance for subsequent developments, the early date of its appearance
(c.5300 BC) has rather served to emphasise that local monumentality in fact
only began with the onset of influences from the Paris Basin and the
loesslands, some 700 years later. The widespread distribution of pottery
related to Impressed Ware, and the minimal changes in genre de vie which
accompanied it, suggest the dissemination of easily accommodated novelties
such as pottery and domestic livestock among existing networks of native
Mesolithic contact, and it is doubtful whether any cultivation of cereals is
implied. Domestic livestock and a local variety of simple pottery also
appeared in parts of Brittany during this time, and the well-known shell
middens with cist burials from Hoedic and Teviec in the Morbihan date to
this period. Since some twenty metres of the contemporary coastline have
been lost in the postglacial eustatic rise in sea-level (in contrast to northern
Denmark where it has been preserved through isostatic uplift), these sites
must stand pars pro toto for a considerable concentration of indigenous
coastal settlement in that region.
   The second revelation of recent work has been the extent of Band-
keramik settlement - ultimately of central European origin - in the Paris


                                        339




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      THE    GENESIS     OF   MEGALITHS:




13 A Neolithic France, 5000-4700 BC, showing initial Impressed Ware spread
from the south, and Linear Bandkeramik (LBK) intrusion into the Paris Basin and
beyond. Data from Constantin, Joussaume, Roussot-Larroque, Lichardus-Itten,
LHelgouach.

Basin and adjoining areas at the western end of the loess zone by c.5200 BC,
and the extent to which epi-Bandkeramik influences penetrated into the
western margins (Constantin 1985). In the period from c.5000-4700 BC,
sites belonging to successive epi-Bandkeramik groups expanded westwards
in three salients, following the loess plains: along the Somme through
Picardy; into Normandy, reaching the Plain of Caen; and south-westwards
across the Plain of Beauce into the middle Loire and towards the Gate of
Poitou (see Figure 13.2). The pottery of these groups began to diverge
strongly from the mainstream Bandkeramik tradition and its successors in
the Rhineland: it carried comb-impressed ornament and had a distinctive


                                       340




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                  NEOLITHIC        NORTH-WEST          EUROPE




13.2 Neolithic France, 4700-4300 BC, showing interaction between Paris Basin
(Cerny) group and indigenous populations in the west, with early monuments.
Data from Constantin, Joussaume, Burnez, Mohen, Giot, UHelgouach, Le Roux,
Kinnes.

bone filler - features which may perhaps indicate a native contribution to
the tradition. Although western finds are mainly pottery (often recovered
from beneath later monuments), sites of these groups in the Paris Basin
show typical late Bandkeramik trapezoidal house-plans (e.g. Maisse,
Essonne).
   This far-reaching extension of the central European farming tradition,
albeit receptive to western elements, was carried further and into more
intimate admixture with indigenous groups in the following phase, that
of Cerny, which corresponds chronologically to middle Roessen in the
Rhineland (Figure 13.3). Late Roessen influence then gradually brought

                                       341




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      THE    GENESIS     OF   MEGALITHS:




133 Schematic chronological chart of the cultural succession in western and
northern Europe, on a calibrated radiocarbon timescale. Asterisks mark the
beginning of monument building: note the later onset of monumentality in the
north.

back the Paris Basin into the Rhineland orbit, while western Cerny groups
(e.g. Chambon) formed part of an emerging western complex including
Bougon, Cous and Carn wares. This phase, from roughly 4700-4300 BC,
saw the genesis of a new pattern of western farming. The complex inter-
digitation of newcomers and natives took place along three principal routes:
in Normandy and the adjacent Channel Islands; in the areas around the
mouth of the Loire; and in the departements of Charente, Charente mari-
time and Deux-Sevres (Figure 13.2). Two basic forms of monumental
tombs resulted from these contacts: long-mounds covering burials in
a timber or stone-lined space without external access; and stone-built
chamber-tombs with an entrance passage giving continued access from
outside (passage-graves). I shall argue that the former show a direct con-
nection with contemporary longhouses, and that the latter are best seen as
a native reaction; (but it should be noted that tombs enclosed by a circular
ditch and approached by a long passage formed by parallel ditches occur
in a Cerny context in the Paris Basin at Passy-sur-Yonne, so that an
explanation in terms of this origin is also possible for the circular passage-
graves).
   It is in Normandy and the Channel Islands that Cerny influences seem to

                                        342




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    NEOLITHIC       NORTH-WEST          EUROPE


be most direct, and in which its pottery is most plentiful; here, too, that the
long-mound tradition seems initially to be the dominant one (Hibbs 1983).
Indeed, longhouse villages may have existed not far away at this time, on the
rich loess soils of eastern Normandy. Important examples of long mounds
from western Normandy and the Islands are Les Fouaillages on Guernsey
(Kinnes 1982), with its stone-edged triangular or trapezoid mound covering
several cists, and the long-mound currently under excavation by Kinnes and
Chancerel at Colombiers sur Seulles near Caen. Les Fouaillages dates to
c.4600 BC; slightly later, on radiocarbon evidence, is the long (though
not trapezoid) cairn of La Hoguette near Caen, with its dozen dry-stone
passage-graves with round chambers, indicating affinities to the early
passage-graves of Brittany (L'Helgouach and Le Roux 1986).
   Long-mounds (often defined by a peristalith and enclosing cists) occur in
eastern Brittany and the Carnac region, and at the mouth of the Loire - in
the two latter cases adjacent to clusters of monuments including early
passage-graves (Figure 13.2). Pottery from the long-mounds hints at Cerny
connections along the Loire. Further round the coast of Brittany to the
north-west, where no long-mounds are known, are mid-fifth-millennium
multiple passage-graves such as Barnenez with its trapezoidal mound, and
the trapezoidal cairn (later enclosed in a circular blocking-mound) of lie
Carn. These are mostly of drystone construction, though some of the
chambers are truly megalithic. These funerary monuments are associated
with the plain Carn ware, which shows similarities with those from Bougon
and Cous further south and together define an emerging 'Atlantic' cultural
province with a stong indigenous background.
   A crucial complex of monuments near the southern salient is that at
Bougon (Deux-Sevres), with long trapezoidal mounds (one enclosing small
cists) and simple chambered tombs in round mounds, all from the mid-fifth
millennium, as well as later and more developed forms. At nearby St Soline,
multiple passage-graves occur in a trapezoidal mound; while nearer the
coast in the Forest of Benon and at Bouhet there are numerous long-
mounds, one at the latter covering a timber structure (Joussaume 1986). All
the diversity of early western megalithic forms is here present within a small
compass - unfortunately without the degree of chronological resolution
necessary to establish typological priorities, but clearly in a context where
influences from the western loesslands were interacting with native
traditions. The situation can best be described as one of morphological flux
in which long-mounds and stone-built passage-graves appeared in varying
combinations. Long-mounds seem to initiate the sequence, and to provide a
continuing influence, although small passage-graves (often combined in
composite monuments of various shapes) seem to have been more adaptable
to local needs.
   How can these developments be summarised? The pattern of monument-
building seems to have crystallised on the margins of loess-based settlement


                                         343




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     THE    GENESIS      OF   MEGALITHS:


with its longhouse villages, at a time when cereal cultivation was being
adopted within a more dispersed pattern of settlement by native Mesolithic
populations in surrounding areas. In each area, and arguably at the
beginning of the process, early monuments took the form of trapezoidal
long-mounds covering wooden structures or small stone cists. Several are
associated with pottery ultimately of Bandkeramik tradition, and contem-
porary with Roessen in west-central Europe. It is not improbable that they
were erected by colonists from the loess zone; but it is equally possible that
they were built by natives in contact with longhouse village settlements. The
two are not exclusive, since recruitment of a labour force would be an
important initial objective of early settlers, and the two groups were not
strangers to each other. Whichever was the case, these longhouse-like
models initiated a period of rapid monumental innovation.
   It appears that the external input was stronger nearer to the main loess
extension in the north (Normandy), and the native element stronger in the
south (Brittany and west-central France). Passage-graves were particularly
characteristic of areas where relatively dense Mesolithic settlement can be
inferred, especially on the coasts. Their basic design, a round chamber in a
round mound, may be a direct reference to indigenous house types; and the
provision of a passage for continued access after interment may suggest a
different attitude to the dead: but the frequent grouping of passage-graves
in trapezoidal mounds shows an accommodation to the exterior appearance
of the long-mound model. Passage-graves - at first drystone structures with
corbelled chambers, often several grouped together as a single monument,
then increasingly megalithic and with single, larger chambers with internal
subdivisions - became the most frequent form of monument in western
France, and it seems as if the initial loessland stimulus was largely absorbed
in the native reaction. The long-mound tradition did, however, survive in
certain enclaves, and was the basis for further developments on this theme
in the Middle Neolithic. I shall return to this in a later section.


THE GENESIS OF MEGALITHS: NORTHERN EUROPE
The major reservoirs of Bandkeramik population in north-central Europe
were the loess-covered basins along the major northward-draining rivers:
Vistula, Oder, Elbe and Rhine. Some penetration of farming populations
beyond the loess, especially along the Oder and Vistula, took pioneer
Bandkeramik groups into the zone of glacial-meltwater valleys (Urstrom-
taler) in Poland and eastern Germany, where they established longhouse
village settlements on small patches of fine-grained soils in Kujavia, west
Pomerania and the Uckermark. To the north of these lay the glacial outwash
sands and moraines of the North European Plain, and the shallow
coastlands of the Baltic with the Jutland peninsula and islands. Mesolithic
groups occupied many of the more productive habitats in this area,


                                       344




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   NEOLITHIC       NORTH-WEST          EUROPE




13.4 Northern Europe, 4700-4000 BC, showing imports from Bandkeramik
successor-groups (Roessen and Lengyel) to Mesolithic communities in the North
European Plain; the west Baltic maritime Mesolithic (Ertebolle culture) is
emphasised. Data from van der Waals, Brandt, Schwabedissen, Gramsch,
Kozlowski, Fischer, Jennbert.
especially by lakes and rivers but particularly on the west Baltic coastlands
where shellmounds and fishing stations demonstrate the importance of
littoral and marine resources.
    On the loesslands, later Bandkeramik was succeeded in the west by
Roessen and further east by Lengyel, with its closer links to the Carpathian
Basin and south-east Europe. The outposts of central European farming
along the Oder and Vistula retained their southern contacts, while inter-
acting with local native populations as shown by finds of imported pottery
and stone shafthole axes in later Mesolithic contexts in the surrounding area
(Figure 13.4). Pottery making, and perhaps some domestic livestock, was
widely adopted as part of the indigenous way of life, seen most notably in
the Ertebolle culture of southern Scandinavia. These coastal Mesolithic
groups achieved a considerable degree of social complexity, largely asso-
ciated with specialised marine fishing. This stable co-existence lasted for
more than half a millennium, during which no major structural trans-
formation took place (Figure 13.4).


                                        345




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      THE    GENESIS      OF   MEGALITHS:


    In the pioneer phase of Bandkeramik colonisation, the domestic
structures were clusters of longhouses, generally 25-3Om in length, grouped
in villages or in hamlets strung out along rivercourses. In the subsequent
phase (Roessen or Lengyel), beginning around 4800 BC, a new pattern
emerged, with single, larger longhouses, often associated with enclosures or
stockades. Some of these longhouses were truly vast, reaching 45-50m at
sites like Inden 1 or Biskupin 18a, and a massive >65m (the full length was
not preserved) at Bochum-Hiltrop (Miiller-Karpe 1968, Tafel 234). By late
Roessen times in the western part of this area, such massive longhouses
show a tendency to fragment into a series of smaller, square buildings, as at
Berry-au-Bac or the Goldberg. These changes reflect adjustments to the size
and composition of the domestic unit as settlement proliferated within the
loess belt and began tentatively to spread beyond it.
    During the early fourth millennium, signs of a fusion between groups
occupying the loess areas of the North European Plain and their native
neighbours became evident, indicated archaeologically in the development
of the TRB (Funnel-neck beaker) cultures. This blanket term is an unfor-
tunate one, since it carries over some outdated overtones of 'nordic influ-
ence' from an earlier phase of prehistoric studies: but it correctly identifies
the process of convergence which was taking place between the northern
loesslands and surrounding territories, at a time of general inter-regional
contact, realignment of exchange networks and cultural fusion contem-
porary with the developments of the south-east European Copper Age. This
resulted in the formation of a series of regional groupings, broadly following
the earlier pattern of Roessen and Lengyel cultures, such as Michelsberg in
the Rhineland and Baalberge on the Elbe. These, however, show a quite new
form of settlement pattern at a local level; for the domestic sites were
generally much less substantial, and instead the non-domestic sites such
as earthwork enclosures and burials became more emphasised. The former
are more common in the Rhineland, the latter on the Elbe, where
they sometimes took the form of stone cists in small mounds (Fischer
1956).
    Baalberge sites, spreading from the Middle Elbe, occurred in small
clusters in the morainic lakelands of Mecklenburg to the north, where they
seem initially to have avoided centres of native population (Preuss 1966).
In the north-west corner of Germany, in Lower Saxony and Schleswig-
Holstein, there seems to have been a greater degree of admixture between
local Mesolithic communities and the immediate successors of Roessen just
to the south; lakeside and coastal settlements from this period show a more
extensive use of pottery and may have imported cereals from their southern
neighbours. Neither of these processes of localised interaction, however,
produced a major shift towards agriculture with fundamental demographic
consequences. Hunting and fishing remained the basis of the economy:
the settlements of these marginal groups consisted for the most part of


                                         346




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   NEOLITHIC       NORTH-WEST          EUROPE


insubstantial groups of round or D-shaped huts, and there were as yet no
monumental tombs. A similar situation existed in the Rhine delta, where
Swifterbant and Hazendonk groups continued until Middle Neolithic times
(beginning c.3500 BC) to maintain a comparable relationship with
Michelsberg populations upstream on the loess.
   A somewhat different pattern characterised this process further east in
Poland, in the region centred on the Urstromtal of the middle Vistula and
Notec, the area known as Kujavia. Here the older pattern of trapezoidal
longhouses on scattered enclaves of fine-grained blackearth soils lasted
somewhat longer than in the west; and in their immediate hinterland, within
the morainic zone, there appeared a pottery assemblage which broadly
resembles Baalberge and is named after the site of Sarnowo (Kosko 1980).
The initial phases of this assemblage seem to overlap with the final phase of
Lengyel nearby (e.g. at Brzesc Kujawski), but the two groups are spatially
discrete; they might thus be considered as communities peripheral to the
Lengyel villages, but intermarrying with native groups. Their domestic sites
were insubstantial. This close juxtaposition and inter-relationship between
Sarnowo and final Lengyel explains the appearance of the monumental
tombs which characterise this group: the 'Kujavian graves'. These elongated
trapezoidal mounds, outlined by morainic boulders and covering single
burials sometimes with wooden structures, are direct copies in earth and
stone of contemporary timber houses (Midgley 1985). The significance of
these tombs is that they seem to have provided a model of monumentality
which answered the needs of pioneer farming groups, establishing
themselves in new territories and drawing in native populations, over a large
part of northern Europe. What is noteworthy about this pattern was the
way it served both to incorporate native populations and to maintain
cultural links with the loesslands to the south.
   The distribution of these forms of long funerary monuments in northern
Europe forms an interesting pattern: they occur predominantly in the zone
of glacial outwash sands, running across the North European Plain north of
the loess but south of the young-moraine and coastal belt with its continuing
concentrations of Mesolithic settlement (Midgley 1985; Figure 13.5). The
latter areas were to become the heartlands of Nordic megalith-building, in
the period after 3700 BC; but this later development can only be understood
in relation to an earlier spread of long, unchambered forms. Unchambered
long-mounds, often in groups, form the principal type of Neolithic monu-
ment in Kujavia, Pomerania and central Meckenburg, where the very large
numbers of such mounds, and the absence of later forms of megalithic
tombs, suggest that they remained the predominant form of monument
down to the later fourth millennium BC. Similar structures, the so-called
kammerlose Hiinenbetten, are found further west, along the lower Elbe, in
the Altmark and the Sachsenwald (Sprockhoff 1938). Northwards again,
they occur in central and northern Jutland, where the best excavated


                                        347




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      THE    GENESIS      OF   MEGALITHS:




13.5 Northern Europe, 4000-3500 BC, showing interaction between central
European (Michelsberg, Baalberge, Sarnowo-Wiorek) groups and indigenous
populations in the North European Plain, with early monuments. Data from
Preufi, Sprockhoff, Schuldt, Kozlowski, Midgley, Madsen, Aner. [Long-mounds are
shown as originating in central Poland before spreading westwards because of the
unique survival of the long-house model there into the period of long-mound
genesis; note also the common drinking-set: Figs 16.4, 16.5.]

examples are to be found, dated to c.3800 BC (Madsen 1979). These north
German and Danish monuments again seem to fit themselves into the
interstices of existing distributions, and should perhaps be seen as a series of
small-scale migrations, travelling from east to west, and absorbing local
populations into the new pattern at each stage; but maintaining their
exchange networks with the south.
   This pattern is evident in western Denmark, where the first unchambered
long-mounds occur in Jutland - an inland area less densely settled by
Mesolithic populations - in association with pottery of the Volling group
(Madsen 1986). A particularly noteworthy feature is the occurrence in
Jutland of perforated copper discs, imported via Poland from Copper Age


                                        348




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    NEOLITHIC       NORTH-WEST          EUROPE


groups in the Carpathian Basin. The import of copper axes is also reflected
in the design of thin-butted flint axes, whose flat sides show the influence
of copper forms. Such a small-scale intrusion of southerners, building
monuments of earth and timber as well as introducing various exotic items,
would help to explain the burst of megalith-building which took place in the
following few centuries, principally in eastern Denmark and Mecklenburg.
The first Neolithic groups in this area were associated with a somewhat
different set of flintwork and pottery types: point-butted axes (unaffected by
copper models), flake-axes of Ertebolle ancestry, and pottery of the Oxie or
A-group that links the Danish Islands both to Mecklenburg and Scania.
These features demonstrate a considerable degree of continuity from
Ertebelle and related Mesolithic groups. While ecological changes may have
played some part in destabilising native coastal populations (Rowley-
Conwy 1984), the major impetus for change seems to have been the arrival
of a foreign cultural model in adjacent parts of north Germany and Jutland.
   The megalithic forms characteristic of areas with a strong Mesolithic
background are the dolmens (Danish: dysser), i.e. closed megalithic cham-
bers made from glacial erratic blocks, set either in round or in long (usually
rectangular) mounds. Although the dolmen chambers have no passages, and
are thus not accessible from outside, they do nevertheless show some
resemblance to the size and shape of the small huts in contemporary use.
The long chambered mounds (langdysser) occur both on the east Danish
islands and in Jutland, around and including the area where unchambered
forms first appeared; the round mounds (runddysser) are largely confined to
eastern Denmark, which has the greatest density of dolmens (Bekmose
1978). The megalithic chamber is thus principally associated with areas
outside the initial long-mound area; but the two ideas were rapidly com-
bined (at Bygholm Norremark in central Jutland, for instance, a trapezoid
mound, overlying wooden buildings and graves and outlined by a post-
bedding trench, was subsequently covered by a rectangular long-mound
with a peristalith and megalithic chamber, showing the local replacement of
an early timber form by a chambered, megalithic version: Madsen 1979).
   As in France, therefore, there seems to be a spatial polarity between the
intrusive monumentalised longhouse and the development of alternative
megalithic forms in areas where substantial populations already existed.
The initial stimulus thus gave rise to complex reaction and interaction,
producing a range of monuments with overlapping characteristics, but with
a continuing set of cultural differences. This polarity is also reflected in other
ways, for instance between the rich grave goods which accompanied burials
in Jutland, and the votive deposits of similar materials (amber, stone axes)
which occur in the Islands. (These contrasts were to re-emerge in later
phases of prehistory, for instance with the spread of Corded Ware.) The
continuing external connections between the intrusive long-mound groups
and central Europe would have been responsible for introducing new


                                        349




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     THE    GENESIS      OF   MEGALITHS:


features such as the collared flask (already known in Poland: Knell 1981)
and other features which came to characterise the Early Neolithic C phase
in Denmark (see Chapters 15 and 16).
   It is even more difficult in these circumstances to distinguish clearly
between 'natives' and 'newcomers', since the whole process is characterised
by the gradual breakdown of this distinction, through intermarriage and
incorporation. Nevertheless, it is possible to perceive different mechanisms
by which farming was spread northwards: small-scale colonisation from the
loesslands, shifts of marginal groups into areas of intervening opportunity,
in situ acculturation of indigenous populations, together with isolated
pockets of resistance, where hunting groups seem to have continued to exist
alongside farmers. These form a complex mosaic, sometimes maintaining
a degree of cultural discreteness, but at the same time participating in
exchange networks that in some cases extended far back into central
Europe.


ALTERNATIVE IDEOLOGIES AND THE RHETORIC OF TOMBS
In discussing the French evidence, it was suggested that the contrasting
designs of long mounds and passage graves, tentatively attributed to a
background in incoming and native groups respectively, might have some
deeper ideological significance. This view receives some support from the
subsequent history of megaliths in this area during the Middle Neolithic
period of the French sequence (4300-3500 BC), though the exciting
possibilities arising from current French excavations can only be briefly
alluded to here.
    In this period, the morphological variety of early passage-graves had
settled down into regional varieties of a basic model with a single passage
and square, internally divided chamber or transepts, set either in a round
mound or axially in a long one (L'Helgouach and Le Roux 1986). But there
is now evidence that in parts of the Morbihan, and probably also the
Charente maritime, long-mounds with cists or inaccessible chambers were
still being built at this time. (Long-mounds may also have been constructed
in the Paris Basin at this period, as indicated by the recent excavation of a
Middle Neolithic trapezoidal mound covering a stone cist at Maisse,
Essonne.) The long-mounds of the Carnac region - which include both
'normal'-sized mounds and the gigantic examples known as Carnac mounds
- are associated with a style of pottery (Castellic ware), and also items such
as stone rings, which have a background in the Paris Basin and the central
European tradition, as opposed to the plainwares of the Atlantic group
which demonstrate growing links to the Chasseen culture of southern
France (Giot, L'Helgouach and Monnier 1979, 2 1 8 - 2 5 ) . The contrast
between long-mounds and passage-graves extends to a different attitude to
burial and the role of the dead, which in the case of long-mounds is asso-


                                       350




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   NEOLITHIC        NORTH-WEST          EUROPE


ciated with closed cists and external indicators in the form of decorated
menhirs, and in the case of passage-graves is associated with accessible
chambers which are decorated on the inside; and the contrast extends even
to a consistent difference in orientation, which is to the east in the case of
the former and south-east in the latter.
    The co-existence of these two patterns, with their respective links to
wider cultural entities generated by the early spread of farming, suggests the
possibility of competition and tension between them in these parts of
western France. The hypertrophied growth of long-barrows into Carnac
mounds (of which there are over a dozen in the Carnac-Locmariaquer area)
is perhaps best seen in the context of an ideological struggle between these
two competing patterns, in which elements of central European origin were
consciously stressed and elaborated in opposition to those of native origin.
It is all the more interesting, therefore, that recent work by L'Helgouach and
Le Roux has demonstrated that at some time around 3800 BC a massive
phase of iconoclasm occurred in the area around Locmariaquer, which
involved the pulling down of major sculptured standing stones, and their
incorporation (usually as capstones) in a new generation of large passage-
graves with large, undivided, rectangular chambers in round-mounds: and
that in at least four cases these were directly adjacent to (and presumably
intended to replace) Carnac mounds (Le Roux 1985). The largest of these
later Middle Neolithic passage-graves is Gavrinis, with its profusion of
intricately carved ornament and sensitive astronomical alignments. This
revolutionary shift of ideological dominance seems to have coincided with a
new wave of southern, Chasseen, influence (both in western France and the
Paris Basin), associated with the arrival of elements such as vase supports.
(It is tempting to interpret these as items of cult apparatus, such as narcotic
burners, which have often accompanied revivalist religious movements in
more recent ethnography - an interpretation which would also explain the
remarkable character of the Gavrinis engravings as entoptic images pro-
duced under the influence of drugs: Bradley 1989 and Chapters 15 and 16.)
Whatever interpretation is preferred, it is clear that these monuments must
be considered in the context of potentially conflicting religious beliefs and
practices; and that the most elaborate examples must be seen not as the cul-
mination of a single evolutionary series, but as increasingly emphatic
dialectical contributions to a megalithic debate.


COMPARISONS
Whereas farming had spread across the loess without substantial opposition
from native groups, its appearance in the north and west required an
accommodation to already established ways of life in a different set of
environments. The greater degree of settlement mobility required in these
circumstances, and the smaller groups needed for a greater diversity of


                                        351




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      THE   GENESIS      OF   MEGALITHS:


tasks, made substantial timber villages inappropriate. The first steps were
apparently taken by peripheral loessland communities, 'going native' in
many aspects of their everyday life as they moved into the new territories.
But colonising groups, needing to recruit a labour force - or native groups,
wishing to compete with them - required a focus for this process; and for
the major ceremonies associated with the remembrance of ancestors they
chose monumental versions of timber longhouses still in use in the
heartlands of Neolithic settlement. Where these models were available close
by, as in Normandy, the long burial mounds were present from the
beginning. In northern Europe, monumentalised forms seem to have spread
from the edges of the eastern loesslands after a first generation of farmers
had already moved north. In somewhat different circumstances, the same
solution prevailed. In both areas, moreover, this move provoked a reaction:
partly an imitation, partly something distinctively different; but monu-
mental and megalithic.
   A similar interpretation could be applied to Britain. The western end of
the loess corridor reaches the Channel at Boulogne, and the nearby long-
mound at Wimereux is only forty miles away from an English example such
as Ashford in Kent. Unchambered earthen long-mounds occupy the chalk
Downs of Wessex; circular mounds with cist-burials underlie several
trapezoid Cotswold chamber-tombs, which fuse the characteristics of both.
Trapezoid chambered long-mounds were introduced to Ireland; round
passage-graves were the reaction. The actors changed, but momentum was
conserved.
   These three areas of megalithic proliferation - western France, Britain,
and northern Europe - seem to have acted out such scenarios independently,
from different starting points on the loess periphery. They began to do so,
moreover, at different times: France during the Neolithic, northern Europe
during what in central Europe was already the Copper Age. The complexity
of northern Europe is partly due to the long-distance links with central
Europe which were present from the very beginning; the ideological conflicts
of the west were partly due to the continuing strength of native tradition and
the absence of this homogenising influence. Even so, however, we begin to
discern different patterns of reaction and external alliance in each of these
areas, rather than a static typology of 'cultures'; and such regional
differences of origin persisted, to emerge again at subsequent points in
prehistory. Behind the general regularities of European development lay the
roots of later nationalisms. Is it inappropriate in these circumstances to
speak of ethnicity?


EPILOGUE
Megaliths are perhaps the most durable structures ever erected by
prehistoric societies, and they have survived down to recent times in vast


                                       352




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    NEOLITHIC       NORTH-WEST          EUROPE


numbers: perhaps 10,000 in the North European Plain and Scandinavia,
more than 500 in a single French departement. They have dominated the
European archaeological imagination since the sixteenth century. Recent
excavation work in central Europe, however, has done something to redress
the balance of differential survival. From the less impressive evidence of
postholes, the older farming societies of the loesslands have been shown to
have had their own forms of monumentality - megaxyles rather than
megaliths - which were as fundamental to the organisation of agrarian
society on the loesslands as megaliths were in the wilder landscapes of outer
Europe. Basic to this interpretation is the idea that houses are not just
'machines for living in', as architects once misguidedly asserted, but parts of
the social system itself. Neolithic villages provided not only shelter, but the
means of creating and perpetuating social relationships. Tombs, similarly,
were not just machines for the disposal of the dead, but could on occasion
assume some of the sorts of roles otherwise played by domestic con-
structions
    The building of long mortuary mounds was both a continuation of earlier
symbols of community and a monumental focus around which new groups
were established. The idiom of monumentality was apparently then adopted
by a wider range of indigenous groups as the basis for their own assimilation
of cereal cultivation and the construction of an appropriate cultural and
social framework for a farming existence - sometimes in conscious oppo-
sition to intrusive communities. These monuments were subsequently
elaborated and transformed in western and northern Europe throughout
the Neolithic, responding both to changing demographic and social cir-
cumstances, and to the possibilities of further interpretation established by
their own material existence. Megalith building became the metaphor
within which social conflicts and ideological competition were played out.
In this sense, megaliths were as much a cause as a consequence of social
complexity.




                                        353




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:12:43 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                         13
      Instruments of Conversion?
      The Role of Megaliths in the
     Mesolithic-Neolithic Transition
         in North-West Europe
                                     (1995)

JVlegalithic monuments were one of the first prehistoric phenomena to be
recognised by archaeologists, and their durability ensured that they became
objects of antiquarian curiosity even before the emergence of a scientific
study of prehistory. By the later nineteenth century they had been recognised
in many parts of Europe, and even beyond. Unlike more specific categories
of artefact, however, it soon became apparent that they were not diagnostic
of a single period or culture. Like other types of prehistoric site, such as
'earthworks' or 'hillforts', they represent a category of construction which
came into existence at different times and for different purposes. Like
'hillforts', however, they are nevertheless typical of certain areas and phases
of prehistory, and demand an interpretation which is both general and
specific: general, in terms of their common social and technological
characteristics, and specific, in terms of the concrete historical circumstances
which gave rise to them. In their more general properties, European
megaliths may usefully be compared with similar constructions from other
periods and times; but in their specific characteristics they must be set in a
context that includes the whole range of prehistoric domestic, mortuary and
ceremonial constructions, both in stone, earth and timber.
   Although the use of large blocks as constructional elements may in
certain circumstances have an ergonomic rationale (depending on the nature
of the rock employed), the use of massive, relatively unaltered stones is more

This chapter presents excerpts from a paper originally given in Mannheim in 1992,
at a conference on Vergleichende Studien zur Megalithik: Forschungsstand und
ethnoarchaologische Perspektiven. It takes the arguments of the preceding chapter
one step further; in reviving (though in a very different way) Childe's conception
of megaliths as rhetorical devices - arguments in stone - concerned with the
propagation of a set of interests and incorporation of people within an ideological
and organisational framework. While treating the emergence of megalithism as a
process, it combines function with intention and genealogy.

                                        354




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

               THE   MESOLITHIC-NEOLITHIC               TRANSITION


typical of pre-urban societies than urban ones. Among urban societies, the
constructional components are adapted to the design of the building, whose
plan exists independently in an abstract conception of (usually straight) lines
and spaces. Where massive blocks are employed in such a context (as with
Mycenaean 'cyclopean' walling or Inka fitted-block construction), they are
usually replicated elements modified to fit together, or else carefully shaped
obelisks or colossi. The use of largely unaltered blocks, where the shape of
the blocks themselves in part determines the nature of the construction, is
more typical of pre-urban societies - whose architecture (like other aspects
of their culture - chipped stone rather than moulded metal, for instance) is
literally less 'artificial'. Hence the major effort is devoted to transporting the
blocks rather than to altering their shape, and the resulting constructions
grow more organically from the nature of the raw material. They thus
employ 'natural metaphors' of size, permanence, etc. (perhaps in conscious
opposition to secular buildings of earth and timber); and they also embody
the symbolism of undifferentiated communal effort involved in hauling the
huge blocks. The monuments themselves are thus often emblematic of the
unity of the group, and possess a special, sacred character that is inherent in
the nature of their construction. The term 'monument' (from Latin monere,
'remind', 'warn') is specifically appropriate where a particular form of
building is not employed for domestic purposes, but is used to impress an
ideal on those who see and use it. It is typical of megalithic architecture that
its use is confined to such a single class of constructions, and not used more
generally as a technology for building everyday structures. The point is aptly
made by comic-strip cartoons of Stone Age life (whether in the context
of dinosaurs or Gaulish tribes) where a typical Stone Age family is shown
living in a dolmen-like dwelling - the reverse of archaeological reality.
    In many instances, therefore, the context in which megalithic construc-
tion is employed is that of burial. It is misleading, however, to describe such
structures simply as 'funerary monuments', since they are not just vehicles
for disposing of dead bodies, and many contemporary societies (such as
those of Neolithic south-east and central Europe) made no use of above-
ground containers for corpses.1 Nor are they 'monuments' in the sense of
memorials to specific individuals. Rather, it is the dead themselves who are
employed as a metaphor in the same way as the architecture. The co-
incidence with burial is a tactical one, and megalithic architecture may be
employed in ceremonial contexts beyond the funerary, while human bones
may be deposited or used in other places than the megalithic 'graves'. The
association comes through a common identification of death and megalithic
architecture with the realm of the 'other', perhaps a world in which the
community of the ancestors retains a powerful existence, to which access
may be gained by appropriate ritual action at particular times in the context
of the monuments. (The incorporation of astronomical alignments may
suggest that such ceremonies had a regular calendrical occurrence, calcu-


                                        355




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                     INSTRUMENTS         OF    CONVERSION:


lated by phases of the heavenly bodies.) It is a not uncommon ethnographic
observation that such ceremonies may employ mind-altering drugs which
are consumed by certain individuals in the context of such ceremonies, and
whose effects are interpreted in terms of communication with this 'other
world' (Reichel-Dolmatoff 1975; Chapter 16).
    Such comments would apply fairly generally to the class of constructions
which are termed 'megalithic', in many parts of the world. This chapter is
concerned, however, with the specific appearance and development of mega-
lithism in Neolithic north-west Europe; and its purpose is to suggest a set of
circumstances in which such phenomena may have made their appearance.
Megalithism in Neolithic Europe is typical of certain areas, especially the
West and North, and also has certain manifestations in the Mediterranean.
It is not a universal feature of Neolithic societies, although it seems to have
been a latent property which could be called into existence in certain cir-
cumstances. In the most general terms, it was associated with a permanent
occupation of the soil which was typical of (though not necessarily restricted
to) the practice of farming; in this sense, the megalithic monuments have
some functional equivalence to the 'monumentality' of domestic settlements
in south-east Europe and the Near East, where Neolithic occupation is often
marked by the partly deliberate accumulation of a tell or settlement-mound:
a visible symbol of the existence of the farming community. Such symbolism
of the permanent occupation of a particular spot is not restricted to farmers,
for the (surely deliberate) accumulation of shell-mounds by sedentary fishers
and foragers such as the Ertebolle communities of the western Baltic or
late Mesolithic groups in Portugal may be considered as part of a similar
phenomenon. The particular forms of many European megaliths - in widely
separated areas - has a more specific set of references, however, in that
certain classes of monument echo the constructional characteristics of
houses (either dwelling-houses, or, perhaps more likely, club-houses). This is
particularly explicit in forms such as the allees couvertes of northern France,
or the dolmens of the western Caucasus, and relates not just to the natural
idiom of building sheltered spaces but to the organisational and ideological
importance of the house and household among the acephalous farming
communities of the Neolithic, who in other circumstances expressed the
same values in female figurines and clay models of hearths and homes. A
final feature which distinguishes these groups is the emphasis on the
communal. While later burial monuments such as Bronze and Iron Age
tumulus burials were sometimes equipped as 'houses of the dead', buried
below ground for prominent deceased individuals (for instance Ukrainian
Timber-Graves or the Hallstatt Fiirstengraber), Neolithic burial monuments
in northern and western Europe were typically structures for collective
burial. Indeed, they increasingly stressed this communal and continuing,
corporate character through their provision of ossuaries in prominent and
accessible structures above ground, in which human remains were regularly


                                         356




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

               THE   MESOLITHIC-NEOLITHIC              TRANSITION


deposited (often rearranged in categories that cross-cut those of the indi-
vidual skeleton), and at which regular offerings were made to the dead.
   The distinctive character of Neolithic megalithism in Europe is thus its
highly visible symbolism of the living community, through the medium of
monumental constructions for the dead. Truly 'megalithic' monuments
formed part of a spectrum of such constructions, which otherwise used
earth, timber and smaller stones; and the beginnings of monumentalism
must be sought in the transformation of the repertoire of domestic and
funerary structures in other materials. The first element of this trans-
formation was the monumentalisation of forms already used for other
purposes, in which domestic metaphors were applied to the creation of
more permanent representations of such structures, themselves useless as
domestic dwellings, which were intended to stand for many generations -
many times the expected lifespan of the average peasant house (which in
effect was probably a single generation). The second element was the use of
large stones to produce an enclosed, three-dimensional space to which
continuing access was possible for the purposes of ritual and ceremony. In
some of the areas in which such megalithic chambers were constructed (and
especially in the far west, in areas such as Brittany and the British Isles), a
further phase of megalithic construction saw the building of open monu-
ments (like the Breton alignments, or British henges and stone circles) which
provided ritual spaces that were enclosed but not roofed, and in which the
'ceremonial' aspect was more prominent than the funerary. This whole
process occupied a period of more than two millennia.
   Megalithism, therefore, was a set of monumentalised messages. Neolithic
communities in certain parts of Europe apparently felt the need to build
permanent statements about the nature of their society. Some of these (like
the larger passage-graves) were on a scale which suggests that their messages
were intended to be read very widely within their region: veritable beacons
in stone. Whatever its original motivation, megalith building came to
embody messages which were directed to more than the local group. The
question which I would like to raise is therefore: to whom were those
messages addressed?


SYMBOLS OF COMMUNITY
A characteristic of the first farming societies, as Ian Hodder has emphasised
(1984; 1990), is their investment in domestic structures. These went far
beyond the mere requirements of shelter, and can be seen both as ideological
statements and media of social organisation and control, owing their
prominence to the role which they played as part of the cultural infra-
structure of a horticultural society without specialised social institutions
and mechanisms for maintaining unity and order. The house as an archi-
tectural and social unit was one part of a larger entity, the settlement, which


                                       357




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      INSTRUMENTS        OF    CONVERSION:


provided the face-to-face community and the permanent, ongoing unit of
organisation. The first farming settlements in the Near East - like Jericho,
Tell Abu Hureyra or (^atalhoyiik - were often spectacularly vast, and this
concentration of population and facilities was a necessary phase in the
emergence of Old World farming as a way of life. Having achieved a viable
model, these settlements were then replicated or modularised on a smaller
scale, in the form of the tell settlement as it spread into Balkan Europe in the
sixth millennium BC. That such tells were not simply dwelling units, but
embodied organisational and even cosmological principles, is shown by the
careful order and astronomical orientation with which some of them were
originally laid out (e.g. Polyanitsa, Bulgaria). The physical representation of
community, on the ground (in the form of a prominent settlement and
constituent houses), was a fundamental feature of Neolithic social organ-
isation. This 'package' of farming practices, domestic technologies (pottery,
weaving) and social infrastructure was introduced to Europe as the basis of
the first agricultural communities.
   Where farming was introduced by population expansion (the 'demo-
graphic wave of advance'), as it was in south-east and central Europe, this
package maintained its coherence. Even where some accommodation was
necessary to ecological circumstances, and a degree of pioneer simplification
occurred (for instance in central Europe, with the relatively dispersed
settlement patterns of Koros and LBK), nevertheless the tendency to
nucleation reasserted itself, and the later phases of the Neolithic in those
areas (Tisza and Roessen) once more show aggregated forms of settlement
(Sherratt 1982; Starling 1985). The houses remained large, rectilinear
structures throughout; and where large villages were not present, there was
nevertheless some effort to construct impressive ceremonial facilities, such
as Kreisgrabenanlagen, near to the domestic structures (Burgess et al. 1988).
These permanent marks on the ground were characteristic of the primary
horticultural community which formed the basis of Neolithic social
organisation.2
   The first phase of European farming, therefore, down to c.4500 BC, was
characterised by a congruence between the social community and the
physical setting of everyday life. This was possible because of the primarily
horticultural emphasis of early farming, in which livestock played a sub-
ordinate role. As economies began to differentiate (both in time and space),
however, and livestock rearing and hunting came to play a larger part in
the economy, potential tensions and contradictions developed between the
village and its domestic structures as the basis of social organisation and the
need for greater flexibility in settlement patterns. In the early-settled loess
areas of central Europe, this was primarily because of the needs of the
expanding cattle-keeping sector of the economy; on the fringes of the loess-
lands, in western France and on the North European Plain, the oppor-
tunities for hunting and foraging (in environments already exploited in this


                                         358




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

              THE   M E S O L I T H I C - N F E O L L T H I C   T R A N S I T I O N


way by indigenous Mesolithic groups) offered a comparable alternative.
Over much of the continent in the later fifth millennium, therefore, a
diversity of new forms of settlement made their appearance. Because the
social relations formerly embodied in the physical form of the village
settlement still remained important, however, some symbolic continuation
of this focal point remained necessary when the individual households split
away from their former collectivity. The new forms of settlement pattern
thus typically included an emphasis on tombs and cemeteries, making
explicit the relations formerly expressed in proximity of residence. Rituals,
including burial, which had formerly taken place within the context of the
settlement (either close to the houses themselves or in nearby small
cemeteries), now came to be associated with special locations that were not
necessarily places of habitation. These provided symbols of a community
which no longer had a permanent physical existence on the ground.


W H Y MONUMENTS?
The application of this model to the beginnings of European megalithism
has been set out in the preceding chapter, which emphasised the essential
complementarity between substantial house construction and the building
of monumental tombs in the archaeological record of Neolithic Europe. The
first farming groups in central Europe, the LBK and succeeding Roessen and
Lengyel groups, occupied substantial, timber-built villages - a temperate
European adaptation of the pattern of tell settlement in the Near East. Their
architectural investment was in domestic structures. Major monuments
were generated when this complex of village-farming reached the outer
edges of Europe, and was adapted and changed to the different circum-
stances of the Atlantic and the North European Plain. It was in this outer
arc - in Iberia, western France, Britain and Scandinavia - that the first
centres of megalithism were established. The stages by which this was
accomplished are defined below, but in general the process could be defined
as a splitting-up of the ideal pattern of domestic co-residence, the physical
community which had been the basis of early Neolithic social organisation
from Jericho to the Paris Basin, in the different conditions of outer Europe,
where cereal farming was perhaps less important and settlement patterns
more mobile; and what was absent from the early Neolithic of these areas
were precisely the large, timber, domestic structures. The underlying reason
for the appearance of megaliths, then, was the transformation of the
primary horticultural community, as it had been constructed in the Near
East at the beginning of farming. Non-domestic structures, and especially
funerary ones, supplied the focal symbolism formerly provided by domestic
architecture.
   The formative phases of this process are now becoming clearer. The
predecessors of the truly megalithic structures which survive so well in the


                                             359




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    INSTRUMENTS         OF   CONVERSION:


archaeological record were the equally monumenr                ut less robust
(and archaeologically less visible) structures of earth         timber, which
were built by a variety of groups of ultimately Bartdkeru ak origin on the
margins of their main loessland distribution, and in some cases within it.3
Timber mortuary houses were monumentalised by the addition of a long
earthen mound, typically trapezoidal in shape. Where appropriate, as in
the North European Plain, these mounds were edged with large stones, to
increase the impressiveness and permanence of the structure; and in western
France the timber internal structures might be replaced by small stone cists.
Such early earthen or stone-edged long-barrows did not cover communal
burials, and the graves were not accessible after the erection of the mound.
Structures of this kind, which occurred independently in western France,
southern Britain and Kujavia at different times between 4500 and 4000 BC,
are particularly associated with a rapid dispersal of small groups beyond the
loessland frontiers. These groups did not replicate the domestic longhouse
architecture of the farming villages in which they originated, but echoed the
shape and significance of houses in the plan and appearance of the tombs.
They might be considered as part of a small-scale colonisation movement,
which carried farming groups from the margins of the loesslands as far as
Brittany, western Britain and Denmark; but there is also some evidence of a
cultural contribution from (and hence probably interbreeding with) the
indigenous populations of those areas.
   It is this context of a breakup of the primary horticultural communities
of the loesslands which explains the significance of monument building.
From a more general perspective, these earthen long-barrows are simply one
aspect of the greater emphasis on burial and funerary elaboration which
took place in several parts of Europe in the later fourth and early third
millennia BC. It was precisely at this time in Hungary and Bulgaria,
for instance, that large formal cemeteries with rich grave-goods, like
Tiszapolgar or the more famous example of Varna, made their appearance.
These, too, were associated with the breakup of primary horticultural
communities in the form of large villages.4 But such funerary elaboration
in central and eastern Europe did not take the form of monumentality.
Elaborate burials, yes; but not funerary monuments. What was absent was
the architectural aspect: these groups in the older Neolithic heartlands did
not transfer the domestic metaphor to their tombs. The specific feature of
prehistoric megalithism in western and northern Europe which requires
explanation, therefore, is precisely its monumentality - its architectural
character. This in turn raises the question: to whom were its messages
addressed? In the case of Varna and Tiszapolgar, we can say that the
messages of the burial - whatever they might have been - were primarily
addressed to those at the graveside: members of the immediate social group
assembled for the burial. In this they resemble many later funerary practices
in prehistoric Europe. Megalithic monuments, however, have the added


                                       360




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

               THE   M E S O L I T H I C - N F E O L L T H I C   T R A N S I T I O N


dimension of durable visibility. Whom were they meant to impress, and to
whom was their rhetoric directed? Was it simply the womenfolk and junior
members of their own lineages, as neo-Marxists have claimed (Tilley 1984)?
Was it their contemporaries and farming neighbours, as Lord Renfrew's
territorial model would imply (Renfrew 1976)? Or was it a wider circle of
spectators?
   The critical difference between eastern and western Europe at this time
was the existence of indigenous, Mesolithic populations. It is generally
agreed that the expansion of Bandkeramik cultures across the loesslands is
best regarded as a spread of population - a slow 'migration' (in the sense of
a demographic expansion in space through the proliferation of new
settlements on the edge of an existing distribution). By contrast, the spread
of farming to outer Europe was more a process of adoption, by which
indigenous groups absorbed farming technologies from their neighbours.
David Clarke likened the preceding demographic pattern of Mesolithic
Europe to a huge doughnut - a ring doughnut, dense on the edge but empty
in the middle (Clarke 1976,462-8). The first phase of farming spread filled
in the centre; the second phase converted the edge. It was in the second
phase that farming appeared in rich Mesolithic environments on coasts and
lakelands, like morainic northern Europe or morainic Switzerland - the
heartlands of hunting, fishing and foraging communities. In the Alpine
foreland, this involved replicating the village communities of the loess, in the
form of the rectangular timber houses of Egolzwil and Cortaillod, on the
reedswamps around the lakes. In western Europe, with its more extensive
Mesolithic populations sustained by seafood, it involved the emergence of
monumentality. Why?


INSTRUMENTS OF CONVERSION?
The clue comes in the word conversion. Mesolithic societies were converted
into Neolithic ones. We can use this word in two senses - in a general way,
to describe an economic change from foraging to farming; or in a religious
context, to describe a change in belief from Christianity to Islam, for
instance. Prehistoric archaeologists usually use it in the first sense. I want to
explore the second one, and to suggest that the messages of megaliths were
at least in part directed outwards, to Mesolithic communities, when farming
groups began to settle in landscapes that were already occupied. The idea
which I want to pursue is an old one: it was an essential part of the model
of diffusion, as presented for instance by Gordon Childe. Megalithic
monuments, in this view, were part of a religion, propagated by megalithic
missionaries. Agriculture had already reached western Europe, when groups
of ideologically committed Egyptians (rather like those tiresome American
evangelists) set out in boats to convert the Neolithic pagans of Portugal,
Brittany and Ireland. This interpretation is now clearly unworkable in the


                                              361




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                      INSTRUMENTS         OF   CONVERSION:


way that Childe envisaged it (which to a large extent derives from his
knowledge of the Phoenicians); but it does contain one element of possible
truth which has been lost sight of in later models. That is this element of
conversion. This term seems to capture something of the monumental
rhetoric of megalithism.
    One assumption of Childe's model that is no longer appropriate is his
perception of the spread of farming and the spread of monumentality as
two different processes.5 Whilst megaliths in the strict sense of large-stone
constructions are indeed a somewhat later feature, it has been demonstrated
that in western France, the British Isles and northern Europe, monumental
earth-and-timber structures (non-megalithic long-mounds) lay right at the
beginning of Neolithic sequences. Monumentality was thus a fundamental
aspect of the spread of farming practices into outer Europe. It was not some
optional luxury, grafted on to the primary process: it was part of the process
itself (Thomas 1988). Why were such efforts necessary? There are many
instances in European and World prehistory of the adoption of farming by
native populations. The Cardial/Impressed Ware groups of the Mediter-
ranean, for instance, or the Pit-and-Comb Ware groups of eastern Europe;
on a wider scene, the makers of Wavy-line Ware in north Africa or Wood-
land groups in north America. In these cases, however, the process of
adopting farming was often slow and partial; many of these groups are best
described as sub-Neolithic, since they adopted pottery (for their own
purposes) and livestock, but often without cereal cultivation as a major
element, and without major changes in settlement patterns or probably in
social organisation either. The early Neolithic in western and northern
Europe, on the other hand, seems to be rather different from these: it was a
'full' Neolithic, with the whole range of characteristics taken over in a single
stage. Mesolithic communities in north-west Europe not only acquired
crops and livestock from their Neolithic neighbours, but they also 'adopted'
new forms of social organisation, and indeed new forms of architectural
construction, as well as new technologies of potting and perhaps textile-
making. The appearance of funerary architecture seems to be a specific
feature of this process. Did it therefore involve an active propagation of
organisation and ideas - a 'conversion' process in Gordon Childe's sense, as
well as just a conversion from foraging to farming? Was it, in a way, more
like the process of Hellenisation or Romanisation, in which an impressive
architecture was used as a kind of propaganda?
   It may be useful to think about the problem in this way. The most
important 'commodity' in Neolithic societies was labour. Land was not in
short supply; and the most essential items of external trade were the flint and
hard stone supplies which were needed to make labour more effective.
Recruitment of a labour force was the key to success. In spreading across the
loesslands, Bandkeramik groups were fuelled by internal demographic
growth. Culturally, there seems to have been very little intermixture with


                                         362




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

               THE   M E S O L I T H I C - N F E O L L T H I C   T R A N S I T I O N


indigenous groups. The cultural network and the mating network were
largely congruent. At the western end of the loesslands, however, this
strategy began to change. In the Paris Basin, in particular, the formation of
'epi-Bandkeramik' groups was characterised by the addition of cultural
elements from an existing repertoire, and with Cerny the difficulties of
classification highlight a dual relationship with the Bandkeramik tradition,
and with other, local groups of native or southern origin (Scarre 1992). It
looks as if the earlier exclusiveness of mating networks was breaking down.
The central European farming pattern was being propagated westwards,
not just by internal demographic growth, but by external recruitment and
incorporation. In short, it was the beginning of a process of conversion - the
'reformatting' (to use a computing metaphor) of an existing demographic
pool. This process was therefore an active, social one, involving a set
of changes in relationships, rather than just the passive adoption of a set of
new practices. This incorporation was itself an active process, involving
persuasion, propaganda, and competition for recruits. A successful strategy
would be immediately rewarded by rapid growth. But how was such a
strategy discovered?


FROM EARTH-AND-TIMBER MONUMENTS TO MEGALITHS
The solution that I would like to suggest is one that arises from the
morphology of the monuments themselves. The two classes into which the
early monuments fall - unchambered long-mounds, and truly megalithic
structures with chambers (often in conical mounds) - represent different
strategies on the part of their builders. The former were simply surrogates
for houses, and were constructed - as the foci of residentially more dispersed
communities - by descendants of the Neolithic villagers who had colonised
the loesslands. Once created, however, the idiom of monumentality had a
potential for employment in other ways. The latter types of monument, the
chambered megaliths, were a further development of monumentalism
through a strategy of incorporation, and reflect the distribution of older,
native populations. This explains the distributional contrast between the
two forms of monument. The earliest monumental structures, in the form of
long-mounds covering timber mortuary structures, seem to be typical of the
areas just within the loessland centres of epi-Bandkeramik, Lengyel and
Roessen villages, or in between (or just inside) these areas on the one hand,
and the coastal concentrations of Mesolithic population on the other. This
is the case in the apparently independent episodes of long-mound creation
in western and northern France, and in northern Poland (Figures 13.2 and
13.5). It was in old coastal heartlands of Mesolithic population, however,
that megalithism - in the strict sense of stone-built monuments - reached its
greatest development. The first type of monument, the 'unchambered' long-
mounds, seem to be characteristic of a rapid movement into areas where


                                              363




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    INSTRUMENTS         OF   CONVERSION:


Mesolithic groups were less dense, and perhaps less highly organised in a
social sense; the second type of monument, the megalithic chambered
tombs, seem to be typical of the phase in which farming moved into the
optimal ecological zones of Mesolithic settlement, with dense populations
and probably more highly organised social networks - perhaps even an
existing lineage structure.
   The second phase of this process thus involved the evolution of a truly
megalithic architecture, instead of the earth-covered timber or small stone
structures which had characterised the first generation of monuments. This
process of lithicisation seems to have occurred independently in the coastal
regions of western France, western Britain, and also of Scandinavia and
northern Germany - resulting respectively in the appearance of French
passage-graves, British portal-dolmens and chambered cairns, and Nordic
dysser. It can therefore be seen as symptomatic of a general development in
the role of the monuments. The most striking feature was the employment
of large stone slabs as constructional elements for internal as well as
external features. This change in building technique from timber to stone
was functionally linked to an equally fundamental architectural change:
from unchambered to chambered structures, and often from long mounds
to round ones. The earlier mounds usually covered small cists for individual
burials; the later megalithic structures emphasised an accessible chamber
for the continuous addition of burials.6 The emphasis moved from exterior
symbols (like those on the decorated menhirs which accompanied long
barrows in Brittany) to interior symbols such as the various kinds of
passage-grave art, visible to those admitted to ceremonies inside the struc-
tures. From being simply a monumentalised burial, the use of stone allowed
the creation of an enclosed ritual space. What took place within these spaces
may also be relevant to the process of recruitment, for if recent suggestions
of the ritual employment of hallucinogens are correct, this may have been a
powerful inducement to belief in the cosmology represented by the tombs.
   It is particularly noteworthy that the areas where megalithic construction
(sensu stricto) developed and most rapidly proliferated from its antecedent
long mounds were areas of relatively dense Mesolithic population - in
Brittany, western Britain and Zealand (as also in Portugal). The two facts
seem to be connected. Various different scenarios could be envisaged: the
building of new forms of stone monuments could be seen as an indigenous
imitation of the new forms of monumentality as native groups adopted
farming,7 or as an adaptation by colonising groups to new circumstances
where native populations existed in greater numbers. In the first case, the
change indicates a shift of initiative from immigrant groups to indigenous
communities, imitating the monumentality but changing its ideology. In the
second case, there was a single, continuous process, but with a greater
emphasis on the incorporation of native populations. The two scenarios are
not necessarily exclusive, in that both processes could operate simul-


                                       364




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

               THE   M E S O L I T H I C - N F E O L L T H I C   T R A N S I T I O N


taneously, perhaps with a different balance in different areas; and neither are
they necessarily distinguishable archaeologically. In both cases, however, the
process involved the propagation of a new form of social structure - the
kinds of trans-generational (lineage) groups necessary for the organisation
of work in a farming economy.
   If this model is correct, it suggests that the incorporation of native
populations was a continuing process. If so, then the proliferation and
growing elaboration of megalithic monuments is itself an index of the scale
of the process. Bursts of monument-building would thus correspond to
phases of demographic intake. Monuments such as Gavrinis or Newgrange
would mark the local climaxes of this process, where the reservoirs of native
population still provided scope for growth through incorporation. The
complexity of these outstanding megalithic structures could thus reflect a
sort of social stratification, between original, founding members of the
group, and lineages which had joined more recently. The great conical
mounds would symbolise in a physical way the conical clan structures that
resulted.8 Social ranking could build up much more rapidly in these
circumstances than on the loesslands; and in this sense the megalithic
communities of the far west may indeed have been more 'complex' than
their contemporaries in central Europe.


MESOLITHIC SURVIVAL
One implication of this idea is that Mesolithic populations survived
alongside the first farming groups in outer Europe for very much longer
than is often supposed. It suggests that there was not an instantaneous, mass
conversion of native groups, but rather a continuous and long-drawn-out
propaganda campaign. This suggestion in not inherently implausible.
Earlier Neolithic groups in western and northern Europe occupied only
relatively small areas of the total landmass. There is no ecological reason
why Mesolithic groups should not have survived in the areas between: and
there are several indications that they did, even though such populations are
inherently less visible archaeologically and harder to date. An interesting
further implication is therefore to revive the possibility of another old idea,
that of a 'primary' and a 'secondary' Neolithic (Piggott 1954; Briard and
L'Helgouach 1957). This idea was abandoned when it became clear that
'secondary' features were largely later than 'primary' ones; but there is no
inherent contradiction here, if the process of Mesolithic incorporation is
seen as a continuing and accelerating one, rather than an instantaneous
conversion. Especially after 3500 BC, when we can envisage some use of the
light plough and a spatial expansion of agricultural activity, we might expect
a further intake of surviving indigenous groups with a Mesolithic way of life
which had survived on poorer soils beyond the earlier frontiers of farming.
   One index of the absorption of indigenous populations is the appearance


                                              365




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       INSTRUMENTS         OF   CONVERSION:




14 A Skeuomorphic echoes: the shape and decoration of later Neolithic pottery
from NW Europe and its derivation from stake-frame basketry: (a) Mesolithic
fish-trap, Netherlands; (b) basket from late Neolithic lake-village, Charavignes,
Switzerland; (c) Grooved-Ware flat-based pot, southern England; (d) late Neolithic
round-based pot, Ireland; (e) TRB Middle Neolithic 'flowerpotNetherlands,       with
construction diagram for corresponding basket shape; [new drawing, after Louwe-
Kooijmans, Egloff, Thomas, Herity, Bakker],

of new cultural elements which were not part of the repertoire of the
incoming Bandkeramik-derived tradition. These arguments have been
applied to flintwork (Newell 1972), to suggest that the assemblages of
the westernmost (Younger) Bandkeramik populations contain Oldesloe
elements, in contrast to the 'purer' assemblages from more central areas of
the loesslands. This interpretation is reinforced by the appearance in the
same contexts of a category of pottery, Limburg Ware, which is equally
without parallel in more central regions, but which is based on shapes which
resemble organic containers. It is suggested that these, and the comparable
La Hoguette wares (Liming 1989), represent the ceramicisation of indigen-
ous container forms as a result of contacts with the native groups. These
form part of a general pattern of new ceramic features on the western
margins of the Bandkeramik distribution, and suggest that an admixture
with native populations was taking place in a small way from the beginning.
It is thus particularly interesting that the ceramic assemblages of many later
Neolithic groups in north-west Europe - for instance Grooved Ware in
Britain and the Middle Neolithic phase of Nordic TRB - contain many
angular and bucket-like shapes with skeuomorphic decoration that has its
origins in stake-frame basketry (Figure 14.1). This technique had been used


                                         366




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

              THE   M E S O L I T H I C - N F E O L L T H I C   T R A N S I T I O N


for many millennia by Mesolithic groups in northern Europe for the
construction of fish-traps, and it contrasts with the south-east European/
Near Eastern tradition of coiled basketry whose shapes are echoed in the
forms and decoration of Bandkeramik pottery. While this argument cannot
be pursued further here, it is symptomatic of the continuing contribution
made by the indigenous populations of outer Europe to the formation of the
Neolithic cultures associated with megalith building.
   I suggest that the elaboration of passage graves is a functional
concomitant of this process, which is reflected in the renewed vitality of the
megalithic tradition in outlying areas such as Ireland and Orkney in the
period after 3500 BC. The position of Irish passage-grave cemeteries in
particular, on a line of hills across the centre of the country, is surely
indicative of the way in which their messages were directed outwards to
populations who could see them from afar. They emphasise that the
adoption of farming and its associated belief systems was as much an
ideological conversion as a calculation of economic benefit, and that monu-
mentalised messages could play a crucial role in its propagation.
   [This cline, from the largely immigrant populations of the loesslands to
the largely indigenous populations of the far west, is reflected in the tension
between quadrilateral and circular structures: ultimately, the farmer's
timber longhouse and the hunter's tent (Figure 14.2). Quadrilateral struc-
tures continuously dominate in continental Europe, from the Passy long-
mounds to the allees couvertes; circular ones in the west, increasingly
dominant with time as further indigenous groups were absorbed. In between
was a zone of ambiguity, where the two models competed, hybridised or
passed decisively from one to the other. Even at the very end of the tradition
of megalithic construction, when the technique was used not for tombs but
for open, ceremonial monuments, the same duality was evident: on the one
hand, Carnac, whose alignments take the form of hypertrophied trapezoidal
longhouses; and, on the other, Stonehenge, whose great ring-beam echoes
that of a circular timber house. The insularity of the British round-house
tradition was still evident in the Iron Age.]


CONCLUSION
Let me briefly try to summarise what I have been trying to say. European
megalithic architecture can be seen as the conjunction of two processes. The
first was the long-term trend towards the splitting up and adaptation of the
primary horticultural community, centred on Ian Hodder's (1991) domus,
with its background in the Neolithic origins of Old World farming. The
second was the outcome of specific circumstances in northern and western
Europe, where foragers were converted to farming as a total package of
economic, social and ideological practices. This phenomenon, precisely
because it was so radical, took the form of an extended process of con-


                                             367




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

          NEOLITHIC    ARCHITECTURAL             TRADITIONS
                          t   :                                               DATE                             CIRCULAR SPACES                        QUADRILATERAL
                                                                             (BC cal)                                                                 SPACES




                                                                             2000
                                                                                                               Stonehenge
                                                                                                                                                      Carnac alignments

                                                                                        cy
                                                                             2500                                               OPEN
                                                                                                                  Avebury          SPACES
                                                                                                                  Complex
                                                                                                                                            s

                                                                                        C>                   ' W W — \      \       \ \ \
                                                                                              ^ \ ^ Irish passage-graves ^
                                                                             3000                                                                w        w
                                                                                              X ^ s^ \Newgrange Complex                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                 \ Allies couvertes i
                                                                                                                                                        Loire
                                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                              dolmens
                                                                                                             \ Danish                                 \     eg Esse \
                                                                                              v       v "> teaman ^             •                 N


                                                                                                  \    \  ^ Jaettestuer         \
                                                                             3500                                                                           WW                   x
                                                                                                              X
                                                                                                  A      \        v \   \ ENCLOSED              ! \ \ Cotswold chambered L M s




                                                                             4000
                                                                                        *
                                                                                        fcj
                                                                                        Q
                                                                                        ©

                                                                             4500


  4000
   BC \


14.2 Neolithic architecture, east and west: the contrast between quadrilateral and circular spaces in domestic and funerary structures,
from the mid-sixth to the third millennium BC; [new drawing].




                                       This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

               THE   M E S O L I T H I C - N F E O L L T H I C   T R A N S I T I O N


version, taking millennia to complete. Megalithic architecture was part of
the rhetoric of this process; and its successive elaboration in different areas
was part of a deliberate strategy (or at least a feedback system with similar
effects) to extend the labour supply in areas where this was still possible.9
   It is possible to distinguish two phases in the genesis of megalithism. The
first lay largely within the village-based Neolithic cultures which had
colonised the loessland corridor from east-central Europe to central
Germany and the Paris Basin. While villages remained the foci of the
settlement pattern in the Carpathian Basin after 4500 BC, increasingly
taking nucleated, tell-like forms of the kind already established in south-east
Europe, the settlement patterns of the northern loesslands evolved in the
opposite direction. Instead of the clear sequence of village plans which had
characterised the preceding millennium or more, a bewildering variety of
non-domestic structures began to appear. Because the loesslands themselves
have been under continuous cultivation ever since, the earth and timber
mounds which formed a prominent part of this new landscape have been
subject to heavy destruction, and are only just being recognised archae-
ologically (e.g. Passy). Paradoxically, therefore, their forms are better
known from outlying examples in areas off the loess (e.g. Kujavia,
Normandy), and often adjacent to the centres of later, truly megalithic
developments (Schleswig-Holstein, Jutland, Charente, Brittany). These
examples indicate that a pattern which had its origin within the older areas
of Neolithic occupation was instrumental in the process of spread beyond
them. This phase of monumentality was generated by the splitting up of
older forms of community.
   The second phase, which took place where this process of expansion
came into contact with the heartlands of continuing Mesolithic settlement,
marks a transformation of this monumentality into an instrument of
incorporation: a 'conversion' of existing peoples, ideologies and social
structures. The incorporation is symbolised by the change from an emphasis
on the external longhouse form, covering a completed burial, to a structure
that could be periodically entered and its contents 'updated'. This mor-
phological change took different forms in different areas, as the same
underlying processes were played out in different contexts; but the
parallelisms are striking (and it is not surprising that they were formerly
attributed to direct contacts by migration or diffusion). The success of this
cultural mutation is indicated by the rapid growth of large and complex
examples, increasingly of truly megalithic construction, as Mesolithic
populations were successfully incorporated.
   It was the existence of the monumentalised longhouse model, therefore,
that determined the mode of Mesolithic incorporation in these areas. On
other parts of the loessland frontier, such as the Ukraine, there was no such
convergence on a monumental solution: Tripole/Cucuteni farming villages
became successively larger and better defended, whilst the indigenous


                                              369




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                        INSTRUMENTS         OF    CONVERSION:


population developed along quite different lines into the sequence of
pottery-using and livestock-rearing sub-Neolithic groups that increasingly
specialised in pastoralism. Rather than incorporation, there was a successive
differentiation. The Neolithic cultures of western and northern Europe, on
the other hand, created a unique synthesis of an ultimately Near Eastern
form of social organisation centred on a transformed domus, and an indi-
genous population with its own distinctive forms of culture and subsistence
base. Metaphorically, therefore, Childe was right: it was, indeed, a meeting
of the indigenous and the exotic; but it was the density of the existing, native
population which made it such a spectacular phenomenon. Childe was also
right that this pattern of investment in the physical symbolism of the
domestic community was in the end replaced by its eastern, steppe-land
alternative with its origins on the steppes: the more mobile, dispersed, and
probably livestock-centred pattern of individual warrior-burials that is
typical of the Pit-Grave culture, Corded Ware and Bell-Beakers - an econ-
omy, cosmology and settlement pattern within which the accumulated skills
of megalithic construction had no role.
   This coincidence of culture-historical and demographic factors explains
why Atlantic Europe is the classic area of megaliths. In other parts of
Europe, north Africa and the Near East - and indeed in other parts of the
world - some of these factors have recurred. Stone-using, or simple metal-
using societies have experienced the break-up of formerly concentrated
communities, and have used monumentalised house-forms, typically em-
ployed as tombs, as surrogate foci for the creation of community identities.10
The phenomenon of megalithism is associated not with a particular kind of
economy, but rather with a social process in space. Such monuments were
everywhere 'houses of the holy', associating the sacred with specific times
and places. What is remarkable about the European examples, however, is
the degree to which this pattern was elaborated, to an extent that rivalled
the monumental efforts of contemporary civilisations. It was the position of
western Europe, close enough to the nuclear centres of agriculture and
urban life to be affected by them, but sufficiently distant not to be directly
incorporated into the developing world-systems of the time, that allowed
this unique cultural experiment to flourish.


NOTES

 1. For this reason it is no more accurate to speak of 'passage-tombs' than 'passage-graves',
    and the latter has priority as a technical term.
 2. In the central and west Mediterranean, this pattern was not immediately replicated.
    Instead, various features of the package were individually absorbed by indigenous coastal
    communities, principally the more easily transferable elements of pottery and small
    quantities of domestic livestock, which appeared in the Impressed Ware culture in sites
    (often caves) which show continuity from the preceding Mesolithic. With time, however
    the full package was absorbed and more formally organised settlements appeared, usually
    accompanied by the technologically advanced forms of painted pottery which were


                                            370




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                  THE   M E S O L I T H I C - N F E O L L T H I C   T R A N S I T I O N


    produced in village communities. This pattern persisted until the spread of the plough in
    the later fourth millennium, when various megalithic phenomena began to appear in the
    Mediterranean region.
 3. These various episodes of monumentalisation, for instance in the Paris Basin (Passy:
    Cerny culture) or central Germany (Latdorf: Baalberge culture), seem to have taken place
    quite independently, and at different times (up to five centuries apart), reflecting similar
    processes of change on the basis of a common cultural background. The most impressive
    examples, however, are those just beyond the margins of the loesslands, like Kujavian
    long-mounds such as Sarnowo. It is in this last case that the most literal copying of
    domestic longhouses took place, since these elaborate dwellings were still in use amongst
    contemporary final Lengyel groups nearby (e.g. Brzesc Kujawski), at a time when such
    structures were no longer being built in central Germany and the western loesslands.
 4. Though Tiszapolgar is associated with a scattered pattern of small tell settlements.
 5. Even quite recently, it was believed that megaliths began at a 'mature* stage of the
    Neolithic in northern and western Europe: a stage of crystallisation, when populations
    were sufficiently dense to require territorial markers - what geographers would describe
    as a 'packing phenomenon'.
 6. Outside Scandinavia, the beginnings of megalithic architecture and collective burial were
    effectively simultaneous; in the Nordic region thefirstmegalithic forms (dysser) were
    mainly individual burials. The addition of a passage for continuous access developed
    some centuries later, at the beginning of the Danish Middle Neolithic c.3500 BC, in the
    form of the Nordic passage-grave (Jaettestue).
 7. On the analogy, perhaps, of those 'rituals of resistance' and 'cargo cults' with which
    native populations more recently attempted to counter foreign political and ideological
    influences.
 8. Do we not, after all, describe hierarchical social structures of the kind which
    characterised the early Egyptian state as 'pyramidal'? Are not the Pyramids themselves
    social metaphors in stone?
 9. There are many gaps in this argument, especially as it relates to Iberia. Did long-mounds
    of ultimately loessland inspiration penetrate beyond the Garonne, to stimulate the onset
    of monumentality in north-east Spain? (Note how recently long-mounds have been
    recognised in such well-known areas as the Paris Basin!)
10. This more general explanation would therefore apply to the varied examples of
    megalithic construction which appeared in different parts of Europe and surrounding
    areas in the third millennium BC and afterwards. The Levantine 'dolmens', for instance,
    date principally to Early Bronze iv, at the end of the third millennium, and are related to
    the splitting up of the kinds of large, nucleated communities established there in the
    period of Early Bronze Age urbanism. A similar explanation may lie behind the 'dolmens'
    of the northern Caucasus, in relation to their complementarity with more nucleated
    forms of settlement and social organisation. These are chronologically and culturally
    parallel to non-megalithic burial monuments in the form of the Catacomb-Graves of the
    adjacent Pontic steppe region, and emphasise the fact that the availability of raw material
    ultimately determines the expression of monumental forms, and whether they are
    constructed of earth or stone.




                                                 371




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 01:13:41 UTC
                 All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       Section          V

  INVISIBLE FLOWS:
LANGUAGES, CULTURE
     AND DRUGS




   The golden bowls from the Vulchetrun treasure, c.1600 BC
  (National Museum of Bulgaria, Sofia; drawing by T. Taylor).




        'O for a beaker, full of the warm south

                                                                JOHN    KEATS

                                            Ode to a Nightingale       (1818)




         This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:23:56 UTC
                          All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        INVISIBLE   FLOWS:      LANGUAGES,        CULTURE       AND    DRUGS


 Ihe last section looked at built structure: fixtures in the landscape, whether
settlements or tombs. This section looks at the less tangible parts of the
archaeological record, concerned with flows of items - some of which get
caught in 'artefact-traps' on sites, but many of which escape entirely:
language and music (totally lost, in the absence of writing), organic con-
sumables (rare, apart from fortuitous residues) and precious metals (mostly
recycled, unless deliberately placed in tombs or hoards). These aspects must
be reconstructed, or the archaeological image enhanced, if our picture of the
past is not to remain an impoverished and misleading caricature of what life
was like.
    Both linguistic and genetic distributions as they are known at the present
day or in the recent past offer tantalising patterns; and both need to be
explained historically, by postulating previous stages of the pattern. With
genetic information, there is some hope that palaeo-DNA studies will one day
reveal past patterns of variability; but direct evidence of ancient languages
can never be pushed beyond the urban, literate societies of early historical
times. It remains the classic case of attempting to reconstruct diachronic pat-
terns from synchronic ones, using both the properties of the phenomenon
itself, and surrogate evidence of related phenomena, to infer past states of
the system. Given its inherent problems, it is not surprising that there is so
little unanimity about such reconstructions; but as a methodology it is more
common in archaeological arguments than might be supposed. Discussion
of 'hunter-gatherer' or 'pastoralist' societies implies precisely such a retro-
jection of recently-observed categories: an essential step in constructing a
narrative, but fraught with the dangers of anachronism (as Sections II and
III above tried to show). A large part of the prehistorian's task must be the
conscious testing of palaeo-ethnological models - reading the record in the
light of prior expectations - and the reconstruction of extinct patterns.
    One aspect of this which I have to some extent pioneered is the study
of the use of psychotropic substances in prehistory (see now Goodman,
Lovejoy and Sherratt 1995). Historical Europe was undoubtedly a realm
of 'drinking cultures', just as North America at the time of its discovery
by Europeans was a realm of 'smoking cultures'. The archaeological record
of European prehistory - together with one or two clues from the Ur-
ethnographer, Herodotus - contains tantalising suggestions about the
appearance of alcohol, and what might have preceded it. The importance of
drinking in recent Europe, as of coca-consumption in aboriginal Colombia,
is both social and economic: social, in that it structures and characterises
the major occasions of social interaction, and economic in that constant
supplies need to be assured. This concern with consumption in its literal
sense is a model for the general turnover of material goods in use by human
populations: the consumption of woollen textiles, say, or metal tableware;
and it is an important aspect of the way in which theory in the social sciences
has changed over the last two decades.


                                        374




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:23:56 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

        INVISIBLE   FLOWS:     LANGUAGES,        CULTURE       AND    DRUGS


   Whereas the comparison of static distribution-patterns (like sites) against
largely permanent backgrounds (like environmental zones) leads to a con-
cern with regular, localised movements in the winning of daily bread, a
concern with rarer types of consumable materials throws the emphasis on
to flows of materials along transport arteries. These networks, especially the
longer-distance ones carrying relatively precious materials, are often the
routes by which new consumption practices, technologies and languages
have spread across the continent. They are crucial to understanding why
certain regions stand out from others because of their wealth; and especially
to understanding the emergence of asymmetric patterns of exchange, in
which certain areas yield up their valuable raw materials in order to import
the 'added value' of manufactured products from other regions.




                                       375




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:23:56 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                             15
