Cups that Cheered: The Introduction
 of Alcohol to Prehistoric Europe1
                                         (1987)

The study of pottery forms a large part of the work of the archaeologist:
most of the entities with which we populate prehistoric Europe are named
after their pots. Unlike many other expressive elements of material culture,
such as clothing, it has survived in large enough quantities to permit some
attempt to study it as a system of communication. Even so, it is only part of
the language of cuisine: the symbolism of the containers is closely connected
with the significance of their contents. Whatever prestige attached to pottery
is likely to have been derived from the special nature of what was consumed
from it rather than from any inherent value in the pots themselves: their
elaboration was simply appropriate for the value of what was provided in
them. While the pots may have been admired, it was on their contents that
the hospitality was judged.
    The diagnostic feature of the Bell-Beaker complex is its eponymous
vessel, the decorated drinking cup. The purpose of this chapter is to suggest
that the association between such a container and an international style of
ostentation is not fortuitous; and indeed that it forms part of a wider pattern
which may be discerned throughout the continent of Europe. Discussion of
this assertion in the following chapter falls into four sections, of differing
character: the first concerns chronology, the second deals with the arrival of

This chapter was written, shortly after having given the Munro Lectures in
Edinburgh on 'Drinking and Driving', for a conference in Oxford on the Bell-
Beaker culture. Having analysed the Early Bronze Age pottery from Sitagroi (and
studied with David Clarke, authority on British Bell-Beakers), I was well aware of
a horizon of drinking-vessels that in Hungary was explicitly associated with carts
and cart-burials (Chapter 8), and associated with massive changes in settlement-
patterns (Chapter 11). Was alcohol, too, an introduction? And if so, was the use of
animal traction equally a cultural (rather than just a subsistence) innovation f (This
piece was originally printed without its bibliography, and with the illustrations
misnumbered; it appears here for the first time intact.)


                                             376




                                This content downloaded from
              128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

     THE   INTRODUCTION          OF   ALCOHOL         TO   PREHISTORIC    EUROPE


technological innovations in later Neolithic Europe, the third looks briefly
at the sociology of stimulants, and the fourth tries to apply these ideas to the
detail of the archaeological record.


EUROPE IN THE FOURTH AND THIRD MILLENNIA BC
Europe at the beginning of the fourth millennium was a land of contrasts.
Although in its south-eastern part there were village communities whose
ancestors had been farmers there for two thousand years, on the north-
western margin of the continent the appearance of stone tombs in small
clearings marked a relatively recent shift to an agricultural way of life by
peoples who had previously lived by fishing, foraging and fowling. Along
the Atlantic coastlands, the convergent development of megalithic architec-
ture picked out a zone of communities, with varied backgrounds but often
located in the heartlands of earlier, Mesolithic population, which formed a
distinctive development on the western edge of Europe. Although the later
Iberian (e.g. Millaran) builders of collective tombs were to acquire some
skills from contacts along the Mediterranean in a more advanced phase of
their development,2 the origin of European megaliths was essentially a local
one. Nothing points up more clearly the contrast between our present
picture of European prehistory and that presented by Gordon Childe than
the interpretation of the megalithic monuments and their makers. Far from
being recent immigrants or converts to Near Eastern religions, the mega-
lithic communities of western Europe can now be seen as equally if not more
isolated, archaic and rural than the peasants of the central European loess -
themselves unsophisticated by the standards of the early-settled regions of
the south-east.
    Even the Balkan and Carpathian areas, technically and perhaps socially
the most advanced regions of the European landmass, had a curiously
isolated appearance by comparison with the technological koine which
existed over much of the contemporary Near East (Renfrew 1969). Its
copper and gold metallurgy, although typologically distinctive, was never-
theless still based on unalloyed metal shaped by single-mould casting and
hammering. After the close links with Anatolia indicated by the material
culture of its pioneer farmers, Balkan and Carpathian Europe seem to have
pursued their own, independent course; while in the adjacent central Euro-
pean loess belt the pioneer unity of Bandkeramik similarly gave way to more
localised groupings. These tendencies towards disunity, however, were
beginning to be reversed; and the core of this process was the Carpathian
Basin. The cultures of the Copper Age seem to show new properties not
possessed by their predecessors. The appearance of display gear in metal,
especially shafthole axes, was paralleled not only by new forms of flint-
working (notably long flint dagger-blades: see Chapter 12) which had to be
brought from great distances, but also by new conventions of displaying


                                            377




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                CUPS    THAT       CHEERED:




15.1 Europe in the period of long-distance connections ('linkup phase')
c.3800-3600 BC.

wealth or status at death - the appearance of rich, differentiated cemeteries
like that of Tiszapolgar (Bognar-Kutzian 1963). This pattern of individual
ostentation, and the long-distance trade needed to support it, was the motor
for spreading innovations like the domestic horses from the Pontic steppes
which appeared in Hungary at this time (Bokonyi 1978).
   Such developments were reaching their climax around 3700/3600 BC, in
what might be termed the Linkup phase (Figure 15.1). It is marked by three
related phenomena:
   1. the extension of trade routes carrying copper from the Carpathian
       Basin (already reaching the Russian steppes, perhaps in exchange for
       horses) to the newly emerged farming communities of Denmark in the
       TRB c period (Bygholm, Salten, etc.: Randsborg 1979);
   2. a pattern of stylistic convergence among adjacent cultures, forming a
       chain from Bulgaria to Poland and characterised by frayed boundaries
       and mixed groups (Bodrogkeresztur/Salcutsa IV; Lengyel-Polgar);
   3. the emergence of certain inter-cultural ceramic types, notably those
       concerned with serving food or drink.


                                             378




                                This content downloaded from
              128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

     THE   INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL         TO   PREHISTORIC    EUROPE




15.2 Inter-regional pottery forms for serving liquids, early fourth millennium BC:
eastern group (two-handled). Left, Silesia (Jordanow); centre, Slovakia (Lengyel
V); right, Bulgaria (Salcutsa IV). Various scales and sources.

All three are aspects of a process of increasing connection between regions,
in which the movement of rare commodities like metals was associated with
a degree of cultural convergence, beginning with common conventions for
ritually important activities. The first represents an interesting example of
directional drift in commodities between two demographically important
centres of settlement, along an axis that was to be of crucial importance in
later prehistory. The second probably relates to new patterns of mobility in
mating networks and the formation of kinship links of greater geographical
scope (Chapter 5). The third, most relevant for present purposes, offers in
embryo a phenomenon not dissimilar to that later represented by the Bell-
Beakers themselves.
   Two inter-regional pottery types present themselves: an 'eastern' form
and a 'western' one.3 (To these may be added the Funnel-beaker drinking set
considered in the following chapter: Figures 16.14 and 16.15.) The eastern
type is the two-handled vessel that distinguishes the latest phase (IV in
Berciu's terminology) of Gumelnitsa and Salcutsa, appears in eastern
Hungary with the distinctive Scheibenhenkeln of later Bodrogkeresztur
(Hunyadihalom), and is known from later Lengyel-Polgar contexts in
southern and central Poland, such as the copper-rich graves of Jordanow
(Figure 15.2). The western type has a single handle, and appears in the form
of a cup or tankard among the constituent groups of the later Lengyel
complex: the Balaton group in Hungary, Aichbuhl and Schussenried in
Bohemia and the east Alpine foreland, Baalberge in central Germany (Figure
15.3). If material culture is fossilised behaviour, it may be possible to infer


                                             379




                                This content downloaded from
              128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                CUPS     THAT      CHEERED:




15.3 Inter-regional pottery forms for serving liquids, early fourth millennium BC:
western group (one-handled). Top row, right and left, central Germany
(Baalberge); top row, centre, Bavaria (Wallerfing); bottom row, Slovakia
(Turchenstichker amik). Various scales and sources.

the appearance of conventions of hospitality or at least the social dispensing
of liquids (e.g. from the Schussenried jug) among the interacting groups
around the Carpathian Basin.4 It may not be coincidence that one of the
more distinctive (and again, eponymous) shapes among the pottery of the
first northern farmers, the funnel-necked beaker, should appear at this time
in an area demonstrably linked to that of the Carpathian Basin by trade in
copper. Contemporary early farming cultures in Atlantic Europe had no
such distinctive drinking vessel: they were 'bowl cultures'.
   This pattern of growing connections within and around central Europe,
centred on the prosperous, copper-using groups of the Carpathian Basin but
reaching out to include both steppe groups to the east and new farming
communities in the North European Plain, was the nucleus from which
more extensive networks of trading and cultural contact were to develop.
    In the next phase, lasting from 3500-3000 BC, this network was
decisively linked to that of the urbanising Near East by way of Anatolia and
the Aegean: its mnemonic is thus the Aegeo-Anatolian phase. These influ-
ences are unambiguous in Balkan and Carpathian Europe, but their echoes
can be traced into central Germany and Poland. An important feature of
internal development was the unification of the 'eastern' (Bodrogkeresztur)
and 'western' (Lengyel) wings of the Danubian province into a single entity,
the Baden culture.5 Baden pottery shows little continuity with that of either
group (though perhaps owing more to Lengyel than to Bodrogkeresztur),


                                             380




                                This content downloaded from
              128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

     THE   INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL        TO    PREHISTORIC   EUROPE




metal prototypes: pottery from the two male burials accompanied by paired cattle
in the cemetery of Alsonemedi, Hungary (cf. Figs 8.1, 8.2). Drawn from photo-
graphs in J. Banner, Die Peceler Kultur, 1956.

but instead it is characterised by an entirely new assemblage of forms and
decorative syntax. The shapes include many-handled vessels for dispensing
and consuming liquids, often combined in graves as a 'service' or set of
vessels of complementary types (like our decanter and glasses), either for
personal enjoyment (Figure 15.4) or social entertainment (Figure 15.5), and
also occurring in domestic assemblages (Figure 15.6). The stylistic and




15.5 Two contemporary pottery drinking-sets, inspired by metal forms, in central
Europe and the Aegean: right, Baden culture assemblage from Dfetovice near
Brandys, Czech Republic /Pravek Ceskoslovenska, 1960, p. 138 and Plate 17);
Early Cycladic grave assemblage from SE Naxos (from Renfrew 1972, Plate 16).


                                            381




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                            CUPS        THAT         CHEERED:


         SITAGROI Va
             SHAPE          DISTRIBUTION


            SHORT-TERM                                                          LONGER-TERM
             CONTAINERS                                                         CONTAINERS




                                    BOWLS         \   ~ ?



                            o -~K7 CO
         String hales   .      ..




                 0r                   o               0
                                            TEMPORARY STORAGE
                                            COOKING, SERVING




                                                       CAPACITY

15,6 The pottery assemblage from the 'burnt house' at Sitagroi, Macedonia (Phase
Va, mid-third millennium BC), arranged according to volume and rim-diameter:
note the jug/cup complex at the personal end of the scale; [from Sherratt 1986a],

morphological features of this assemblage, such as the use of strap-handles,
omphalos bases and channelled decoration, are indicative of the impact of
metal prototypes. Nandor Kalicz long ago (1963, 42-52) assembled an
impressive list of features of Baden pottery which have their origins in the
type of precious metal vessels then existing in Anatolia. This metal impact
is very clear in the Beycesultan sequence, and I have described it (Sherratt
1986a) in the north Aegean at Sitagroi, with the appearance of these metal-
related features in phase IV there. The same is true for Ezero (with specific
parallels at Troy) and also Cernavoda III and Baden (Chrpovsky 1973). Its
impact can be traced less directly further north, in some Salzmiinde types in
central Germany, and more generally thereafter with Bernburg and early
Globular Amphorae, which have the rounded, southern shapes of the Baden
'metal style' as opposed to the angular, Nordic profiles of Walternienburg
[which I suspect go back to the tradition of stake-frame basket forms:
Chapter 14; cf. also Chapter 16].
   To summarise the pattern of this phase, therefore, we can see the
establishment, in the Carpathian Basin and south-east Europe (with some
echoes further north), of a major cultural block with close stylistic connec-
tions to the adjacent areas of the Aegean and Anatolia. This style is typically
expressed in sets of drinking vessels, whose forms were inspired by metal
originals.
    Our next phase is more complex, and involves eastwards contact with the
area to the north of the Black Sea. For this reason I have called it the Steppe
phase (3000-2500 BC); and it falls into two parts. A striking feature of its
earlier part is the expansion of the Globular Amphora complex (Wislanski
1970; Nagel 1985), over an area from south Denmark to Kiev (Figure 15.8).


                                                               382




                                      This content downloaded from
                    128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                              All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

     THE   INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL        TO    PREHISTORIC   EUROPE




                                         o            10
                                                     J CMS.


15.7 Pottery characteristic of the two successive major inter-regional complexes of
the North European Plain, 3400-2400 BC: left, Globular Amphora culture (eastern
Poland); right, Corded Ware culture (western Poland).

Its essential feature is the liquid-container, the eponymous globular
amphora (Figure 15.7 left). A comparable form of vessel occurs in the areas
more immediately influenced by Aegean prototypes, including both the
Baden area and Italy. It is sometimes accompanied, in a true drinking set,
by handled cups; but this is not true everywhere. The Globular Amphora
culture picked up, on its 'eastern front', the practice of impressing pottery
with cord decoration which was already practised by Pontic Steppe groups
(Telegin 1973; Merpert 1974); and its burial practices were an eclectic
mixture of southern paired-ox burials, western megalithic cists, and eastern
tumuli. At about the same time, there was a short, temporary fashion for
cord decoration in the Balkans (e.g. at Mikhalich and Sitagroi Va; for a
general survey see Roman 1974), and what seems to be an actual steppe
intrusion of ochre-grave (= Pit-Grave,'Kurgan' or tumulus-building) groups
into the Lower Danube and eastern Hungary from the Pontic steppes
(Ecsedy 1979). This was the time when two-piece mould casting and
arsenical alloying started in south-east Europe. The Globular Amphora
diaspora had its own impact on TRB, most clearly seen in MN IV in Denmark
(E2 in the Netherlands), when the cord decoration was imitated rather
laboriously in local tvaerstik - stab and drag ornament (Bakker 1979).
   As a second stage of this process, the Corded Ware complex (Behrens
and Schlette 1969, Schnurkeramik Symposium Halle 1979) crystallised
around a further set of international (and typically male) equipment. This
consisted essentially of the shafthole stone 'battle-axe', the flint dagger,
and the cord-decorated beaker (a large drinking cup with wrapped-round
decoration) often associated with a larger liquid-container, the globular
amphora - and usually occurring with single burials in the tumuli that now
became the standard form of burial monument (Figure 15.7 right). The core
area of the Corded Ware complex lay to the west of that of Globular


                                             383




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                CUPS    THAT       CHEERED:




IS. 8 Map showing the spread of the drinking-vessel complex in Europe in its
three regional manifestations: SE Europe with vessels of shapes inspired by metal
originals; N Europe with a more rustic style incorporating cord decoration; and
Atlantic Europe with various groups of the Bell-Beaker culture. (Bell-Beaker
arrows distinguish between AOC Beakers - hatched; Maritime Beakers - stippled;
and Beaker groups appearing in former Corded Ware areas - blank, broken
outline.) Drawn by Pat Jacobs.


Amphorae (Figure 15.8), but Corded Ware took over the western periphery
of the latter, and expanded widely beyond it to the east.6 The western wing
of this complex extended from Switzerland to Scandinavia; the eastern
wing as far as Moscow and beyond. I leave on one side whether this was a
population (e.g. acculturated remnant hunters), a specialised minority (e.g.
pastoralists), or merely a set of symbols indicative of social convergence on
a common formula: for the moment I merely want to clarify the spatio-
temporal pattern.
   The last part of this process (Figure 15.8), at the far western end, was the
formation of a further international complex with maritime and riverine
links to western and south-western Europe: hence its designation as the
Maritime phase (2500-2000 BC). The Bell-Beaker sequence (Clarke 1976;
Harrison 1980), beginning with AOC (All-over-Cord) beakers in the North
Sea basin, was initially close to the Corded Ware model; it substituted
archery equipment for battle axes, but continued the daggers, single burial
under a tumulus, and especially the emphasis on a cord-decorated drinking


                                             384




                                This content downloaded from
              128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

     THE   INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL        TO    PREHISTORIC   EUROPE


vessel. This was followed by the 'Maritime' or 'Pan-European' phase, in
which the cord ornament was translated into zones of comb-stamped
decoration and Beakers spread even more widely, perhaps meshing with pre-
existing maritime trade networks to bring northern novelties to the west
Mediterranean in exchange for copper. The scale of this Bell-Beaker
diaspora was to exceed even that of Globular Amphorae and Corded Ware;
from Scotland to Sicily, Cornwall to Moravia. Nevertheless, its position
peripheral to a continuing Baden-like core should still be noted, as should
the continuing irradiation of this periphery by metal-inspired forms: the so-
called Begleitkeramik. This interaction - in which Nagyrev jugs and cups
spread into the loesslands and the north Alpine foreland, while decorated
beakers spread into central Europe from the west - was also marked by the
transfer of technological sophistication to the periphery: copper (and then
copper-alloy) daggers began to replace flint ones in Bell-Beaker graves
(Burgess and Shennan 1976; Shennan 1977).
   Comparing this sequence of maps, one may discern a pattern unfolding
over the course of a millennium, and consisting of the following features:
the establishment of a Carpathian/Balkan bridgehead of Aegeo-Anatolian
styles; two successive diasporas in the North European Plain - one in the
east, one in the west - creating a chain of common conventions from the
steppes to the Rhineland; and finally a more selective linking-up of the main
centres within the great arc of western Europe. The whole process thus took
the form of an anti-clockwise movement around the European landmass,
coming full circle in the Mediterranean: Italy in general, and Sicily in par-
ticular, received impulses from both directions - from the east, originating
in the Aegean, and from the west, along the Beaker sea-lanes (hence that
unique phenomenon, a painted Bell-Beaker).
   Each of these major, inter-regional cultural complexes had at its heart a
set of distinctive drinking vessels, usually closely associated - in the typical
burial formula, and putatively therefore in the minds of their users - with an
equally distinctive kit of personal weaponry, and more generally (as we shall
consider in the next section) with another important novelty: the use of the
horse.


EUROPE IN TRANSITION: SOME KEY INNOVATIONS
These very large-scale phenomena demand equally large-scale explanations;
so let us consider some of the major changes that were taking place at this
time or just before (Figure 0.6), which were the results of a second gen-
eration of revolutionary changes within Old World farming practices.7
These changes have been discussed in the preceding chapters; and together
they produced a fundamental alteration in social organisation, sexual roles
and settlement patterns. Horses arrived early in the open steppes of eastern
Hungary, but for another millennium spread no further into a continent still


                                            385




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                              CUPS     THAT       CHEERED:


largely forested. The existence of the plough, demonstrable from c.3500 BC
onwards, was the main incentive for an accelerated pace of forest clearance,
and prepared the way in northern and western Europe for other innovations
requiring open country, such as horse-rearing, or the keeping of sheep in
sufficient numbers for wool. I have argued that the introduction of the
light plough (ard), as part of a larger 'traction complex' that also included
wheeled vehicles, can be dated to the beginning of the 'Aegeo-Anatolian'
phase that followed the great Copper Age linkup; that is, Baden in Hungary
and earliest Middle Neolithic in Denmark. The association between the
traction complex and new features of ceramic style in central and south-east
Europe (including the coincidence of drinking sets and paired-ox burials in
the Alsonemedi cemetery) suggests a common origin; and perhaps, there-
fore, a similar route of spread via Anatolia. Animal traction was clearly a
very significant innovation, and I envisage the plough as spreading along the
Mediterranean at the same time as it did along the central European axis, to
be present in Millaran Spain (along with bastion fortifications) just as it is
known to have been in Middle Neolithic Denmark or the British Isles. The
same would probably be true of wheeled vehicles, the other application of
animal traction. This is the horizon c.3500 BC in calendar years, maybe a
couple of hundred years later in the west Mediterranean, which corresponds
to radical changes in settlement pattern and organisation in many areas,
though its full impact was only to become evident when the full suite of
innovations was present to make use of the new conditions. One continuing
effect, however, was a relative enlargement of the pastoral sector, and a
concomitant enhancement of male domination of the system of production.
This continued a trend first evident in the Carpatho-Balkan Copper Age, but
now much more widely occurring and especially marked in the North
European Plain as settlement rapidly expanded onto the easily-deforested
outwash sands in the Corded Ware period.
   Links with more open areas to the east, both through the Carpathian
Basin and across the North European Plain, continued to have a crucial
effect on the development of forested temperate Europe. Domestic horses
had both an origin and a continuing reservoir on the Pontic Steppes; and
I suspect that wool-sheep may have arrived in central and northern Europe
by the same route a little later, to replace the existing hairy varieties that had
come in with the Neolithic. The use of horses for riding can be traced by the
occurrence of their bones on settlements and in graves, and seems to have
been carried successively further west and south on our series of flor-
escences, first with Corded Ware and then with Bell-Beakers. Their associ-
ation with early Mediterranean Bell-Beakers, in Iberia, Italy, and now on
Majorca, is striking.8 The keeping of horses for riding must at this stage have
been confined to a limited elite, since they would have been very expensive
to maintain on the limited areas of grazing then available. Nevertheless, they
must have been an impressive sight to communities which had never seen


                                            386




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

    THE   INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL         TO   PREHISTORIC    EUROPE


ridden horses before, and must have conferred great prestige on their
owners: probably the same people who figure prominently in the graves as
possessors of fine stone or copper weaponry and drinking equipment. They
would have been desirable items of trade; and, as a means of transport
themselves, would have facilitated travel and the distribution of other high-
value items. They would also have had an important role in more open areas
in the enlarged scale of flock- and herd-management.
    Since linen was the universal fibre of the Neolithic (locally supplemented
by nettle or esparto grass), the introduction of wool-bearing sheep meant
the appearance of a new, prestige commodity that could be made into a
wider range of garments, potentially more colourful than before.9 Although
it was later to become a major item of trade, wool is likely to have been a
rather rare, elite commodity for many centuries after its first appearance,
and perhaps even longer in heavily forested regions. The introduction of
wool sheep is rather harder to date than that of the horse, and must be
inferred from a mixture of different types of evidence including metrical
data on sheep bones, the transition from buttons to pins, and on the very
infrequent finds of the fibres and their textiles. The combined evidence for
the first use of wool suggests a date in the later part of the 'steppe' phase,
and a slow spread westwards: perhaps later Baden in Hungary, later Corded
Ware in Germany, middle Beaker in the far west. The geometrical, zone-
filling motifs of mature beakers suggest an obvious inspiration from textiles
- perhaps garments like the woven belts10 on the Swiss/north Italian statue-
menhirs; while more elaborate clothing might be one reason for the shift
from crouched to laid-out burials, to display their finery in the grave.
Woollen textiles are therefore likely to have been carried to new areas over
the Beaker network, although an independent spread along the Medi-
terranean was probably taking place at the same time.
    To summarise: the spread of the 'drinking complex' - a common
emphasis on sets of vessels, often combined in graves, which in several cases
are so distinctive stylistically as to have given their name to whole cultures
- took place during a period of unusually rapid social, cultural and econ-
omic change. During this time, Europe was opened up - both literally, in
terms of the further deforestation of its landscapes, and metaphorically,
in terms of its new contacts and social opportunities. Fundamental to this
process was the increasing importance of livestock, and the emergence of
male warrior elites whose sub-culture was portrayed in the characteristic
combination of weaponry11 and drinking vessels in their graves. Their dis-
tinctiveness was enhanced by their possession of horses, and probably of
woollen clothing. The progress of metallurgy, keeping pace with the need for
metal equipment for fighting and display, was shortly to cross the tech-
nological threshold which allows us to speak of the Bronze Age.
    The pattern that we have so far recognised is encouragingly congruent:
the introduction of major innovations in animal husbandry, and the new


                                            387




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                               CUPS     THAT      CHEERED:


lifestyles associated with them, do seem to coincide with the main currents
of cultural change as they can be reconstructed from the ceramic inventories
of the groups concerned. But can we be more specific? What was the signifi-
cance of Corded Ware, or Bell-Beakers? Can these features be tied together
as comprehensible elements of social practice? To say more will involve us
in a brief excursion.


SYMPOSIA: DRINKING TOGETHER
Our timetable - in conferences or at work - is structured by drinking-events.
The day is punctuated by social occasions which differ from one another
in their scale, character and appropriate beverage. In England, 11 o'clock
means coffee-time; water would satisfy our thirst, yet hospitality would be
lacking were that to be the only drink provided. A mild stimulant is re-
quired. Symmetrically, the British provide tea at 4 o'clock. At lunchtime it is
a common practice to drink a glass of beer; a more formal, evening dinner
would be accompanied by wine. None of these is strictly necessary for
physical well-being. What they do is to partition the day into units,
separated by events at which graded levels of social interaction take place12
- each stage and level marked by its appropriate drink (cf. Douglas 1975;
1982).
   So too with the containers (Vintners 1933). I expect my wine in a glass,
and of a different shape from that in which I would drink my beer. It may
even be specifically appropriate for the type of wine, whether it is imported
from the Rhineland, Champagne or Portugal. The hot beverages are more
appropriately presented in pottery; the tea, especially, in good china with an
unnecessary saucer. If it is not a social occasion - travelling, for instance, by
train - 1 may be content with a plastic beaker; and if I relax at the end of the
day with a private drink of cocoa, it is taken unpretentiously, in a mug.
   Each of these modest stimulants thus has its own container, its own
etiquette, its own ritual. Other rituals surround such mild narcotics
as tobacco, consumed by smoking.13 Each of the non-alcoholic drinks,
interestingly, has its origin in a different part of the world (Hobhouse 1985)
and only arrived in Britain in the sixteenth century;14 and, moreover, each
was part of a tradition of social entertainment in its area of origin: for
instance tea in China and Japan, with its ritualised 'tea ceremony'. This
beverage brought with it its own material culture, the porcelain 'china' tea-
service, subtly transformed for western use. Coffee performs a similar role
in Arabia, and more widely in the Near East: anyone who has excavated in
the Arab world is familiar with the seemingly endless sequence of cups of
coffee, without which formal negotiation is impossible. Cocoa - kakao -
was the elite drink of the Maya and the Aztecs. Tobacco, in American Indian
culture, was equally social and communal: the pipe of peace, passed around
the fire. So too were the rather stronger narcotics: cannabis in the Islamic


                                            388




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

     THE   INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL        TO   PREHISTORIC    EUROPE


world, and opium (which we associate with south-east Asia, but is only so
characteristic of this area because we promoted it there). All of these drugs
started off in well-defined and controlled social occasions - rare, special and
essentially communal. It is only with the atomisation of society that has
followed industrialisation that public use has given way to private use, and
hence to uncontrolled indulgence, abuse and addiction. Originally they were
social lubricants, agents of hospitality. So too was alcohol.
   They are also, of course, symbols. Don't ask for alcohol in Riyad; don't
smoke cannabis in the streets of Oxford. In the Arab world, cannabis - and
later coffee to complement it, as a social drink - symbolised the victory of
Islam and camel-riding desert pastoralists, with their brass drinking-vessels,
over the populations which they conquered: the Christian, wheel-going,
wine-drinking, silver-vessel-using town dwellers. The place of wine in Near
Eastern and especially Christian ritual needs no exposition: Hie est calix
novum testamentum in sanguine meo (Luke 22: 20) - the blood of the New
Testament shed for the forgiveness of sins, the chalice, the cup of sacrifice;
an image that goes back to libations poured from animal-head rhyta in
the early Bronze Age. These are powerful symbols, and people have died
for misusing them. Alcohol is especially suggestive, with its potential for
euphoria and ecstasy: one thinks of course of the cult of Dionysus, but do
not forget the Vulgate version of the 23rd Psalm: calix meus inebrians est -
my chalice inebriateth me. [These arguments are developed further in
Sherratt 1995.]
   So all of these stimulants, and most especially alcohol, are likely to have
had strict social contexts and profound symbolic and social implications
when they were first introduced. Let us concentrate first on alcohol, and try
to tie it in with some archaeology. Alcohol depends on sugar, transformed
by the fungus Saccharomyces cerevisiae (otherwise known as yeast) through
the process of anaerobic glycosis (otherwise known as fermentation). When
was it discovered? Not, I suspect, in the early Neolithic. All the encyclopedia
entries on alcohol start by saying that it began way back in prehistory: I am
not so sure. I think it is more like horses, ploughs and woolly sheep - a
second-generation development of the farming tradition, with its origins in
the south. The sugars available to prehistoric man were glucose, fructose,
maltose and lactose, available from honey, fruits, sprouting grain and milk
respectively, to produce mead, wine, beer and koumish. Few of these sources
of sugar were abundant in primeval temperate Europe, and our own sugar-
saturated environment is a poor guide to the conditions that obtained then.
Fermentation is constantly happening accidentally now - in some long-
forgotten bag of fruit in the kitchen - but only because of the highly selected,
sugar-rich varieties of fruit that are now so easily available on the super-
market shelves. Wild fruits, and this includes the wild grape Vitis sylvestris,
simply do not have enough sugar to ferment. Given that the process also
includes lengthy preparation in closed containers with the appropriate


                                            389




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                               CUPS     THAT      CHEERED:




      "vT




15.9 Drinking scenes: above, beer-drinkers using straws, on an Early Dynastic
(mid-third millennium) cylinder-seal impression from Mesopotamia; below, a
wine-drinker from a Hallstatt-period (6th-century BC) situla from Kuffarn, Austria
Ifrom Sherratt 1985].

variety of yeast, I think it entirely probable that alcohol was not invented in
Neolithic Europe.
    That is not to say that they were completely without stimulants; seeds of
the opium poppy, Papaver somniferum, are well known from Bandkeramik
contexts in Germany, from Neolithic Switzerland, and from the later Neo-
lithic levels of La Cueva de Los Murcielagos in Granada (see next chapter).
While it is unlikely that opium was highly prepared and smoked, it is quite
possible that it might have been chewed or infused (Merlin 1984). Birch-
bark chewing gum, itself mildly narcotic, is incidentally also known from a
lakeside site in southern Germany.


                                            390




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

     THE   INTRODUCTION          OF    ALCOHOL        TO    PREHISTORIC   EUROPE


   So where was alcohol discovered? The most likely origin, I suspect
(Figure 0.3), is in the tree crops cultivated from the fourth millennium on-
wards in the east Mediterranean and around Mesopotamia (Zohary and
Spiegel-Roy 1975). The date palm, both in its fruits and its sap, is one of the
most concentrated natural sources of sugar (Werth 1954, 233-41; Samuel-
son 1898). Cultivated vines, Vitis vinifera, carry both sufficient sugar and
natural yeasts. Mediterranean polyculture, as practised in the east Medi-
terranean, was closely associated (as Colin Renfrew pointed out long ago)
with the elite consumption of wine (Sereni 1981), reflected in a whole range
of pouring and drinking vessels which significantly all have metal prototypes
(Renfrew 1972). The depas amphikypellon at Troy, the 'sauceboat' in Early
Helladic Greece, and the 'teapot' in EM Crete, are all regional variants of
craftsman-made, elite drinking vessels surely concerned with the con-
sumption of wine.
   The introduction of alcoholic drinks, with their properties of intoxication
and the generation of conviviality - a socially accepted alteration of con-
sciousness - is a major event for any society (Malcolm 1971). The religious
and elite overtones of wine in later European and Near Eastern societies
point to its fundamental social importance, and its use in prehistoric times
is likely to have been accompanied by cult and ceremony (Lutz 1922;
Kossack 1964; Goody 1982). The preparation of alcoholic drinks required
investment and the ability to concentrate surplus for conspicuous con-
sumption, as did also the manufacture of appropriately ostentatious vessels.
Such privileges may have been available only to the few. Such a socially
visible form of enjoyment and display is highly likely to be emulated by elite
groups in contact with those already practising alcohol consumption: the
recent history of North American Indians in contact with white settlers
offers an instructive, if more concentrated example - interestingly paralleled
by the adoption of the horse in the same context.
   Now look at the chronological relationship of the various culturally
emphasised drinking vessels that we have been considering in later Neolithic
or Copper Age Europe. East Mediterranean developments (wine and
precious metal vessels), and their Balkan/Carpathian imitations, were
clearly at the beginning of the sequence Baden, Globular Amphorae, Corded
Ware, Bell-Beakers. Are we not witnessing the spread of the 'alcohol cult',15
the socially desirable use of intoxicating drink with elite and perhaps
religious significance?
   But think again about the Baden case. Here is a set of drinking equip-
ment, clearly equivalent to that in use in the Aegean, copying similar metal
models. Yet Baden is already beyond the limits of viticulture (just as it was
beyond the area of advanced technology in which metal vessels could be
produced). Cultivated vines were not grown in central Europe before the
later Iron Age or the Roman period; and wild ones do not ferment. So what
we must be witnessing is a substitution, the development of a local alcoholic


                                            391




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                              CUPS     THAT       CHEERED:


drink as substitute for wine, most probably mead. I think this is a pattern
that we can see time and time again, on a global basis. Alcohol ultimately
became very widespread, but largely by imitation of introduced drinks (as
I shall argue below in the case of koumish). In the same way, the prestige
technologies associated with the serving of alcoholic drinks were also
imitated. Looking ahead, through later European prehistory, we can see
how the technology caught up with its imitations: first precious metal
drinking vessels, then bronze ones, and finally bulk imported wine and then
viticulture itself, under the Romans (see Chapter 17). What we see in north-
west Europe is a long-drawn-out series of substitutes, both for the drink and
for its original Mediterranean style of serving.
    We can appreciate, then, why in the third millennium there should be a
series of international drinking sets, spreading between dominant groups in
different areas as part of a complex of new subsistence technology and as
parts of new modes of social interaction. What we are actually looking at is
the origin of a tradition of alcohol-based hospitality that we will see later
on, in the Classical world, as the symposium:16 more than just a drinking
party or a forum for philosophical discussion (for that is what it became,
and why we use the word today), but originally a fundamental social
mechanism, the 'feast of merit', the gathering of a following of warrior-
companions, like the Mannerbund of early Germanic history (Murray 1982;
1983; Quiller 1981). As Morton Fried (1967, 178) recalls, ranked societies
are particularly characterised by their frequent 'intercommunity activities,
most notably feasts, parties, ceremonies and other ceremonies predicated on
organised hospitality'. It is a common and fundamental feature of later pre-
and protohistoric societies in Europe. As kinship networks became larger
and less linked to immediate communities, so the possibilities of creating
and organising an armed body of supporters became greater, and the
emphasis on warrior feasting and hospitality became more pronounced.17 It
is the genesis of this fundamentally new social fabric that we are witnessing
in the third millennium, behind the spread of drinking equipment and
weaponry which is the elusive characteristic of the beaker complex that we
are trying to tie down. And the social lubricant of this process was, I believe,
alcohol: that is what the beakers were for, and why their decoration was so
elaborate.


' W H A T BEER THE BEAKER FOLK WERE WONT T O BREW' 18
The question of what kind of drink might have been consumed from Bell-
Beakers is an old one, which can be taken further only by combining
evidence, argument and speculation. Since sources of sugar were relatively
restricted, the possibilities are likewise limited. Beer is clearly a possibility,
and will be discussed further below. We may set aside koumish, which re-
quires large quantities of surplus milk (especially the sugar-rich mares' milk)

                                            392




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

     THE   INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL        TO   PREHISTORIC    EUROPE


and is unlikely to have been produced in forested temperate Europe at this
date. Likewise tree-sap and native fruits or berries: there are few temperate
equivalents to the sugar-rich palms, and although birch-sap can be tapped
(like maple syrup in North America) it is not very sweet. Fruit wines require
added sugar (for example from honey) and are best considered as types of
flavoured mead (Gayre 1948). Beer or mead are thus the best candidates.
    On a global scale, only a fraction of cereal-cultivators convert their grain
into beer. In temperate North America, for example, no alcoholic beverages
were produced in pre-contact times despite the extensive cultivation of
maize, even though this grain was used further south (in Mexico and Peru)
to make beer (Hatt 1953, 158). It is unlikely, therefore, that beer-making
(and leavened bread) was part of the original way in which domesticated
grains were utilised (Braidwood et al. 1953). Early cereal-based diets are
more likely to have used parched and cracked grains for porridge ('grits'),
or - if ground - for coarse, unleavened bread (Mauritzio 1932; 1933; Forbes
1954; 1955). For fermentation, conversion from starch to sugar is neces-
sary; and various methods have been used. The most primitive is to chew
the grain, making use of the enzyme ptyalin (amylase) in the saliva - a
widespread technique, used both with grains and roots (and also to make
kava from Piper methysticum in Polynesia). In the rice-growing area of
south and east Asia, a fermenting fungus (Aspergillus oryzae) is used, that
accomplishes both saccharification and fermentation. The most common
method today in Eurasia and Africa is malting, using the naturally produced
enzyme diastase which occurs during sprouting. This last method may not
be as ancient as the first beer production in Europe, however: finds of
sprouting grain are not known to me before the Roman period (though
there may be many reasons for this), and the chewing method may have
been the original one in Europe (with malting confined to the Near East). It
has certain echoes in folklore: bear-spittle was used to induce fermentation
in one episode in the Finnish Kalevala epic.
    A good deal is known about the production of beer in the ancient
civilisations of Egypt and Mesopotamia (Lutz 1922; Oppenheim 1950;
Forbes 1954). Written evidence indicates that beer was made in both areas
from the beginning of the historic period, and brewing-vats are shown in
Predynastic Egyptian figurines. Not only barley was used, but also emmer.
Dry malt-loaves (sometimes spiced) were often made as a durable com-
modity that could be converted into either bread or beer. The yeasts,
perhaps originally gained from making palm-wine, survived in the brewing-
vats, or from the remains of a previous mash; and the mixture could be
strengthened by the addition of honey or date-juice. The grains were not de-
husked, and the beer was either strained or drunk through straws. The first
illustration of such straws occurs in the Protoliterate (Jamdat Nasr) period,
around 3200 BC, and the custom was still encountered by Xenophon
(Anabasis IV, 5, 26) in Asia Minor in 400 BC. By this time it was probably


                                            393




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                              CUPS     THAT       CHEERED:


a rather rustic survival: in lowland areas a 'strong drink' (shekhar), largely
made from dates, had become more common.
    Perhaps surprisingly, beer was not produced in the Aegean in Classical
times, and the only tentative indication of its earlier use is an MM III jug from
Knossos with what resemble barley-ears moulded in relief. It is not clear,
therefore, whether the production of beer was a widespread early habit that
was ousted in the Aegean by wine, or whether - as is perhaps more likely -
we are dealing with two quite separate regional traditions that grew up in-
dependently in the Near East and Europe, and may have used quite different
methods. The beer of Egypt was sufficiently unfamiliar to the Greeks to be
thought worthy of remark by Herodotus (Histories, II, 26); while the god
Dionysus was said to have fled to Greece from Mesopotamia in disgust at
its inhabitants' liking for beer. On the other hand, the Greeks and Romans
also associated beer with the Celts: Pliny (Natural History XIV, 29)
recorded that the natives of western Europe (principally Gaul and Spain)
intoxicated themselves with a drink made from corn and water, while
Dionysius of Halicarnassus (Roman Antiquities XIII, 10) snobbishly noted
that 'the Gauls at that time had no knowledge of wine ... but used a foul-
smelling liquor made from barley rotted in water'. The Latin word for beer,
cerevisia (Spanish cerveza), is relatively late and is itself a compound of the
Latin for cereal plus a Celtic element meaning 'water' and surviving today
in the word 'whisky'. Tacitus (Germania XXIII) records the use of beer
amongst the Germans, and both he and other writers mention the use of
wheat as well as barley to make beer in the north.
    We can also turn to the kinds of cereals grown in later prehistoric Europe
to see if they contain any clues. The most useful survey (for northern
Europe) is by Hopf (1983), and the results are somewhat surprising.
Modern brewers prefer the hulled form of two-row barley (Hordeum
distichum); but there was no two-row barley in prehistoric Europe, only the
six-row form (H. hexastichum); and the naked form, in contrast to the Near
East at this time, was the predominant one down to the Urnfield period.
Since the naked form has no advantage for brewing, it seems unlikely that
its major use was for beer, whose production on any scale may have been
one of the many innovations of Urnfield times. Thus the oft-cited general
trend towards barley in the later Neolithic and Early Bronze Age is unlikely
to be related to beer-making, and most probably it simply reflects the spread
to secondary soils. There are some indications, in fact, that emmer was the
cereal used for brewing in northern Europe: we shall return to this point
after considering the evidence for mead. Tentatively, however, we may con-
clude that beer as such probably only gained its prominence in continental
Europe in the Late Bronze Age or Iron Age, and may only have become pre-
dominant in the Middle Ages, by which time it consumed 20-30 per cent of
the total cereal crop.
   We may next consider honey and its product, mead (Gayre 1948). Honey


                                            394




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

    THE   INTRODUCTION            OF   ALCOHOL        TO    PREHISTORIC   EUROPE


was the most concentrated source of sugar in prehistoric temperate Europe,
and no doubt a valuable and much-traded commodity (Forbes 1957). Quite
how much was available, however, is an important question. 'The collection
of wild honey must have been a laborious business involving movement over
wide areas' (Clark 1942, 210); and Eva Crane (1983) has usefully sum-
marised the ways in which the natural production of honey can be increased
by human intervention. One system of domestic bee-keeping existed among
the ancient civilisations, and is shown on Egyptian Old Kingdom reliefs.
It was based on the use of a horizontal hive, of the type known ethno-
graphically from many parts of Africa, and in Egypt used in stacks of several
hives. Horizontal hives (in a pottery form still used in the Cyclades) are
known from Classical times in Greece, and wood or wicker ones are
described in Roman Italy by Columella. This ancient type of formal bee-
keeping, typical of unforested areas and characterised by the horizontal
hive, did not spread to temperate, Transalpine Europe. Instead, the tradition
of forest bee-keeping - managing wild populations in living trees - lasted
down to historic times. It is known from England in the Middle Ages, and
remained the sole method in the Slav lands (in competition with the bears)
down to fairly recent times. The erection of artificial beehives, in the form
of vertical logs mimicking the trees, is known from the early centuries AD
on the north German heathlands, and may be older if the more doubtful
example from an Urnfield context near Berlin is accepted as a beehive. The
first wicker skep - the typical Medieval form of west European beehive -
again dates to the early centuries AD, at Feddersen Wierde. (All references in
Crane 1983.) The keeping of domestic bees, therefore, although of some
antiquity in the Mediterranean, was largely a development of the historical
era in temperate Europe. The quantities of honey available to earlier
Bronze Age populations are likely to have been neither large nor easily
increased; honey would have been a prestige commodity. Although
in Bronze Age Greece mead may have been a major competitor of wine,
and even preceded it in general use (as some of the myths indicate:
Zafiropulo 1966), it must have been much more restricted further north.
The supply of honey in temperate Europe is not likely to have sustained
a mass production of mead, which even in the Middle Ages was four times
as valuable as ale.
    Not surprisingly, therefore, the first evidence for a pure mead in tem-
perate Europe dates to the Iron Age, and comes from the Hallstatt princely
wagon-burial dated to around 500 BC at Hochdorf near Stuttgart (Korber-
Grohne 1985). In an imported bronze cauldron set in one corner of the
grave-chamber was an organic deposit consisting largely of pollen grains
and beeswax. The 'tide-mark' on the vessel indicates a capacity of c.350
litres, and the mass of pollen indicates a 15-60 per cent honey content: a
very high-quality mead. Some sixty different plants were represented in the
pollen, covering a wide variety of ecotopes including heathland with wild


                                            395




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                              CUPS     THAT       CHEERED:


thyme, pastures, meadows and bean-fields: several honeys of different origin
(perhaps four or five by comparison with modern samples) would have been
used. This clearly represents, like the elaborate material fittings of the tomb,
a very considerable concentration of wealth. It also testifies to a rather open
landscape, with many communities of honey-bees, using fields and pasture:
looking towards the Medieval pattern rather than typical of the conditions
of earlier prehistory.
    The most direct indicator of the kind of honey known in Beaker times is
the material from a spilled S4 Beaker in a cist-burial on Ashgrove Farm,
Methilhill, Fife, associated with a fine metal dagger (Clarke 1970, fig. 1016;
Dickson 1978). Pollen samples from a mass of leaves and moss next to the
recumbent vessel gave a pollen spectrum matching the smaller quantities
still adhering to the vessel wall, and presumably reflecting its original con-
tents. It is dominated by small-leaved lime (Tilia cordata) at 54 per cent,
followed by meadowsweet (Filipendula cf. ulmaria) at 15 per cent, and with
Calluna heather and ribwort plantain (P. lanceolata) around 7 per cent each.
Perhaps two honeys were used; certainly several ecotopes are represented:
lime-forest (i.e. mixed oak forest selectively sampled by the bees), and much
smaller areas of pasture and heath - a very different picture from Hochdorf.
Interestingly, the find lies at least 100km north of the boundary of T. cor data
at that time, and must reflect a honey traded from northern England. The
meadowsweet (medesweete = mead-sweet) seems likely to have been added
as a flavouring, and is known from other Bronze Age finds. Since the c n-
tents of the vessel as a whole were not examined, it would be wrong to
conclude that this was necessarily a pure mead; we can only be certain that
(no doubt fermented) honey was a component.
    The best guide to the nature of Bronze Age brews is still the famous birch-
bark container from an oak-coffin burial in the tumulus at Egtved, Denmark
(Thomsen 1922, 184). The residue in this vessel had three components:
1. honey, indicated by pollen of lime, meadowsweet and clover; 2. fruits and
leaves used for flavouring, notably Vaccinium (probably cranberry) fruits,
and leaves of sweet gale (see below, note 22); and 3. cereal grains, identified
as wheat (and therefore most probably emmer). Precisely the same mixture
was found in the Danish Juellinge find of the Roman Iron Age. This is a
mead, an ale, and a fruit wine all in one!
    Such a mixture was almost certainly more typical of early temperate
European alcoholic drinks than the 'pure' forms which probably began to
appear during the first millennium BC. Before that, all sources of sugar were
pressed into service, and techniques of alcohol were probably much less
effective than those in use at that time in the Near East. The answer to the
question of what drink was consumed from Bell-Beakers cannot be given
in a single word. Alcohol was a precious substance, hard-won (no doubt
with much ritual and mystique) from a temperate environment, and often
adulterated with other things. Its effects would have been a remarkable


                                            396




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

     THE   INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL        TO    PREHISTORIC   EUROPE


experience, perhaps not available to society at large, and monopolised by
the powerful.


A FINAL CLEW
It remains to explain one important thread in the argument which I have just
discussed, the significance of which occurred to me only after writing this
text in 1986. The thread is, of course, the strand of twisted cord that linked
the societies of the North European Plain, from the Pontic steppes to the
British Isles, and was a fundamental feature of the first generation of Bell-
Beaker, the All-over-Cord type (Figure 15.10). Why was cord decoration so
prominent, albeit temporarily, in that area? Can we follow the logic of our
explanation further? I believe that we can.
    Cord ornament started earliest on the steppes, in Sredni Stog and Pit-
Graves (Telegin 1973; Merpert 1974). It was also widespread in east Asia
from quite early Neolithic times (the Sheng-wen horizon in China and
Jomon in Japan: both terms mean 'corded ware'); but not in the northern
forest belt of Eurasia, where rather similar, coarse, impressed pottery was
nevertheless decorated only with pit-and-comb ornament, not cord im-
pressions. Cord decoration spread west with Globular Amphorae, and then
with Corded Ware, and it was painstakingly imitated as false cord and
stamped comb decoration. Why? Think about the steppes. The drinking
complex - jugs and cups related to metal forms, or even distinctive drinking
vessels of any type - did not penetrate until very late; not till Greek colonial




15.10 Cord impressions on a cord-impressed (AOC) Bell-Beaker from Cassington,
Oxfordshire (Clarke 730); (Ashmolean Museum); [new photograph],


                                            397




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                               CUPS     THAT      CHEERED:




15.11 Equipment for inhaling cannabis smoke from Barrow 2 at Pazyryk, Altai
Mountains, Siberia (late 5th/early 4th century BC: bronze 'censers' with charcoal
and hemp seeds, and wooden framework for small tent (after Rudenko 1970);
[new drawing],

influence in Scythian times. That is probably when the steppe tribes invented
koumish - like mead, a local wine substitute. So how did they amuse them-
selves? The answer is in Herodotus, supported by the archaeology of the
Pazyryk tombs (Figure 15.11):
   On a framework of tree sticks, meeting at the top, they stretch pieces
   of woollen cloth. Inside this tent they put a dish with hot stones on it.
   Then they take some hemp seed, creep into the tent, and throw the seed
   on the hot stones. At once it begins to smoke, giving off a vapour un-
   surpassed by any vapour bath one could find in Greece. The Scythians
   enjoy it so much that they howl with pleasure.19
Poor Herodotus: he thought it was an alternative to washing. Years before,
the inhabitants of the steppes had discovered the joys of the native hemp
plant, Cannabis sativa, that they cultivated for its fibres, and converted it
into a socially approved intoxicant (Merlin 1972). I think that those people
were the Sredni Stog group, and that they celebrated its importance by
imprinting it on their pottery.20 They passed on their knowledge, and their
cultigen,21 to their neighbours, the eastern wing of the Globular Amphora
culture, who incorporated it in the complex of male-associ ired para-


                                            398




                               This content downloaded from
             128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

     THE    INTRODUCTION           OF   ALCOHOL         TO   PREHISTORIC         EUROPE


phernalia inspired by the southern alcoholic tradition. They may even have
mixed them in some amazing combination22 - the trick, apparently, is to
heat the hemp leaves in butter - and passed on their secret to their Corded
Ware successors. Did the All-over-Cord beaker, like those Late Bronze Age
Cypriot opium jugs in the shape of a poppy, actively advertise its contents
through its ceramic form and decoration? It is an attractive thought.
   Cord decoration remained typical of northern Bronze Age pottery well
into the second millennium. Hemp was probably ousted, as a fibre by wool,
and as an intoxicant by better brews of alcohol, perhaps beer. It survived on
the steppes, of course, and it was passed on, via the Persians, to the Arabs.
The rest you know. But what of Beakers? Hemp seems to have remained
a northern plant, until it was introduced into the Mediterranean from
Anatolia by Hellenistic Greeks and Romans, who wanted it for ropes. As
Bell-Beakers spread south, they left their cord decoration (and presumably
their hemp) behind them. For a short time its memory was kept alive
by imitative comb decoration, but then incised panels, drawing their
inspiration from woollen textiles, took over. And the Beakers themselves
diminished in size as they spread further south. I like to think that alcohol's
long journey, through remote northern regions where it was adulterated by
other infusions, was coming to an end. In the west Mediterranean, the
alcoholic tradition found once again sunshine, and sugar, and strength
(Walker 1985). It was like coming home.


EPILOGUE: DAS GLOCKENBECHERSYMPOSION 23
The specific interpretation offered above may or may not be true. The
general point remains: beakers were for drinking, and most probably for
drinking alcohol. This form of (usually male) entertainment has been a
characteristic feature of European culture ever since, and is still a familiar
part of the pattern of social life. It is basic to an understanding of our
everyday modes of interaction.
    The fabric of social relations is held together by knots of hospitality:
social occasions at which the participants come together in larger numbers
than usual to display their achievements, to compete with their neighbours,
choose their partners and cement their alliances. The character of a culture
takes its tone from these events. That we can understand these aspects of
Beaker society - far better than we can think ourselves into the ways of their
megalithic predecessors - is because these motives are still with us. Our cups
still cheer; our conferences are still symposia.

NOTES

 1. On the subject of drinking, it is hard to avoid literary allusions: hence both the title, and
    the quotation which introduces this section. William Cowper's interest was in temper-
    ance: the 'cups / That cheer but not inebriate' (A Winter Evening; 1785) were part of the


                                              399




                                 This content downloaded from
               128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                 CUPS     THAT      CHEERED:

   new, middle-class tea ceremony. John Keats' intentions (Ode to a Nightingale; 1818)
   were alcoholic, but misguided. His beaker 'full of the warm south, / Full of the true, the
   blushful Hippocrene, / With beaded bubbles winking at the brim, / And purple-stained
   mouth' could have been no more than a mirage - for the Hippocrene was in fact a spring,
   the 'horse's spring' supposedly created where the foot of Pegasus struck Mount Helicon
   in Boeotia. Although the well was sacred to the Muses and said to be the inspiration of
   poets, Keats may have found red wine more effective in his quest, 'That I may drink, and
   leave the world unseen.'
2. The Millaran Kiippelgraber seem to represent a somewhat different phenomenon from
   the other; truly megalithic burial monuments which occur from Iberia, through Brittany
   and Britain to Scandinavia and north Germany. The former are distinctive not only in
   their more sophisticated architecture and the quality and quantity of their grave-goods,
   but also in their association with large, nucleated settlements (like Los Millares itself).
   The more northerly megalithic tombs, while they may in certain phases be associated
   with ritual enclosures, seem to be in some way an alternative to nucleated settlement on
   the pattern of central and southern Europe. The social units represented by the two sorts
   of megalithic collective tombs, and the social organisation and ideology underlying them,
   may thus have been very different.
3. Whether this development was a purely European phenomenon, or whether there was
   already some connection with the Late Chalcolithic cultures of Anatolia (where handled
   jugs and cups were prominent features of pottery assemblages) is unclear: unfortunately
   this phase is not yet represented in well-excavated levels in the central Bulgarian tells
   (e.g. Dipsiska Mogila, Ezero, which has a hiatus at this point). Neighbouring areas,
   including both Greece and Moldavia, seem more conservative in their culture at this
   time, and their assemblages continue to be dominated by painted pottery,figurines,and
   other archaic elements. The Carpathian Basin (and, on a smaller scale, areas like Thrace)
   had the combined advantages of dense populations, copper and gold sources, and open
   land for stock-raising. This area thus became the focus of European developments; and
   it is possible that already by this stage it had links to Anatolia. The rich finds at the
   cemetery of Varna suggest that the Danube/Black Sea trade route to northern or western
   Anatolia was already in use. These latter areas, however, are very poorly known at this
   period.
4. Since they are open, handled shapes, then the alternative explanation, that they were
   containers for traded organic commodities, seems less likely (although some later inter-
   regional shapes, like the TRB collared flask, almost certainly were).
5. One reason for this is a large-scale internal redistribution of population (probably con-
   sequent on use of the plough), which produced a move to the foothills and interfluves,
   filling in the Danube-Tisza interfluve which formerly separated these blocs. On a large
   scale, this is typical of the shift from riverine to interfluvial patterns of settlement, and
   the changed topology of interaction which it brought about.
6. Although the Corded Ware complex seems to have spread initially in areas formerly
   influenced by the Globular Amphora complex, the two complexes existed in parallel for
   some centuries in distributions which were to a large extent mutually exclusive (Kruk
   1980). The Globular Amphora 'heartland' in Kujavia and the middle Vistula resisted
   the pattern of Corded Ware expansion (which engulfed surrounding areas) down to the
   emergence of the Chlopice-Vesele group.
7. For the evidence behind these assertions, see previous chapters.
8. The use of domesticated horses in the west Mediterranean seems to show a striking
   association with the Bell-Beaker culture, even if they then became very rare before be-
   coming more common in the Bronze Age. The association with Beakers was first pointed
   out for Spain by Schtile (1969), confirmed for Italy by the site of Sesto Fiorentino near
   Florence, and now for Majorca at Ferrandell-Oleza by Waldren. The same picture seems
   also to apply to Ireland, and probably the British Isles as a whole. I thank Lawrence
   Barfield and Bill Waldren for their comments on these finds.
9. Wool has a very high affinity for dyes, and takes the colour well and evenly; linen has a


                                              400




                                 This content downloaded from
               128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

      THE   INTRODUCTION            OF   ALCOHOL        TO    PREHISTORIC       EUROPE

    very poor affinity (worse than cotton) and its structure prevents an even penetration of
    dyestuffs. I am much indebted to Mrs Beatrice Clayre (Beatrice Blance) for confirming
    this point and providing me with a photocopy of From Fibre to Fabric (1946), a hand-
    book printed for the staff of G. and R. Wills.
10. It is, of course, significant that we describe Bell-Beaker ornament as being organised in
    zones, using the Greek word zone meaning a belt. The association of belts and warrior
    prowess is an old-established one. The elite troop of Greek soldiers are the Evzones, the
    'well-belted ones'; and the various colours of belt ('Black Belt' etc.) are still used to
    denote grades of attainment in the martial art of judo. The bone belt-fastener is a
    characteristic feature of rich male Corded Ware and Bell-Beaker graves (Clarke 1970,
    265 and 299, fig. 144), and the tangless buckle survives today in English heraldry in the
    insignia of the Order of the Garter. The belts on the Aosta statue-menhirs are particularly
    emphasised and decorated with (possibly woven) geometric motifs. They may have been
    worn with leather armoury or possibly quilted clothing, to give the characteristic lozenge-
    shaped decoration found also on later Bell-Beaker pottery (and onto which the Clandon
    lozenge would perhaps fit?).
11. It is possible to define different regional traditions in weapon use (oi; more often, dis-
    play). The axe was characteristic of central Europe, supplemented by the dagger (perhaps
    for younger males, as hinted by the gravefinds);in western Europe the bow and arrow
    was more common, with the dagger being somewhat rarer - perhaps equivalent to the
    axe further east. Several of the characteristic features of the 'Beaker complex' relate to
    archery (and perhaps to leather armour). Daggers became the standard personal weapons
    of the early Bronze Age throughout Europe, supplemented in the later phase by pole
    arms: halberd and spear.
12. As Mary Douglas has remarked (Douglas and Isherwood 1980): 'The ultimate object of
    consumption activity is to enter a social universe whose processes consist of matching
    goods to classes of social occasions.'
13. Tobacco is a particularly privileged substance, with its own social conventions: if I cadge
    a cigarette, it is polite also to accept a light for it - to light one's own in such circum-
    stances is to deny the essentially social character of the transaction by treating one's
    partner as a machine.
14. Tea, coffee and drinking-chocolate all arrived in London in 1657; but coffee was already
    being drunk in Balliol College, Oxford, twenty years before; while Oxford had its first
    coffee-house (the 'Angel') in 1650.
15. Direct comparison with the drug-based cults of the New World such as Mescalinism (the
    Peyote Cult) in North America is misleading, since this was related to the breakdown of
    native cultures in the post-contact period. Indeed, in some aspects this cult mimics the
    Christian Eucharist, and it forms part of an ideology of accommodation to Western
    culture, after the rebellion of the Ghost Dance. What is interesting, however^ is the way
    in which the use of the peyote cactus did not spread into the Great Basin, because of the
    existing use there of Jimsonweed. There may be some analogy here with the apparent
    failure of the drinking complex to spread on the Pontic steppes in the third millennium
    BC. (For discussion of hallucinogenic substances and their cult significance see Furst
    1976; Harner 1973; and La Barre 1972.)
16. See Athenaeus for extended descriptions of feasting, and especially drinking (Book XI),
    in the Graeco-Roman world. The book itself is cast in the form of an after-dinner
    discussion, and its various participants introduce quotations from older writers and
    information from their own experience to provide an extensive 'ethnotaxonomy' of
    drinks and drinking-culture in the Ancient World.
17. Cf. C. A. Wilson (1973, 331) on early Medieval England: 'Mead was a warrior's drink,
    the drink of the aristocracy both Celtic and Saxon. Not for nothing was the great hall of
    the Saxon palace called the mead hall. In the highland zone mead drinking had a special
    significance. The bodyguard who surrounded a Celtic chief or princeling consumed his
    mead, but in recompense fought his battles, a service known as "paying for mead". When
    300 Celtic warriors met the English at Catraeth in the late sixth century, "the pale mead


                                              401




                                 This content downloaded from
               128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                CUPS     THAT       CHEERED:

    was their feast and their poison"; for all except one gave their lives in battle in payment
    for their mead.'
18. The quote is from Stuart Piggott's famous Ballade to Gordon Childe, written in 1935:
       All secrets of the past are here laid bare -
       What beer the Beaker Folk were wont to brew,
       The answer to a Lausitz maiden's prayer
       The recipe for Maglemose fish glue ...
        You'll find them all in footnotes in The Dawn.
    The reference is to a footnote on what became p. 223 of the seventh edition of The Dawn
    (Childe 1957), where millet grains are reported from a Beaker in Portugal (International
    Institute of Anthropology Congress 1930, Portugal, 356).
19. Herodotus, Histories IV, 75.
20. It is worth noting that the early use of cord-impressed pottery in China - the so-called
    Sheng-wen horizon - was associated with an early use of hemp and an appreciation
    (explicit in the early historical records) of its narcotic properties.
21. Thefirstcertain identification of hemp in Europe is in the Hallstatt-period Fiirstengrab of
    Hochdorf near Stuttgart, dated to c.500 BC. The report on the organic remains (Korber-
    Grohne 1985) is the most thorough summary of data on the question of the introduction
    of Cannabis sativa. It corrects the list of finds reported by Willerding (1970) and removes
    as uncertain all the claimed pre-Iron Age occurrences; and it provides a pioneering set of
    criteria for microscopic identification. These now need to be systematically applied to the
    well-preservedfibresfrom Swiss lake-village textiles, usually identified macroscopically as
    linen. My suspicion is that hemp was introduced to Europe in the third millennium, but
    largely died out and only became common again under Scythian influence.
22. This may seem far-fetched; but do we not even today flavour our beer with lupulin from
    another member of the Cannabiaceae: the hop, Humulus lupulus, a close relative of
    hemp? Other historically recorded European beer-flavouring plants were the sweet gale,
    Myrica gale, and members of the genera Salvia, Artemisia and Laurus: see Behre 1984;
    Hartley 1954; 1964. There are records also of Tamarix germanica and Vitex agrius-
    castus among the ancient Germans, and yarrow, Achilloea millefolium (a plant with
    medicinal properties) in Iceland. In ancient Egypt, lupin, Lupinus termis, and skirret,
    Sium sisarum, were apparently used: Lutz 1922. In Mesopotamia the work of the brewer
    in the Akkadian period 'consisted mainly in the grating of aromatic substances and their
    mixing into liquid or fatty carriers for the preservation of their specific smell or taste'
    (Oppenheim 1950, 9). The method of heating hemp-leaves in butter to make a ganga-
    drink was used in Pakistan early this century.
23. Forgive the double entendre: I have argued that Bell-Beakers were symbolic of hospi-
    tality; and a major conference on the Bell-Beaker culture took place in Oberried in 1974
    - the Glockenbechersymposion - at which David Clarke gave a famous paper.




                                              402




                                 This content downloaded from
               128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:25:00 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                          16
      Sacred and Profane Substances:
       The Ritual Use of Narcotics
        in Later Neolithic Europe1
                                      (1991)

T he opposite of sacred is secular;2 the concept of profanity is dependent on
the pre-existence of a division between them. Just as dirt is matter out of
place, so profanity is part of the sacred which has escaped from its proper
context, into the realm of the secular. It is this structure which underlies our
colloquial usage of the word 'profanity' to mean an oath or swear-word: for
even the trivial emphatic 'bloody' began life as a religious invocation ('by
Our Lady').3 It is a religious utterance made in a secular context. The fact
that we no longer see it in this light is a consequence of the way it has lost
its religious force and has been dulled by repetition.4 In current usage the
term 'profanity' has almost lost its distinctive meaning, and the words
'profane' and 'secular' are practically interchangeable. In understanding
pre-industrial Europe, we need to regain our sensitivity to such distinctions.
    Like other categories of cultural classification, the distinction between
sacred and secular begins by partitioning the world into paired opposites,
and so can generate further qualities from the mixture of the two (Leach
1976; Douglas 1966). Profanity is a form of pollution resulting from this
mixture: the sacred-out-of-context as opposed to the sacred-in-context.
But what distinguishes the sacred/profane distinction from the merely
inappropriate collision of categories - putting one's feet on the dining-table,

The conclusions of the last chapter raise the question: what came before alcohol?
Surely not sobriety! In recognising the central significance of consumption-events
involving psychotropic substances3 this approach offered suggestive interpretations
for some of the most prominent artefacts in the archaeological record. (The pre-
diction concerning Grooved Ware was magnificently fulfilled recently by the dis-
covery of henbane (Tlyoscyamus niger^ seeds in a pot at Balfarg, Scotland.) This
particular account was prepared for another Oxford conference, under the title
'Sacred and Profaneand I used the opportunity to explore the contrast between
megalithic and succeeding cultures in terms of what I would now call'shamanic'
and 'hospitable' uses of psychotropic substances - the domestication of ecstasy.


                                         403




                   This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                    All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                  SACRED      AND    PROFANE       SUBSTANCES:


for instance - is the degree of supernatural power iherent in the sacred.
Where the power which attaches to sacred thingr as to be restricted to
its proper places, the fana or shrines, it is important that it should be
confined within these limits; taken outside this conceptual boundary, the
sacred becomes literally pro-fane. Within such a religious system, profanity
is a particularly powerful form of pollution. This does not mean that it never
happens; but when it does, it has important consequences.5 Unless
traditional values are reasserted, the sacred can be allowed to atrophy; or it
can be actively subverted, and used to new ends. In this case it may be an
important lever of social change, as I shall try to exemplify later in this
chapter.
    When the sacred has spatial boundaries, it also has temporal ones. Sacred
time is periodic, punctuated by appropriate ritual observance and visits to
sacred places (Leach 1961, 124-36). Objects used at these times will pass
into the category of sacred things, after which they have to be treated in a
special way - as with the consecration of the host in the Christian Eucharist.
With food, this is usually consumption within the context of the sacred; that
is, within particular spatial and temporal limits. Theological arguments over
the reservation of the sacrament hinge upon this point: to what extent can
the power of consecrated elements be carried over from the ritual meal of
which they form part? This dilemma is more acute where the ritual involves
an inedible residue, as in the case of animal sacrifice where the bones and
offal are left over. Consumption by fire, or by burial, is often an appropriate
response.6 Neolithic 'ritual pits' may find an explanation in this context, as
an appropriate way of disposing of inedible remains of sacrificial meals by
returning them to the earth. In the same way, pottery containers used in
ritual may be deliberately smashed: they belong to the world of periodic
time.
    In prehistoric communities the distinction between sacred and secular
power is unlikely to have been a sharp one; priestly and elite activities are
unlikely to have been strongly differentiated, as they often are in literate
societies. Nevertheless, the basic opposition, sacred: secular, was undoubt-
edly present, and is likely to have been congruent with structures of social
power, although potentially in several different ways. Thus the various
'elites' recognised by processual archaeologists can also be seen as social
categories with preferential access to supernatural force, whether they are
recognisable by megalithic monuments or by burial with such apparently
secular items as drinking-cups and copper daggers. The profound changes
in the later Neolithic of north-west Europe, indicated by the shift from the
former set of artefacts to the latter, have often been seen as a process of
secularisation: in caricature, as the replacement of communities of religious
devotees by groups of boozy warriors. Yet such a crude contrast is undoubt-
edly an oversimplification, however disguised in structuralist or Marxist
clothing. The purpose of this chapter is > review some of the phenomena


                                         404




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

   THE   RITUAL   USE   OF   NARCOTICS        IN   LATER    NEOLITHIC       EUROPE


which cross-cut this division, and to trace some of the common 'super-
natural' elements in the construction of social power in the two periods.
Having identified this continuity, however, I shall return to the contrast; for
it suggests that 'profanity' is a concept which makes sense in one sort of
religious universe but not in another.


T H E ANTHROPOLOGY OF INTOXICATION
Archaeologists, by the very nature of their raw material, tend to place undue
emphasis on durable artefacts. Anthropologists and historians, observing
their societies in the round, have given equal emphasis to perishable, organic
items as distinguishing characteristics of cultures and social groups: and the
subtle languages of clothing and cuisine have both been illuminated by
structural analysis (e.g. Douglas 1975; 1982; 1987). Following this lead,
archaeologists have to follow such indirect clues as pin types and pot shapes,
supplemented occasionally by the analysis of organic clothing or food
residues. This often requires an imaginative leap: but our vision of pre-
historic Europe is likely to be more misleading if we ignore these clues than
if we mis-identify their detail. That is the justification for this essay in
speculation.
   In approaching any pre-industrial society, there are many features of the
modern world which we must leave behind. The loudest noise in Medieval
Europe was the sound of church bells; the brightest colours were the clothes
of the rulers and the vestments of the priests. The sweetest taste was honey;
the sharpest spice was, for most people, something like wild mint. Neolithic
Europe had even fewer sensual stimulants, and it is hard for us to imagine
how powerful would be the impact of even modest innovations in this mon-
otonous sensory spectrum. Conversely, there would have been an extensive
knowlege of the various mood-altering substances which occur in the
natural flora, and which survive today in the attenuated form of 'herbal
remedies'. Temperate Europe, however, was not rich in such herbs, which
are more abundant in Mediterranean and sub-tropical areas where sun-
shine, seasonal aridity and competition factors produce a greater variety of
stimulating and aromatic chemical substances in plants. There was thus
considerable potential for the spread of even mild stimulants, and of
methods of preparation which enhanced their effectiveness.
   The acts of eating and drinking, however, like the wearing of clothes, are
not simply private responses to individual needs. In societies other than the
present capitalist world of takeaway junk food and TV dinners, such con-
sumption is a public affair whose structure and organisation say much
about the social relationships of those involved. Special foods are for special
occasions, and the composition of the social grouping at such times is of
special significance, providing opportunities for exercises either in inclusive-
ness or exclusiveness. This is true both for overtly religious feasting and for


                                        405




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                  SACRED      AND   PROFANE       SUBSTANCES:


forms of conviviality which while not explicitly 'sacred' are nevertheless
episodic and meaning-laden. While we cannot predict the precise form that
such consumption ceremonies will take, we might expect the archaeological
record to be particularly eloquent about such phenomena, since the
equipment for the occasion is likely to be the focus of unusual elaboration
and the residues especially copious. With care, one might hope to discern
various cycles of feasting, from domestic celebration to communal occasions
requiring the large-scale slaughter/sacrifice of animals7 and the brewing of
drinks.
    Eating and drinking themselves, however, are only a part of the spectrum
of expressive consumption behaviour. Organic substances are also used for
cleansing and scenting, and so can form part of purification ceremonies
- often, though not necessarily, combined with occasions for feasting.
Although it appears common sense to modern western observers that
cleansing is achieved by washing, it may equally be carried out by fumi-
gation. The northern steam-bath and sweat-house has its counterpart in the
smoke-bath and fumigation-tent; and both may use scented media to en-
hance the effect. In more concentrated form, these may be available as
perfume and incense - the close relationship between them indicated by the
name perfume (par fume, 'by smoke'). These bodily applications in turn
grade into other categories such as cosmetics and paints, and the use of
ornaments and special clothing. All are likely to be combined in periodic
special occasions, as aspects of ritual.
    Expressive behaviour of this kind is especially significant in such rituals
if it is accompanied by changes of mood and metabolism. Of particular
importance on such occasions, therefore, is the consumption (either by
ingestion or inhalation) of substances which have psychoactive effects,
inducing excitement, inebriation, hypnosis, phantasy or euphoria (to use
conventional pharmacological categories). The quantities of the stimulant
may be small, but if the sensation is an unusual one it will have a
corresponding effect, which may be enhanced by fasting or breathing
control. Such experiences are likely to be deliberately sought in the course
of ceremony or religious ritual, when they can be interpreted within a cos-
mological scheme and perhaps seen as a means of access to other worlds.
Such shamanistic rites must go back to an early phase of prehistory, perhaps
shortly after the emergence of Homo sapiens sapiens; and the emergence of
a written record provides ample evidence of the employment of drugs in this
way: the ritual use of Nymphaea caerula as part of the Osiris cult is known
from Dynastic Egypt, just as the Inkas used coca leaves and the Aztecs con-
sidered hallucinogenic mushrooms to be teonanacatl, the flesh of God; the
Aryans of the Rig Veda drank the intoxicating soma as a divine beverage;
while Herodotus described the Scythians' practice of inhaling Cannabis
smoke in communal (male) ceremonies (Emboden 1979). Wine was the gift
to Greece of Dionysus, praised in the dithyramb hfore drinking at the


                                        406




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

   THE   RITUAL   USE   OF   NARCOTICS        IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC        EUROPE


symposion; and the Christian whose 'cup runneth over' echoes the cry of the
psalmist: 'My chalice inebriateth me'. Any account of prehistoric Europe
which omits a consideration of such substances is likely to be incomplete.


NARCOTIC ARCHAEOLOGY
There are two avenues of discovery which may potentially lead to the
kind of information which is needed. One is paleobotany, which can
demonstrate the occurrence of plants producing narcotic8 substances;
though this is not in itself sufficient to show that they were used as such.
The other type of evidence, less direct but more abundant, is material
culture, principally pottery. Certain distinctive and widely distributed
artefacts can find an explanation in this context.

Palaeobotanical      evidence for prehistoric       narcotics
Although many plants contain substances with psychoactive properties, two
in particular stand out as possibilities for narcotic use: the opium poppy
(Papaver somniferum) and the hemp plant (Cannabis sativa). The former
was a member of the native European flora (perhaps with a southern or
Mediterranean distribution), while the other has an eastern and Steppe
distribution. Both were grown and utilised in Neolithic times.
   The evidence for the early history of opium has been reviewed by Merlin
(1984). Poppies occur as weeds in fields of cereals, and their seeds are
nutritious and tasty, so that they may initially have been cultivated for this
purpose. The complex of narcotic alkaloids (morphine, codeine, papaverine,
etc.) known collectively as opium occurs most abundantly in the sap of the
unripe seed-head (capsule), from which it may be extracted in dilute form
by soaking and in a stronger form by puncturing or scoring the surface of
the capsule. Dilute forms of opium were used medicinally in the ancient
world to assuage a variety of conditions and as an analgesic, as noted by
Galen in the second century AD. Earlier literary and iconic references show
that it was often used in religious contexts in the first and also the second
millennia BC.
   Poppy seeds were identified as early as 1878 among material from the
Swiss Neolithic lake villages; and more recently they have been identified
among the earliest Bandkeramik assemblages in the Rhineland. They have
also been found in Neolithic caves in Spain. The very wet and very dry sites
preserve capsules as well as seeds. As with other early cultigens, the tax-
onomy of early cultivated forms is complex, but indisputably domesticated
forms may be identified (as with the non-shattering rachis in cereals) by loss
of the ability to seed themselves. In the case of poppies, this is the closure of
the dehiscent ring of pores around the head of the capsule, through which
the seeds are ejected by jactitation. This condition has been identified in
prehistoric specimens. The general view is that the opium poppy was


                                        407




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                  SACRED      AND    PROFANE      SUBSTANCES:


domesticated in the West Mediterranean, perhaps as early as Impressed
Ware times, and spread from there to other parts of Europe.
   The most explicit indication of its cultural significance in Neolithic times
comes from discoveries in a burial-cave fifty metres above the bed of a ravine
at Albunol near the coast of Granada in southern Spain. This site, the Cueva
de los Murcielagos ('Bat Cave') was explored and largely destroyed by dig-
ging for bat-guano and minerals in the mid-nineteenth century; but the finds
were published by Gongora (1868) and have recently been restudied and
radiocarbon-dated to c.4200 BC (Giner 1980; see especially plate 1, p. 147 9 ).
A large number of burials was reported to have been found, accompanied
by globular bags of esparto grass (Stipa tenacissima) with a variety of items
inside them, including large numbers of opium-poppy capsules. This find
suggests that poppy-heads had a symbolic significance beyond the simple
use of their seeds as a source of food, and that this symbolism was particu-
larly appropriate as an accompaniment for the dead.
   The case for cannabis is similar. Its use in the Iron Age, from western
Europe to China, is established by the abundant finds from the Hochdorf
Hallstatt D wagon-burial, from Herodotus' famous account of the Scyth-
ians (whose accuracy has been confirmed by the Pazyryk finds), and from
references in Han medical texts (Chapter 15). The plant has been spor-
adically noted in earlier contexts, and there are two finds from the early
third millennium which establish its probable use as a narcotic at that time
in eastern Europe (Ecsedy 1979, 45). The first is from a Pit-Grave (Kurgan)
burial of the later third millennium BC at Gurbane§ti near Bucharest in
Romania, where a 'pipe cup' containing charred hemp-seeds accompanied
one of the burials in the tumulus.10 The second is a more or less con-
temporary burial belonging to the north Caucasian Early Bronze Age, where
a similar 'pipe-cup' with hemp-seeds in it came to light.11 The appearance of
these items coincides with the rise of the Pit-Grave culture on the steppes,
and its westward penetration to Romania, Bulgaria and Hungary. This
agrees with the botanical data for a steppe distribution of Cannabis sativa,
and its spread from this region as a cultivated plant into Europe and China.
   In both these cases, the plants were known to early farmers in Europe,
and some familiarity with their narcotic properties may be presumed. The
varieties with a stronger narcotic content probably evolved later (perhaps
by conscious selection?), but even a weak narcotic effect would have been
appreciated in Neolithic times. The early varieties may well have gone out
of use when other psychoactive substances such as alcohol came into wide-
spread use, to reappear when stronger forms were available and perhaps
also had the social cachet of exotic, introduced novelties. Their social
history is thus likely to be a complex one. Various other plants with similar
weak narcotic properties may also have been used in prehistoric times,
though their use has been forgotten since they did not evolve more potent
varieties.


                                        408




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

  THE   RITUAL    USE   OF N A R C O T I C S   IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC       EUROPE




16.1 Pottery *altar' (probably a lamp or aromatic-burner) from a deposit of
pottery vessels in the Vinca-period copper mine at Rudna Glava, Serbia; height
20cm (after Jovanovic).

   Such narcotic substances could have been used in several different ways:
either by inhaling fumes or by ingestion in solid or liquid form. All of these
methods may have been used, before the Industrial Revolution provided the
means of preparing chemically pure forms; but there are suggestions from
the archaeological record (see below) that burning was the original mode of
narcotic use, and that it survived in peripheral parts of Europe when in-
fusion had become more common. It is likely that the context of consump-
tion by whatever method was a ritual one, and the particular mode of use
was probably dependent on the prevailing symbolism of burning, eating and
drinking, and its significance as a means of purification, communion, or
whatever. (The causation is complex, for such significance could be re-
cursively affected by the appearance of new psychoactive substances with a
single mode of use, as I shall argue for alcohol.) Such 'religious' uses would
no doubt have included 'medicinal' uses as well, since it would be artificial
to separate physical healing from ritual observance.

The ceramic evidence: 1. smoke                 inhalation
Among the ceramic items of the Balkan Neolithic, and especially common
in the fifth millennium BC, is a group of objects which have long been
described as 'ritual' and discussed in the context of figurines and models of
houses, ovens and shrines. These objects are usually described as 'altars'
(Figure 16.1), and consist of a small dish on three or four feet. They often
incorporate representational elements such as animal-heads at the ex-
tremities, and they are usually richly decorated in the manner of con-
temporary fine pottery. It has been suggested that they are lamps (Nandris
1973), but this 'common-sense' interpretation may conceal an expressive


                                         409




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   SACRED     AND    PROFANE       SUBSTANCES:




Chasseen period from the ceremonial site of Er Lannic, Morbihan, Brittany;
height c.lOcm (after Le Rouzic). Some 160 vessels of this kind were recovered
from the site, an enclosure of standing stones.

dimension beyond simple functionality, which is suggested by their
elaborate form and decoration. Fire and smoke have a particular potential
for symbolic meaning (and can be enhanced by the burning of simple
aromatic substances such as pine resin);12 such vessels may have combined
the characteristics of lamps and incense-burners (thymiateria), rather than
simply providing illumination. They are sufficiently common to suggest a
context in domestic ritual. However, fragments of such elaborate vessels
have been found in the Vinca-period copper mine of Rudna Glava in north-
east Jugoslavia (Jovanovic 1982), which might suggest that an element of
(propitiatory?) ritual may have accompanied the extraction of metal ores.
    Such items do no more than suggest the widespread symbolic importance
of small braziers in the minor rituals of households or work-groups of a
variety of cultures in Neolithic south-east Europe; but a more specific sig-
nificance may attach to various classes of 'inter-cultural' braziers which
appeared later on in the Neolithic. One of these is the so-called vase-support
(Figure 16.2): a characteristic artefact of Middle Neolithic France in the
early fourth millennium BC, associated with the spread of the Chassey
culture - a convergent grouping of heterogeneous megalithic and non-
megalithic societies, from the Midi to Brittany and the Paris Basin. They are
associated with a particular style of pottery decoration, which seems to have
spread from south to north. Again, they are shallow, bowl-like containers of
limited capacity, set within a cylindrical or cubic stand, and almost in-
variably carrying profuse decoration; and some of the bowls carry traces of
burning. The suggestion that these were stands for round-bottomed bowls
is less convincing than the interpretation expressed in their alternative name:
brule-parfums. These objects occur in caves in the south, and in ditched


                                        410




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

   THE   RITUAL   USE   OF   NARCOTICS        IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC        EUROPE


enclosures in the Paris Basin, and they occur not infrequently in megaliths
in the west. In Brittany, they occur in vast numbers on the sacred site within
an arc of standing stones (cromlech) on the hilltop (now an island) of Er
Lannic, opposite the great passage grave of Gavrinis in the Morbihan.
   Their use in group ritual, within sacred contexts in space and perhaps in
time, seems rather clear; and their inter-regional distribution suggests that
they were associated with a cult which spread from south to north over a
large area of western Europe, uniting groups of different ultimate origins -
Impressed Ware in the south, Bandkeramik in the north, indigenous in the
west. Were they also, therefore, associated with the use of a particular
substance, perhaps with psychoactive properties, which was the focus13 of a
specific ritual? There are many ethnographic examples of the spread of cults
centred on the use of narcotics, of which the north American peyote cult
(based on an intoxicating cactus) in the historic period is perhaps the best
known, though tobacco provides an older example of a widespread New
World ritual narcotic (cf. Hopewell stone smoking-pipes). Is it coincidence
that the appearance of the apparatus of a southern cult should occur in
northern France at the same time as Breton megalithic art reached its
psychedelic climax in the entoptic forms and hallucinogenic images of the
Gavrinis carvings (Bradley 1989; Chapter 13)? Since the palaeobotanical
evidence suggests a west Mediterranean focus for the use of Papaver
somniferum, this would seem to constitute a prima facie case for the ritual
use of opium as a narcotic.
   Such 'inter-cultural5 artefacts, suggestive of the cult use of narcotics,
appear on an even wider scale in the later Neolithic. One of the clearest
examples, commonly interpreted as a brazier, is the polypod bowl, often
with a radiating star or 'sunburst' design of incised or cord-impressed orna-
ment within it, which occurs in several parts of eastern Europe in the early
third millennium BC (Figure 16.3). Its occurrence has recently been usefully
reviewed by Ingrid Burger (1980). The earliest examples occur on the Pontic
steppes, in the fortified settlements of the Mihailovka culture. It spread
westwards to the Carpathian Basin, where it is particularly characteristic of
Vucedol, and then into southern Germany and Czechoslovakia where it
occurs in Cham and llivnac contexts, and it survives in EBA contexts (Caka,
Nagyrev) in the Carpathian Basin. This westward progression parallels the
spread of the system of decorative elements based on cord-impressions
(although this also occurs beyond the distribution of the braziers, as we shall
see below). The point to note is its retention of highly specific characteristics
of form and decoration over a thousand miles and half a dozen cultures,
spreading from the steppes into temperate Europe. This, too, is suggestive
of a cult context: and in view of the palaeobotanical evidence discussed
above for the use of Cannabis sativa, is strongly suggestive of its interpret-
ation as a ritual hemp-burner (perhaps in conjunction with a small tent of
the kind described by Herodotus).14


                                        411




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   SACRED     AND    PROFANE       SUBSTANCES:




16.3 Pottery polypod bowls (Tufechalen - braziers, perhaps for cannabis?) from
eastern and central Europe: left, Mihailovka period, Ukraine; right, Vucedol
period, Slovenia; heights are 11 to 14cm. The design has been interpreted as a
solar symbol (after Gimbutas).

The ceramic evidence:       2. eating and         drinking
Bearing in mind these indications for the possible reflection in material
culture of the social use of psychoactive substances by burning, let us turn
to other means of consumption, by ingestion. The elaboration of particular
sets of eating and drinking equipment may indicate a comparable role for
the ritual uses of food and drink, and its sanctification in ceremony. Some of
these recipes, especially by the late Neolithic, may have involved special
ingredients.
   It is important to bear in mind that all assemblages of pottery containers
are likely to reflect a culinary syntax, more or less elaborate, and that such
an elaboration of cuisine is one of the characteristics of farming societies.
A perception of this kind of difference lies behind our classification of
Ertebolle (with its simple repertoire of large point-based pots) as Mesolithic,
and TRB (with its variety of bowls and amphorae) as Neolithic, despite the
fact that both are formally ceramic, used polished stone axes, and had not
dissimilar subsistence economies.15 With increasing elaboration of cuisine,
one might expect an increasing differentiation of pottery according to
the contexts in which its contents were consumed. Neolithic pottery
assemblages, however, have traditionally been analysed on the assumption
that coherent styles represent either the different periods or regional varia-
bility, with some allowance for a functional contrast between coarse and
fine wares. This minimal model is often enough to produce a sufficiently


                                        412




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

   THE   RITUAL   USE   OF   NARCOTICS        IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC        EUROPE


coherent ceramic sequence for the purposes of dating and correlation.
Increasingly, however, this model is causing confusion: the data are not
patterned in this simple way; and this kind of complexity is especially
evident in the assemblages of the later Neolithic.
   In Britain, for instance, it is apparent that Grooved Ware has a totally
different pattern of variability from that predicted on the expectation of
tight regional or chronological groups; the various sub-styles are distributed
without regard to the geographical zonation of other classes of artefacts
such as stone axes, and, moreover, Grooved Ware occurs on its own in
specific contexts such as monuments or isolated pits, without other wares
known to have been in contemporary use. In this respect its deposition
resembles that of metalwork, which is notoriously difficult to integrate into
conventional ceramic sequences. Although it is not in itself of intrinsic value
(as could be argued, for example, with the finer types of Bell-Beaker),
Grooved Ware seems to have had a special quality which set it aside from
everyday containers. It can therefore be suggested that this quality lies in the
context in which it was used, and that this is likely to have been some form
of ceremonial meal with sacred connotations, taken at central cult places
throughout the length of Britain. If this is so, then what was consumed at
such a meal may also have some sacramental significance, and may have
involved more than everyday ingredients: something more sugary, spicy, or
exciting (even narcotic) than was encountered in secular existence. There is
at present no evidence to suggest what it might have been.
   The taxonomic problems of later Neolithic pottery are not peculiar to
Britain; and a particularly knotty example is presented by central Germany.
Baalberge, Salzmiinde, Walternienburg, Bernburg, Globular Amphorae,
Corded Ware: all these 'cultures' are represented in a single settlement cell
within a span of 500 years (Bakker 1979). There is certainly a chronological
dimension: the list is roughly in sequence. There is also a spatial dimension:
Walternienburg has the angular shapes of the Nordic area, Bernburg the
rounded shapes of the south, Globular Amphorae (with their cord-
decoration) relate to the east. But there is no simple partition of units in time
and space, as distribution maps (Behrens 1973) make clear. Some, such
as Salzmiinde, have a more restricted, central, distribution within the loess
heartland of central Germany;16 the others occur more generally within it.
Why such rapid alterations of style and decoration, in a series of apparently
competing configurations? The answer is likely to lie in competing forms
of ceremonial, even cult, use of the most distinctive types of vessel, which
together in their particular assemblages formed the appropriate containers
for the ritual consumption of their own, liturgically appropriate, food and
drink.17 The complexity of the ceramic sequence records a competing variety
of possible approaches to the sacred.
   How can we make sense of this? At the risk of reductionism, I want to
suggest that all of these could have involved psychoactive substances,


                                        413




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   SACRED     AND    PROFANESUBSTANCES:




flask (perhaps for infused opiumf) and a funnel-beaker; from a grave under a long-
barrow at Tovstrup, Denmark: heights are c.30, 15 and 9cm respectively; (after
Knoll). This 3-piece set is especially characteristic of Jutland.

including both the narcotics postulated above, and also alcohol, in various
permutations. I have suggested that early narcotics (both in temperate
Europe and on the steppes) were consumed by smoking. During the fourth
and third millennia BC, ceramic assemblages in all parts of Europe were
transformed by the appearance of distinctive drinking-cups and vessels for
manipulating liquids. This is particularly striking in the case of the metallic
style of pottery drinking-sets of the Baden culture, which echo the silver
drinking vessels of the kind preserved in the Troy II treasure - whose influ-
ence (in the form of globular shapes, strap handles, channelling, omphalos
bases, etc.) can be traced northwards into the Carpathian Basin and adjoin-
ing areas (Chapter 17). More rustic forms of standardised drinking vessels
came to characterise the areas further north and west, most spectacularly in
the case of the Bell-Beaker complex. For reasons which I have set out else-
where, I believe that what this reflects is the impact of alcohol on prehistoric
Europe.18 These arguments indicate a southern origin, originally based on
the fermentation of sugar-rich fruits, and adapted further north to other
sources of sugar and flavouring - honey, milk, grain, and wild temperate
fruits. Thus while wine was known in the Aegean, substitute concoctions
took over further north.
   The first 'inter-cultural' drinking-sets were the jugs and cups which are
characteristic of 'Aeneolithic' assemblages c.4000-3500 BC: the phase
which saw the beginning of the various TRB cultures in northern Europe,


                                         414




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

   THE   RITUAL    USE   OF   NARCOTICS       IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC        EUROPE




16.5 Pottery assemblage of early TRB consisting of a lugged amphora, collared
flask and a handled cup, from a grave at Chruszczow Kolonia, near Lublin,
Poland; heights are 18,9 and 6cm respectively; (after Knoll). This combination is
characteristic for south-eastern TRB, occurring e.g. in graves under long-barrows.

and the first imports there of Carpathian copper. Indeed, it can be argued
that what gives the variety of local versions of TRB their distinctive character
is essentially the appearance of a particular drinking complex. Consider the
name: TRB, Trichterrandbecher, Funnel-necked Beaker culture - the first of
a long line of 'beaker' cultures which superseded the older 'bowl' cultures.
The various cultures (such as Danish Early Neolithic, Baalberge, and Polish
TRB groups) which are grouped together under this label have diverse
origins, but their common feature (at least in the formative phase) is their
equipment for handling liquids. This is not just the eponymous drinking-
vessel (which is principally characteristic of the Nordic area, and whose
place further south is taken by handled cups of central European type), but
the formalised set of vessels (Figures 16.4 and 16.5) consisting of the beaker
or cup, long-necked flask or amphora, and the smaller, round flask with
a distinctive collar (Knoll 1976; 1981). This assemblage occurs together in
graves (with individual burials) over an area from southern Poland to
Scandinavia, in a consistently replicated set of associations - not unlike the
combination of cut-glass decanter, water jug, and tumbler or thistle-glass for
Scotch whisky (cf. Piggott 1959) - providing a complementary set of vessels
appropriate for ritual consumption. It seems to represent a local adaptation
of the south-east European drinking sets which I have related to the intro-
duction of wine and other alcoholic substitutes.
    What, then, was the elixir (cf. whisky = Uisge bheath, 'water of life')?
Invert the TRB decanter, the collared flask. Is it not absurdly like a poppy-
head? Does this not give us a clue? Are we again dealing with opium, this
time in soluble form? Far-fetched as the suggestion may seem, it has a well-
documented prehistoric analogy. For precisely such an interpretation was


                                        415




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   SACRED     AND    PROFANE       SUBSTANCES:




16.6 Selection of pottery vessels from the mortuary house at Tustrup, Jutland:
pedestalled conical bowls Cfruitstands') and pottery spoons, some with sockets for
wooden handles; height of the tallest vessel is c.28cm; (after Kjaerum). These
elaborate vessels (for communal consumption of some special food?) are
characteristic ofTRB (MN) I, and especially of such ritual sites.

suggested by Robert Merrillees (1962) for a common type of Late Bronze
Age flask or juglet, the base-ring bilbil manufactured in Cyprus and widely
exported to the adjacent lands of Egypt and the Levant. Analyses of organic
residues from several such vessels has recently been undertaken by Dr John
Evans, of the North London Polytechnic: and in two cases he has been able
to confirm that the contents did, indeed, include opium. Reading the record,
even upside down, may sometimes reveal a hidden iconography. If this
reading is correct, and it can potentially be tested by the same methods of
organic chemistry, then it fits perfectly with the reconstruction offered
above: the use of traditional intoxicants in new medium, as the result of an
introduced model: consumption by mouth in liquid form. The full set of
ritual equipment for its consumption - containers for the concentrated
elixir, the dilutant, and the cup - became the hallmark of T R B . 1 9
    Could this model be further extended? In the previous chapter I sug-
gested that precisely this phenomenon was involved in the spread of cord-
decoration, from a steppe origin: the cord was hemp, Cannabis, and in
northern Europe the cannabinol was infused rather than smoked, as it was
in its area of origin (and as it was to be again, in a further phase of steppe
influence associated with the spread of 'sunburst' braziers). By the time of
the emergence of the Corded Ware beaker it may well have been combined
with alcohol itself (as we still do in the case of the close relative of Cannabis,
the hop, Humulus lupulus, to make bitter beer). In this case, too, the cord


                                        416




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

  THE   RITUAL    USE   OF   NARCOTICS        IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC        EUROPE




                  SMOKED       INFUSED        INFUSED      SMOKED
                   OPIUM        OPIUM         CANNABIS     CANNABIS



                                   X Z
                                   ALCOHOL


16.7 Postulated relationships between various indigenous and introduced
narcotics and intoxicants in later Neolithic Europe. The arrangement is roughly
geographical: horizontally E to w, and vertically N to s.

decoration would be a hidden iconography, continued in early Bell-Beakers.
   Small wonder, then, that the central German ceramic sequence shows
such a frenetic proliferation of ritual pots, for this area was the crossroads
of these various intoxicating currents, and its successive ideological trans-
formations had potentially powerful lubrication.20 After the early TRB
(Baalberge) phase, elaborate Walternienburg bowls take the prominent
place of jugs and cups; and a similar development took place in con-
temporary Middle Neolithic Denmark, with the appearance of forms such
as the distinctive conical bowls on stands found with pottery spoons in
mortuary houses such as Tustrup and Ferslev (Figure 16.6). These seem to
indicate more solid sustenance as the core of the consumption event: a food,
rather than a drink.21 This seems to be a particularly north-west European
feature (as with Grooved Ware in Britain and Late Neolithic pottery in
Ireland),22 and may represent a native reaction to the earlier foreign drinking
practice; and this north-western pattern spread to central Germany with the
Nordic influences evident in Walternienburg.23 The competing southern and
eastern influences evident in Bernburg and Globular Amphorae, on the
other hand, continued the emphasis on drinking vessels and amphorae with
their associated cord decoration: alcohol and, if you believe it, infused
cannabis. This pattern was again to spread northwards and westwards in a
new form, that of Corded Ware and Bell-Beakers.
   It is possible, therefore, to summarise a large part of the ceramic varia-
bility of later Neolithic Europe in terms of different ceremonial pottery sets,
each probably appropriate for a specific type of food or drink, with the
suggestion that psychoactive substances played a part in each of them. The
various oppositions which I have identified are diagrammed in Figure 16.7.


T H E SOCIAL CONTEXT OF DRINKING
To place these typological changes in a social setting, we must turn to the
very different types of archaeological context in which they are found; for
there is a profound contrast between the communal pot-smashing of Nordic

                                        417




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   SACRED     AND    PROFANE       SUBSTANCES:




16.8 The 'death-pit' at Nitriansky Hradok-Zamecek, Slovakia (after Tocik).
For description, see text. Note the lugged amphorae in channelled ware, and
the handled cup. The amphora/cup combination occurs in contemporary
'rich' graves with paired cattle burials in western Hungary.

Middle Neolithic, for instance, and the individual graves with Corded Ware
beakers which succeeded them in large parts of northern Europe.
   First, central Europe: in the Carpathian Basin in the later fourth and third
millennia there is a clear association between drinking equipment and other
indicators of 'wealth' in individual burials such as the flat-grave cemeteries
of the Baden culture. Thus, for example, in the Alsonemedi cemetery in


                                         418




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

   THE   RITUAL   USE   OF   NARCOTICS        IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC        EUROPE


Hungary the two male graves (one accompanied by a younger female) which
contained assemblages consisting of a bowl, jug and cup, also contained
copper ornaments and were accompanied by burials of paired cattle.24 In
common with others of my generation, I have been prone to describe such
assemblages as an 'elite drinking set' (e.g. Chapters 8 and 15). While justi-
fiable etymologically, this usage carries a secular, even military, connotation
which may be inappropriate for the societies under consideration. It is
appropriate, therefore, to draw attention to another find which illustrates
a ritual dimension to their use.
   The site in question also belongs to the Baden culture, and was en-
countered by chance during excavation of the important EBA fortified hilltop
settlement of Nitriansky Hradok in western Slovakia (Tocik 1981, 25). It is
a truly remarkable discovery (Figure 16.8): a bell-shaped pit, four metres
deep and widening out to a chamber some 2.75 metres in diameter, within
which lay several layers of sequential deposit that must have been made on
a single occasion.25 In the lowermost layer, thrown in with the fill, are a two-
lugged amphora and a one-handled drinking cup. This deposit is sealed
by a layer of burnt material. Above it is a deeper layer, within which ten
skeletons are disposed around the perimeter of the chamber, each kneeling
(on a layer of clean earth) but with the bodies upright, the arms uplifted and
with the hands held before the face. The posture of each of the individuals
is similar, and must be a ritual gesture rather than an attempt to avoid
asphyxiation, since each one has maintained the same pose in alignment
with the others as the pit was filled over them. Above them, in the same
layer, lies the articulated skeleton of a dog; and at the same level is a
perforated stone 'battle-axe' and another amphora. A final layer of burnt
material seals the chamber, and the shaft is filled with soil.
   Of its many significant features, two must be singled out. The ten indi-
viduals must have been interred willingly; there are no signs of struggle or
disorder.26 Equally, however, they must have been stupefied, and perhaps
also poisoned: truly der Trunk des Abschieds.27 The stupefient was pre-
sumably contained in the amphorae, and drunk from the cup: a sacrament
of death. Both the substance which it contained, and the beliefs of those who
drank from it, must have been extremely powerful to carry out such a
ceremony. It is hard to generalise from the unique, but this was surely the
realm of sacrifice and the sacred.28 The use in this ceremony of vessels which
are otherwise associated with 'elite' graves suggests that preferential access
to the sacred through intoxication was one of the elements employed in the
construction of social power.
   This element lies behind the appearance of drinking sets in early TRB in
northern Europe. After this brief appearance, however, drinking vessels
north of the Carpathians were not thereafter associated with individual
burials until the Corded Ware period. As with the Danish Middle Neolithic
and Walternienburg bowls, drinking vessels in the Bernburg and Globular


                                        419




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   SACRED     AND      PROFANE     SUBSTANCES:




                                   '     '     '   '    '
16.9 Long cist of the Bernburg period at Nietleben, central Germany (after
Sprockhoff, from Kruse). For description, see text. Note the large handled cup
and pottery drum.
Amphora cultures seem to have a communal rather than individual context.
Similarly, some of the features of the Alsonemedi cemetery occur in the con-
text of communal burials in stone cists of the Globular Amphora culture,
which sometimes also contain burials of domestic animals including paired


                                         420




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

   THE   RITUAL   USE   OF   NARCOTICS        IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC        EUROPE


cattle: sacrifice again seems to play an important role. The communal
character of drinking vessels at this time can be illustrated by the Bernburg
tomb at Nietleben, in the Saalkreis of central Germany (Figure 16.9). This
is a trapezoid stone cist of the general class of Hessische Steinkisten, with
incised drawings on its covering-stone that may resemble the cart-drawings
from the famous example at Lohne (Ziischen). It dates to c.3200 BC,
approximately contemporary with the Nitriansky Hradok death-pit. It is in
three parts. In the larger, innermost section, defined by a low cross-slab, lie
two opposed skulls and crossbones, one in each of the end corners. In the
centre of the chamber is a low wooden structure of two tabular planks
separated by timbers, beside which stand three small pots. In the second,
smaller compartment is a single, centrally placed pot: a globular, one-
handled cup or Bernburger Tasse. An upright slab closes off the narrower
end, and defines a small vestibule half filled with deposit, on top of which,
again centrally placed, stands a pottery drum (Sprockhoff 1938, 109).
   The tomb itself falls into a class of later Neolithic stone monuments,
including the allees couvertes, which evoke communal cult-houses. 29 This
is not the burial of an individual; the cup does not appear as an item of
personal equipment but as a more generalised symbol forming part of a
larger conceptual unity. Although the vessel form is ultimately a foreign,
southern, one, it is incorporated into a local context. The cup is sealed in the
tomb as part of the interment ritual; outside, but covered by its roof, is
a musical instrument, the Tontrommel,30 which was a characteristic part of
the elaboration of pottery forms indicative of communal ritual, which began
in Salzmiinde and continued to be a feature of central Germany until the
beginning of Corded Ware. As part of the ceremonies, therefore, we should
imagine the artificial production of loud noise, probably for a large audience
(including both the living and the dead) during the performance of com-
munal and mortuary rituals.31
   In the North European Plain, therefore, the second half of the fourth
millenium BC was characterised by investment in communal ceremony,
frequently involving the dead, which in the east took the form of drinking
rituals and in the west - perhaps in conscious reaction - took the form of eat-
ing rituals. Features of southern origin (not only the drinking complex but
also paired traction for wheeled vehicles and the plough, as well as the circu-
lation of imported items of copperwork) were absorbed into local contexts
and interpreted in terms of the ideology of common ceremony and burial.
   The radical break with this pattern occurred with Corded Ware. In the
new pattern of individual burial, adult males were often interred with a
specific kit: the stone battle-axe and a drinking set consisting of a cord-
decorated beaker and an amphora. 32 No continuing offerings were made at
the tomb, which was not a focus of ceremonial in the same way as earlier
burial monuments. Nor are there comparable ceremonial centres separate
from the tombs where drinking ceremonies could have taken place:


                                        421




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                   SACRED     AND   PROFANE       SUBSTANCES:


the ritual cycle was apparently constructed in an entirely different way.
This pattern was propagated westwards with Bell-Beakers (the battle-axes
being replaced by daggers and archery equipment, the beaker no longer
accompanied by an amphora), to intrude on other communal, monument-
building societies in the British Isles, Brittany and Iberia.


T H E PROFANITY OF BEAKERS
What interpretation can be placed on this change in ritual eating and
drinking, from an initial pattern of shrine-centred cult to a more personal
association? It is important to note that this devolution of drinking
paralleled a devolution in settlement and in burial itself, from the centralised
villages, ceremonial centres or mortuary shrines of the later TRB groups to
the scattered hamlets and tumuli of Corded Ware (Starling 1985). The new
pattern was more fluid, and less permanent. The settlements were less sub-
stantial and less long-lasting; the tombs were less durable, no longer built of
large stones to last for eternity. The general dispersal of settlement units was
accompanied by a change from collective graves (often megalithic in con-
struction) to single graves (often under smaller, round, mounds). Centralised
ritual observance thus gave way to practices associated with particular indi-
viduals in smaller (family?) units. The 'sacred places' were de-emphasised:
earthwork enclosures and mortuary shrines went out of use (some megaliths
being deliberately sealed), and burial became a different type of event. Stone
structures above ground were replaced by pits below ground;33 the bodies
were buried once and for all, rather than being de-fleshed and remaining
accessible in a built structure. Personal possessions, including drinking
equipment and weapons, were stressed for the first time and buried with
individuals. The shift from an elaboration of monuments to a concern for
items of personal equipment is indicative of a change in emphasis from
collective representation, often associated with remembrance of group
ancestors, to a society more oriented towards personal possession and per-
haps to more specific lines of ancestry. The changed context of drinking was
thus congruent with a larger social transformation.
    The occurrence of personal drinking equipment does not mean that
substances such as alcohol were generally available, but rather that from
being a prerogative of individuals acting on behalf of the community, in
a shamanic or priestly role, their consumption became a hallmark of some
more general status category, probably that of older males in positions of
familial authority. (Even today, among the Tuva Mongols, the drinking
of alcohol is only permitted to males over forty!) Instead of being part of
communal ceremony by stable and long-lasting groups, drinking could be
used tactically through hospitality and the formation of horizontal relations
among a more fluid pattern of communities: a class of event whose best-
known representative is the Greek symposion (Chapter 15).


                                        422




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

   THE   RITUAL   USE   OF   NARCOTICS        IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC        EUROPE


   Despite this structural transformation, what continued was the con-
sumption of psychoactive substances in a socially constituted context.
Differential access to the sacred through intoxicating experiences could be
seen as part of the ritual definition of authority in both cases; it was simply
deployed in a different way. It is possible, therefore, that the ideological re-
sources available for the construction of social power at the transition from
TRB to Corded Ware were to a large extent already present in existing ritual
systems. Seen in this way, the devolution of drinking was not a process of
secularisation, but of profanation: the escape of a sacred medium from its
place in the established shrines, and its successful propagation in new loci.
It was a redeployment of the religious properties associated with drinking
rituals and more generally with the consumption of psychoactive sub-
stances.
   Such a redeployment of the resources of the sacred is a characteristic
feature of certain types of social change, as Edmund Leach has pointed out
in the contrast between what he calls 'icons of orthodoxy' and 'icons of sub-
version' (Leach 1983). Leach argues that superficially similar sets of beliefs
and symbols can be used in radically different ways. He draws attention to
two contrasting theologies in the early history of the Christian church,
before and after its adoption as a state religion. 'One of these can serve to
support the legitimacy of an established hierarchical political authority,
the other is appropriate for an under-privileged minority seeking justifi-
cation for rebellion against established authority' (Leach 1983, 84). These
theologies are based on different conceptions of the relationship between
God and Man, through the mediation either of sacrifice or of direct
inspiration. In the former:
  The mediator is a human being, the priest of the sacrifice, who acts on
  behalf of a lay congregation. The sacrificial rite is viewed as an 'offer-
  ing' to the Deity, and the priest, who stands in a superior position to his
  congregation, is in a suppliant status vis a vis the Deity ... In the second
  pattern it is God who takes the initiative by offering grace to the faith-
  ful. The individual devotee is directly inspired. The charisma is a direct
  gift from God which is in no way dependent on the efficacy of a
  mediating human priest. (Ibid., 67)
This model neatly summarises a continuing duality within the Christian
church, in which the second mode was to reappear with the Reformation;
but it can also be applied more generally in the sociology of religion: Leach
points to analogies between his second pattern and protest movements such
as the cargo cults of Melanesia, the Ghost Dance, and the Taiping rebels of
nineteenth-century China. Viewed in this light, the transition from TRB to
Corded Ware has certain formal analogies with the Protestant Reformation
in the same area 4500 years later: the shift from a hierarchical model with
a mediating priesthood and elaborate shrines intended to last in perpetuity,


                                        423




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                  SACRED      AND    PROFANE      SUBSTANCES:


to an emphasis on personal salvation, individual responsibility, architectural
and liturgical simplification, often with a millenarian perspective of impend-
ing cosmic change. It was also, of course, marked by a shift from a female
imagery - expressed in devotion to the Virgin Mary - to an exclusively
male imagery consistent with a strengthening of patriarchal authority.
    The parallel should not be pressed beyond its usefulness, but it is a
provocative analogy for the formal contrast between earlier and later Neo-
lithic Europe. Investment in sacred places and sharply defined sacred events
was characteristic of megalithic and monument-building societies with their
plentiful traces of 'ritual' activity in the form of enclosures, astronomical
alignments, esoteric paraphernalia, pits and sacrificial offerings - the resi-
dues of public ceremonies. TRB and Grooved Ware belong to this category.
Its perspective was one of cyclical change within eternal changelessness, in
which access to the sacred was constrained to specific times and places.
These would have provided the rhythms within which everyday life was
organised, including the slaughter of livestock and the exchange of goods
and marriage partners. This pattern was subverted by one in which the
sacred was no longer tied to ritual cycles and specially constructed shrines.
The perspective of time was shorter, and did not require such permanent
monuments; while the burial-mounds (and perhaps also the patterns of
exchange) were organised in terms of particular events, rather than being
accommodated to a predetermined cycle.34 Opportunity and mobility re-
placed predictable regularity. This attitude began in northern Europe with
Corded Ware, and penetrated, initially as a minority ideology, into areas
such as Denmark. 35 The older pattern survived longer in the west, where
a similar pattern of penetration was repeated with Bell-Beakers.
    This way of thinking about the problem is particularly instructive be-
cause it situates ideological change within a social and economic context.
Leach instances the rise of a new economic class, 'a self-identifiable com-
munity which can readily be led to perceive itself as alienated from the
interests of the paramount political power' (Leach 1983, 71). This descrip-
tion accords well with the situation that can be reconstructed in the later
Neolithic of northern Europe. The increasing areas of pasture opened up by
deforestation, following the introduction of plough 36 agriculture, made
possible more flexible economic and social arrangements involving a larger
role for animal-keeping. It was to those parts of the population involved in
herding activities that such a revolutionary ideology would have made its
appeal. The transfer of legitimacy and social power to such nascent political
groupings, however, required the capture of means of access to the super-
natural, and its liberation from the established fana: the profanation (but
not secularisation) of psychoactive substances, and especially alcoholic
drink.
  True or not, this parable offers a model for the relationship between
economic, social and ideological change. Ritual is not an autonomous


                                        424




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

  THE   RITUAL    USE    OF   NARCOTICS       IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC       EUROPE


domain, obeying only the laws of structural symmetry; it can be, and is, one
of the levers by which groups within society attain ascendance and temporal
power. Nor is its metaphorical content arbitrary, for the images of family
relationships and 'female' values are important in constructing wider con-
cepts of community and social order on a consensual basis, while warrior
images and 'male' values are important in breaking up and realigning such
groupings, with the more explicit threat of force. Each produces its own
ritual and iconography, sometimes (perhaps even typically) by the trans-
formation or partial inversion of its predecessor. While the first pattern is
perhaps easier to recognise as more formally 'religious', it would be a mis-
take to categorise the second as simply 'secular'.
   Is it, then, 'profane'? Yes, from the point of view of a stable orthodoxy,
with shrines and sacrifices; but not from the point of view of the subversives,
for whom the concept has no meaning in a world scheme which is structured
on different principles, and in which shrines as such do not exist. Pro-
fanation as a process, therefore, is characteristic of the transition from one
type of system to the other, which then redefines the world in its own terms.
  Treason doth never prosper; where's the reason?
  If it do prosper, none dare call it treason.
Successful profanity, like successful treason, rewrites its own history.


[On a visit to the Soviet Union in July 1990, two strands of this argument
came together in an unexpected way. Discussing Prehistoric narcotics
above, I mentioned finds of Cannabis sativa from 'pipe-cups' in the Early
Bronze Age of eastern Europe, without knowing quite what this term im-
plied. Later on in the same section, I singled out polypod bowls or braziers
as a typical inter-cultural form of the kind likely to have been associated
with narcotics. I was therefore delighted to learn that the term kurilnitsa,
which had been translated as 'pipe-cup', was in fact the common Russian
term used to describe such footed bowls, and that they are interpreted as
small braziers. The connection between these two lines of evidence has, in
fact, been completed. These forms begin, in the Pontic steppe region, in the
period from c.4000 to 3600 BC. This is the period when cord-impressed
ornament appears, for the first time, on the Pontic steppes, before spreading
westwards with Globular Amphorae. This considerably strengthens the
arguments, presented in Chapter 15, for an association between corded
ornament and the use of Cannabis as a fibre-plant and potentially as a
narcotic.]

[In the Proceedings     of the Society of Antiquaries      of Scotland for 1993 is
the information which answers my question in the section on The ceramic
evidence: 2. eating and drinking above, concerning Grooved Ware - which


                                        425




                 This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                    SACRED    AND    PROFANE           SUBSTANCES:


                                                          Balfarg / Balbirnie




                           ® i j F 1 0 0 2
                conjoining  \                   .
                 sherds    ^ w?
                  of P63

                                                        STRUCTURE 1
            0        10m         v    /                (open enclosure
            1          i                            for corpse exposure?)

                      CONTEXTS OF DISCOVERY
16.10 The Grooved Ware vessel from Balfarg/Balbirnie with preserved food-
residues; the plan shows the features inside and outside Structure 1 (an open
timber enclosure) which yielded sherds of this vessel [new drawing, after Barclay
and Russell-White 1993].
I suggested should contain something 'more sugary, spicy or exciting (even
narcotic) than was encountered in secular existence'. A botanical report by
B. Moffatt (in Barclay and Russell-White 1993, 108-10) on the carbonised
residue preserved in a pot from Balfarg Riding School, Glenrothes, Fife
(Figure 16.10) describes it as representing a porridge-like substance pre-
pared from barley and oats, sweetened with honey (minute droplets of
beeswax were observed) and flavoured with meadowsweet (Filipendula
ulmaria), with other potherbs such as fat hen (Chenopodium album), and


                                          426




                  This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

   THE    RITUAL     USE    OF   NARCOTICS         IN   LATER    NEOLITHIC        EUROPE


some species of Brassica and one of the Umbelliferae (probably as a condi-
ment), and a little flax (perhaps as oil). The cereals were identifiable from
seeds, the other herbs from pollen. One further plant was indicated both by
seed remains and pollen, in some quantity: henbane, Hyoscyamus niger.
Sweet, spicy and narcotic: using a classic 'Saturnian herb', long associated
with witchcraft. Was this also the food dispensed from the TRB 'fruitstand'?
A further article is in preparation ...]

NOTES

 1.1 use the term 'narcotic' to cover a range of psychoactive substances including some
    which are more correctly described as stimulants. Despite the fact that the technical
    meanings of the two words are in fact quite opposite (i.e. sleep-inducing versus arousing),
    their usage is now irremediably confused - largely for bureaucratic and legal reasons!
    I have avoided the word 'drug', which is best applied to the refined substances. The
    opening remarks of this paper were prepared for general discussion at the conference;
    the paper itself was written afterwards. I must thank the organisers and editors for their
    invitation to contribute, and especially Paul Garwood for his perceptive comments on
    the text.
 2. The literal meaning of secular is 'lasting for an age1 (cf. in saecula saeculorum, 'for ever
    and ever'): the idea of continuity is opposed to periodic or cyclical occurrence, as in the
    term 'secular trend' (i.e. a continuous, long-term process). The sacred, on the other hand,
    is characterised by regular^ periodic, rites and festivals, usually on an annual cycle.
 3. As did the now extinct Shakespearian exclamation 'Zwounds!' ('by God's Wounds').
    Such expressions imply a Catholic theology, which is one reason why they have atrophied
    in a largely Protestant context. The difference between Catholic and Protestant theologies
    in this respect is an example of a more fundamental contrast in religious attitudes, to
    which I shall return at the conclusion of this paper; for in this more abstract form it has
    a surprising relevance to Neolithic Europe.
 4. A similar pattern can be discerned in words for other emotionally charged but culturally
    regulated activities, such as sex. Thefirstunexpurgated edition of D. H. Lawrence's Lady
    Chatterley's Lover contained, if I remember rightly, a preface by Richard Hoggart in
    which he neatly exemplified the change of role in the word for which that text was then
    chiefly famous. A soldier returning from service abroad, was reported as saying: 'Three
    effing months in effing Africa and what do I effing-wellfind?My wife engaged in illicit
    cohabitation with another man.' I quote from memory. The whole point of Lawrence's
    novel was to reassert the sanctity of the sexual act and to rescue its terminology from
    casual profanation, as many eminent witnesses pointed out at the trial of its publisher,
    Penguin Books, in 1960.
 5. Note, for example, the political dimension (and hence the historical significance) of
    events such as the 'Profanation of the Eleusinian Mysteries' by Alcibiades in 415 BC.
 6. There is an analogy here in Catholic practice in the appropriate treatment of the con-
    secrated wafer if the communicant fails to digest it; a regurgitated wafer should be burnt.
    (I have a similar attitude to the Christmas tree after it has been ritually decorated and is
    then unceremoniously taken down after Twelfth Night - it seems inappropriate just to
    consign it to the dustbin, so I usually burn it.)
 7. The killing of animals has always been an act of social significance. In hunting and forag-
    ing societies, the meat is typically shared among the group, while gathered products are
    consumed by individual family units. In many farming and pastoral societies, the relative
    rarity with which domestic livestock was slaughtered (by comparison with the more
    regular flow of vegetable- and secondary-products) has often made it a principal event
    within the periodic observances of the ritual cycle. In some societies, all slaughter is
    sacrifice, and can only take place within the context of the sacred, after appropriate kinds


                                             427




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       SACRED      AND    PROFANE       SUBSTANCES:

    of purification. This is likely to have been one of the activities which took place at Neo-
    lithic ceremonial centres. (It is worth remembering that a 'sacrificial stone knife' was
    discovered within a niche within one of the altars in the Tarxien temple in Malta.) Such
    structures could perhaps be envisaged as elaborate abattoirs, much as certain Near
    Eastern Bronze Age temples contain metallurgical debris and must have operated as
    foundries: their categorisation as 'religious' structures should not exclude a range of
    activities which we would now think of as purely mundane.
 8. As noted before, I use the word in its colloquial sense, to include all psychoactive sub-
    stances, including stimulants, inebriants, etc. - in fact, the complex mixtures of organic
    compounds which occur naturally in plants often combine several of these properties.
 9. The date, on esparto grass, is 5400 ± 80 BP (CSIC-246).
10. The seeds, being the most resistant, form the carbonised residue - the flowers and leaves,
    which have the greatest concentration of cannabinol, having been burnt away. Unfortu-
    nately the 'pipe-cup' was not illustrated.
11.1 am grateful to Istvan Ecsedy for pointing out these finds, whose significance he drew
    attention to in 1979.
12. Substances such as birch-bark resin were also chewed, as indicated by an Alpine lake-
    village find with toothmarks!
13. Focus = 'hearth'; the metaphor is not accidental.
14. Finally, and beyond the chronological scope of this paper; one should note the occurrence
    of comparable artefacts in earlier Bronze Age contexts in Britain: the 'Aldbourne cups' -
    some with perforated sides - and related 'grape-cups' or 'incense cups' that are associated
    with 'rich' burials of the Wessex culture in Britain (e.g. Gerloff 1975). These have long
    been interpreted as small braziers for aromatic substances (though I am not aware of any
    suggestion of a narcotic use), and apparently represent a more localised cult/elite practice
    than the 'inter-cultural' forms discussed above, which seem to relate to thefirstspread of
    specific types of narcotic use over long distances.
15. Thomas Harriot observed just such a point-based cooking pot in Virginia in 1590: 'Their
    woemen know how to make earthen vessels with special Cuninge and that so large and
    fine, that our potters with [their] wheels can make no better ... After they have put them
    uppon an heape of erthe to stay them from fallinge, they putt wood under[,] which being
    kindled ... they or their woemen fill the vessel with water; and put in fruite,fleshand fish,
    and let all boil together like a gallimaufrye which the Spaniarde call, olla podrida.' This
    he contrasts favourably with the complexity of contemporary European cooking, which
    he considers responsible for 'many kynes of diseases which wee fall into by sumtwous
    and unseasonable blanketts, continually devisinge new sawces, and provocation of
    gluttonye to satisfie our insatiable appetite' (D. B. Quinn, The Roanoke Voyages,
    London: The Hakluyt Society, Ser. II, Vol. 104,1955). This neatly summarises both the
    polarity between 'primitive' and 'civilised' cuisine, and also the strain of iconoclastic
    utopianism (usually espoused by a rising bourgeoisie) which can potentially challenge this
    elite cultural elaboration and seeks a return to the purity of the primitive. Modern
    organically grown wholefoods are a good example of this in practice. For the anthro-
    pological significance of this polarity, see the final section of this article.
16. The Saale-Mittelelbegebiet (Starling 1985).
17. Although such vessels are often associated with tombs, they should not be considered
    as 'tomb pottery' in the sense of being specially made for burial (like Greek vases for
    Etruscan tombs!); rather, they occur as offerings, usually in the forecourt, and should
    thus be seen as ritual food containers in the context of a feast that included the dead.
    Such vessels may be poorly represented on settlement sites, except those larger or
    centrally placed sites where communal ceremonies took place.
18. This article should be considered as complementary to the present paper, and I have tried
    to avoid repeating its arguments. It is shortly to be reprinted without the many editorial
    alterations and deficiencies which marred its publication in 1987.
19. Compare the flagon, cruets and chalice of the Christian communion-set. Other pieces of
     standardised 'ritual' equipment, in a modern, secular context, would include the silver


                                              428




                      This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

   THE    RITUAL     USE    OF   NARCOTICS         IN   LATER   NEOLITHIC         EUROPE

    cocaine-spoons, made by expensive jewellers and occasionally worn as neck ornaments
    by the smart set; or even the standardised shape of the Coca-Cola bottle (which now
    contains neither coca nor kola, though originally it was made of both these stimulants).
    Psychoactive substances, whether sacred or profane, create their own material culture.
20. The symbolic significance of intoxicants in relation to specific, competing ideological
    systems is well exemplified in the contrast between Judaeo-Christian wine and Islamic
    cannabis.
21. This probably excludes alcohol, but might still contain opium, cannabis, or other psycho-
    active herbs. A similar transformation from drink to food is indicated in the British Early
    Bronze Age by the shift from Bell-Beakers to Food Vessels, which Professor Hawkes has
    suggested might contain a substance such as frumenty.
22. Both, incidentally, skeuomorphs of organic containers - made perhaps of leather on a
    withy framework - which may have their origin in native (ultimately Mesolithic?) vessels.
    This is pursued further in Sherratt (in prep.).
23. The collared flask, however, continued its inter-cultural spread westwards, to appear in
    the TRB West Group in the Netherlands and in SOM contexts in northern France shortly
    after it disappeared from Denmark (Huysecom 1986).
24. Symbolising, if not actually accompanying, wheeled vehicles of the kind represented in
    the Szigetszentmarton and Budakalasz models, which were themselves handled cups.
25. This pit is No. 107, and was excavated in 1952. Another pit, No. 119, apparently similar
    and containing 19-25 skeletons, was found in 1949 but not recorded in detail. Other
    remains of the Baden culture on the hill included the ovens and hearths of a domestic
    settlement, and many storage pits. Two smaller pits also contained double graves, one
    that of two infants, one of an infant and an adult.
26. An alternative, but rather less likely, explanation is that they were mummified. For other
    mass 'ritual' burials, though in an explicitly elite context, see Woolley's account of the
    'death pits' at Ur, and more generally such royal graves with slaughtered retainers as the
    Shang royal tombs at Anyang.
27. The parting drink, or cup of farewell; the final song of Mahler's Das Lied von der Erde,
    translating a Chinese poem, uses it as a symbol of release from earthly cares.
28.1 cannot resist the observation that such a sacrifice would be the structural inverse of the
    Christian Eucharist, whose cup offers life and the grace procured by the sacrifice of the
    Crucifixion. What both rites have in common, however, is a union of the themes of
    drinking and sacrifice.
29. See my forthcoming article on Neo-megalithism (Sherratt in prep.) for a justification
    of this statement. In France, such structures are associated with a specifically female
    iconography (breasts, 'guardian goddesses').
30. See the article Trommel in J. Filip (ed.) Enzyklopadisches Handbuch zur Ur- und
    Friihgeschichte Europas, 2, 1494 (Prague 1969), and further references therein, especially
    Seewald and Mildenberger.
31. Loud noise may be associated with events in the other world: cf. the 'Last Trump'.
32. The occurrence of drinking vessels in graves and their use in communal ritual are not, of
    course, mutually exclusive: priests in medieval times were sometimes buried with a token
    chalice of non-precious metal, often of lead.
33. The classic Corded Ware (Single Grave) sequence is a progression from earth graves to
    tumuli: 'Under-graves' (Untergraber); 'Ground-graves' (Bodengraber); 'Over-graves'
    (Obergraber) in the body of the barrow: i.e. from simple pits to a new, though simpler,
    form of monumentality.
34. There is a direct analogy here with the change in the concept of time which came about
    with the Reformation: the other-worldly, ritual time of the Medieval church was
    challenged by the bourgeois concern for commodified time and opportunistic trade.
    Usury was condemned by the church as 'selling time'. See Jacques Le Goff, Time, Work
    and Culture in the Middle Ages (Chicago, 1980), esp. pp. 59-61. Perhaps bronze hoards
    fit into an 'opportunistic' pattern, rather than a 'cyclical' one (unlike Neolithic 'ritual'
    deposits of pots and axe 'hoards'?).


                                             429




                     This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                       SACRED     AND    PROFANE        SUBSTANCES:

35. There is not space here to go into detail, but there is considerable evidence that the
    Corded Ware 'culture* began in Jutland while the final phases of TRB (V and perhaps IV)
    dominated in the Danish Islands. (Denmark often shows this regional pattern, as it did
    with EN longbarrows: Sherratt 1990.) While there is a similar chronological overlap in
    the Netherlands between Corded Ware and TRB phases F and G, the contrast is con-
    textual rather than regional. After c.2700 BC (in the 'Ground-grave' phase) the Corded
    Ware pattern became the single dominant one in both areas. A similar pattern of limited
    penetration, ideological competition and recruitment, and finally total subversion, can be
    reconstructed for Bell-Beakers in Britain. It was at this point that many of the
    monumental tombs were blocked and symbolically sealed.
36. Like such symbols as drinking and the use of wheeled vehicles, the plough in northern
    and western Europe was initially absorbed into traditional social structures, and was
    associated during the MN period of TRB with a settlement system based on stable and
    long-lasting patterns of land use associated with large settlements or megaliths and ritual
    enclosures, of the kind established by the initial, horticultural, communities. Only with
    the ideological transition to Corded Ware was the potential fluidity of the new economy
    unleashed. ('Religion* retarding 'progress', as Gordon Childe would have described it!)




                      This content downloaded from 128.122.149.9 on Fri, 28 Aug 2020 03:26:17 UTC
                                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

                                          17
