Copyright © Timothy Insoll 1999
The right of Timothy Insoll to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
First published 1999
Transferred to digital print 2004

4

r

24681097531
Blackwell Publishers Ltd
108 Cowley Road
Oxford 0X4 IJF
UK
Blackwell Publishers Inc.
350 Main Street
Maiden, Massachusetts 02148
USA
All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the purposes of criticism
and review, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording
or otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that it
shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated
without the publisher’s prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in
which it is published and without a similar condition including this condition being
imposed on the subsequent purchaser.

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Insoll, Timothy.
The archaeology of IslamJTimothy Insoll.
(Social archaeology)
cm.
p.
Includes bibliographical references (p.
) and index.
ISBN 0—631—20115—7 (pbk.)
ISBN 0—631—20114—9 (he.).
1. Civilization, Islamic. 2. Social archaeology—Islamic
countries. 3. Material culture—Islamic countries. 4. Muslims—
Social life and customs. I. Title. II. Series.
DS36.855.147
1999
98—26727
909’.097671—dc2l
CIP
—

—

Typeset in Stemple Garamond on 10.5/12 Pt
by Pure Tech India Ltd, Pondicherry, http://www.puretech.com
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Marston Book Services Limited, Oxford
This book is printed on acid-free paper

This book is dedicated to Rachel

Contents

ix
xi

List of Figures
List of Plates
Acknowledgements

xiii

Introduction

1

Aims and Objectives
Islamic Archaeology: a Brief Critique
The Role of the Scholar: Archaeology and Religion
Islam and Islams
Annales Theory and Archaeological Practicalities
Geographical, Temporal and Material Ranges
Islam: Origins, Requirements and Components
Muslim Diversity: Mystics, Wahhabiyyah and Taliban
The Individual and the ‘Islamic Way of Life’

1
3
7
9
12
13
17
21
24

The Mosque

26

Scales of Analysis: Structuring Principles and Cultural
Diversity
Structuring Principles: the Mosque
Cultural Diversity: Regional Traditions
The Archaeological Study of the Mosque
Places of Prayer and Muslim Religious Identity
Summary and Conclusions

27
28
33
33
49
58

The Domestic Environment

60

An Ideal Islamic Domestic Environment
Archaeological Recognition

62
66

1

2
p

3

viii

4

5

6

7

8

CONTENTS

Archaeology, Domestic Space and Social Use
Summary and Conclusions

90

Muslim Life

93

Food and Drink
Education and Health
Pilgrimage and Travel
Personal Possessions and Dress
Magic and Talismanic Protection
War
Summary and Conclusions

94
108
109
116
124
128
131

Art, Trade and Ideas

133

Islamic Art or Art of Muslims: Background and
Components
Visual Imagery
The Transmission of Muslim Iconography and Other Ideas
Coinage
Trade Routes and Trade Goods
The Transmission of Islamic ‘Civilization’
Summary and Conclusions

134
144
148
149
151
162
165

Death and Burial

166

Muslim Burial: Ideals and Origins
The Place of the Dead
Tombs for the Living and the Dead
Funerary Epigraphy: the Language of Death
The Apple and the Olive
The Archaeology of Paradise
Summary and Conclusions

167
169
176
187
195
197
199

The Community Environment

201

77

Muslim Cities and Settlements
Social Dimension of the Muslim Settlement
A Total Approach: the Landscape
The Contemporary and Future Situation
Summary and Conclusions

218
224
225

An Archaeology of Islam?

227

References
Index

Figures

1.1

1.2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4

202
207

233
262

3.5
4.1
4.2
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5

Map of approximate extent of former or currently
14
Muslim-dominated areas in Europe
The Islamic world AD 600—1924: a simplified chronology
16
showing the major dynasties
Stylized plan of mosque components in an ‘ideal’ mosque 30
34
Simplified plan of types of mosque.
The position of the mosque in relation to the palace,
35
Madinat al-Zahra, Spain
48
Simple dry-stone mosque, Hoggar, central Sahara
Minaret built in pagoda style, Niu Jie mosque, Beijing,
52
China
Plan of the interior of the Mawson Road mosque,
57
Cambridge
Stereotypical layout of an idealized Muslim courtyard
63
house
66
Spatial domains in Isfahan
70
in
Vertical utilization of space a San’a tower house
from
mud-hut
pup
Evolutionary sequence
tent to
75
compound in Afghanistan
86
a
Algeria
Interior of Berber house,
112
Pilgrimage routes in Arabia
113
Plan of Aidhab, Sudan
140
basmala
Forms of
in kufic script
Three types of figural representation achieved through
calligraphy
141
Al-Buraq image
145
Simplified map of trade routes
154
161
Cemeteries in the Niger bend region, Mali

X

FIGURES

6.1
6.2

Grave clothes formerly used in Palestine
171
Alignment of Muslim burial section in comparison to the
predominantly Christian burials in the Newmarket Road
Cemetery, Cambridge
174
6.3 Bilingual tombstone in Chinese and Arabic from
Quanzhou, China
191
7.1 Stereotypical city layout based on Tunis
203
7.2 Reconstruction of the round city, Baghdad
209
7.3 The Octagon of Husn al-Qadisiyya
210
7.4 Plan of Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
214

-ni
1

iates

Former mosque, now Church of St John, Almeria, Spain
Decorated columns from a Hindu building re-used in the
Quwwut ul-Islam mosque, Delhi
2.3 Ostrich eggshell displayed on the Sidi Yahya mosque,
Timbuktu, Mali
2.4 Sacrifice remains in a mihrab, Green Island, Massawa,
Eritrea
2.5 The Dome of the Rock, Jerusalem
2.6 Former mosque, Chesterton Road, Cambridge
3.1 Mashrabiyya, Massawa, Eritrea
3.2 Kazakh family in front of tent, early twentieth century
4.1 Halal butchers, Kom Ombo, Egypt
4.2 Songhai women cooking in Gao, Mali
4.3 Qur’an school, Rakai District, Uganda
4.4 Various personal items from Ottoman period levels
at Qasr Ibrim, Egypt
4.5 Higab (amulet) contents from Qasr Ibrim, Egypt
4.6 War scene from The Khamsa of Nizami
5.1 Tombstone, Dahlak Kebir, Eritrea
5.2 Salt caravan, Gao, Mali
6.1 The Taj Mahal, Agra
6.2 Qubbas from the air, Old Dongola, Sudan
6.3 Ottoman tombstones, Hadarpasha cemetery, Istanbul
6.4 Muslim cemetery, Borneo
7.1 The citadel and later town, Daulatabad, India
7.2 Bathing scene from The Khamsa of Nizami
2.1
2.2

37
39
43
44
50
56
65
72
98
105
108
119
126
129
139
160
179
185
193
194
221
223

Acknowledgements

Various people have helped directly or indirectly in many ways to
bring this volume to fruition, and I would like to take this opportun
ity to thank them. Particular thanks are due to Henri Medard for
providing such a convivial environment for the initial idea to take
shape in his flat in Paris; to the series editor, Ian Hodder, for his
encouragement and faith in the project; to the six original anonymous
reviewers for making this volume more cohesive; and to Rachel
Maclean, Faraj el-Rashedy, David Edwards, John Alexander, Jo
Bruck, Ian Hodder, Helen Watson, and Andrew Petersen for reading
and commenting on all or parts of the text. Louise Martin and Kevin
Rielly provided much valuable information on faunal analysis; Ven
etia Porter (Department of Oriental Antiquities, British Museum)
provided references on seals; and Talib Ali, then a student at St John’s
College, very kindly made possible my visits to the Cambridge
mosque and introduced me to members of the Muslim community
there, while the Manager of Cambridge Crematorium and Cemeteries
kindly allowed me to see the plan of Newmarket Road Cemetery. Dr
Abdullah al-Sharekh and the Reverend Steven Shakespear discussed
various issues with me in the early stages of my research.
I have also benefited from discussions with Harry Norris, Paulo
Farias, Robin Coningham and Jo Bruck. For hospitality and assist
ance during various visits made while undertaking this research, I
would like to thank: in Gibraltar and Spain, Clive and Geraldine
Finlayson; in India, Vicky Singh; in Eritrea, Yassin Adem, Drs
Yoseph Libsekal, Chris Hillman and Charles Spence; in Turkey,’ Dr
Rachel Maclean; in Mali, Nafogo Coulibaly, Dr Téréba Togola, Massa
Diarra, Jo Lee, Elmoctar Toure, Dr Klena Sanogo and Dr Mamadi
Dembele. If I have neglected anyone who has helped, I apologize.

X1V

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I am also grateful to St John’s College, Cambridge, for funding
various research visits, and to Nick Hollaway, and Abigail and
Pamela Insoll for preparing the illustrations.
Every effort has been made to trace copyright holders. The author
and publisher would like to apologize in advance for any inadvertent
use of copyright material, and thank the following individuals and
organizations who have kindly given their permission to reproduce
copyright material.
For figures: 1.2 (Simplified chronology), courtesy of the Trustees of
the British Museum. 2.2 (Types of mosque), courtesy of Martin
Frishman and Thames and Hudson. 3.3 (San’a tower house), courtesy
of the Centre of Middle Eastern Studies, University of Cambridge.
3.4 (Afghan structural evolution), courtesy of Garland Publishing,
New York. 3.5 (Berber house), courtesy of Professor Pierre Bourdieu.
5.1 (forms of Basmala), courtesy of Professor Annemarie Schimmel
and E. J. Brill Publishers, Leiden. 6.2 (Cambridge cemetery), courtesy
of the cemeteries manager, Cambridge City Council. 7.2 (Round
City), courtesy of Wayne State University Press, Detroit.
For plates: 2.1 (Almeria mosque), courtesy of Dr Peter Mitchell,
Pitt-Rivers Museum, Oxford. 3.2 (Kazakh family) and 6.4 (Borneo
cemetery), courtesy of the Cambridge University Museum of
Archaeology and Anthropology. 4.2 (women cooking), courtesy of
Dr Rachel Maclean. 4.4 and 4.5 (Qasr Ibrim objects), courtesy of the
Egypt Exploration Society. 4.6 (war scene) and 7.2 (bathing scene) by
permission of the Master and Fellows of St John’s College, Cam
bridge. 5.1 (tombstone, Eritrea), courtesy of Dr Charles Spence. 5.2
(salt caravan), courtesy of Mrs Anna Bennett. 6.2 (qubbas), courtesy
of the Library, Institute of Archaeology, University College, London.

Note on sources, orthography, pronunciation and dating It
should be noted that the translation of the Qur’an used throughout
this volume is that by Dawood (1993), while the spelling of Arabic
words in English, italicization and capitalization largely follow
Waines (1995). Likewise, for simplicity’s sake, and following Lind
holm (1996), no attempt has been made to include diacritical marks
which would give the proper pronunciation of the Arabic words,
except in a few instances. Readers are referred to Arabic—English
dictionaries for correct orthography. The CE (Common Era), BCE
(Before Common Era) dating system has been adopted, and all dates
are CE unless otherwise specified.

1

Introduction

Have they not heard the histories of those who have gone before them?
The fate of Noah’s people and of Thamud and Ad; of Abraham’s
people and the people of Midian and the Ruined Cities.
Q ur’an. Repentance 9: 70

Aims and Objectives
This volume takes as its starting premiss that the study of the material
remains left by adherents of the Islamic faith across many regions of
the world deserves to be better known by all those interested in the
past. It also accepts that Islam, the religion, exists as a definable,
cross-culturally applicable entity: a set of religious beliefs which
have been adapted and interpreted across the world depending on
cultural context. In other words, we can see Islam as a uniform
superstructure composed of the fundamentals of belief, with a diverse
substructure of practices, cultures and their material manifestations
below. Thus, the presence of a Muslim community should be recog
nizable in the archaeological record, for being a Muslim should gen
erate certain types of material culture, specific to the faith, and
reflecting its doctrines and its requirements of the believer. This, in
turn, means that categories of archaeological evidence can exist, from
the Atlantic to Central Asia, which could indicate the presence of a
Muslim community. Yet how these categories are manifest will be
extremely diverse. This notion will be explored with reference to
how Muslim life is structured by the Qur’an (to Muslims, the Word
of God revealed to the Prophet Muhammad through the Angel
Gabriel), hadith (sayings and actions of the Prophet Muhammad as

2

3

INTRODUCTION

INTRODUCTION

remembered and recorded by his companions) and shari’ah (Islamic
law): namely, is the ideal reflected in practical reality?
The oft-quoted maxim, usually from a secular Western viewpoint,
that, ‘Islam is more than just a religion but a way of life’ has funda
mental implications for archaeology, implying religious influence
beyond the frequently considered domains of places of worship and
treatment of the dead. This notion will be considered with specific
reference to a wide range of material (much of which is frequently
ignored). This includes the religious environment (the mosque); the
physical environment (cities and other settlement types); the domestic
environment (in all its many forms); death and burial; art, design,
manufacturing and trade; and other aspects of Muslim life which are
often neglected, including diet, pilgrimage, warfare and magic. As
well as examining the issue of whether Islam can be seen to exert an
influence on all areas of life as represented by material culture, atten
tion will be paid to evaluating the evidence and its archaeological
recognition from a practical perspective, thus demonstrating that
Muslim communities are recognizable archaeologically. Yet it is not
the objective of this volume to generate an essentialist image of Islam,
Muslims and their material culture. Broad categories are considered,
numerous exceptions exist and have existed, the pre-Islamic heritage
is often considerable and great diversity is manifest.
The second aim of this study is to illustrate the richness and
diversity of Islamic material culture through a series of case studies,
but without recourse to providing typologies of monument forms,
pottery types and so on, topics which have often been approached
elsewhere. Our concern will be to place Islamic material culture
within its social context, and the emphasis will be upon interpretation
and the importance of studies of material culture as a way of further
ing our understanding of Muslim societies in the past. To achieve this,
we need to be selective and adopt a multi-disciplinary approach. In
this respect, Islamic archaeologists are in a privileged position: a
wealth of anthropological, historical and sociological evidence is
available in addition to the archaeology; all can help in developing
hypotheses and aiding interpretations. A further, and fundamental,
advantage enjoyed by the archaeologist of Islam is the fact that Islam
is a living religion and, although great changes are affecting contem
porary Muslim material culture, the core doctrines have altered little
since the first century of Islam, facilitating our understanding of the
tenets of the religion. All this can help us to breathe life into the
subject.
Finally, while many readers will know something of Islam, I hope
that those with a greater knowledge of the religion and its history will

excuse the stating of facts that are basic to the discussion. In many
ways this volume has to assume a variety of identities: part textbook,
part review and part theoretical study. It is also necessary to consider
the present state of our knowledge, and the perspectives that I bring
to the study.
Islamic Archaeology: a Brief Critique
Various criticisms can be made of Islamic archaeology as it presently
exists, which impinge upon its position as an essential component of
the discipline of archaeology. First, there has been an element of
separation between the study of Islamic archaeology and other areas
of archaeology through the simple fact that Islamic archaeologists
have tended, perhaps not surprisingly, to be based within specialist
departments, something which has both advantages and disadvan
tages. Scholars well versed in Arabic and other relevant languages
are grouped together, and much admirable and often very specialized
research is produced, but such departments can be seen as rather
limited and there is an element of academic pigeonholing, with ‘Isla
mic’ and other ‘exotic’ archaeological studies placed away from the
received mainstream and thus made to appear remote, inaccessible
and different.
This separation of Islamic and other branches of archaeology is
unfortunate as a closer working relationship would benefit all in a
variety of ways:
•
•
•

by reaching a larger community than those who consciously
choose to study what is often perceived as the ‘exotic’;
by realizing that the archaeology of such an influential religion is
of great import and significance;
by creating in European and American contexts an atmosphere of
mutual understanding thrQugh learning from each other and
drawing upon each other’s experiences.

Thus improved methodologies could be developed for the study of all
religions and for archaeology in general. Furthermore, it would help
in appreciating that much of the past has been shared, rather than
divided up into polarized insular, continental or regional blocks. Such
closer working relationships might also assist in reducing criticism
that a tradition of occidental scholarship within the ‘orientalist’ vein
continues (Said 1978): a well-documented creation of Western his
toriography, evoking stereotypical images of Islam, for example in

4

INTRODUCTION

stressing decadence, luxury, the harem and bizarre sexual
practices,
and creating an exotic ‘other’ set in opposition to a superior
Western
world. Similarly, an isolated scholarly tradition does little
to refute
an alternative and increasingly common Western view of
Islam,
assisted by the media, as a religion of intolerance, restriction,
radical
ism and, stereotypically, associated with terrorism and Kalash
nikov
rifles.
Criticism can also be levelled at the way in which Islamic archae
ology has developed. First, many studies have been inclined
to con
centrate upon one aspect of material culture (architecture,
art and so
on) or to be very site or regionally specific, without considering
wider context, even though the necessary data might be availab the
le for
such a study to proceed. Where larger studies have been undert
aken,
frequently no attempt is made to integrate other forms of
evidence,
anthropological, historical or sociological. A multi-disciplin
ary
approach is largely lacking, leading to a one-dimensional
emphasis
in research. Much new information about Islamic societies
can be
gained through the study of the archaeological record, but,
unfortu
nately, excavation reports, the bedrock of research, often lack
inter
pretation, their appeal is limited and hence are little used
by the
non-archaeologist. This further impedes the development
of
Islamic archaeology which is multi-disciplinary in outlook, an
restricting theoretical debate, a required starting-point. Secondby
ly,
the process of self-examination which has been undertaken in
other
fields of archaeology has largely passed Islamic archaeology by.
Isla
mic archaeology has tended to fall behind those fields of archae
ology
where advances have been made in theoretical studies and in
what is
best termed ‘social archaeology’.
However, these are not problems unique to Islamic archaeology.
Medieval European archaeology, chosen as it is broadly compa
rable
chronologically, has suffered, or in certain cases continues to
suffer,
from similar problems of theoretical and practical isolation, as well
as
a perceived inferiority of archaeological evidence to the written word
(Champion 1990). The main difference, however, lies in the fact
that
medieval archaeology has carried out, over the past twenty years
or
so, a profitable process of self-examination (Hinton 1983; Austin
and
Alcock 1990; Austin and Thomas 1990). Methodologically sound,
and
interesting, archaeological research is now being conducted.
Other kinds of Islamic studies have gone through the process of
re
examination and have progressed in theoretical leaps and bounds;
for
example, Islamic anthropology (see the classic studies of Geertz 1968;
Gellner 1981; Gilsenan 1982) and socio-historical studies (Eickelman
and Piscatori 1990). Although not everything put forward might be

5

INTRODUCTION

accepted, new ways of examining and describing Islamic societies are
proposed. Indeed, within this vein of self-examination by related
fields of Islamic studies, a recent paper looking into the use of
material culture studies from a historian’s perspective (Keddie 1992)
has isolated the frequent absence of a multi- or inter-disciplinary
approach. Archaeologists often ignore other available sources of evi
dence, and in a similar way the historian ignores material culture.
Further problems can be isolated. Whereas European medieval
archaeology has been shown to be subservient to history, primarily
textual, Islamic archaeology could in many cases be said to be sub
servient to art history. This point was indeed raised by Grabar (1971)
over twenty-five years ago in one of the few evaluations of Islamic
archaeology as a discipline that have been undertaken. But, unfortu
nately, this admirable sentiment was undermined by his statement
that Islamic archaeology should have as its objectives: providing the
exact features of standing monuments and the chronological and
spatial setting of objects, with archaeology as ‘an indispensable tool
for the authentication, the dating, the localisation and explanation of
works of art’ (1971: 198). To be fair, this statement was somewhat
tempered in a later, more substantial, review of both Islamic art and
archaeology (Grabar 1976), but the emphasis on Islamic archaeology
as involving cataloguing, classifying, collecting and recording, at the
expense of interpretation and theory-building, still persists in this
later paper and is accounted for by the fact that, among other reasons,
‘the humanist fears committing himself intellectually until he is sure
of himself, he fears hypotheses, mental gambles, and discussions’
(1976: 260). This position is not adopted here where hypotheses
will be advanced and various ‘mental gambles’ taken in the following
pages and is, indeed, at odds with the examples of Grabar’s elegant
and ‘socially aware’ work which will be drawn upon in the following
chapters.
Whole categories of archaeological evidence have been neglected
owing to dated research designs and methods tied to the dictates of
art history. For example, excavated material has contributed to our
understanding of the formation and development of Islamic art, but
we know very little about what was eaten in the Islamic world. The
analysis of botanical remains and faunal assemblages from Islamic
sites is under-developed, compared to the study of high-quality pot
tery, whereas the cruder everyday pottery is similarly neglected.
Economic, demographic, landscape and environmental archaeology
are all under-developed or under-utilized in Islamic archaeology.
Neglecting such evidence inevitably limits our understanding of Isla
mic civilizations by reducing the possibilities of interpretation and
—

—

6

INTRODUCTION

INTRODUCTION

biasing the picture we present. Unfortunately, much Islamic
archae
ology is still not being done to accepted modern standards.
Emphasis within Islamic archaeology is still upon major monu
ments
the great mosques, palaces and so on
and the
echelons of society to the detriment of research into the bulk upper
of the
population, the sedentary agriculturalist, the nomad and the
lower
classes of city-dwellers. What is best termed a ‘top-heavy’
Islamic
archaeology has largely been the result, whereby our
picture
skewed in favour of palace-dwellers and consumers of prestigis
e
items such as lustre pottery, rock crystal and ivory; whole
strata of
society are absent or rarely represented. It is what Austin
terms, in
the context of European medieval archaeology, the history of
‘great
events’ and ‘great men’ (1990; 10), and this is a great shame
because,
as Keddie (1992: 34) notes, material culture is ideally suited
to ‘mak
ing the silent masses speak’. This preoccupation with courtly
and
prestige production is further emphasized in the Islamic galleri
es of
most major museums where the exhibits, a fair proportion of
them
provided by archaeology, rarely represent the everyday life and
death
of most people. It is not true to say that this emphasis on the grande
r
objects draws the crowds and thus creates interest in the Islamic
past
for in many cases it is the material culture residue of the ordinary
and
the everyday with which people most identify. This aspect of
the
recent Islamic past is sometimes found in the ethnography galleri
es,
even if obviously archaeological in origin.
The relative youth of Islamic archaeology is no excuse for
the
existence of theoretically and methodologically old-fashioned techni
ques for, as already noted, comparable fields of archaeology have re
evaluated themselves quite successfully. For Islamic archaeology
to
avoid being marginalized and neglected it needs to adopt a higher
profile. The superposition of Islamic archaeological deposits with
other more ‘fashionable’ earlier ones is a case in point: archaeologists
frequently either wholly neglect or half-heartedly record Islamic
levels, in a rush to get at those beneath, the true aim of their inves
tigations. Examining the theoretical and practical role of Islamic
archaeology is a necessary step in developing a more modern
approach to the archaeology of Islam, one concerned with all aspects
of the Muslim world and society.
But why is this of importance? To end this section on a positive
note, a modern approach is indeed being achieved by some Islamic
archaeologists, and there is absolutely no reason why Islamic
archaeology cannot make a contribution to, or fully enter, the main
stream of archaeological theory and practice. It is not through neces
sity a specialist backwater, but an area of study where exciting

7

possibilities for research are offered into the material culture remains
left behind by a major, living, world religion, whose material culture,
past and present, covers much of the globe.

—

—

The Role of the Scholar: Archaeology and Religion
Undertaking such a study also raises the issue of the qualifications of
the researcher in observing and writing about Islam. The issues
surrounding Western viewpoints and scholarship on Islam have
been much analysed and debated (Said 1978; 1-lourani 1991). In
essence, does one need to be a Muslim to study Islamic archaeology?
It will be argued here that this is not the case (interestingly, support
for this was offered by all my Muslim colleagues and friends who
were consulted on the issue). Similarly, one need not be a Jew to
study Jewish archaeology or a Christian to study Christian archae
ology, though some would insist on just such a prerequisite. A more
equitable perspective, as was proposed earlier, is that we should
envisage the past as something common to us all, rather than attempt
ing to appropriate great spatial, cultural or chronological blocks as
somehow belonging to this or that group, with only members or
adherents of the group being able to study it.
However, the charge can be levelled that something may be lost in
interpretation through not being an adherent of the faith or belief
system studied; one cannot see the complete whole through being
detached from it. Conversely, something could also be lost by being
an adherent of the faith or belief system under study, by making it
more difficult to question established doctrines; in this way, the
question of faith enters the equation. Essentially, there is no simple
answer to this charge, and the issues of scientific rationality as
opposed to belief are discussed in greater detail below. But it is
certainly wise to proceed with sensitivity when dealing with extant
beliefs, and to acknowledge that one is after all only an observer,
albeit in a privileged position observing a living religion and ongoing
processes.
The second major factor affecting the role of the scholar is how
deeply he or she should be immersed in the area of archaeology
which he or she is studying? Here, I should confess that I am not
from an orientalist background, but from a general archaeological
one. However, 1 envisaged that the present study would emphasize
the advantages offered by exploiting archaeological evidence and be a
contribution to the growing interest in the general archaeology of
religion. In this context, I should admit that there are scholars who

8

INTRODUCTION

INTRODUCTION

are better versed in many individual aspects of the subject art
history, architecture and languages. Nor do I claim that the book is
all-encompassing and all-knowing; on the contrary, the shortcomings
of this study seem all too apparent. However, I will consider the work
to have succeeded if it generates some debate on the current aims,
methodology and future of Islamic archaeology, and if it illustrates
the unity, and at the same time diversity, encompassed in the terms
‘Islamic archaeology’ and Muslim, and demonstrates how powerfully,
and socially constituted, material culture can be.
Thirdly, I hope that the relevance of this study might be felt by
illustrating how, in the case of Islam, all facets of life can be struc
tured by religion, and thus to separate out the religious element as
something confined to a specific part or element of an individual’s life
is wrong. This could equally apply to Christianity, Hinduism, Bud
dhism, any major religion, besides Islam. To be a believer, to state ‘I
am a Muslim’ or ‘I am a Christian’, should entail a life structured by
particular spiritual codes, beliefs and outlook. Archaeologists have
too often appeared to forget this, and while perhaps acknowledging
that the individuals who made up the past communities under study
were religious represented, say, by a mosque, synagogue or church
see the other spheres of people’s lives as segregated out, and con
trolled by other preoccupations, and accordingly study these as some
thing separate.
But it is also correct to say that the archaeological study of religion
in general is a complex affair, and for this reason is often avoided as a
taboo subject, or hidden under the all-encompassing and difficult-todefine term ‘ritual’ (Renfrew 1994). It has been acknowledged that
the archaeological study of religion lags behind other specialized
fields, both theoretically and practically (Garwood et al. 1991: v).
Elements of religion, sacred structures or burials are examined, but
the bigger picture is often avoided, other than providing a historical
overview (an interesting exception within the context of Islam is
provided by Alexander’s 1979 comparative study, and in general
terms by Carmichael et al’s. 1994 volume). This reticence is more
understandable when it comes to considering the study of prehistoric
religions (a notable exception is provided by the Journal of Prehistoric
Religion), restricted as prehistorians are by the nature of their evi
dence, but it is less easy to understand when world religions or
historically documented cult or ritual practices are under considera
tion archaeologically. Here the impact of religion upon all aspects of
the archaeological record could be investigated in the pursuit of a
more complete understanding of the role and impact of religion in
different contexts.
—

—

—

b

9

A final point which must be considered is the validity of sacred
texts and religious law as a guide to interpretation. In studying Islam,
can the Qur’an, hadith and shari’ah, for example, be taken as a form
of interpretative manual for the structuring of Muslim life in the past?
The answer is yes, they act as a guide to all aspects of life, and a
Muslim life should be structured by them. But we are dealing with
individuals, and individuals are often selective; they make their own
choices about their religious beliefs, and accept varying interpreta
tions within the overall structure of the system of belief. Issues of
non-observance must, of course, be considered. But in other ways the
Qur’an and hadith do provide precise insights into why people do
what they do, and thus why this or that might be found in the
archaeological record. As such they should obviously not be dis
missed as having no value as guides to everyday life, past and present.
To repeat, we can and indeed should, where possible, examine past
life as a coherent whole, of which, within the framework of a major
world religion such as Islam, all aspects of life can be structured by
religion and can be approached and reconstructed by the archaeol
ogist. That society and religion are inextricably linked, and that reli
gion can serve as a means of perpetuating the structure of society, its
norms and requirements, has long been recognized by anthropologists
(see, for example, Geertz 1966). Within sections of the secular society
which exists in contemporary Western Europe and North America
this point could easily be forgotten: religion frequently holds little or
no sway over many. Where it does exist, and this point will be referred
to again later, it is often compartmentalized (Hubert 1994: 12), either
physically or conceptually, as something placed within an allotted
timespan, an hour in church on a Sunday, or the synagogue on a
Friday perhaps. Religion as a guiding force in all aspects of life has
been forgotten, and subsequently Western archaeologists, influenced
by the prevailing social climate no matter how much they like to think
of themselves as neutral observers, have likewise reflected this absence
of an overall spiritual structure within their interpretations.
Islam and Islams
While acknowledging the overall existence of Islam as a structuring
code to material culture, one stumbling block which has been
encountered needs to be explained. This is the very existence of the
notion of ‘Islam’ as compared to ‘Islams’; in other words, the degree
to which regional traditions, schools, sects and different nationalities
within Islam and the Muslim world destroy, or at least encroach

10

INTRODUCTION

upon, the idea of the cohesive whole, the ideal Muslim,
Atlantic coast of Morocco to Indonesia diversity which from the
might be
reflected in the archaeological record.
The existence of regional traditions is in certain ways
contrary to
the notion of ummab, the world-wide Islamic comm
unity. In the
course of conducting the research for this book, I was
often told by
various Muslim informants that, for arguments sake,
a mosque con
gregation in London is not composed of different nationa
lities but is
one community. This creates a contradiction as it is plainly
that our hypothetical mosque congregation is composed apparent
of different
nationalities, from diverse cultural backgrounds. Yet at the
these informants were wholly correct in arguing for the same time
existence of
the world-wide Muslim community, extending beyond
and super
seding national and cultural boundaries, the ideal Islamic
community,
which it is argued here is recognizable, in part, in the
archaeological
record. Perhaps by bemoaning the disappearance of regional
cultures’, we are serving our own desires for a diverse ‘material
and exotic
tableau of Islam when, in fact, the creation of the
single Islamic
community is the ideal of most Muslims.
Antagonisms between universality and regionalism have
been
examined by various scholars. Eickelman and Piscatori
(1990: xiii),
for example, stress that ‘universality competes with
local commun
ities and dogma with actualities’, and that there is inheren
t
generating an essentialist view of Islam or of being Muslim danger in
, when it is
difficult to predict the practice and significance of Islamic
faith
given historical setting from the first principles of dogma in any
or belief
(1990: xxii, 18). Similarly, Hourani (1991: 51) reviews these
issues
with regard to anthropology and how relevant the term
‘Islamic
society’ actually is as a cross-cultural descriptive device,
while Gell
ner has emphasized that it is simplistic to take ‘Islam at face
value’
and naïve to think that ‘because Muslim life is the implementatio
n of
one book and its prescriptions, therefore Muslim civilisation
is homo
geneous’ (1981: 99). Although these important arguments have
inevit
ably been simplified here, within the context of this
study it is
stressed that there is, of course, a departure point betwee
n ideals
and realities, and in no way is Islam a bland uniformity across
the
whole of the Muslim world. Heterodoxy exists, as attested
by the
importance of Sufism in many areas, and by the existence of the
two
dominant creeds of Sunni and Shi’ah Islam (see below).
However, there also exists an underlying uniformity; otherwise
notion of the existence of a series of Islams, rather than a univerthe
sal
Islam, implies that the whole idea of a system of belief falls down,
which is patently in opposition to the beliefs of the majori
ty of

11

INTRODUCTION

—

F

Muslims, Sunni or Shi’ah. This raises the question ‘where then does
one cease to be a Muslim?’ Where do you draw the line about what is
acceptable if you adapt your own Islam to just how you like it? It
appears to be nonsense to chip away at the existence of a single Islam
in favour of various regional Islams when one considers the essential
input of faith in a universal belief system, compared with the obser
vational rationality of usually Western social scientists. Furthermore,
Geilner continues, from the point quoted above, that ‘for all the
indisputable diversity, the remarkable thing is the extent to which
Muslim societies resemble each other’ (1981: 99). The obvious exist
ence of an Islam, even if only reduced to an acceptance of basic tenets,
and thus of a Muslim, is further reinforced in my view by observa
tional data collected away from the popularly perceived heartlands of
Islam. In sub-Saharan Africa, for example, though great local adapta
tion of Islam has taken place, Muslims are immediately recognizable
as Muslims, both today and in the past (Insoll 1996a,b,c). The point
has been well made by Akbar Ahmed (1988: 25):
the ideal would be recognisable in spite of differences of society,
economy, social structure and organisation throughout the world,
even outside the mainstream and established Muslim heartlands. It
would be recognisable in the tropical jungles of Africa, in the steppes
of Central Asia and in the humid forests of the Far East. Over 1300
years later it is recognisable in Muslim communities whether in Chi
cago, London, Cairo or Tokyo.
This is precisely what I argue for here, the existence of one Islam,
rather than a series of disparate regional traditions, which lends itself to
archaeological investigation. Yet within this whole there exists diver
sity, represented by different ways of life nomad and sedentary,
town- and country-dweller ethnic, cultural and geographical factors,
elements of non-observance, and varying interpretations and creeds.
The notion of a ‘flexible Islam in thought and practice’, which is
suggested by Eickelman and Piscatori (1990: xiv), is accepted here,
and an attempt will be made in the following pages to show that
assimilation between the superstructure Islam, its beliefs and practices,
and local variety is possible, and indeed usual. For example, the exist
ence of a Christian community would probably entail building a place
of worship, a church or chapel, but within the categories of structure
encompassed by the terms ‘church’ or ‘chapel’ huge variety exists, as it
does equally within the category ‘mosques’ (see chapter 2). Archae
ological investigation is well suited to shedding light both on local
issues and on the larger questions, social organization, technology,
urbanism and, of course, religion, across cultural and temporal scales.
—

—

12

INTRODUCTION

A.nnales Theory and Archaeological Practicalities
A possible way of reconciling the problem of investigating universal
ity and regionalism within the archaeology of Islam is provided by
the approach of the Annales School of history as outlined by Fernand
Braudel (1972). Here time is conceptualized as operating at a variety
of levels, long, medium and short term, represented by ‘la Iongue
durée’, long-term forces, woridviews or ideologies, ‘conjonctures’,
medium-term structures operating over several centuries, and ‘evene
ments’, short-term events, the ‘fireflies’ of time (Braudel 1972: 901;
Bintliff 1991: 6—7). A theoretical approach such as that of the Annales
School is not directly transferable to investigating this issue, but
rather a ‘mix and match’ position can be taken, using elements of
various models and ways of approaching the data in an attempt to
breathe life into the archaeology of Islam. Yet the general notion of
long- and short-term time scales as defined by the Annales approach
ideally suits what we are attempting to explore here. Namely, the
Ion gue durée as the central tenets of Islam, structuring behaviour and
remaining essentially unchanging, with regional traditions and events
as the medium- and short-term cycles. This may seem an oversimpli
fication, yet, as Sherratt (1992: 140) points out, ‘while Braudel may be
unsophisticated from the point of view of the fact-saturated modern
historian or the philosophical subtleties of metahistory, his example
may still inspire those with bigger and cruder problems’ (my em
phasis). In many ways, such a paradigm, alloyed with a none-too
dogmatic position, allows the subject to be examined from a non
‘culture-historic’ perspective.
Three examples can be provided to illustrate how a framework
involving la Ion gue durée and the medium/short term can be applied
to an examination of the archaeology of Islam. First, Muslim diet.
Dietary rules exist, but there is no such thing as a Muslim cuisine.
Food and drink are subject to fashions and regional traditions, but
the underlying structure remains the same; for example, certain
foods and alcohol should be avoided because of religious imperatives.
Secondly, in dress and domestic architecture there is an emphasis
upon privacy and modesty, but how this is obeyed is subject to
myriad ways of expression without losing the core underlying pre
requisites structured by religious doctrine and resulting social codes.
Thirdly, the mosque usually contains a number of essential features,
with primary among them the rnihrab or prayer niche oriented to
Mecca and indicating the direction of prayer (alongside a minbar
pulpit] in a congregational mosque, and usually a minaret of some

13

INTRODUCTION

sort for the call to prayer), yet the style of the mosque and its
can
decoration, architecture, configuration
component parts
longue
La
elements.
vary greatly without losing the fundamental
durée is represented by the Islamic structuring codes, immutable
elements of Muslim faith; the conjonctures and even ernents, either
medium or short term, are represented by fashions, interpretations
and regionalism (though this can exist over the long term, it is still set
apart from the essentials), which create the diversity apparent within
the overall entity.
—

—

Geographical, Temporal and Material Ranges
Having considered the reasoning behind this volume, it is necessary
to define the limits of the material under discussion, for this study
will of necessity range over a large geographical area. First, we must
ask what exactly is meant by the Muslim world? This is difficult to
define: as Grabar (1971) has noted, its extent has varied over time,
fluctuating in size following successes and failures (the example of the
creation and loss of Al-Andalus or Islamic Spain is a case in point).
There was, and is, no unchanging entity (see figure 1.1). The spread or
contraction of Islam has not been a uniform process, a perceived
series of ‘pulses’ or ‘waves’ from a central place (though the early
conquests sometimes appear to resemble this). The geographical bor
ders of the Muslim world changed over time often leaving material
culture remains for the archaeologist to decipher. Geographical
blocks such as Christendom, and the Hindu, Jewish, Muslim and
Buddhist worlds are tenuous entities, if really definable as such at
all. They intermingle and mix, and have ‘fuzzy’ borders, with Islam,
like the other great religions, drawing upon the material and even
spiritual legacy of other religions and civilizations with which it came
into contact over the centuries.
Fortunately, this volume is not concerned with charting changes in
either the geography or history of the Muslim world, something
which has been done on many occasions elsewhere (see, for example,
Gibb et al. 1960; Lapidus 1988). Rather, the predominant concern
with the theoretical implications that being a Muslim has for material
culture means that examples can and will be drawn from wherever a
Muslim community is found. This ranges from regions of the Muslim
world as usually defined, from Morocco in the west to Indonesia in
the east and from Central Asia to Central Africa, but also from
regions not usually considered to be Islamic, including Britain and
North America. However, their inclusion can be justified as there are

14

INTRODUCTION

Figure 1.1 Map of approximate extent of former or currently Muslimdominated areas in Europe (after Lapidus 1988: 243)
now substantial Muslim minorities within these regions, and
to
neglect the implications of their presence for the material culture
record of the future would be wrong, as it is equally wrong to neglect
that of religious minorities in Islamic regions.
In this context it should be noted that the term ‘Muslim’ rather
than ‘Islamic’ will frequently be used as a descriptive device because
it
seems more flexible, admits diversity, recognizes the input of faith
and, equally importantly, allows for the individual. ‘Islamic’ by con
trast, certainly with regard to concepts such as the ‘Islamic world’,
seems that much more impersonal and as if everything is dictated
by
religious doctrine alone, with individual choice removed, which is
patently not the case.
Within the Muslim world, as has already been noted, both unity
and diversity are found. Bearing this point in mind, we should avoid
creating a distinction between the perceived ‘pure’ Arab heartlands of
Islam (Arabia and the early conquered regions of western Asia
and North Africa) and the ‘impure’ periphery (sub-Saharan Africa,
South-east Asia). Great regional variation exists, but that does not

INTRODUCTION

15

necessarily mean that the Muslim living in Mecca is a better one than
his or her co-religionist in Dar es Salaam. Both are members of the
Muslim community. In this regard, general catch-all models such as
those invoking a single centre and a vast periphery are inapplicable as
an explanatory device when applied to the diverse phenomena present
in a world religion such as Islam, incorporating many cultures
and lifestyles. These include the Maghrib, land of the marabout
or holyman and saint’s tomb par excellence; Shi’ah Iran; Turkey
with its Ottoman and Central Asian heritage; sub-Saharan Africa,
where syncretism between traditional animist religion and Islam is
often evident; the culturally diverse Indian subcontinent and South
east Asia; Arabia and the Near East, the original lands of Islam;
China, Afghanistan and Central Asia, home of numerous ethnic
groups and lifestyles, Sinicized coastal Hui, descendants of Arab
conquerors, nomadic and semi-nomadic Turkomen, Uzbeks and
others, sedentary town and oasis dwellers; and the European frontiers
of Islam, past and present, Spain, Sicily, the Balkans and the Caucau
sus. This is a vast area, with further diversity represented by the
various schools of law, creeds and sects which have developed within
Islam.
Although it is possible to define categories of material culture
within the ‘archaeology of Islam’, their contents will vary both
through time and space. The essential doctrines of Islam might
have been largely established in the seventh century CE, and detailed
ritual practices developed between the seventh and ninth centuries
CE, but Islam itself is not a fossilized entity; Islamic material culture in
all its forms was not fixed at that time. It has changed and evolved
over the course of the centuries, with reference to custom and
requirements. Perhaps one of the most significant periods of change
is occurring at the present, and it would be wrong to regard
contemporary developments as aberrations; rather, they are the
continuation of the development process. A contemporary mosque
in Bradford has as much relevance within the sphere of Islamic
material culture as does the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem.
Although in many ways we are concerned with the ideal, the ideal
Islamic city, house, burial and so on, this is not meant to infer that
material culture is in any way static. Material culture is, of course,
socially constituted and reflects the evolutionary process. Hence,
where applicable, archaeological and other examples are also drawn
from a wide time period, encompassing the origins of Islam in the
early seventh century through to the developments of the late twen
tieth century.

17

INTRODUCTION

Islam: Origins, Requirements and Components

The origins and initial spread of Islam
The origins of Islam have been well studied and extensively discussed
elsewhere (for example, Lapidus 1988: 21—36; Waines 1995: 7—32).
Briefly summarized, Islam (‘submission’ to the will of God) orig
mated in the Arabian peninsula when the Prophet Muhammad (born
c.570 died 632), an Arab trader from Mecca and the last and most
important prophet (the ‘Seal of the Prophets’), began to receive his
first revelations from God, via the Angel Gabriel, in about 610.
Muslim (those who have submitted) converts in these early years
were few, but by 615 ‘Muhammad had become the leader of a corn
munity’ (Lapidus 1988: 25). This nascent community was in Mecca,
but conditions there were difficult, and in 622, having obtained a
guarantee or pledge of safety, Muhammad and his followers moved
to Medina in an event known as the hijrah or migration (year one of
the Muslim calendar, 1 A H, al-hzyrah) This event is of fundamental
importance to Muslims (El-Rashedy 1997) as here the Muslim corn
munity (ummah) was formally established, and the hijrah is regarded
as ‘the transition from the pagan to the Muslim world from kinship
to a society based on common belief’ (Lapidus 1988: 27). Conflict
with the pagan Meccans continued until an armistice was sigmed in
628, and in 630 ‘the Muslim occupation of Mecca was complete’
(Waines 1995: 20). In 632 the Prophet died in Medina, where he
was buried.
The progress of Islam in the first century AH was swift. Muslim
power in Arabia was rapidly consolidated, and under the Khalifahs or
Rightly Guided Caliphs (successors to Muhammad) the Muslim
armies spread into and conquered Palestine, Iraq, Syria, Egypt and
large parts of Iran between 633 and 650. Under the subsequent
Umayyad Caliphs, between 674 and 715, a Muslim Central Asian
zone was established with the conquest of Transoxania,
frontier
and
by the end of the first quarter of the eighth century, the
conquest of the Maghrib (North Africa) and Al-Andalus (Islamic
Spain) was complete. Further expansion was also made into southern
Pakistan at the same time (Nicolle 1993: 3—5). Islam, the religion,
accompanied the Muslim armies, and its social and religious codes
and material culture were disseminated through conversion and con
quest. Figure 1.2 gives an idea of the historical complexity of the
events beyond these initial conquests (see also Gibb et al. 1960;
Lapidus 1988).
—

-

—

7

§
o

-

;:

18

INTRODUCTION

INTRODUCTION

The Qur’an and hadith
The Qur’an (literally, recitation or reading) is regarded by Muslims as
the immutable Word of God revealed to the Prophet Muhammad via
the Angel Gabriel in the form of verses, which are arranged in 114
chapters or surah. The precepts and principles of the Qur’an form
the
basis of the Islamic faith. Second only to the Qur’an as the source of
shari’ah (Islamic law) are the hadith (traditions), the Prophet’s say
ings and doings, which were transmitted by either, or both, oral and
written methods from their original source. Thus a hadith usually
comprises the matn, ‘or point it conveyed, and a chain of transmit
ters, (isnad)’ (Waines 1995: 41), which enable verification. Six major
collections of hadith are recognized by almost all Muslims as genuine,
and are thus the most important. These were compiled by (in chrono
logical order): al-Bukhari (died 870), ibn al-Hajjaj (died 875), ibn
Maja (died 887), Abu Dawud (died 889), al-Tirmidhi (died 892) and
al-Nasa’i (died 915). Together these form the sunnah, the Prophet’s
‘deeds, utterances and his unspoken approval’ (Gibb and Kramers
1961: 552), thus comprising the way of the Prophet, which should
form the example as to how to lead one’s life for all Muslims. To
quote Ahmed (1988: 24), ‘across the world his followers would
imitate the Prophet with affection in every kind of activity abstain
ing from alcohol and pig’s meat, colouring a man’s beard with henna,
using green for clothes and flags’. The Muslim ideal structured many
aspects of life.
—

Shari’ah and the Five Pillars
The shari’ah is the law of Islam, which by its origins and nature is
sacred in character, and which ‘lays down an entire scheme of life
whose aim is to make sure that good flourishes and evils do not
destroy or harm human life’ (Mawdudi 1986: 17). Besides the Qur’an
and hadith, the other two main roots of the law are analogy through
reasoning, ijtihad, and consensus or zjma. The essential principles of
the Islamic faith as contained in the Qur’an and shari’ah are the Five
Pillars of Islam, which are the requirements for believers. The first is
the credo or shahadah, ‘There is no god but God and Muhammad is
the Prophet of God’, which is the expression of absolute monotheism.
The second is ritual prayer five times a day in the direction of Mecca
(salat). The third is the fast (sawm) in the tenth month of the lunar
year, Ramadan. The fourth is zakat (alms), giving between 2.5 and 10
per cent of one’s wealth to the needy. The fifth is hajj, pilgrimage to
Mecca at least once in one’s life.

19

In fact, as will be discussed in greater detail later on, the Five Pillars
lend themselves to archaeological recognition and are key criteria to
the archaeological recognition of a Muslim community. The shahadah
can be represented in inscriptions in many different media (chapter 5);
salat by the mosque and other places of prayer (chapter 2); zakat by
inscriptions and the system of waqf (endowments) of buildings,
including hospitals, mosques and religious schools, by pious and
wealthy individuals (chapter 4); hajj by pilgrims’ hostels, routes,
wells and milestones (chapter 4). It is only sawm which will be
unlikely to be recognized archaeologically (chapter 4). Besides these
fundamentals, many other aspects of life are codified in Islamic law,
and guidelines provided to live according to Muslim ideals (see
Schacht 1964), a life which draws no boundary between the sacred
and the secular, and which has many archaeological manifestations.

The schools of law and the Sunni
Different approaches in interpreting the law led to the emergence of
four legal schools (madhabib): the Hanafi, Maliki, Shafi’i and Hanbali, which are named after the scholar-jurists who founded them, and
which were largely consolidated by the tenth century. All four legal
schools are Sunni, meaning the adherents of sunnah, the way of the
Prophet. Both the Shi’ah and the Kharijites (discussed below) de
veloped their own laws, but these differ little from orthodox Sunni
law, as both kept sufficiently close contact with the Sunni community
in the eighth and ninth centuries, ‘for them to take over Islamic law as
it was being developed in the orthodox schools of law, making only
such modifications as were required by their particular political and
dogmatic tenets’ (Schacht 1964: 16). For example, Shi’ah inheritance
laws differ, and the institution of temporary marriage exists, which
Sunnis do not allow (Momen 1985: 182). The four Sunni legal schools
differ in how they interpret points of the law, which is the domain of
learned men (ulama) and administered by the religious judges (qadi).
But it should be noted that the existence of a class of learned and legal
men does not equate with that of a priesthood which does not exist
in Islam. Even the Imam, here meaning the leader of congregational
prayer, can be ‘any respectable Muslim, sufficiently versed in the
technique of salat’ (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 165).
The majority of Muslims today are Sunni, probably as high as 90
per cent of the total Muslim community, and are found throughout
the Muslim world. Which legal school is of importance varies accord
ing to geographical area (but they also often co-exist): predominantly
Maliki in North and West Africa, Shafi’i in East Africa, South-east

20

21

INTRODUCTION

INTRODUCTION

Asia and southern Arabia, Hanafi in the areas formerly covered
by
the Mughal and Ottoman empires, and Hanbali in Saudi Arabia
(Ahmed 1988: 48).

was the Mahdi or “guided one” and is still alive, though hidden,
waiting for God’s instruction to appear and establish the kingdom
of God on earth’ (Bruce 1995: 82; see also Momen 1985). The ‘Seven
ers’ stop the line at the seventh Imam, Ismail; thus they are known as
Isma’ilis. This obviously differs from Sunni beliefs, but in practice
differences in rituals and customs are ‘only marginally different to
Sunni practice’ (Ahmed 1988: 58), and have few material culture
implications (exceptions, such as the Shi’ah focus on visits to martyrs’
tombs and certain festivals such as Muharram, are discussed later).

The Shi’ah
The other major Muslim grouping is the Shi’ah, historically associ
ated with the Fatimids, and geographically associated today with
Iran, but also found in the Gulf States, southern Iraq, India, Lebanon,
East Africa and, more recently, in Europe and North Ameri
ca.
Shi’ism has been defined as ‘the general name for a large group
of
very different Muslim sects, the starting point of all of which is
the
recognition of Au as the legitimate caliph after the death of th
Prophet’ (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 534). Thus from this it can
be seen that the schism in the Muslim community which led to the
development of Shi’ism occurred early in the history of Islam (the
latter half of the seventh century), and developed primarily from
politics, namely, conflicts over the nature of the caliphate between
the family of Au, the fourth caliph, son-in-law and cousin of
the
Prophet, and the Umayyad dynasty. Gibb and Kramers (1961: 534)
again clarify this succinctly when they describe the split in the Mus
lim community as a consequence of the fact that ‘Islam is a religious
and a political phenomenon as its founder was a prophet and a
statesman.’ Thus how the relationship between political or secular
and religious leadership was considered became of fundamental
importance to the Shi’ah. Three paths are evident: the Sunni ‘middle
line’, the Kharijite one of indifference to the caliphate, and that of the
Shi’ah, with ‘great religious value on the question of the Imamate’.
Ali, who was martyred by his opponents, was viewed as the true
Imam or caliph, and the martyr tradition in Shi’ism further increased
in significance with the subsequent martyrdom of Hussein and Has
san, Au’s sons, who with the Prophet and Fatima, the Prophet’s
daughter and Ali’s wife, form the five central figures to the Shi’ah,
and the ‘model family for all Shi’is to follow in their family inter
relationships’ (Momen 1985: 235).
But, essentially, Shi’ah doctrines differ little from Sunni. The
Qur’an is central, the Five Pillars are the same, ‘the Sunni ideal also
holds for the Shi’ah’ (Ahmed 1988: 57). However, it is in the position
of the Imamate, or religious leadership, that the real difference lies. In
the Sbi’ite view, the caliphate became corrupted through the wrong
succession. Ali was the first Imam designated by the Prophet, fol
lowed by a line of twelve or seven Imams depending on tradition. The
majority ‘Twelvers’ believe ‘that the Twelfth Imam (last seen in 873)

Other Muslim groups and sects
Many other offshoots of Islam exist and, although all are of minority
status, some are of greater significance than others. Primary among
them are the Kharijites, who are in turn divided into a number of
subgroups, the Nukkarites, Sufrites and Ibadites. The Kharijites have
been described as espousing ‘intransigent idealism’ (Waines 1995:
106), and were democratic in outlook, believing that anyone could
be elected head of the Muslim community, if they possessed the right
qualifications. The Ibadi Kharijite group survives to this day in
Oman, and in parts of North and East Africa. Elsewhere in the
Muslim world numerous other Muslim sects exist or have existed
(see, for example, Khuri 1990). More unorthodox than the Kharijites,
and usually classed as non-Muslim by the majority of Muslims, both
Sunni and Shi’ah, are the Druze of Syria, Palestine and Lebanon, a
secretive religious sect broadly derived from Shi’ism and founded in
the late tenth to early eleventh centuries. Of similar status and also
found in the same geographical region (but extending into eastern
Turkey) are the Alevi or Alawi, who emphasize the importance of
Au, and differ in many practices (lack of regular prayer and pilgrim
age) from other Muslims. To these could be added the Qarmatians of
the Persian Gulf and the Zaidis of Yemen, both offshoots of Shi’ism,
and the Zikris of Baluchistan. This is by no means exhaustive but
serves to show the diversity which exists within Islam, from a sliding
scale of orthodoxy to heresy, depending upon the view of the obser
ver.
Muslim Diversity: Mystics, Wahhabiyyah and Taliban
Three further and contrasting dimensions to Islamic religious and
social practice are manifest by the Sufi tradition (mystical Islam) in
all its divergent forms, and those represented by the Wahhabi Islamic

22

23

INTRODUCTION

INTRODUCTION

reform movement, and the Taliban. These examples have been chosen
not to exhaust all the possibilities of Muslim religious manifestation,
which they do not, but because they represent different points on the
scale of Muslim religious experience.

Geilner has proposed the terms ‘religious orders and holy lineages’ as
a way of delimiting Sufis from holymen, but he correctly points out
that their dividing line is indeterminate, as religious orders can be led
by holy lineages, and holy lineages can become religious orders (1981:
160), a definition followed here. Around the tombs or houses of
saints, settlements (in North Africa called zawiyah, and similar in
certain respects to a Sufi lodge) often grow up, in which their de
scendants live. The intercession of the saint is sought by the populace
for various things, with sacrifices or offerings made as a source of
receiving baraka or blessings. But even this simplistic definition fails
to cover the range of experiences and manifestations covered by the
term. Even ‘saint’ is problematical as Waines mentions (1995: 145):
‘there can be no procedure for the canonisation of individuals since
there is no authority to validate their sanctification.’ Yet overcoming
this handicap is straightforward by the simple expedient of remem
bering that Islamic mysticism covers a whole gamut of Muslim re
ligious experience, alongside what Geilner describes as the ulama-led
‘puritanical, unitarian, individualist’ Islam (1981: 159).

Sufism
Mystical Islam in various forms is one popular manifestation of
Muslim practice. Yet it should be noted that it is difficult to categor
ize too succinctly. The word Sufism is derived from ‘suf, Arabic for
wool, ‘to denote the practice of wearing a woollen robe hence the
act of devoting oneself to the mystic life’ (Gibb and Kramers 1961:
579). Prior to the ninth—tenth centuries, the mystical tradition within
Islam was represented either by individuals who retreated from
worldly concerns or perhaps by a teacher and his circle of pupils.
After this, as Islam spread, more organized communities of mystics
began to form in lodges, with a religious master (shaykh or pir) at
their head, surrounded by a group of disciples. These tariqah (mean
ing path or way) took the form of brotherhoods or orders which were
usually male, and less commonly female, and followed sets of rules
which laid out behaviour, litanies and etiquette, the path to spiritual
understanding (Schimmel 1975). At the heart of Sufi teaching is the
‘truth of the Divine Unity’ (Nasr 1991: 3), and the spiritual ‘path’ for
the initiate is in a series of stages, whose number and sequence vary
between orders. Fundamental among Sufi rituals is the dhikr, ‘the
repeated vocal invocation or silent remembrance of the name, Allah’
(Waines 1995: 140), and whose basic practice varies little between the
orthodox orders. Music, poetry and dance can also be used to attain
the ecstatic trance-like state which the dhikr can bring on. Numerous
tariqab have existed or continue to be found throughout the Muslim
world, most named after their founder. The Shorter Encyclopaedia of
Islam lists over 180, not including the branches within the main
fraternities (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 575—8; see also Trimingham
1971). However, all are united in their adherence to the mystical
path and in the similarity of their basic practice.
—

Wahhabiyya
In direct contrast to mystical Islam is the Wahhabiyya Islamic reform
movement. This Sunni movement, followers of the Hanbali legal
school as interpreted by Ibn Taimal, was founded by Abd al-Wahhab
in the late eighteenth century. Wahhabi written polemic has been
described as ‘almost entirely aimed at the cult of saints, as exhibited
in the building of mausoleums, their employment as mosques, and
their visitation’ (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 618). The Wahhabis are
thus obviously opposed to Sufi or holymen practices, and represent
austere Islamic religious practice, attested in their simple mosques and
tombs (see chapter 6). Geographically they are centred in Saudi
Arabia, but their doctrines have spread to India and West Africa, a
process partly facilitated by pilgrims returning home from hajj carry
ing their message. Thus, Wahhabi Islam represents another manifesta
tion of Muslim religious practice and outlook.

Saints

Taliban

A second facet of Islamic mysticism is provided by the ‘saint’ or
‘holyman’ tradition, especially manifest in North Africa, though
saints’ tombs are found in most regions of the Muslim world. The
cult of saints can perhaps be conceived of as more popularist in
outlook, and certainly less hierarchical and organized, than Sufism.

A third example of the variety of Islamic religious practice and
interpretation is offered by the Taliban, of contemporary interest in
the late 1990s as representative of ‘fundamentalist’ Islam. The Taliban,
whose name is derived from ‘talib’, as students from the Islamic
madrasahs or religious schools in Pakistan, have recently taken

24

25

INTRODUCTION

INTRODUCTION

control of large areas of Afghanistan, where they have proceeded
implement their own interpretation of shari’ah. Although the Talibato
n
are currently condemned by both Muslims and non-Muslims,
they
are in fact continuing the age-old process of reinterpreting
Islam,
further illustrating the vibrancy of the religion. However,
in the
sum total of Muslim practice they are of little relevance outside
a
restricted geographical area.
Yet, it should also be noted that, with all the examples given, belief
in the essential elements remains the same, the primacy of the
Qur’an
the fundamental of belief. All are Muslims though they range throug ,
h
a spectrum, resembling perhaps, as a crude analogy, the diversi
ty
exhibited between a Presbyterian congregation in Scotland
and
Catholic church in Italy, both classed as Christian. But, as will a
be
shown in the following pages, the implications for diversity of
ma
terial culture, though great, do not mean that common categories
do
not exist. All, for example, bury the dead according to Muslim rites
information which the archaeologist can utilize to examine the
inter
play between uniformity and diversity, ideals and reality.

whether they are recoverable by archaeologists. The following chap
ters will therefore examine the image of Islam as displayed in material
culture, and how this might be archaeologicaliy recognizable. Essen
tially, we then return to the questions raised at the beginning of this
chapter. Are religious universals rendered materially? And in the case
of Islam do we have a complete set of data available to us as archae
ologists to understand all areas of Muslim life?

—

The Individual and the ‘Islamic Way of Life’
Having noted some of the major manifestations of group practic
e in
Islam, it is also necessary to consider the implications of being Mus
lim for the individual. To quote Mawdudi (1986: 9), ‘the chief charac
teristic of Islam is that it makes no distinction between the spiritu
al
and the secular in life.’ All aspects of life are governed by God’s law,
the shari’ah, and the ‘Prophet organised all those who accepted
his
message into one community (ummah) charged with living in accord
ance with the teachings of Islam’ (1986: 11). All spheres of activity,
social, political, economic, and obviously, spiritual, should be gov
erned by God’s dictates and the moral code of Islam in creating
a
society above racial, national and class concerns: ‘In brief, all his
[man’s] energies should be directed towards regulating the affairs of
this world in the way in which God wants them to be regulated’
(1986: 55). Here is stated, from a Muslim perspective, both the ideal
of one Islam and also of our starting position that Islam is a way of
life. Anywhere in the Muslim world, therefore, devout Muslims
could, quite apart from their formal religious observances, aspire to
certain personal and family conventions which also demonstrate that
they are Muslim.
Having ended this chapter on an idealistic note, we will now begin
to examine how these ideals are made manifest materially and
—

THE MOSQUE

2

The Mosque
e

None should visit the mosques of God except those who believe in
God and the Last Day, attend to their prayers and render the alms levy
and fear none but God. These shall be rightly guided.
Qur’an. Repentance 9: 18

The mosque has been chosen as the starting-point of this book as it
is
an immediately recognizable symbol of Islam, to Muslims and nonMuslims alike. It is a material personification of one of the Five
Pillars of Islam, the obligation to pray, as is stated in the Qur’an
:
‘Proclaim the portions of the Book that are revealed to you and
be
steadfast in prayer. Prayer fends away indecency and evil. But your
foremost duty is to remember God. God has knowledge of all your
actions’ (The Spider 29: 45), and thus at once brings us to the funda
mentals of the religion. Furthermore, the mosque can be said to act,
through its various functions, both sacred and secular, as a creator,
unifier and perpetuator of the Muslim community (ummab), the
creation and maintenance of which should be the aim of all Muslims.
Rashid Chaudhri (1982: 2) expresses this when he remarks ‘prayers in
a mosque teach us brotherhood and equality of mankind, as in a
mosque we find people of all races and classes standing shoulder to
shoulder without any discrimination of colout rank, wealth or
office. all are equal in the House of Allah.’
The mosque is also a structure which is usually found wherever
communities of Muslims exist, which of course has major implica
tions for the archaeologist interested in Islam as a key aid to the
archaeological recognition of the Muslim community. Yet, surpris
ingly, the archaeological recognition of the mosque and the criteria
which might allow this have never been adequately investigated. The
. .

27

following discussion will not be concerned with charting the
development of the mosque or providing a typology of mosque
types, both of which have been exhaustively covered elsewhere
(Frishman and Khan 1994; Hillenbrand 1994). Rather, attention
will be focused upon assessing how the translation of Muslim re
ligious essentials into material culture is achieved, how this might be
theoretically approached, and the resulting implications for the
archaeologist.
A twofold approach will be adopted whereby mosques can be
viewed via different scales of analysis: what are termed ‘structuring
principles’ and ‘cultural diversity’. Examples of how places of prayer
can be seen to serve various purposes will be provided to illustrate
how the structuring principles are adapted to suit political and cul
tural context. The practicalities of archaeologically investigating mos
ques will also be discussed, including their recognition (along with
the often-ignored ephemeral types of mosque) and where archaeol
ogists could contribute to the study of the mosque, and thus to
Muslim society in general. Finally, the implications for the archaeol
ogist of the future confronted by the establishment of new Muslim
communities in previously non-Muslim areas of the world will be
examined through the analysis of the growth and development of the
Cambridge Muslim community, and how it has adapted a pre-existing
place of worship to its needs. Thus Islam will be placed firmly in
context as a living religion, and the need for a socially aware Islamic
archaeology will be re-emphasized.
Scales of Analysis: Structuring Principles and Cultural Diversity
The two scales of analysis were introduced briefly in the last chapter
and it is not necessary to repeat what was said there. Nevertheless, a
couple of points should be elaborated. Although a debt is owed to
Annales theory, such approaches are not directly transferable for
three reasons. First, because specifics such as the notion of ‘fireflies’
are largely irrelevant here; secondly, because it is not the purpose of
this volume to provide anything so presumptuous as ‘general laws’, or
to shoehorn the evidence into fitting such theoretical ‘straitjackets’;
and, thirdly, because it is easy, in the words of Bulliet (1992: 131), ‘for
appropriators of ideas and approaches originating in disciplines other
than their own’ not to understand them properly, or ‘wilfully mis
understand them’. Rather, the concept of different scales of time or
analysis can be borrowed, as was explained before, to allow a division
to be made between the unchanging elements of being Muslim and,

28

29

THE MOSQUE

THE MOSQUE

within this, the diversity which exists and which is apparent in all
areas of human endeavour and its material remains.
The obligation of prayer, a Pillar of Islam, is a structuring principle
in our ‘Islamic structuring codes’, an immutable element of being
Muslim. The material manifestation of this is the mosque in all its
many forms with the many forms qualifying as the second scale of
analysis, that of cultural diversity as comprising regional traditions,
fashions and decorative and architectural trends. Thus, this second
scale allows for the presence of diversity, which must always be
recognized as existing within the broader structuring principle or
code.

of all the Muslims of the World’ (1978: 35). The actual act of prayer is
also reflected in the form of the mosque, with the rectangular shape of
the mosque sanctuary, the haram, reflecting the need to pray in rows
parallel to the qiblah, the wall facing Mecca. Prayer is led by an adult
male, the Imam, at the front. Whether women are allowed to pray in a
mosque depends on doctrines followed and regional variation. Where
women do pray in mosques they pray behind the men, often in a
special section. Lane (1883: 228) relates a saying attributed to the
Prophet that ‘the best rank of men [in a mosque] is the front; and the
best rank of women is the rear’, which is taken to mean those most
distant from the men. Amongst the Shi’ah, Friday congregational
prayer is of less importance, though they have other special prayers
besides the obligatory ones for various occasions (Momen 1985: 181).
The origins of the mosque and its component parts have been, and
still are, much debated. However, general consensus sees the proto
type in the Prophet’s house in Medina. Here, a zulla, or shelter of
palm trunks and leaves was built on to one of the walls of the
courtyard, initially on the side in the direction of Jerusalem (accord
ing to Creswell 1958: 4, perhaps due to the veneration Muhammad
saw that the Jews, who formed the leading community in Medina,
gave to Jerusalem). Following a revelation from God experienced by
Muhammad, the direction of prayer was changed to the side facing
Mecca (Kuban 1974: 1—2). This simple structure, the predecessor of
the Arab hypostyle mosque, was also built to aid in the creation of
the ummah, the Muslim community, by functioning not only as a
place for religious ceremonies, but also where social gatherings were
held, religious teaching was undertaken and public proclamations
were made (Gibb and Kramers 1961; Nasr 1993). The functions
encapsulated in the first mosque were to be replicated in mosques
throughout the centuries, serving religious, social, communal, pol
itical and legal purposes. The Prophet’s house was a place of both
religious and political importance, emphasizing the lack of division
between the sacred and secular in Islam, both being invested in the
ruler. This duality is a theme which we will return to repeatedly in the
following chapters.

—

Structuring Principles: the Mosque
The criteria which define a mosque are ‘forbiddingly simple: a wall
correctly oriented towards the qiblab, namely the Black Stone within
the Ka’bah in Mecca. No roof, no minimum size, no enclosing walls,
no liturgical accessories are required’ (Hillenbrand 1994: 31). Kuban
(1974: 1) is even more minimalist when he mentions that, strictly
speaking, a mosque is not needed at all, as a hadith records (al
Bukhari 7: 1) ‘all the World is a masjid’ (the place of prostrations).
This statement would at first sight appear to be of little use in
attempting to identify a Muslim community within the archaeological
record. However, mosques of a form recognizable across the Islamic
world developed rapidly after the establishment of Islam as structures
for, and defined by, the requirements of prayer (salat). In part this was
undoubtedly aided by sentiments recorded in another hadith (Muslim
b. al-Hajjaj: Book of Prayer): ‘prayer said in a congregation is
twenty-five times more excellent than prayer said by a single person’
(Brown and Palmer 1987: 90).
Prayer itself occurs at four levels: individually five times a day (fajr,
morning prayer; zuhr, early afternoon prayer; asr, late afternoon
prayer; Maghrib, sunset prayer; isha, night prayer); congregationally
at noon on Friday; communally (village or town prayer) at festivals
(discussed in chapter 4); and at the level of the entire Muslim world.
Material manifestations of these prayer requirements are: first, the
prayer rug and a simple masjid or prayer hail; secondly, the jami’ or
Friday (congregational) mosque; and thirdly, the musalla (place of
prayer), a common term, but sometimes employed specifically
to denote a place of prayer used at festivals. A physical embodiment
of the fourth level of prayer does not exist, but pilgrimage to Mecca
or hajj can perhaps be seen to be what Dickie terms ‘a congregation

I

Prayer axis
The one concern which can be isolated even in the first mosque, the
Prophet’s mosque, is the direction of prayer, which was ultimately
fixed on Mecca and is perhaps the only universal which can be said to
exist when considering the mosque as a structure (see figure 2.1). All
mosques should be aligned in the direction of Mecca (allowing for

30

THE MOSQUE

THE MOSQUE

p

0

Figure 2.1 Stylized plan of mosque components in an ‘ideal’ mosque (after
Chaudhri 1982: 36—7)
human error) and, as was noted above, all that is actually needed is a
wall, built or even just marked out on the ground, and aligned in the
correct direction before which the faithful can pray. Dickie has
described this focus as ‘spread out like a gigantic wheel with Mecca
as the hub, with lines drawn from all the mosques in the world
forming the spokes’ (1978: 16). To the archaeologist this is of import
ance: given a compass and an understanding of the position of Mecca
in relation to the area under study, theoretically at least, the archae
ological recognition of a mosque should be straightforward (however,
problems could arise when, for example, Mecca is due east, as
churches are aligned in the same direction, or, as already mentioned,
mosques are incorrectly aligned). Luckily, this task is facilitated by
the fact that the vast majority of mosques do not only fulfil the
simplest requirements of prayer, a correctly aligned qiblah wall, but
incorporate various other features which in themselves form recogni
tion criteria.

The mihrab
Related to the question of orientation is the physical marker of the
direction of prayer, an almost universal feature which is built into, or

31

salient from, the qiblah wall, and forms the focus of the prayer hall
(see figure 2.1). From in front of the mihrab the prayers are led by the
Imam, and, while almost always a niche in form, the mihrab can be
decorated in many ways and is often surmounted by a dome,
although this is not obligatory. Although Grabar suggests that the
mihrab ‘grew to commemorate the presence of the Prophet as the
first imam’ (1973: 121), it is extremely unlikely that Muhammad’s
mosque had such a permanent indicator of prayer direction: the
earliest mibrab niche at Medina dates from 705, though does not
survive in its original form (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 343; Hillen
brand 1994: 46). Flat plaque-like mihrabs were also occasionally used
in the early Islamic period. The influences from which both the dome
and the niche were drawn have been recognized: for the dome,
Roman palatial architecture; and for the niche, the place for a statue
in the Graeco-Roman temple or, on a larger scale, the apse in a church
(Hillenbrand 1994: 45, 53). However, unlike a statue or an altar, the
mibrab is not sacred in itself, but indicates the direction of prayer,
which is sacred (Frishman 1994: 35). From the early eighth century
the use of the mihrab spread, utilizing single or, less frequently,
double or multiple niches. The mibrab is therefore a critical indicator
of the presence of a mosque, as the symbol of prayer direction in
what would otherwise be a blank wall.

Other features
A variety of other features exist which could be present in a mosque
and which form further elements of the translation of the structuring
principle of prayer into material culture. The minbar, introduced in
the time of the Prophet, is a flight of sometimes moveable steps
placed next to the mihrab (see figure 2.1) from which the Imam
preaches a sermon (khutbah) at Friday prayers and, much less fre
quently today, makes public pronouncements (radio and television
has made this function largely superfluous). This juxtaposition of
mihrab and minbar, it has been argued, quite plausibly, is a reflection
of the co-identity within the person of the Imam of both secular and
spiritual power (Dickie 1978: 37). Orthodox definitions of the mos
que usually classify the minbar as primarily a feature of the jami’
mosque, and thus it could perhaps be seen as a material symbol of the
obligation of Friday prayer upon every free Muslim male. Though
perhaps valid in the past, such a definition has little validity today
where the minbar is frequently found in the ordinary rnasjid (El
Rashedy 1997). The best-known visible feature of the mosque is the
minaret, which has been called the ‘symbol of Islam’ (Bloom 1989).

V

32

THE MOSQUE

THE MOSQUE

Though common today, the original function, origins and introduc
tion of the minaret in the eighth and ninth centuries have been the

subject of debate perhaps as a lighthouse, watch tower and so on
(Gibb and Kramers 1961: 340—1; Bloom 1989; Hillenbrand 1994: 129—
37). The importance of the minaret archaeologically is that in all its
—

existence of a number of largely unchanging features, which will in
turn allow (and have on numerous occasions allowed) the archaeol
ogical recognition of the mosque. It is at the second scale of analysis
that great variation in the presence of these
cultural diversity
features, and how they are organized and constructed, is apparent.

—

I

many forms it is a physical representation of the call to prayer (see

figure 2.1). It is usually a tower, attached to or near the prayer hail
containing a staircase leading to a balcony for the muezzin, who
makes the call to prayer.
Further features of the mosque which might be found include an
enclosed courtyard (sahn) attached to the sanctuary in which an

33

p

—

4

0

t

Cultural Diversity: Regional Traditions
Cultural diversity is best exemplified by regional traditions, and these
have been extensively covered elsewhere (see, for example, Hillen
brand 1994), but it is useful to draw upon Frishman and Khan’s (1994:
13) five basic categories and seven regional styles of mosque design by
way of illustration (see figure 2.2). Within them, numerous subtypes
exist as defined by materials, decoration and differences in layout.
With these must be considered the different types of mosque: Friday
and ward mosques, collegiate, monastic, tomb and cemetery mosques,
not forgetting temporary mosques and places of prayer used for
festivals or laid out by travellers and nomads. But, looking at the
mosques in figure 2.2, it can be seen that, though visually differing
quite considerably, the structuring principle is in operation, with
minarets, for example, along with defined thresholds visible.
Although we cannot see inside the mosques, it is almost certain that
a mibrab would be found set into the qiblab wall, used as they are in
all these types of mosque, however well or badly aligned. Moreover,
although Frishman and Khan (1994: 12) deliberately exclude the
mosques of the ‘Modern Movement’ as these take many forms, it is
probable that in the vast majority the structuring principle will be in
operation, above and beyond the most important requirement of
correct orientation. The actual recognition of these modern structures
as mosques, however, will, as discussed below, offer further chal
lenges to the archaeologist of the future, confronted by an everexpanding range of cultural diversity. Cultural diversity, or regional
tradition, can change, and the mosque can be adapted to suit context
and fashion, but the structuring principle behind the mosque as a
place of prayer, and the elements which result, cannot be altered
beyond certain limits.

ablutions area is situated, often centrally or near the entrance (see
figure 2.1). Washing prior to prayer is obligatory, and thus a fountain,
tap or pot of water should be provided for the use of worshippers.
This would certainly be archaeologically recognizable, and theoreti
cally may even allow doctrinal differentiation as, for example, the
Hanafis disagree with washing in anything but running water, pre
cluding the use of pots and pools of standing water (Kuban 1974: 9).
The entrance to the courtyard and thence to the sanctuary should also
be mentioned (see figure 2.1). Frequently imposing and ornate, it
serves as a portal between the world outside and the ‘tranquil atmo
sphere within’ (Frishman 1994: 41). These two further elements of the
prayer ritual might be archaeologically recognizable: the act of phys
ical separation from worldly concerns by stepping over the threshold
into the mosque courtyard, and ritual cleansing prior to entering the
sanctuary. A number of other features may or may not be present: a
screened area for women; a raised and screened enclosure (maqsura)
for the ruler or Imam; Qur’an stands and chests; and a dikka, a
platform formerly used by the muezzin to transmit responses to the
prayers to the congregation before the advent of loudspeakers (Gibb
and Kramers 1961; Kuban 1974; Dickie 1978); the maqsura and dikka
are unlikely to be found in modern mosques.
It is therefore possible to isolate a number of features which show
the structuring principle in action. Furthermore, although the basic
archaeological recognition of the mosque is by orientation, the
archaeologist can be helped by the existence of a number of other
features. For example, perhaps 90 per cent of mosques found will
have a mihrab, and a descending scale of features which might be
present can be proposed below this: minaret, ablutions area, minbar,
defined threshold, and a variety of less common items inside what is
usually a clutter-free, clean prayer space lacking the paraphernalia
associated with the places of worship of other world religions.
Thus, the requirements of the structuring principle lead to the

The Archaeological Study of the Mosque
What, then, of the mechanics of recognizing the mosque archaeol
ogically? What are the practical issues involved? And how can

r

34

35

THE MOSQUE

THE MOSQUE

4

archaeology contribute to our understanding of the mosque and, in
turn, Muslim society in general? To answer these questions, the
following discussion has been divided into three areas: archaeological
recognition, miscellany, and temporary mosques or ‘ephemeral’
structures.
Archaeological recognition

I

4

Churches to mosques The one concern to be found in the mosque is
orientation: prayer in the direction of Mecca. This is not only evident
in the excavation of ‘virgin’ mosques, as at Madinat al-Zahra, a city
founded in the tenth century by Abd al-Rahman III, a few kilometres
from Cordoba in Al-Andalus (Islamic Spain), where the south
eastern orientation is quite striking in comparison to the other build
ings (see figure 2.3), it is also visible archaeologically in the re-use of

I

Ii,

III
L

1+

.

4
.1

-

(f)

—=-.—: —i:

rooms

(g)
N

7
0

Figure 2.2 Simplified plan of types of mosque (not to scale). (a) Arabian
heartland, Spain and North Africa; (b) Sub-Saharan West Africa; (c) Iran and
Central Asia; (d) Indian subcontinent; (e) Anatolia; (f) China; (g) South-east
Asia (after Frishman and Khan 1994: 13)

I

25

50m
•1

Figure 2.3 The position of the mosque in relation to the palace, Madinat al
Zahra, Spain (after Triano 1992: 28)

36

THE MOSQUE

THE MOSQUE

other places of worship, most noticeably converted churches. Rather
than building anew, Muslims in many areas of the world, past and
present, have converted churches into mosques, as with the Hagia
Sophia in Istanbul, and this was a fairly common process through the
simple expedient of altering the fabric to a greater or lesser degree.
This process is often recognizable by archaeologists through the
change in axis and direction of prayer. It may be seen in the wider
context of ‘conversion’ practices, of adapting pre-existing holy places,
and was by no means confined to Muslims alone.
Numerous examples exist. In Syria, where the qiblah had to be due
south and churches faced east, Creswell (1958: 7) records that ‘it was
only necessary to close the western entrance (or three entrances),
pierce new entrances in the north wall, and pray across the aisles.’
In northern Jordan, the archaeological survey of two Byzantine
churches found that various alterations had been undertaken, includ
ing destroying and walling off the apses, with the new walls function
ing both to fill the gap and, ‘perhaps more importantly, to negate the
Christian direction of prayer that the apses indicated’ (King 1983:
134). Interestingly, the church towers were not touched as they were
designed as minarets ‘from the first’ (1983: 134). Church doorways
once blocked could be utilized as mihrabs or, as in Jordan, con
structed by removing a layer of stone from the church walls to create
a simple niche. The paramountcy of the qiblab and its archaeological
visibility are thus shown, and it appears that it is this process of
‘qiblarization’ which is of fundamental importance. As will be dis
cussed below, this process continues today in England.

Mosques to churches The conversion of mosques to churches is
perhaps less common, but is still archaeologically important. In for
mer Islamic Spain, for example at Almeria, the principal port of the
caliphate of Al-Andalus, the Great Mosque which was started in the
late tenth century was converted into a church following the Chris
tian reconquest in 1489. The qiblah wall forms the south wall of the
present church, and both the mibrab and what appears to be the
minbar niche survive to this day (Ewert 1971) (see plate 2.1). Simi
larly, on Gibraltar the congregational mosque was converted to a
church in the fifteenth century, and recent excavations have clearly
defined the mosque structure (Finlayson 1997). These actions of
conversion and re-conversion of places of worship illustrate that in
many areas we are not dealing with static processes. World religions
such as Islam expand and contract, following conquests and defeats or
other changes in circumstances, often on a large scale: witness the
disappearance of Islam in Spain or of Christianity in North Africa,

37

Plate 2.1 Former mosque, now Church of St John, Almeria, Spain (photo.
P. Mitchell)
for example. Archaeologists are well placed to investigate these phe
nomena through deciphering the legacy of material culture.

t

Buddhist and Hindu temples These processes were by no means
confined to a Muslim—Christian interchange. The vast extent of the
Muslim world, and the fluid, changing boundaries, meant that other
religions were encountered and diverse structures were converted
into mosques. The Friday mosque at Istakhr, ancient Persepolis, was
originally a palace hall of the Persian kings (Creswell 1958: 8); Zoro
astrian fire temples, and Buddhist, Jam or Hindu places of worship in
India were also converted. To quote Hillenbrand (1994: 35), ‘its
austerely simple liturgy meant Islam could appropriate almost any
kind of building for worship.’ Once again, the archaeologist is ideally
placed to investigate this. The immutable requirements of being
Muslim, the structuring principles, come into contact and mix with
many different peoples and cultures which together form the great
diversity of the Muslim world.
An interesting recent example of this comes from Kashmir, where
archaeologists have investigated a syncretism of Buddhist, Hindu and
Muslim traditions in mosque architecture. As well as building in the
style of pre-Islamic Buddhist stupa-courts and Hindu temples, actual
shrines were incorporated in mosques following Muslim domination
of the region in the early fourteenth centUry. The mosque of Shah

38

THE MOSQUE

Hamadan or Khanqah-i-Maulla, originally a shrine of
the
Kali, contains within it a spring dedicated to the goddes goddess
s, and ‘the
water flows down outside the structure where Hindus
offer worship
to Mother Kali’ (Shah 1993: 247). At the mosque and
tomb of Madin
Sahib the steps taken to convert this Hindu temple into
were minimal, the mosque being built on the temple plintha mosque
and the
fluted stone columns re-used; ‘only the superstructur
e of brick
walls was raised over it so as to convert it into a
mosque’ (Shah
1993: 255).
Similar examples can be found across South Asia. Sir
Alexander
Cunningham describes the re-use of columns from Hindu
temples in
the mosques of Jaunpur (1880: 112), while in Ahmadabad
(Gujarat)
building materials from Hindu temples were employed
along with
Hindu craftsmen themselves who brought with them their
artistic and
architectural repertoire (Soundara Rajan 1980: 11). But perhap
s
the best-known examples of the re-use of a Hindu temple one of
site, and
some of the masonry, is provided by the Quwwut-ul-Islam
mosque in
Delhi. Here, plaster was used to cover ‘offending’ sculpture,
much of
which has come off over time revealing Hindu carvings of
Vishnu,
Indra, Siva and Brahma along with figures of the seated
Buddha
(Stephen 1876: 47) (see plate 2.2). Through appropriating
a place of
worship Muslim domination could be stamped upon
an area: an
assertion of religious superiority to non-Muslim populations
which
occurred often in an immediate post-contact or post-conquest
situa
tion, when the need for such a visible statement might
be most
necessary.
Howevei it should also be remembered that Christians,
Jews
and others were not persecuted as a matter of course but,
on the
contrary, enjoyed protected status under Islamic law, as dhimm
i, or
protected persons. Protection achieved through the payment
of a
poll-tax, jizyab, provided a status which, among other things,
gave
freedom to conduct their own religious practices. This can
be
attested archaeologicahly. An inscription found inside a Roman
!
Byzantine thermae renovated in the early Islamic period at
al
Hamma on the River Yarmuk in Jordan began with a cross, was
in
Greek and was dedicated to the Caliph Mu’awiya, a discov
ery
which led Zeyadeh (1994: 124) to infer that ‘a Greek inscrip
tion
dedicated to the Muslim Caliph and with a cross suggests the degree
of freedom which the Christian community at al-Hamma enjoyed
in
Mu’awiya’s time.’
Mosque positioning Much information can also be gained throug
h
the archaeological study of the context and position of the mosqu
e

39

THE MOSQUE

—

\

Plate 2.2 Decorated columns from a Hindu building re-used in the Quw
wut ui-Islam mosque, Delhi (photo. T. Insoli)
within a settlement. As well as a religious statement, the construction
of a mosque can demonstrate secular concerns and statements serving
as a unifier of communities which, as has already been stressed, was
one of the primary aims of the Prophet’s mosque. The mosque can
also act as a symbol of authority and political power and, as will be
discussed later (see chapter 7), as a medium for conveying individual
secular status. Information on the growth of, and changes in, com
munities and settlements over time can also be gained through exam
ining locational data; for example, it may be possible to examine

r
40

THE MOSQUE

changes in the composition of Muslim religious
communities by
identifying different Islamic schools and sects through
inscriptions,
mosque layout and other features.
In the early Islamic period sacred and secular power
were usually
invested in the same individual, and the mosque was
constructed alongside the palace, emphasizing the lack of frequently
differentia
tion between the two spheres as, for example, at Basra,
Damascus
and
Fustat (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 347). The jami’
was the focus of
settlement, recognizable archaeologically, and the minbar
a symbol of
rule. However, quite quickly the separation of
secular and sacred
began, and the palace monopolized effective control
and functioned
both as the physical centre of the city and as the centre
of true power,
apparent, for instance, in Abbasjd Baghdad (see chapter
7). Never
theless, this did not necessarily mean that the close
relationship
between religion and the state dissolved, and material
culture can
again be informative in this respect. At Madinat
al-Zahra, for ex
ample, it can be seen that the caliph went directly from
a passage and bridge to the mosque, which he entered the palace via
through a door
adjacent to the mihrab in the double qiblah walls
uertas
(Fernández-p
1994: 103). Here mosque and palace were still
physically connected in
the tenth century.
The function of a mosque as a seat of power, an arbiter
of com
munities or indeed as a vital component of a Muslim
settlement
is
not, moreover, confined to sedentary communities.
It is found
throughout the Muslim world among sedentaries and
In Timbuktu (Mali), for example, the available evidencenomads alike.
suggests that
mosque building was of fundamental importance in creating
a unified
community in this city. Initially, it appears that
Timbuktu was
founded in two parts, one animist and largely inhabited
by blacks
(Djinguereber), the other Muslim and largely occupied
by white
Saharan nomads (Sankore), following a common pattern of
dual
cities
in the western Sahel and savam-iah in the eleventh to
twelfth centuries
(Insoll l996a, b, 1997b). In the early fourteenth century
were built in each quarter (extant today), but the quarters mosques
seem to
have remained divided, though this was to change in the
mid-fifteenth
century when a third mosque, also still standing, was built
at their
midpoint (Sidi Yahya). Thus, through the action of the
mosque being
built, these two quarters were both symbolically and
physically uni
fied (Saad 1983; 110; Insofi l996a).

Context and condition The presence or absence of certain categories
of material might also be informative in aiding recognition
mosque and elucidating possible phases of its use. A mosque of a
could

THE MOSQUE

41

be expected to be a relatively sterile, clean environment, probably
lacking the domestic or industrial debris and refuse often present in
secular buildings, perhaps in close proximity in the surrounding area,
and reflecting the sanctity and orderliness of the mosque setting,
sustained through the conscious separation of the world outside,
beginning with the defined entrance way or portal. The archaeol
ogical implications of this probable contrast in environment are
obvious, and could well aid archaeological recognition.
The possible presence of various other key features must also be
considered. An instance of the archaeological preservation of practi
cally all the mosque features discussed earlier is provided by the
congregational mosque at Siraf on the Iranian side of the Persian
Gulf. As well as the mibrab foundations and an ablutions area which
were recorded, the solid masonry base of a minaret, the shallow
depression left by the base of a wooden minbar, and even a slot
marking the position of a maqsura were all noted. If this were not
enough, the presence of former abutments was interpreted as possibly
indicating the existence of a dikka (Whitehouse 1980: 11, 23). These
features variously date from phases of rebuilding between the midninth and twelfth centuries and, of course, could not be expected to be
encountered in every instance, but show the possibilities which could
exist, above and beyond the minimum mosque requirements, and
what can be achieved through careful excavation and interpretation.

Miscellany
It is also instructive to look beyond the primary features of the
mosque to the details which could further aid our understanding of
Muslim communities based on archaeological material. Yet here no
universals will be found; instead, the information which archaeology
might provide will tend to be contextually specific, both temporally
and spatially. But this is obviously also of crucial importance, adding
the culturally specific flesh to the bones of our structuring principle,
so to speak. Furthermore, it is also necessary to re-emphasize the
need to adopt a multi-disciplinary approach in developing a socially
aware Islamic archaeology. For example, the significance of the
materials and their contexts would often be difficult, if not imposs
ible, to reconstruct without supporting evidence gained from eth
nography, history and anthropology.
Other fields of archaeology have moved onwards and matured
through the simple understanding that the wider the horizons
enjoyed, the greater the possibilities for interpretation. For example,
we might recognize a pot as a pot, but we would hope to know

42

THE MOSQUE

something more about its functions, possible socia
l sign
who might have used it, aided perhaps by informati ificance and
ethnography, practical studies and historical sour on gained from
ces. Likewise, we
might recognize a mosque as a mosque, and place
it within a regional
category, but it is probable that interpretation coul
d be taken a stage
further. Who used it? What makes it different?
Is it individualized?
Life can be breathed into description. For life, after
all,
with the social, of which we, as archaeologists, are surely equates
certainly in pur
suit. But while numerous examples illustrating the
rich diversity and
meaning of material culture associated with the
mosque
lim world could be provided, great selectivity has had in the Mus
to be exercised
in this volume.
Materials Ostrich eggshells, fig wood and pebb
les are three ex
amples of how the materials used within a mosque
can be of signifi
cance beyond their obvious function. Ostrich eggs
hells are frequently
displayed on the top of minarets in parts of
West Africa and the
Republic of Sudan (see plate 2.3). Purely decorativ
e?
the significance is deeper than this, for as well as havi Not wholly,
ng pre-Islamic
ancestry (in the Sudan at least) within the Muslim
context the shell
acts as a symbol of the unity of Islam, and is
of such cultural
significance that now that the ostrich has large
ly vanished in the
Sahel, ceramic copies are substituted (Laviolette 1994).
Similarly, the
very materials that a mosque could be built with
can function above
and beyond the decorative or utilitarian. Ahmed
(1984: 314), for
instance, relates how the Pukhtuns (Pathans) of Paki
stan use the
wood of the fig tree for beams in the mosque but
never burn it, the
reasoning behind this being that when the Prophet
was
tree lowered its branches and gave him a drink of milk a child, a fig
.
Significant materials can be as mundane as flooring mate
rial. At
Shanga on the coast of northern Kenya a mosque
dating from
between 750 and 850 was excavated (Horton 1991: 112)
with a pebble
floor. This type of floor, known to have been used in
other areas in
the early Islamic period, was laid as a convenient floor
ing
but also as a dust-control measure. This is remarked upon material,
elsewhere
in the Muslim world as a means of stopping peop
le clapping their
hands to get rid of dust after prayers, an act which
migh
sidered as part of the religious ceremony (Creswell 1958: t be con
12, quoted
in Horton 1991); hence a practical measure with imm
ense import
ance. The significance of mosque floors can also be seen
among the
Shi’ah, where the oniy notable feature setting them apart
from Sunnis
during prayer is their insistence during the prostratio
n phase of
prayer that ‘the forehead be placed on dust or the earth
(preferably a

THE MOSQUE

43

Plate 2.3 Ostrich eggshell displayed on the Sidi Yahya mosque, Timbuktu,
Mali (photo. T. Insoll)
block of baked mud from the earth at Karbala)’ (Momen 1985: 179).
All these examples could at first glance appear to be minor details, but
which when seen in their full context, through accompanying histori
cal or ethnographic sources, are all of great importance in recon
structing the whole picture within specific local or regional contexts.
Mibrabs and minarets Details of minaret and mihrab form and use
can also provide us with important culturally specific information

44

THE MOSQUE

Plate 2.4 Sacrifice remains in a mihrab, Green Island, Massawa,
Eritrea
(photo. T. Insoll)
beyond the concerns of aesthetics, decoration and architecture.
They
can tell us about the specific nature of the Muslim
community
who worshipped in a particular mosque. The conversion
of pre
existing places of worship and the structural incorporation of
nonMuslim features has already been touched upon, yet the
practice
of Islam is much more diverse and can encompass a wide
variety of
non-Muslim practices. One of the richest veins of material which
can be drawn upon to illustrate this is provided by
sub-Saharan
Africa where, over the centuries, dualistic ritual has developed
in
much of the continent (Insoll l996c). On Green Island off
Massawa
in Eritrea, traces of sacrifices made by fishermen are to be
found in
the mibrab of a small mosque (see plate 2.4), all of which
could
survive in the archaeological record. These include a whole young
goat and many pottery incense burners and braziers for
‘burnt
offerings’ as well as the resultant ashes. Similar practices
been recorded on the East African coast (Serjeant 1959: 447). have
Exam
ples such as these provide evidence for the existence of unortho
dox ritual practices in local contexts but can also illustrate
the
development of syncretic Muslim traditions, a theme to which we
will return.
Detailed information about more orthodox Islamic creeds can also
be obtained from the archaeological study of minaret and
rnihrab

THE MOSQUE

45

form. In certain instances, it may prove possible to differentiate
between the different sects of Islam based upon this evidence, though
the existence of supporting documentation would make such recon
structions more precise. A wide-ranging study of the mosques of
Zanzibar stone town (Sheriff 1992) has shown the various differences
between the mosque architecture of the Sunni and Ibadi communities
living there which could theoretically be archaeologically visible. The
egalitarian ethos of the Ibadis was manifest in the absence of a jami’
until recently, as none of the Omani rulers wanted to be elected to the
Imamate; an elected Imam is a requirement of Friday prayers. This
meant the absence of minbars. Secondly, their egalitarian and austere
ethos (they have been described as ‘the Calvinists of Islam’ by Gel!
ner 1981: 132) was further reflected in the shallow plain mibrab
because ‘their dogmas disapprove of their prayer leaders being iso
lated in the niche away from their followers’ (Sheriff 1992: 13).
Interior decoration was also lacking so that it did not distract the
worshippers. Furthermore, the minority status of the Ibadis led to
concealment which was achieved, for example, through the nonprotrusion of the mibrab niche in direct contrast to the Sunni com
munity, and by building a raised floor to the prayer hall so that their
rituals could not be observed, and thus attention drawn to them.
Finally, their mosques tended to be broad and shallow so that wor
shippers could obtain greater spiritual reward by being closer to the
qiblab, and minarets were rare.
A further and related example of the difficulties of establishing
doctrinal or sectarian recognition can be provided by examining the
staircase minaret as a possible indicator of the Ibadi sect. The staircase
minaret is described by Schacht (1961: 137) as the earliest type of
minaret in Islam, and consists of a flight of steps built on the corner
of the mosque which led up to the roof, where a sentry-box type
structure was situated for use by the muezzin for the call to prayer.
This type of minaret is found widely in East Africa, where its pres
ence has been recorded in archaeological contexts at Shanga, and in
West Africa, Anatolia, Iran, Tunisia and Egypt (Whitehouse 1972:
156; Horton 1991: 108). In certain areas there appears to be a correla
tion between the introduction of the staircase minaret and Ibadi
influences, as in West Africa (Schacht 1954), or the presence of
Ibadi communities, as in parts of Tunisia and in Zanzibar. But else
where no such correlations exist. The staircase minaret is common in
Sunni mosques in East Africa (Bloom 1989: 191), and Whitehouse
(1972: 156) mentions finding staircase minarets on both Shi’ah and
Sunni mosques at Taheri in Iran. In general, it would appear that no
universal translations of Ibadi tenets into mosque form exist, other

46

THE MOSQUE

THE MOSQUE

than a vague emphasis upon simplicity, and how this is achieved
depended upon local circumstances.
However, this is not necessarily discouraging for it has been shown
that an Ibadi mosque can be recognized in certain contexts. This
example serves to illustrate that fine-tuning of interpretations is poss
ible, but that this will not always be the case. Once it has been
established that the cruder structuring principles are in operation,
that the structure being examined is in fact a mosque, then the
other details can be examined more closely, with options considered
and accepted or rejected. It is hoped (assuming that the recognition of
presences and absences does not become an end in itself) that this will
aid the detailed reconstruction of a more complete Islamic archae
ology, mindful that much more can be made of archaeological evi
dence in all its many dimensions.
Impermanent and ephemeral structures
Temporary mosque1 Many Muslim communities are nomadic. The

requirement to pray exists, the structuring principle still operates, but
‘temporary’ or ‘ephemeral’ mosques have been ignored through being
perceived as lesser structures. As Islamic history neglects the ‘pro
ductive activities and material life’ (Keddie 1992: 49) of nomads, so
Islamic archaeology is guilty of the same omission. This presents a
distorted picture of the nature of the Muslim community, past and
present, usually in favour of the sedentary population. Ethnographic,
historical and archaeological sources tell us that many mosques and
prayer areas are not made from durable materials, but could still be
archaeologically visible. Depending upon doctrine, the requirement
for a building is not even a necessity: a marked-out space will suffice
(Gibb and Kramers 1961: 338). The first mosques of Islam were
sometimes more ephemeral in nature; at Basra in Iraq, for example,
the first mosque founded c.635 was, depending on the source fol
lowed, either simply a marked-out prayer area on the ground, or an
area enclosed with a reed fence (Creswell 1958: 9). By visualizing a
place of prayer as not necessarily only a ‘well-finished’ structure as
represented by the five types of mosque in figure 2.2, we expand our
possible interpretative horizons, even if they might be difficult or
impossible to recognize archaeologically in many instances.
An example of the great diversity which exists is provided by
Schimmel (1980: 107), who describes a variety of ephemeral places
of prayer which are found in the Indian subcontinent: huts of acacia
twigs in the Thar Desert of Rajasthan, places of prayer built of multi
coloured blocks of salt in the Khewra salt mines in the Punjab,

0

47

rectangular stone enclosures with semi-circular mihrab niches in
Baluchistan and Sind, bamboo oars bound together with fishing nets
and palates of swordfish used to mark out places of prayer in the
Makran. To these can be added many more among nomads in Africa
and Central Asia, for example. To many nomads, the ease of worship
which Islam offered may have been an attraction (Insoll 1996b);
the outline of a mosque could be scratched out on the ground, or a
crude enclosure built of stone or other readily available material.
Scratched mosque outlines were used among the Bedouin, both
while on the move in the Rub’ al-Khali (Empty Quarter) of Saudi
Arabia, and in their camps, where ‘nothing more than a place
drawn in the earth just to the east of the tent’ (Cole 1975: 127) was
used by men for prayer. More tangible was a stone ‘outline’ mosque
recorded at Ancient ar-Risha (Jordan) (Helms 1990: 73), dating per
haps from as early as the second half of the seventh century. This, it
was suggested, was once roofed at its southern end with fabric
supported on wooden rafters, the evidence being several ‘Y’-shaped
worked flints found near the qiblab wall, whose recovery in nomadic
contexts elsewhere allows the suggestion to be made that they might
have been used to attach guy-ropes, or some similar function (Betts
1990: 165).
To enumerate individually the probabilities of archaeological sur
vival of other types of temporary or ephemeral mosques is unneces
sary. However, undoubtedly some will form part of the
archaeological record, but which will survive is as much down to
chance as particular local circumstances such as environment and soil
conditions. Nomad prayer enclosures and mosques, for example, have
been recorded in various areas of the Muslim world, predominantly
in areas, perhaps not surprisingly, which are little visited by people
other than nomads. Throughout the western Sahara dry-stone cres
centic prayer walls are found, with similar structures built by the
Tuareg of the Hoggar in the central Sahara (Reygasse 1950; Mercer
1976: 144) (see figure 2.4). These .structures are somewhat difficult to
date being devoid of any associated dating evidence, but in the Negev
desert in Palestine, Rosen and Avni (1993: 198) have dated similar
dry-stone nomad mosques ‘to the earliest stages of the rise of Islam’
and, of even more interest, have suggested that ‘the juxtaposition of
the mosques and non-Islamic shrines reflects the transition from
paganism to Islam’ (1993: 198).
Portable ‘mosques’ Similarly transient, though permanently mani
fest places of prayer, arc prayer rugs, which can be used to provide a
clean place to pray almost anywhere. The literature on prayer rugs

48

THE MOSQUE

THE MOSQUE

49

archaeologically recognizable structure manifest in various forms and
materials, both more and less permanent, but the information which
can be gained from its study goes beyond mere recognition criteria. It
can attest to the contraction and expansion of the Muslim world, the
interplay with pre- and non-Muslim elements and the development of
syncretic traditions, enable the recognition of sects and doctrines, and
chart changes in power structures and community relations.
It is now pertinent to move on to examine material culture ‘in
action’ through three case studies, considering how Muslim religious
identity can be stated through the mosque in different ways: as a
symbol of religious dominance, in difficult or challenging circum
stances, and in new environments. Our three examples will illustrate
the diversity evident in mosque form, the operation of the ‘structur
ing principle’ and the meaning which can underlie the mosque, but
which could elude the archaeologist hampered perhaps by a much less
complete set of data.
Places of Prayer and Muslim Religious Identity
Figure 2.4 Simple dry-stone mosque, Hoggar, central Sahara (after Rey
gasse 1950: 43)

The Dome of the Rock

and carpets is vast, almost wholly because of their desirability to
Western collectors, but reduced to their barest essentials the prayer
rug acts as a personal place of prayer, easily moved and stored.
Almost always a mibrab design is incorporated into the rug which
can be oriented in the correct direction. They are common in Central
Asia, India, Iran and Turkey (Gassong 1987: 83), but are found in all
areas of the Muslim world. Prayer rugs are generally made for a single
person, but can also incorporate multiple mibrabs for the family or,
on an even larger scale, as a mosque carpet (Denny 1990: Sakhai
1991). Rugs and carpets can survive archaeologically, both as scraps
of material on archaeological sites, as at Fustat (Old Cairo), Quseir
al-Qadim (Egypt) and in Sinkiang (eastern Turkestan) (Thompson
1993: 67; Vogelsang-Eastwoocl 1993: 86), and also in the form of
strata on mosque floors, where (uniquely) in Turkey, the rugs and
carpets given to mosques by weavers have sometimes built up in such
a fashion that ‘from the layers accumulated over the centuries, it is
possible to reconstruct a fairly complete history of Turkish carpets’
(Thompson 1993: 66).
Archaeology can contribute to the study of the mosque in many
different ways, and thus in turn to that of Muslim society. It is an

The Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem is both the third holiest shrine in
Islam after the Ka’bah in Mecca and the Prophet’s mosque in Medina,
and the earliest building in Islam to survive in its original form (see
plate 2.5). It is not a mosque but is both a place of prayer and of
pilgrimage, and is included here because of its significance in the
creation of Muslim religious identity. The Dome of the Rock is
built on a large flat open area in the Old City, the Haram al-Sharzf,
the ‘noble sanctuary’, which is also known as the Temple Mount,
being the site of the three Jewish temples. The Dome enshrines the tip
of Mount Moriah, and is a site holy to Muslims, Christians and Jews
alike. Its significance to Muslims lies in the tradition that it was from
here that Muhammad made his Night Journey and ascended to Hea
ven. However, it has been argued that this tradition was not the
reasoning behind the original construction (Grabar 1959: 38), but
that the building served a variety of purposes, ‘a mixture of religion
and politics’ (Nuseibeh and Grabar 1996: 49). The Dome was com
missioned by Caliph Abd-Al-Malik and is dated 691—2; it comprises
an octagonal building capped with the famous golden (alloy) dome
which encloses a double ambulatory with the rock at the centre, in
which there is a small cave. It is richly decorated inside and out with
coloured marble tiles and mosaics, forming both textual, pictorial and

p

50

faith. These inscriptions are interpreted by Kessler (1970: 11) as
‘declaring for all to read Muslims or People of the Book that
Islam had superseded both Christianity in its doctrine of Jesus and
Judaism in its inheritance from David’. A further concrete statement
of the power and identity of the new faith.
The pictorial imagery inside the Dome of the Rock is also signifi
cant in this respect. Again, Grabar suggests an interpretative option
which is highly convincing in explaining why Byzantine and Sasanian
royal symbols were utilized, as these symbols ‘demonstrated that the
unbelievers had been defeated and brought into the fold of the true
faith’ (1959: 52). The fact that the Dome of the Rock is also influ
enced by Byzantine ecclesiastical architectural traditions has similarly
been interpreted as of importance: ‘this first monumental building of
Islam, planted in the heart of the supreme Christian city, modelled
after Christian churches and intended to surpass them in splendour’
(Kessler 1970: 12). The Dome of the Rock, though a unique building,
illustrates both the degree of interpretation which can sometimes be
achieved, and how material culture can be used to signal religious
identity. The theology, vitality and power of the new faith of Islam
are writ large in the Dome of the Rock, a new place of worship,
which through considered use of position, form and decoration lays
claim to, and supersedes, the pre-existing religious traditions.
—

I

Plate 2.5 The Dome of the Rock, Jerusalem (photo. T. Insoll)
abstract decoration. It is, to quote Nuseibeh and Grabar (1996: 27), ‘a
building of powerfully palpable substance that contains hidden and
unexpected meanings, a building that is not quite what it at first
appears to be’.
Grabar (1959), and to a lesser extent other scholars (see, for ex
ample, Kessler 1970), have reconstructed something of the meaning
and significance which underlay the construction of the Dome of the
Rock. First, the position of the Dome of the Rock is of importance,
built upon a site sacred to both Christianity and Judaism, and thus
symbolizing through its setting a victory monument, with Islam ‘as
the continuation and final statement of the faith of the People of
the Book’ and ‘of setting up a symbol of the conquering power
or faith within the conquered land’ (Grabar 1959: 57). The power of
Islam and its position as the revealed truth is further emphasized in
the inscriptions and imagery inside the Dome of the Rock. Several
bands of inscription run around the interior, one of which is 240 m
in length, with the majority of the text religious in nature and
composed of carefully and deliberately selected Qur’anic passages,
utilized in a unique form. Three basic points are emphasized, accord
ing to Grabar (1959: 54): the fundamental principles of Islam are
forcefully asserted, the special position of Muhammad and the
importance of his mission are underlined, and, thirdly, the position
of Jesus and other prophets is defined in the theology of the new

51

THE MOSQUE

THE MOSQUE

r

—

Hui mosques

In contrast to the Dome of the Rock, which acts as a supremely
powerful statement of Muslim conquest and the superimposition of
a new religious identity, the following exampleshows how this same
religious identity, encapsulated within the mosque, can be adapted
without breaking the structuring principle, while at the same time
taking ‘cultural diversity’ to new limits. The Hui Muslim commu
nities of coastal China provide an example of the adaptation and
evolution of Muslim material culture. This is because they have had
to adapt their identity as a Muslim minority within a non-Muslim
country, where ‘otherness’ and ‘belonging’ have to be accommodated
and ‘juggled’ in an ongoing relationship with their often hostile
neighbours. Hui is the name given to Chinese Muslims who do not
have a language of their own (in contrast with the Turkic-Altaic
languages spoken by the Muslim groups of Central Asia), but speak
that of the surrounding people (Gladney 1991: 20). The Hui are in
part descended from merchant communities (Arabs, Persians) who
settled on the coast of China from as early as the ninth century, and in
1990 they numbered about 8,500,000.

52

THE MOSQUE

53

THE MOSQUE

The ambivalent relationship between the Hui and the majority of
the Chinese population is eloquently attested in the mosque archi
tecture which has been developed. The core features of the mosque
are present, but the outward appearance of many of these structures
displays little or nothing to set them apart from traditional Chinese
architecture, helping to distract unwanted attention. Minarets could
be built in a pagoda shape as in the Great Mosque in Xian built in
1392, which is laid out in Chinese courtyard fashion, and where
dragon figures, a traditional Chinese decorative form with supernat
ural and celestial associations, were used as decoration on the minaret,
in a further fusion of Chinese and Muslim elements (Xiaowie 1994:
214, 222) (see figure 2.5). Xiaowie describes how this syncretism is
apparent in many other outward characteristics, including the capping
of the mibrab not with a dome but with a wooden roof, which

was not only a response to climate but ‘one of the essential formal
characteristics of indigenous Chinese architecture’ (1994: 211).
Minarets, it seems, could have a triple function: for the call to prayer,
to serve as the portal or entrance way, both obvious Muslim require
ments, but also as a ‘moon pavilion’ for observing the moon, a
Chinese tradition.
Yet it would be simplistic and incorrect to say that the Hui were
merely subservient in their relationship with the majority non-Mus
lim population, and that they sacrificed the structuring principle for
an easier life. On the contrary, although the exterior of the mosque
might be Chinese in appearance, the interior, the inward face, was
recognizably Muslim, a fact noted by commentators. ‘Our second
thought is, this place is clean. Those who know what a Chinese
temple is like, will appreciate this remark. Our third thought is,
here there are no hideous idols. The whole of the west end, the
Mecca side, is adorned with Arabesque in gold, blue and black,
some sentences from the Qu’ran being most conspicuous’ (Broomhall
1910: 185). Prayer halls were correctly oriented and mibrabs were
built. The Emperor’s tablets, which were kept in a prominent position
inside, and whose presence placed the Hui Muslim congregation
under imperial sanction, an important consideration, were the only
example of Chinese script to be found within the mosque. From
every external angle the Hui mosques might look Chinese pagoda
or pavilion minarets, courtyard gardens, traditional wooden roofs
but this was surface dressing to suit the social and political context. It
was part of the ‘double standard of behaviour’ described by Israeli
(1979: 169). Where it mattered, the mosque was a mosque, orientation
was unaltered, and other features, though adapted, were present the
minaret, mibrab, portal and so on. The structuring principle was thus
left intact.
The Hui mosque also provides an instructive example of how
the mosque can be read as a ‘social document’, imbued with a
significance to archaeologists far beyond its functioning as a place
of prayer. It is not solely a ‘dead’ structure of architectural or arthistorical interest, but imbued with a wealth of information on Hui
society and identity, its creation and maintenance over time. Similarly
with the Dome of the Rock, understanding of the significance of this
edifice has extended far beyond recording the structure and extolling
the virtues of its decoration; we understand its purpose and import
ance within its social context. But too often interpretative opportu
nities have been lost or passed over in Islamic, medieval or historical
archaeology in favour of the easier typological or cataloguing option.
These two examples might be unusual, but are not overly so; mosques
—

—

—

EL

L

Figure 2.5 Minaret built in pagoda style, Niu Jie mosque, Beijing, China
(after Xiaowie 1994: 216)

r

T
54

THE MOSQUE

THE MOSQUE

as places of prayer are social constructs built by, and filled with,
individuals. Even what might appear to be the most mundane of
mosques can tell us something about the community which used it
and thus provide valuable social information. This, after all, is what
we should be seeking to obtain, rather than only being preoccupied
with building plans and architectural styles, which even a quick
perusal of much of the literature shows to be still a continuing
fascination.

noted that the mosque authorities prefer to regard the community as
one unit, superseding ethnic identities, and thus, it could be said,
acting in the true spirit of the Muslim community, is how it should
be conceived.
As well as growing in numbers over the past 25 years, the cornmunity has also grown in strength and in actions, mirroring processes
apparent across the whole of Britain where the number of registered
mosques has grown from 16 in 1966 to 452 in 1990, the latest figures
found (Nielsen 1995: 45). Originally, in Cambridge, the incipient
community used a room in the City Guildhall for prayers (CEN
1973), which was obviously not ideal, but which could be adapted,
albeit temporally, as requirements dictated. In 1972, an ordinary
terraced house of a type found all over Britain, dating from the late
Victorian period, was bought as a more permanent place of commun
ity and prayer, number 175 Chesterton Road, where the two small
downstairs rooms were used as a mosque (see plate 2.6). Unfortu
nately, this was found to be unsatisfactory, as the house was
obviously built without the direction of Mecca as a primary concern,
a fact commented upon by a reporter from the local newspaper, the
Cambridge Evening News: ‘those praying are in lines at an angle
across the room, facing the south-east corner’ (CEN 1976). A further
problem was that planning permission to use the house as a mosque
had not been obtained; the City Council therefore served an enforce
ment notice, which was given a stay of execution while another
property was sought (CEN 1981a, b).
The third, and current, location which was chosen as a place of
prayer was originally a gospel hail, then a meeting house of the
Plymouth Brethren and, finally, a social centre for the Co-operative
Society. It began to be used as a mosque in September 1982 (CEN
1982, 1988). Although still not ideal, in many ways the new location,
which became the Abu Bakr Siddiq Islamic Centre in Mawson Road,
was much more suitable, primarily because the orientation is right;
prayer can be said, by chance, on exactly the right alignment by
making use of the original layout of the building, which is also,
being a hail, relatively open and spacious. Secondly, the former
choir or stalls area upstairs serves as a ready-made area for women.
The necessary alterations have been minimal: ‘those who look for
minarets or listen for the distant sound of the imam. will, however,
be disappointed. The church hall-like building has mundane sloping
roofs, while any sounds from the imam would be lost in the roar of
nearby traffic’ (CEN 1985). The process of converting pre-existing
places of worship to mosques, which was discussed earlier, is here
being continued.

The Cambridge mosque
A third example of how Muslim religious identity can be manifest
through the mosque is provided by the Cambridge mosque. As
with many of the subjects discussed in this volume, it is important
to draw in modern examples to reinforce the point that Islam is not
static, but a vibrant living religion. Furthermore, by considering
contemporary examples, the privileged position of the Islamic
archaeologist as an observer of a living religion is re-emphasized.
Although the core tenets of the religion remain unaltered, fresh
challenges are faced by many recently established Muslim commu
nities in North America and Western Europe. An obvious part of
these challenges is how to adapt the situation to Muslim require
ments, perhaps in the face of financial and other constraints, such as
planning laws. The mosque as a symbol of a Muslim community and
a place to pray is usually one of the first priorities, and many in
genious solutions have been adopted in creating places of prayer and
community.
The Muslim community in Cambridge, England, can be used as an
example. This community numbers some 2,000 individuals, having
grown rapidly from about 70 in 1973 (CEN 1973). The ethnic origins
and social backgrounds of the community are diverse, with the
majority from Pakistan and Bangladesh, and others from India, Tur
key, Morocco, East Africa, and Saudi Arabia, for example. Some 20
converted European families also form part of the community. Shop
keepers, restaurateurs, engineers and many other occupations are
represented (CEN 1990) and, not surprisingly, considering that Cam
bridge is a university town, university students and staff, visiting
scholars and researchers are well represented. The presence of the
university and a large sector of high-technology industry does in fact
mean that the Cambridge Muslim community is probably more
mixed than in other medium-sized cities in Britain. However,
although it might be convenient for the sake of academic procedure
to break the community down into its component parts, it should be

55

.

.

r

56

57

THE MOSQUE

THE MOSQUE

Tennyson Rd

House to be
converted
Kitchen

Ablutions

L

Qiblah

U)
1)

0
C,)

Mosque
extension

>

Qiblab

>
C)

Clock
Women’s toilets
and ablutions
area above
Shoes
Lower
floor office

Minbar

—

Prayer
room
F
Library

,-

-

Gallery for
women and
girls

—

-

Loudspeakers
Hadith, Qur’an,
general Islamic
works
Stairs to
first floor

Mawson Rd

Figure 2.6 Plan of the interior of the Mawson Road mosque, Cambridge
(not to scale)

Plate 2.6 Former mosque, Chesterton Road, Cambridge (photo. T. Insoll)
As figure 2.6 shows, the interior of the mosque is plain and unclut
tered. It is divided into two parts. The former church meeting hail
contains the cloakroom, women’s area and one prayer hall where a
minbar and copies of the Qur’an and other religious texts are stored.
Adjacent to this a second prayer hail has been added in which the
Imam stands to lead Friday prayers, directed via a microphone relay
throughout the building. Due east of the qiblab wall are the ablutions
area and a kitchen. Entrance is through the main western doorway or
via a passage which leads into the second prayer hail. Noticeably, a
mibrab is absent. At normal daily prayers between 30 and 50 people

are usually present, but for Friday prayers and at festivals these
numbers increase dramatically, highlighting the lack of space. The
primary disadvantages of the mosque are the general lack of space
and the inconvenient position of the ablutions area, as well as a
preference for a building aligned so that more worshippers can be
accommodated parallel to the qiblah (Au 1996). A programme of re
building is planned to solve these difficulties, and ideally the senti
ments expressed in 1981 still hold true to build a mosque, ‘in the
classical style with a gold-decorated dome and a minaret’ (CEN
1981b) but finances are unlikely to allow this option, even if the
planning authorities were amenable to such a suggestion.
The development of the Cambridge Muslim community over the
past 25 years, and the resulting material culture, are important to the
themes discussed in this volume in a variety of ways. First, and
fundamentally, is the fact that this example shows that a Muslim
—

—

58

THE MOSQUE

sacred space, no different in ethos to that encountered in the per
ceived Islamic heartlands, is now to be found in a new environment.
Although the material culture translation of the church hail to the
requirements of a mosque are minimal, this structure is unmistakably
a mosque when one sets foot inside. Its function as the centre of
worship remains the same as that evident in Jerusalem or on the coast
of China. But how would the archaeologist define this structure in
the form it is today 200 years hence? If the contents were complete,
the identification would be immediate, but divest of these and levelled
to its foundations it would be much more difficult: only an empty
space with an east—west orientation would remain, no traces of mih
rab, minaret or minbar, thus differentiating it little from any other
hail. In this respect, it provides a sobering reminder of what can elude
the archaeologist.
Summary and Conclusions
The mosque is the material culture embodiment of one of the funda
mental components of Muslim life, the obligation of prayer, an
immutable pillar of belief and of being Muslim. The origins of the
mosque can be traced directly back to the Prophet, as regards both its
religious and social significance. The latter element is of crucial
importance: the mosque, as well as its religious role, also serves as a
perpetuator of the Muslim community, through acting as its centre
and, as is apparent in so many areas of Muslim life, as a unifier of the
secular and sacred domains. The mosque is found in a similar form
throughout the Muslim world, and should be recognizable for what it
is in the archaeological record. Yet diversity is great, and numerous
types of mosque exist, from the most ephemeral to vast edifices, but
all are subject to the structuring principle, even if this is only repres
ented in its simplest form through a concern for correct orientation.
This in turn is one of the most pertinent points which can be drawn
for the archaeology of religion in general: that a place of worship can
encompass such a vast range of forms within a set of prescribed limits,
and that pre-existing structures can be absorbed and adapted with
minimal effort to suit the requirements of a different religious tra
dition, leaving recognizable material culture residue for the archaeol
ogist to interpret. Churches and temples to mosques, mosques to
churches and temples, the targeting of other holy places as the pre
eminent place to stamp religious identity would appear obvious, but
perhaps a pre-existing religious structure also appeals for other

THE MOSQUE

59

reasons, questions which remain largely unexplored in terms of
archaeology and world religions.
It is also obvious that many challenges undoubtedly await the
archaeologist of the future as the modern movement takes hold, and
regional diversity disappears under the spread of a uniform concrete
mosque in a vaguely ‘oriental’ style. Such architecture has been
recorded as far afield as Albania and Uganda (Vickers 1995; Insoll
1997a), and is built with the best of intentions, but creates what has
been termed, a ‘pan-Islamic style’ employing a universal ‘kit of
standard parts’, elements such as the dome and minaret, ‘as a result
of pressures to become more “normative” and international, as well as
of a conscious desire on the part of Muslim communities to be seen as
Muslim’ (Khan 1994: 267). However, such developments offer far
from insurmountable challenges for the archaeologist, and, on the
contrary, present exciting possibilities for future research in the
archaeology of Islam.

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

3

The Domestic Environment

Believers, do not enter the dwellings of other men until you have asked
their owner’s permission and wished them peace.
Qur’an. The Light 24: 27

While the mosque could perhaps be expected to accord with a fairly
standard form (and therefore be archaeologically recognizable), what
of the domestic environment which is not imbued with any overt
religious importance? Does this form a significant component of
Muslim life, or is it somehow neutral and merely confined to the
secular domain? Before examining specific ‘Muslim’ examples of the
use and creation of domestic space, it is as well to draw in certain
strands of current thinking on the social role of the domestic envir
onment.
Archaeologists appear to have come rather late in comparison with
other related disciplines to realize that a structure used for domestic
purposes does more than just provide shelter. It is an environment
which is thought out prior to construction and becomes the ‘physical
embodiment of an ideal environment’ (Rapoport 1969: 48, 1980). It
has been referred to as a ‘structuring structure’, both a medium for,
and the outcome of, social practices (Bourdieu 1977; Giddens 1979).
It is the home of the family unit, ‘the foremost and fundamental
institution of human society’ (Mawdudi 1986: 39), and the one
which forms the primary sphere in the Islamic social order. Thus,
the domestic environment can tell us much about society, beyond
merely illustrating the technological choices available to the builder,
and the architecture preferred by a society. It is also the environment
for family life within which children are raised, and in which social
codes and gender roles are defined, taught and transferred. In these

61

events, the house itself (here meant in its broadest definition) need not
be a passive player, but can be utilized, consciously or unconsciously,
in teaching processes and in perpetuating social codes and values.
Thus space can be used to reproduce the social or cosmological
order (Moore 1986), and the very structure and layout of the house
can be a metaphor for society (see Cunningham 1964; Humphrey
1974; Hugh-Jones 1985). To quote Carsten and Hugh-Jones (1995: 2),
‘house, body and mind are in continuous interaction, the physical
structure, furnishing, social conventions and mental images of the
house at once enabling, moulding, informing and constraining the
activities and ideas which unfold within its bounds.’ Archaeologists
have similarly become interested in viewing domestic architecture as
imbued with a greater social significance than previously acknow
ledged (see, for example, Kent 1990; Samson 1990; Parker Pearson
and Richards 1994). This is of great significance as domestic
structures are one of the categories of archaeological evidence
most frequently encountered by archaeologists, and within Islamic
archaeology this is no exception.
Having stressed that the domestic environment is far from neutral,
is it possible to define a type of domestic architecture as specifically
Islamic? Can it be said to be distinctive, even with an idealized
generalized form? Although culturally diverse, there is a definable
Islamic domestic architecture, and this has been studied in some detail
both by architects and archaeologists (see, for example, Petherbridge
1978; Fentress 1987, Campo 1991). However, one of the primary
concerns of this study has rarely, if at all, been considered, namely,
the archaeological analysis and recognition of Islamic domestic struc
tures. For example, if the archaeological recognition of nomads,
including their architecture, is considered (as by Cribb 1991), then
Islam is not considered as a structuring principle, even though the
majority of the groups used as examples are Muslim, and in many
cases their religion could have been of fundamental importance in
structuring their domestic space.
In contrast, where Islamic domestic structures have been consid
ered, there has often been a tendency to focus upon the grander
monuments, a further instance of ‘top-heavy’ Islamic archaeology
and architectural studies. As has been generally voiced elsewhere
(Petherbridge 1978: 193—5; Rudofsky 1981: 1), study of the vernacular
is usually neglected in favour of largely non-representative palatial
architecture which, when the full corpus of domestic architecture is
considered, forms a numerically insignificant part. Archaeological site
plans might portray a central cluster of buildings perceived as import
ant, a citadel perhaps, but the periphery, perhaps of less permanent,

62

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

and thus more archaeologically ephemeral, structures, is given short
shrift or left unstudied. This imbalance in the study of the archae
ology of the Muslim domestic environment is unfortunate, as again
the archaeologist interested in Islam is privileged in the sources of
information available in pursuing this field of study (textual, ethno
graphic, iconographic). Thus, this chapter will be concerned with
defining what constitutes Muslim domestic architecture, exploring
the criteria for its recognition archaeologically, and placing it within
its social context.

Women and children’s
quarters

1996).

Obviously, the concept of privacy was not invented by Muslims,
but domestic space is referred to in both the Qur’an and the hadith,
where the sanctity of the house is indicated, and strict rules to main
tain domestic privacy are outlined (see Petherbridge 1978; Campo
1991). The primary and over-riding concern is with privacy and the
protection and seclusion of women (in certain cultural contexts
referred to as purdah) and the sanctity of the family. Both wife and
domestic space are to be protected, and domestic life is linked to ideas
of purity. Indeed, Campo (1991: 21) suggests that Muslim ‘rules
governing access to domestic space are regarded as similar to rules
governing exposure of and access to the human body’. To achieve
this, physical space is often segregated into two spheres, whether two
halves of a tent, within a single or double courtyard or spread over

Inner private
courtyard

_T

i
Private

Private

I
Kitchen!
for
guests

An Ideal Islamic Domestic Environment

The model for the Muslim household can be regarded as that of the
Prophet, and the courtyard house built by the Prophet in the first
year of the hzjrah (622) in Medina as the first Muslim domestic
structure. Although often seen as the progenitor of Muslim domestic
space, it was in fact based on existing west Arabian architectural
traditions, and the pre-Islamic architectural heritage must be
acknowledged. The Prophet’s house itself, as far as it has been recon
structed historically, consisted of a rectangular walled courtyard, in
which livestock were kept, and on one or more sides of which were
rooms for sleeping, storing goods, and for each wife and her children.
The house functioned as both a dwelling and a meeting place for
believers (Cresswell 1932: 7; Marcais 1965: 113; Fentress 1987: 63).
The terminology applied to the Muslim house varies, but the most
frequently encountered Arabic names are dar, for the enclosed com
pound, and beit or bayt, for smaller dwellings, and a name which can
also be applied to a tent as in bayt sha’ar (Campo 1991; Petersen

63

Men’s
jquarters
Semi-private
courtyard

bi

Entrance
Street

Figure 3.1

Stereotypical layout of an idealized Muslim courtyard house

several palatial complexes. The private area is for family life, includ
ing the harem or women’s quarters, which is the arena for domestic
activities and from which all men except immediate male relatives
(husbands, sons, brothers) are usually excluded. The second area
forms a male—communal sphere, usually referred to within the litera
ture as ‘public’ or ‘semi-public’, and which can include a reception
room or rooms, or area where guests (usually male) are entertained,
and possibly separate men’s living quarters (see figure 3.1). Numerous
permutations are possible, and many devices can be used to ensure
privacy.
Within the traditional courtyard house, the dominant permanent
type which might be encountered archaeologically, privacy can be
further maintained through a deliberate inward orientation of space.
Exterior windows, which are usually few, are above street level to
avoid views inward, and the exterior walls are usually austere and
undecorated and entered by a single door; a second (women’s) door is
sometimes present. Angled entrance ways are employed to deny the

64

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

passer-by a view into the interior of the house, and guest rooms are
placed close to the entrance so that the family quarters are left
undisturbed (Al-Azzawi 1969). It should be noted, however, that
Muslim houses do not have a monopoly of features developed to
promote privacy. These predate Islam in many areas, as in Ancient
Greece, examples from which Nevett (1994) discusses and compares
with Islamic houses, and also in Assyria, and equally with many nonMuslim Byzantine period houses, including those described by Wool
ley and Lawrence in southern Palestine (1936: 92—3). Similarly,
domestic features promoting privacy can also be found today
among adherents of different religions, Jews, Christians and others.
Allied with the social requirements which Muslim domestic archi
tecture might aim to satisfy, cultural and environmental factors must
also be considered. It is perhaps best to define traditional Muslim
domestic architecture as a mélange of varying local cultural, religious,
social and environmental factors, and Rapoport (1969: 17) raises the
need to differentiate between the primary forces acting on house form
and those which he terms secondary or modifying. As regards the
Muslim domestic environment, the relative dominance of various
factors will vary, and it is the innumerable secondary or modifying
forces which serve to create the diversity found. But it is apparent
that to attribute the development of Muslim domestic architecture to
purely economic or environmental factors would be wrong. As will
be discussed in greater detail below, what might at first glance appear
as solely utilitarian, need not be so; the mashrabiyya or boxed
wooden lattice-work window screens, which were commonly used
in many regions of the Muslim world, provide a case in point (see
plate 3.1). They both reduce glare and allow the entry of cooling
breezes, but at the same time can provide privacy for women to
observe the world beyond the domestic unit without being seen
(Oliver 1987: 120—3).
Regional diversity has to be acknowledged, but a common concern
can be seen to run through the entire spectrum of Muslim domestic
architecture, from the palaces of the rich to the tents of the pastoral
ists. This (where observed, and this is, and even more so, was fre
quent) is a preoccupation with maintaining privacy through gender
segregation and the separation of the domains of public and private
life. Yet this explicit spatial division into public equals male, and
private equals female, can be criticized for being too rigid in its
definition (see figure 3.2). It has been argued that, through the
terminology used, the fact that women also visit each other is denied,
and in reality there is a constant but less visible round of public life in
the female sphere, which renders it not really private at all (Webster

Plate 3.1

65

Mashrabiyya, Massawa, Eritrea (photo. T. Insoll)

1984; Maclean 1996), with women exercising ‘veiled power’ (Webster
1984: 256). Male ‘public’ space is thus pushed to the fore at the
expense of a de-valued ‘domestic’ female space. This is a valid criti
cism of somewhat restrictive terminology and in many ways the
category of ‘male communal sphere’ is preferable to ‘public’, as is
‘female communal sphere’ to ‘private’.
To the archaeologist, who for interpretative simplicity likes the
existence of common codes or rules, the existence of these separate
domains, however termed, is reassuring. But as with all the other
categories of material culture discussed, exceptions do occur, and how
space is demarcated can vary and need not necessarily be fixed. As
Carsten and Hugh-Jones note, ‘we should then be wary about
describing the house as a structure of unchanging gendered opposi
tions’ (1995: 41). Yet, the existence of these public/private spatial
domains means that a definable Muslim domestic space exists. How
ever, we can recognize a Muslim domestic space not merely
4.

66

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

of investigation: how can Muslim domestic space be visualized
both horizontally and vertically in buildings, and how can the
essential structuring principles be recognized in more ephemeral
materials.

Semi-public (semi-private)
space

/

//
///

.

II

L

Coffee
house

/‘

4

ens
erublic

I

I Transition point

Figure 3.2

67

4\que
\quiet, public)
house
(men’s social)
Street
(public realm)

Spatial domains in Isfahan (after Rapoport 1969: fig. 3.14)

because of a spatial divide; furnishings, inscriptions, individuals all
create the image. But it is when we come to try to recognize a
domestic space archaeologically, basing this identification solely
upon the existence of these separate domains, that difficulties
arise. A terraced house in Leicester, England, for example, reduced
to a ground plan or standing as an empty structure, though
perhaps inhabited by a Muslim family for many years, and perhaps
formerly curtained or partitioned into separate areas, would defy
identification. It is not possible to define a Muslim domestic
space utilizing plan alone; in this manner it could not be set apart
from a Christian, Hindu or secular domestic structure which shows
privacy concerns. Not all Muslim domestic structures do or have
maintained a public/private divide, and Muslims do not and have
never maintained a monopoly on privacy. The only way in which
the Muslim domestic structure can be archaeologically identified is
if it is found in company with other categories of archaeological
evidence.
Archaeological Recognition

Assuming that we are investigating the Muslim domestic environment
as part of a complete package, the practical issues which might be
of interest to the archaeologist can best be summarized as the axes

Permanent structures in stone and brick
The horizontal axis The most frequent level of archaeological inves
tigation of domestic architecture will be upon the horizontal axis, for
two main reasons. First, single-storey dwellings are much more com
mon than multi-storey ones: probably over 70 per cent of the world’s
total today according to Oliver (1987: 136), and the figure was almost
certainly even higher in the past. Secondly, very rarely will standing
structures be preserved in the archaeological record. No hard and fast
rules exist, but within the rural environment it is probable that single
storey Muslim dwellings will be more frequently encountered. While
pressures of space in the urban environment, certain defensive situa
tions and specific environmental conditions (for example, taller
houses can capture breezes, as on the Red Sea coast) will facilitate
the use of multi-storey houses (Petherbridge 1978). In many cases
only the strength or depth of foundations will suggest upper storeys.
Although numerous regional traditions exist which dictate differ
ences in how this space is structured (see, for example, Marcais 1965
for a summary of regional variations in domestic architecture, their
development and spread), archaeological excavation of the horizontal
axis in many areas of the Muslim world has provided data which
supports the existence of public and private spaces, as argued for
above, but this could only be defined as ‘Muslim specific’ because it
was found in association with other categories of evidence, or identi
fication was achieved by using other sources of evidence such as
historical documents. Examples include Siraf (Iran) where courtyard
houses dated to c.1000 were found. These were originally multi
storey buildings, but the walls only survived to a maximum height
of 3.5 m (Whitehouse 1970, 1971). Similar courtyard houses were
recorded at Sétif (Algeria), where Fentress (1987: 65—6) charted
changes between the tenth and eleventh centuries, with a greater
emphasis on the seclusion of women becoming apparent. In the
later phase, the courtyard was divided into two sections, in one case
by a suite of rooms, in another by a wall ensuring that male visitors
did not have to pass through the women’s quarters to reach the
reception rooms. Likewise, in what has been termed the ‘Abbasid
popular quarter’ at Samarra (Iraq), houses were often linked by
secondary doorways, perhaps, as al-Janabi has suggested (1983:

68

69

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

308), ‘reflecting the extension of families by marriage, or possibly
even an earlier Mesopotamian combination of separate public and
domestic quarters’. A further variant of the courtyard house is the
iwan, which differs from the previously discussed Maghrebi and
Persian examples in its layout, and is defined as ‘a room enclosed
by three walls, opening out in the whole width of the fourth side’,
and open to the courtyard space (Marcais 1965: 113), examples were
recorded at Fustat, the initial Muslim settlement in the vicinity of
Cairo (see Scanlon 1970a; Kubiak 1982; see chapter 7). This type of
house is extensively found throughout Central Asia, Iran and the
Middle East.
Similar spatial concerns can be seen within palatial complexes, and
Hillenbrand (1994: 377, 381) makes the point that, although palaces
are something of a problematical category, they meet all the private
and official requirements of Islamic decorum. They replicate and
amplify the smaller everyday domestic environment on a much larger
scale, with their public audience quarters, private rooms, strongly
fortified entrance and storerooms, magnifications of features found
in smaller houses. Some palaces were even in part composed of mul
tiples of courtyard houses, as in the eleventh-century Palais de la
Salut at Qal’a (Algeria) (Fentress 1987: 60), and certain of the
Umayyad ‘desert palaces’ of Syria and Palestine were comprised of
a number of bayts, each housing a tribal or family unit (Petersen 1996:
296), with some of the latter inhabited by Muslims but built by
Byzantine architects. Yet, obviously, we should not take the analogy
between palaces and more humble domestic environments too far, as
most houses do not contain features such as mosques and baths.
Examples on the horizontal dimension can also be found at the
very base of the domestic architectural spectrum. In the village of
Ti’innik (Palestine) during the sixteenth to mid-eighteenth centuries,
up to seven or eight single-room houses (bayt) were clustered
together within walled courtyards (hawsh). Though built like this
for defence, Muslim requirements regarding social relations were
not relaxed, and thus dictated that the occupiers of each hawsh
were members of the same extended family (Ziadeh 1995: 1004—5).
The existence of structured Muslim domestic space is also found
within military installations. In the garrison fortress of Qasr Ibrim,
220 km south of Aswan (Egypt), characteristic double courtyard
houses were built in stone during the Ottoman occupation (late
sixteenth to early nineteenth centuries), with a clear subdivision into
distinct male and female areas (Adams 1990: 4—7), forming recogniz
able public and private domains. These certainly indicated a changed
social pattern from that of the previous Christian and pre-Christian

settlements, and the arrival of a Turkish military garrison (Alexander
1988: 86, 1994). Far to the west in Al-Andalus similar spatial concerns
were also evident in Granada. Within the Alcazaba, the fort attached
to, but preceding, the Alhambra, the capital of the Nasrid kingdom in
Granada dating from the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, 17
houses for guard families were found, ‘laid out in the characteristic
Islamic urban pattern’ (Lopez 1992: 154), with angled entrance ways,
and attention focused inwards on the courtyards.

p

p

I.

The vertical axis Spatial structuring according to Muslim social
requirements need not only be projected in the horizontal dimension,
but vertically as well. It is perhaps too easily forgotten that a multi
storey building could equally be structured spatially into male and
female, family and guest areas, a factor of great importance where
space might be restricted for many reasons, especially in the urban
environment. At the Ottoman fortress on Sai Island in the Sudan, a
roughly contemporary southern companion to Qasr Ibrim, men
tioned previously, mud-brick houses of up to three storeys were
recorded still standing (Alexander 1997b; see also Vercoutter 1958;
Alexander 1997a). These structures could have been similar to the socalled ‘castle’ houses found along the same stretch of the Nile (Adams
1987: 334—8; Insoll 1996c: 453), but at Sai were perhaps less overtly
defensive in character, surrounded as they were by a substantial wall.
This fact is indicated by the surviving slots for the now-missing
mashrabiyyas which were recorded, a feature which parallels the
houses of the Red Sea coast, such as those in the abandoned town
of Suakin where numerous multi-storey houses survive (Greenlaw
1995).
Possibly the best-known examples of muiti-storey housing in the
Muslim world are the ‘tower houses’ of Yemen, clustered in the
mountainous central plateau and San’a, the capital (Kirkman 1976;
Serjeant and Lewcock 1983). These extraordinary structures provide
us with an example of how the public and private domains, most
frequently encountered horizontally, can also be articulated through
vertical space (see figure 3.3). Beginning at the ground floor, interior
space is highly structured, fulfilling both practical and social require
ments, through between five and nine storeys. Of importance within
this context is the relationship between the mafraj, the principal
reception room for men, and the private quarters of the women
(including the kitchen). The former is usually located on the topmost
floor, while the latter are situated just below. Practicality and social
requirements are combined. For example, chance encounters on the
staircase can be avoided through the presence of strategically placed

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

a

animal stalls

d

diwan

e
g
h

entrance hail
grinding mills
excrement room
grain and fruit store
k kitchen
I lobby
lb lavatoryIbathr00

m mafraj
o
r
u

loading and mounting animals
room: general use and sleeping
Store
terrace
shaft

z

manzar

S

Figure 3.3 Vertical utilization of space in a
San’a tower house (not to scale)
(from Lewcock and Serjeant 1983: 458)

71

wooden grilles which allow women to observe who is on the stairs.
Similarly, the open-work wooden box windows, already referred to,
have an aperture in their base to ‘allow women to see down to the
street and control access to the house’ (Kirkman 1976: 54).
What might be of cultural importance here is what Gerholm (1977:
163) terms Yemeni ‘sensitivities to height difference’. This is certainly
not a Yemeni Muslim prerogative, but perhaps status was also
involved in reaching such heights in construction (perhaps as well as
something as mundane as wanting a pleasant view!), while at the
same time not infringing upon social codes. Another factor which
should be considered is that being a Muslim gave, as is universally
found in the Muslim world, superior status. Jewish houses in San’a
and elsewhere could not overlook Muslim ones, in case Muslim
women were observed and Muslims should similarly not be able to
overlook their neighbours. Jewish houses were thus restricted to two
storeys, and differed architecturally from Muslim houses in many
other ways (Lewcock and Serjeant 1983: 497; see also Rathjens
1957). These are factors which could be archaeologically discernible,
and might facilitate the identification of different religious commun
ities.
Another example of the vertical utilization of domestic space is
provided by contemporary African-American Muslim communities
who live in blocks of flats. Here, choice is restricted as these
communities do not live in a Muslim society; however, at the same
time, they attempt to differentiate themselves and demarcate their
domestic space from the outside world (McCloud 1995: 105—6). To
achieve this a variety of mechanisms are utilized. Where feasible,
complete blocks of flats are bought; failing this, emphasis is placed
upon signalling the existence of a Muslim domestic space at the
entrance to the home, through calligraphy, stickers and similar
mechanisms. Inside, space is ‘gender neutral’ unless visitors are
present, then the public—private divide becomes apparent, as does
gender segregation, the living, room for men, the kitchen for
women. To quote McCloud, ‘in their domestic spaces, African Amer
ican Muslims have thus taken small portions of various Muslim
cultures and woven an interesting tapestry that transcends (without
denying) both their American nationality and their ethnicity. They
have, in short, created a space for Islam inside the boundaries of
Western architecture and culture’ (1995: 110). Just how this would
be recognizable to the archaeologist of the future presents great
problems: the fabric of the home does not set it apart from those
occupied by non-Muslim neighbours, other than that the windows
are covered.

72

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

Impermanent and ephemeral structures

Both nomadic pastoralists and sedentary agriculturists living in
struc
tures built of less durable materials have obviously been attracted to
Islam since the beginnings of the religion (see plate 3.2). The fact that
such people frequently live in shelters constructed of
ephemeral
materials, cloth, skin or reeds for example, does not mean that they
were excluded from structuring their domestic space according to
Islamic custom.
Tents This incorporates a huge range of structures
utilized by
numerous ethnic groups over a vast region and time period. Four
examples drawn from the substantial literature which exists will be
discussed to illustrate to what degree the tented domestic environ
ment can be structured to fulfil Muslim requirements where they
are
followed.
Among the Bedouin of the Arabian peninsula, the customary shel
ter, the textile ‘black tent’, is divided into men’s and women’s
spaces
(see Feilberg 1944; Faegre 1979). This separation is
maintained
through a dividing curtain, the qata. The men’s side, usually
the
smaller, is covered with carpets and cushions for guests. Here
also

Plate 3.2 Kazakh family in front of tent, early twentieth century (Haddon
Collection, Cambridge)

I

I

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

V

73

will be a hearth for preparing coffee and all the accompanying accou
trements. The larger women’s side is the main living and working
area, which will not usually be seen by any other man except the tent
owner. Therefore, in this example it can be seen that spatial use is the
same as that found in more permanent domestic structures. Other
tent users can maintain a similar spatial divide. The Hassaniya Moors
of north-west Africa utilize a curtain-divider which can seclude
women when visitors are present (Andrews 1971, 1995), and among
the Kababish of the Sudan internal space (within the Sheikh’s tent at
least) is firmly demarcated into public and private areas, with each
wife having her own tent positioned so no wife would have preced
ence over another (Verity 1971: 31). Also of interest, though
obviously without wide archaeological significance, is Andrews
(1987: 151) mention of a historical source which records that private
tented rooms were created for queens in the great Mughal tented
courts of early seventeenth-century India, so they could see but not
be seen.
In other areas and with other ethnic groups explicit domestic
spatial separation is not so clear. The Qashqa’i of the Zagros Moun
tains in Iran do not divide the tent structurally into male and female
sections, though in practice such a division, of tasks and entertaining,
does occur (Beck 1978: 356—8). Similarly, the Tuareg and Tedu of the
central Saharan regions, who utilize a type of free-standing frame,
non-tensile, mat and skin tent, do not generally maintain a spatial
division (Nicolaisen 1963; Faegre 1979). However, although internal
physical boundaries might not be created, manifestations of a concern
with privacy may be present. One such feature can be the orientation
of the tent or indeed of the whole camp. With the Qashqa’i, for
example, although they might not subdivide the tent, the tents them
selves are positioned so that no tent entrance faces another (Beck
1978: 357).
Although we cannot directly transfer from the past into the pres
ent, it is also reasonable to suggest that information gained from
ethnography has some bearing upon the tented domestic environment
of the past. It can be seen that variety is found, and the degree to
which space is structured into public and private domains, male and
female spaces, varies greatly, and in many instances no such demarca
tion exists at all. Once again we are largely concerned with an ideal,
but where such a spatial separation exists could it be archaeologically
recognizable? Matters are complicated by the very nature of the tent
which allows great flexibility of space. Cribb (1991: 101) notes that
the tent is rarely a self-contained spatial unit; activity areas can be
extended, as can the tent itself to cope with feasts and similar

74

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONME
NT

occasions. Furthermore, within the basic
unit, space can change func
tion: a domestic space can becom
e a guest area, for example. This
complicates things, as does the ephemera
l nature of the structure, and
the transient lifestyle of its occupant
s. The archaeological recognition
of a tented domestic space which has
been structured by possible
Muslim requirements is difficult, yet
this is not an impossible under
taking. Whereas nomads are frequently
attested archaeologically, as
with Garlake’s (1978) survey and
excavation of a temporary tented
camp at Ras Abaruk (Qatar) re-used
from the seventeenth to the
nineteenth centuries, evidence which
might allow the recognition of
a division of domestic space is more
southern Jordan isolated a number of elusive. Recent research in
featu
this (Banning and Köhler-Rollefson 1992 res which could attest to
:
nomadic encampments near Beidha there 195). In recently occupied
were two hearths within the
tents, the larger one placed in the centr
e of (or just outside) the tent
(itself represented by an area cleared of
ston
and goat dung) which was used by the es and blanketed by sheep
women for cooking, and a
smaller one used by men for coffee-making
. Faegre (1979: 25) claims
that ‘the size and depth of the coffee
hearth tells the observer whether
the host was a generous man and even
what tribe camped there.’
Numerous other features testified
to the former tents: stone bed
platforms, stone storage platforms, ditch
es for water run-off, stone
bases for poles, and stone cord weights
or trailing weights.
The existence of such features could
division had existed within a tent, possibly illustrate that an internal
ing of domestic items and faunal remains reinforced by the pattern
wit
To make such an identification more secu hin the demarcated area.
re, physical evidence for the
partition would be needed, such as lines
of
place. Avni (1992: 245) found that just suchstones to hold a curtain in
to strengthen tents externally in pre-Islam an arrangement was used
ic contexts in the Negev
desert. Thus, it can be argued that in certa
in cases it could be possible
to recognize archaeologically the form
er presence of a tented domes
tic space which had been structured acco
rding to different spatial
domains, but to take this identificatio
n one stage further, to say it
was structured by Muslim social codes,
requires more than an outline
of stones on the ground. Other categories
of archaeological evidence
are required as well (see figure 3.4).
Reed, grass and palm architecture

drawn from the repertoire of dom

A second example which can be

estic structures made from more

ephemeral materials, and which can show
a spatial division, are
houses built of reeds which as with
the tent and the courtyard
house, significantly predate Islam. The spli
t-reed houses of the Shi ah

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

75

1”
2m

1

0

Low perimeter wafl

Pup tent

0
Roof

o

1

2

1.5w
Mushrooming wal’

3m

)
House

Complex of huts

)

Figure 3.4 Although are not told whet
according to possible
ound in Afghanistan provides an example of how
pup tent todmull
over time through various stages of construction
incre
ased
privacy gra U Y
(from Hallet ana camizay I °8O 56—7)
-

76

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

‘marsh Arabs’ (Madan) of southern Iraq are built on reed platfor
ms
or natural islands and are usually occupied by a family unit (Thesiger
1954, 1980; Salim 1962: 55; Young and Wheeler 1977).
Although little
attempt is made to keep women apart from visitors, a raised reed
platform divides the family quarters from the area used to entertain
male visitors in the absence of a separate guest house, the mudhi
f,
often an elaborate barrel-vaulted structure. In contrast, a stricter
division of space into the usual public and private spheres is found
in the palm-branch houses built in the Muscat region of Oman. Here
a soubla or maglis, a guest room made of branches for the reception
of males, is incorporated into the courtyard house. This is entered
from outside the house and is adjacent to the main entrance (Abdu
lak
1977: 20). Similarly, a spatial demarcation is maintained by the Hamar
Arabs (Kordofan province, Sudan). A grass or cane compound is
built
surrounding three inner compounds, one for men, one for women
(and children) and the other for animals, and a guest hut of grass
on a
wooden framework is incorporated within the men’s compound
(Asher 1986: 54).
Although all these examples of domestic structure tents, and reed,
grass and palm houses are made from less durable materials,
it
has been shown how they too can be spatially structured into
different domains, and how in certain instances it might be possible
to identify these as structured according to Muslim social require
ments, if other categories of evidence are found. It is this latter
point which is of critical importance as all of the recognition criteria
outlined for the recognition of Muslim domestic space could
be
exhibited by non-Muslim groups, including the ground plan with
the existence of internal partitions, division of internal space and
angled entrance ways. Secondly, there is the question of orientation,
with a focus on the interior not the exterior (decoration, windows
and so on), and the orientation of structures so as not to face
each other; and, thirdly, the artifacts present, the positioning of
features such as hearths, and the patterning of artifacts which
might allow the recognition of a gender division. A satisfactory
identification of Muslim domestic space based on these criteria
alone cannot be achieved: it is necessary to strengthen this identifica
tion by examining the other evidence which might be present within
(coins, personal possessions, inscriptions, furnishings, dietary
remains) and around (burials, other structures) the domestic struc
ture. Fortunately, we do not, or should not, study the domestic
environment in a vacuum, as devoid of all contextual information,
and thus the above criteria are valid when a more holistic examination
is being undertaken.
—

—

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

77

Archaeology, Domestic Space and Social Use
Once domestic space has been identified as being formerly occupied
by Muslims, can more be made of its study? Of course it is possible,
and indeed necessary, to move beyond building materials and the
actual physical dimensions of domestic structures to a broader,
more socially aware, Islamic archaeology. A variety of further in
formation may be retrieved: the composition of the society and the
family, gender and status concerns (and possible links with purdah),
spatial use and the way physical and spiritual thresholds or bound
aries are created.
Society and the family
To see what might be learnt about Muslim society at a larger scale,
and the Muslim family at a smaller scale, from a study of domestic
architecture, three examples will be considered here: orientation;
house form in sub-Saharan Africa; and the -built expansive mechan
isms of the Muslim domestic structure.
Orientation House orientation is in fact an area of research with very
little general applicability; there is no one fixed orientation for Muslim
houses. Instances occur where the domestic structure is oriented to
Mecca, but this is by no means uniform, though latrines may deliber
ately face away from Mecca. Often orientation is primarily for climatic
reasons, to encourage cooling breezes and prevent the entrance of dust
(Petherbridge 1978: 201—2). Unfortunately, this absence of a dominant
domestic orientation removes from the archaeologist an avenue of
interpretation, which is usually exploited to the full.
House form However, one interesting and broadly inter-related
example of a link between orientation and possible social change
can be provided. In many areas of sub-Saharan Africa there appears
to be a correlation between round houses and local religions, and
square or rectangular houses and Islam. While some Islamized groups
live in round houses and vice versa (Insoll 1996b; see also Engestrom
1959: 65; Sanogo 1991: 152), the correlation occurs frequently enough
in the archaeological record to suggest that it is of some significance,
and that there can be a switch in how space becomes ordered follow
ing conversion to Islam in certain areas.
Rapoport (1969: 41) has suggested that in general round houses
cannot be easily oriented, a statement that would not appear to make

78

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

sense. Rather, it is perhaps possible that it was easier to fulfil
privacy
requirements, perhaps newly introduced with Islam, or, as is
more
likely, increased in significance following conversion through the
use
of rectangular or square house plans. Moore (1986: 191) has
suggested
that there is a link between a prestige system with positive ‘mode
rn’
values (Western ones in her example) and the replacement
of round
houses by those of rectangular plan. Similar thinking appears
to have
in part underlain the recent use of rectangular architecture
in favour
of round houses in the northern Cameroons, and where the govern
ment pushed ‘modernization’ policies (Lyons 1996). Perhaps
a similar
interpretation can be projected further back in time. Thus,
along with
the new religion come elements of different material culture
,
necessarily better or improved, but part of the package proclai not
ming
Muslim identity. In turn, it also brings us back, though withou
t any
direct connection whatsoever, to the sentiments underlying
the
inscriptions in the Dome of the Rock and its very construction
(see chapter 2) making a statement of the new faith, in this instanc
e
by utilizing the domestic environment as one of the signall
ing
mechanisms.

79

Fentress (1987: 67), reminiscent of the development of the Prophet’s
house itself. Yet to reconstruct how a particular Muslim domestic
complex of one or more natural families was conceptualized in the
past is difficult for it could vary regionally and according to gender.
This is the case with the Qashqa’i, for example: their camp was
viewed by men as a number of different households, while women
saw it as a single community (Beck 1978: 357). Such differences in
conception serve to reinforce the point that, when dealing with the
archaeological record, with the legacy of different groups and indivi
duals with different conceptions, to stress too firmly that a single
interpretation of events is the only possible answer is flawed. If a
multiplicity of options can exist regarding something as prosaic as
how a settlement is conceived, what does this infer for more complex
entities?
The division of house types into two categories correlating with
‘collectivistic’ and ‘individualistic’ societies (Parker Pearson and
Richards 1994: 60—1) is of importance with regard to Muslim house
holds. Collectivistic societies are defined as possessing a shared value
system and having an emphasis on restricting and ‘containing’
women. Features relevant to their domestic structures include gender
separation inside and outside houses, separate men’s accommodation
and dwellings largely functional and similar in appearance. In con
trast, in individualistic societies, mobility is high, kinship is weakened
and competing value systems and fashions develop. Here identity
(personal status) is affirmed through the house, which in itself is
more public, although domestic life may be private. These categories
can be seen to equate with what Rapoport (1969: 5—6) terms the
‘additive quality’, characteristic of vernacular architecture as com
pared to the ‘closed, final form of high-style design’.
It is obvious that, while elements of the ‘collectivistic’ social defini
tion apply to Muslim society, elements of the ‘individualistic’ defini
tion also apply, and it would certainly be wrong to say that the
Muslim domestic environment is somehow egalitarian and thus
devoid of any competitive tendencies as elaborately decorated house
interiors testify. But, on the whole, collectivist values dominate,
although increasingly coming into conflict with ‘individualistic’
ones. Collectivistic attributes are having to be shoehorned, and not
through force, into domestic structures associated with individualistic
design as outlined above. Al-Azzawi (1969: 98—9) has studied this and
describes how ‘Western’, ‘European’ or ‘closed’ houses have been
introduced into Iraq and in many cases replaced the traditional ‘col
lectivistic’ courtyard house. These new structures did not fulfil any of
the social, environmental or religious requirements discussed. Simple

—

Communality and individuality Although studies of house orien
ta
tion might be largely unprofitable, it could be possible to reconstruct
something of Muslim family structure from an archaeological study,
taking as our starting point the fact that we know from both histo
r
ical sources and modern observation that Muslim society has
been
based around the extended family comprising the father, his wife
or
wives (up to four), their children, and sometimes including marrie
d
sons and their households. Physically, this is best exemplified by what
has been termed the ‘accretive nature’ of the Muslim house (Pether
bridge 1978: 198); as the extended family grows so does the house,
which is often left unfinished to allow further quarters to be built on.
An example of this process in action is provided by Talib (1984: 55),
who describes how the roof timbers of courtyard houses in Saudi
Arabia were often left uncut to allow new beams to be connected to
the old. Such a process could even be archaeologically recognizable
through a careful evaluation of structural phasing.
Indeed, Fentress (1987: 66) has gone as far as to draw parallels
between the structure of the house plans excavated at Sétif and the
Muslim families who occupied them, with the individuals of the
family standing as subordinate to the patriarch ‘as the single rooms
do to the courtyard’. Here also additional wings could be added to
the house as a son got married. This process was facilitated by co
operation between the inhabitants of the quarter and, according to

f

80

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

yet obvious shortcomings were apparent: ventilation
was poor, airconditioning needed, and courtyards which were
built
over and
turned into the main living room, failed to fulfil
privacy requirements
being frequently over-looked by neighbouring
houses.
However, this apparent incompatibility with the
‘modern’ does not
mean that Muslim societies have lived in a
form of stasis for 1,400
years; merely that the process of change has
accelerated much more
rapidly recently. Ziadeh’s (1995: 1005—7) study of
the village of Ti’in
nik provides a case in point. Altered social
and political conditions
since the l950s could be plotted through changes
in
residence patterns. The collective houses (ahwash) architecture and
were largely aban
doned in favour of separate multi-room concrete
reflected the shift from an economic system based buildings which
on self-sufficiency
and collective free labour by members of the
extended family to one
based on waged labour and the nuclear family. At
the same time, an
economy which had been dependent on animals
disappeared,
indi
cated by the absence of the internal stalling of
animals within the
courtyard.
These examples show how house form can reflect
familial and
social structure within Islam, the domestic
environment being an
active rather than passive aspect of material culture.
But, regardless
of change, it is still possible that the existence
of the structuring
principle, even if only reduced to an emphasis upon
privacy, will be
seen to continue, as it has done for so long. This
element,
a concern
with privacy and its resulting manifestation in many
different
forms,
is thus presented as a generality, where utilized,
and is the structuring
principle of the Muslim domestic environment and the
possible key
to its archaeological recognition (bearing in mind
the points already
made to make such an identification more certain).

Public and private faces
But what of other factors which might be investigated
once the initial
identification is certain? The pursuit of status and how
this
is manifest
is one factor. To display one’s finest possessions
within the area where
one receives guests is a universal characteristic; such
a room or rooms,
courtyard, open area or tent can become an arena for
signalling status
and wealth. The primary means of achieving this is
simply by dis
playing the choicest possessions within the space
used to entertain
guests. Kirkman (1976) mentions that in the guest room
the San’a (Yemen) tower house, for example, ornate (mafraj) of
copper trays,
candlesticks and other expensive items were displayed
a concentration of equipment ancillary to entertainingalongside
guests:

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

81
water-pipes, tobacco boxes, braziers, spittoons for the ubiquitous qat
chewing sessions, and cushions and rugs, often richly patterned and
finished, for the guests to sit and recline on. Similar processes are
apparent in traditional houses in the Ghadames oasis (Libya) where
the room used to receive guests was also the focus of decoration;
painted motifs, mirrors, brass utensils and wall hangings were all used
to create an impression of wealth (Evans 1975—6: 35; Shawesh 1995:
43). Likewise, such notions of display are present in the sitting rooms
where guests are received in modern apartments of the Egyptian
middle and upper classes in Cairo, which Campo describes as a
‘blend of Euramerican and Islamic material culture’ (1991: 127).
More complex was the pursuit of status by the ruling class within
the Lebanese village discussed by Michael Gilsenan (1982). Here
space itself was transformed for Status purposes. Foremost in this
process was the house itself, described as a Franco-Italian château,
which was built in direct contrast to the traditional inward-looking
castle of the ruling class. The château was all ‘facade, appearance,
show’ (Gilsenan 1982: 169), used to enhance status and distinguish
the owners from the other members of the village, and the maglis or
reception room was also transformed into a ‘salon’. Whereas the
traditional maglis, the ‘social heart of the house’ (1982: 182), had
been furnished in a conventional and austere manner with mats and
cushions, coffee-making equipment and water-pipes, the salon was
the absolute opposite, furnished with polished marble tables, plastic
chandeliers, high gilt chairs and gilt mirrors, all for show, and to
express wealth and status. Emulation, again for status purposes, was
pursued lower down the social scale; even the peasants occasionally
replicated in cheap materials the ‘salon’ or aspects of it in order that
they might ‘pretend to a minute but crucial economic advance over
the others’ (Gilsenan 1982: 186). In fact, the only group who resisted
this process of emptying social space of any traditional value in the
blatant pursuit of status were religious men, concerned as they were,
as Gilsenan notes, with inner rather than outer meanings. Such pro
cesses of display and of emulation might well be archaeologically
visible. Furthermore, a preoccupation with gaining status advantage,
no matter how small, is not confined to the upper echelons of society,
but is something that can be found through all levels of society and
across the Muslim world, and in other societies. But a concern for
status need not solely be concerned with inanimate material posses
sions. Status is also a factor which must be considered with regard to
the seclusion of women, with once again the domestic environment
functioning as one of the primary mechanisms by which this can be
achieved, which in turn has certain archaeological implications.

82

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

Status, society, culture and purdah
Yet to propose status as the sole reason for the existence of an
emphasis upon secluding women in parts of the Muslim world
would be incorrect. Three dominant factors influence the extent to
which the seclusion of women is practised: social concerns, status
considerations and cultural context. Equally, the existence of seclu
sion practices (sometimes referred to as ‘purdah’, meaning literally
screen or curtain) should not be taken to mean that women in Muslim
societies are weak and devoid of any power; this too is wholly
incorrect. Gender relations and social ‘power’ can be negotiated in
many ways.
But if we consider social concerns, a link between these and purdah
appears to be directly connected with religious considerations
through the existence of a conscious effort to restrict female social
interaction as outlined in the Qur’an, where this subject is considered
in some detail. For example, it is stated that one should ‘Enjoin
believing women to turn their eyes away from temptation and to
preserve their chastity; to cover their adornments (except such as are
normally displayed); to draw their veils over their bosoms and not to
reveal their finery except to their husbands, their fathers, their hus
bands’ fathers, their sons, their step-sons, their brothers, their broth
ers’ sons, their sisters’ sons, their women-servants, and their slavegirls; male attendants lacking in natural vigour, and children who have
no carnal knowledge of women’ (The Light 24: 31). What can perhaps
be seen as being intimately linked with this are concerns over purity
and pollution, not in the manner that Douglas (1966) discusses them,
that is, the physical concern with polluting substances, but more with
social matters; namely, the physical power of women, and the protec
tion of the purity of the family through the seclusion and protection
of women, who are potent as the agents of reproduction, and who
have, according to Khan (1976: 100), ‘the power to defile the pure
blood of the group’. Khan defines purdah as a ‘control mechanism’,
ensuring acceptable and orderly relationships between the sexes
(1976: 106).
The second major factor linked with secluding women can be
manifest as a concern with status. The degree to which women can
be segregated depends much on social and economic position, and
‘social prestige is associated with strict observance’ of segregation
(Khan 1976: 101). Cosar (1978) discusses how, in Turkey, peasant
women could not wear the veil due to its impracticability for working
in the fields, whereas women working in towns were veiled and

II (

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

83

segregated. Similarly, Gilsenan (1982: 172—3) relates that peasant
women in Lebanese villages are ‘seen to work’, which is crucial
within an environment where ‘seeing someone is a socially deter
mined act and not a question merely of images on the retina and
physiological process’. The reverse of this, not seeing someone, is
thus also of importance, and status is gained through the absence of a
family’s female members, thereby implying that their work is being
done by someone else.
The third dominant factor is cultural, and the importance of this
should not be underestimated. Although the seclusion of women is
found in Muslim societies from Morocco to Indonesia, the status of
women can and does differ markedly (Papanek 1973: 305; see also
Stowasser 1984; Webster 1984): in certain areas, a concern with seclud
ing women is particularly manifest; in others, it is of no importance.
An example of commonplace close purdah is provided by the Muslim
communities of South Asia. Here seclusion has been explained as a
cultural response to the patriarchal society which already existed,
rather than being ‘a reflection of Islam’ (Raza 1993: 60). It might in
part have been influenced by the existence of a caste system,
although, strictly speaking, caste should not be accepted by Muslims
as it goes against the notions of the universality of the Muslim
community; in practice it has deeply influenced Muslim groups in
the region. This can in turn affect the domestic environment. Ahuja
(1979: 33) records that among certain Indian Muslim groups, the
kitchen, considered the purest part of the house, is carefully pos
itioned according to place in the caste hierarchy. This ranges from
being exposed at the front of the houses of lower-caste families to
being situated on the top floor, and away from the entrance as far as is
possible, in high-caste, two-storey dwellings. Otherwise, Indian Mus
lim houses often manifest the usual spatial pattern of public and
private domains, frequently based around a courtyard (Mujeeb 1967).
Of particular interest in this context are studies of the Muslim
communities of South Asian origin in the United Kingdom (Khan
1976; Barton 1986; Raza 1993; Lewis 1994). Along with the physical

movement of these people from South Asia have come their cultural
concerns, including those relating to purdah. However, the transla
tion of purdab concepts into practice in Britain is not the same as in
Bangladesh or Pakistan; as we saw with the Cambridge mosque
adaptation in chapter 2, compromises have had to be reached. An
example of this is provided by the Bengali community from the
Syihet region of Bangladesh who, since the 1960s, have settled in
large numbers in the city of Bradford in the north of England. This
group has been studied by Barton (1986), who found that in the

84

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

village environment in Syihet purdah was maintained in many
ways,
through, for example, erecting screens around houses. In
Bradford
this is more difficult, but purdah is both considered customary
and
attached to status connotations, making its abandonment improbable;
likewise, among Muslims of Pakistani origin who have also settled
in
Bradford. In many cases, they came direct from villages where
purdah
concerns were strong, especially among those from Mirpur
district
(who number some 15,000, out of a total community of
25,000
Pakistanis in the city) (Khan 1976: 102). In certain
instances,
women are now isolated more than they ever were in Pakistan
or
Bangladesh.
In both of these communities the domestic environment is
consid
ered the female domain and a public/private spatial division is
main
tained, yet many of the houses occupied are small terraced
houses
built during the Victorian era which do not always suit the
social
requirements of Muslim families, often of the extended type (even
though a public/private spatial division was frequently
maintained
during the Victorian period, as evidenced by the parlour; Petersen
1997). As Nielsen notes, constraints of climate and traditional
domes
tic architecture in northern Europe have ‘forced domestic
family
activities indoors into accommodation designed for small nuclear
families’ (1995: 102). Existing space has to be adapted to suit
cultural,
religious and social requirements through, for example, utilizing back
rooms as female quarters, with the front for men, and by erecting
curtains and other partitions to maintain divisions (Barton 1986). Yet
although purdah is practised, perhaps even to a greater degree than
was ever the case in South Asia, the archaeological visibility of
this
would be nil if these houses were reduced to their foundations and
studied on the basis of ground plan alone. However, it assumes
relevance to the archaeologist interested in Islam because it again
shows that rigorously defined boundaries do not exist; what
consti
tutes the Muslim world and the non-Muslim world has in fact a
great
degree of fluidity, as in all probability it always had. Although
Bradford is patently not within the dar al-Islam, a large Muslim
community lives there which will offer future challenges to
the
archaeologist.
Space, gender and its archaeological recognition
Within archaeology in general there has been a move towards rectify
ing the imbalance in gender studies (see, for example, Conkey
and
Spector 1984; Ehrenberg 1989; Conkey and Gero 1991). In Islamic
archaeology a similar imbalance exists, which may in part be due to

I

r

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

85

neglect, but also because of the difficulty in recognizing and defining
both gender-specific items and space archaeologically. Yet having said
this, there often appears to be an emphasis, albeit in all probability
subconscious, on male space and activities. This is expanded upon by
Chatty (1978: 399), who argues that the women’s sphere, private,
domestic and informal, is often regarded as secondary to the extradomestic, public and formal ‘universe of men’. In fact, one could be
forgiven for thinking that the Muslim world through much of its
history, as presented in many sources, was populated solely by caliphs
and soldiers, with women (if considered) subordinated to concubines
and servant girls.
Recognizing gender relations is a necessity in understanding the
‘social’ content of Islamic archaeology. Conkey and Gero (1991: 9)
discuss gender as ‘a structuring principle setting certain guiding
rules for the enactment of daily life’; and, with reference to social
structure in many parts of the Muslim world, to propose such guiding
criteria would certainly be valid. The domestic environment is more
than just a shelter offering physical protection from the elements, but
the arena in which gender roles are ‘taught’, making its study much
more significant than merely charting a succession of architectural
styles, decorative finishes or ground plans. Yet at the same time it
should be acknowledged that ‘engendering archaeology’ is no easy
process.
In the archaeological study of a domestic environment structured
according to Muslim social requirements, various possibilities to
study gender exist. By, for example, examining the patterning and
typology of personal artifacts, and the contextual examination of
features such as hearths, it might be possible to begin to recognize
the division and interplay between male and female space. Allied with
this, the privileged position of the archaeologist interested in Islam is
again a factor of some significance, for he or she has recourse to
observing a living faith and numerous cultures influenced by it,
and can supplement his or her archaeological data from an extensive
body of ethnographic, anthropological and historical evidence. To
emphasize this point, recourse will be made to two studies, one of
which is drawn from ethnography, and which it is argued could not
be reconstructed archaeologically (Bourdieu 1973), and the other
which is archaeological, but which the author, Linda Donley-Reid
(1990: 115), admits would have been difficult to reconstruct from
archaeological evidence alone. Both have direct reference to the
domestic environment, but at the same time illustrate the range of
interpretative possibilities which can exist, but which equally could
elude us.
—

86

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

The Berber house Bourdieu’s (1973) analysis of a contemporary
Berber (Kabyle) house in Algeria shows strict male/female opposition
through the existence of demarcated public and private domains. The
rectangular house interior is divided into two parts: a ‘dark and
nocturnal’ lower part of the house, of moist, green or raw objects,
natural beings (animals), natural activities (sleep, sex, death, birth),
and tasks such as fetching water, wood and manure. The second is a
light-filled, noble, upper part, which is defined as a place of human
beings, fire and objects created by fire, including the rifle, the symbol
of male honour, and the protector of female honour (see figure 3.5).
Various spatial oppositions were recorded, with the low, dark part
opposed to the higher, as female is to male. Gender oppositions were
also extended from the internal to the external world, and evident in
how the very physical structure of the house is visualized, with, for
example, the main beam being identified with the master of the house,
and the supporting pillar with the wife, interlocked in a representa
tional act of physical union (1973: 99—102).
The existence of genderized space is of great significance and the
fundamental structuring mechanism of the Berber domestic environ
ment. However, this example is in its details particular to the specific
context in a part of Algeria, it is not Islamic, but is within the Muslim

Figure 3.5 Interior of a Berber house, Algeria (from Bourdieu 1973: 107)

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

87

world; moreover, it could even be suggested that how one person,
male or female, might visualize the domestic environment in terms of
gender need not necessarily be the same as another. Thus we can draw
no general conclusions from such an example. Rather, it serves to
illustrate that the seemingly innocuous material we encounter in the
archaeological record, such as a house plan, can be the residue of
complex or perhaps even unexpected meaning or process. The ap
plication of such concepts within Islamic archaeology is rare,
although it must be recognized that drawing this kind of anthropo
logical explanation from archaeological data is at present difficult, and
frequently, impossible.
The Swahili house This second example attempts to combine just
these sources of evidence, archaeological and ethnographic, in the
examination of several Swahili coral and clay houses in the Lamu
Archipelago and on the adjacent mainland of Kenya, all dating from
after the early eighteenth century (Donley-Reid 1990; see also Donley
1982, 1987). The Swahili conceptualized people as falling into five
basic groups: Waungwana (freeborn men and women), Madada
(female domestic slaves), Wazalia (locally born slaves), Watumwa
(plantation slaves) and, finally, Washenzi (all other Africans). Within
the inter-relationships between these groups the domestic structure
took on a great importance. To quote Donley-Reid (1990: 119), ‘the
hierarchical relationships among groups of individuals and the inter
actions between each of these groups centre on the types of houses
and where houses were built.’ Space and location were paramount.
Who built what, where and when was decided by the Waungwana,
and social progression into and through Swahili society was repre
sented by the progression from the grass round hut into the lower
levels of the multi-storey coral house, and finally into the upper
levels, and the inner sanctum, the ndani. Non-Waungwafla men
were excluded from the process of upward mobility altogether, but
it was possible for the female descendants of a slave girl taken as a
concubnie to have a coral house built after a couple of generations.
Thus here it can be seen that both social mobility and specific gender
exclusions are manifest with the domestic structure as the key to
both.
Donley-Reid records that, with the Swahili, status was linked with
purdah, and women were secluded both through the use of the veil
(discussed in chapter 4) and through the house. Women were
excluded from the mosque, and in turn the ndani, the room at the
very centre of the top of the house, though reserved both for the
woman who owned the house and her husband, became the ritual

88

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONME
NT

centre for women, and associated with their
polluting and shameful
aspects, such as childbirth. Women were
also regarded as a highly
Valued commodity, similar to the correlatio
purdah evident in the South Asian examples n between status and
discussed above. In this
context, a point made by Donley-Reid is of
great relevance: ‘the most
valued objects, including the highest status
women, were located in
the innermost room, the ndani, of the hous
e’
added to stress the explicit link between women,(1990: 124; emphasis
the domestic envir
onment and status).
In this instance genderized space was again
culture actively utilized within gender relat created, and material
ionships. Furthermore,
within this example it can be seen that
the links with Islam are
more explicit than was apparent in the Berb
er house. This is evident
in the interplay between the pure mosque,
the male space, and the
ndani, the female and impure space, as one
level of meaning which
can be discerned in the complex interplay
of factors, indigenous and
foreign, Muslim and non-Muslim, which char
acterize Swahili society
itself. The challenge herein lies in attempting
to reconstruct such rich
tapestries of detail (remembering that this exam
ple
vertical axis of reconstruction, making the arch also relates to the
aeologist’s job even
harder) in other contexts, where perhaps the
acco
mpanying ethno
graphic and historical evidence is not so abun
dant.

Thresholds, boundaries and entrances
A final area of study is how boundaries and
thresholds between the
different domains can be created. Frequent
ly, for them to be effective
they must be demarcated, and three primary
categories can be iso
lated of how a threshold or boundary
can be created. The first
comprises physical boundaries, such as angl
ed entrance ways, blind
walls and similar features. According to Park
er Pearson and Richards
these ‘can serve to mark differences in domains
control access between them’ (1994: 24). The and thus restrict and
thresholds with lesser degrees of physical visib second category are
ility, perhaps evident
within the domestic environment as charms
and amulets buried under
entrance ways, for example. They might not
be visible, and thus are
not known to the individual crossing the thres
hold, but to the house
owner they exist and can protect both from
the djinn, ‘a race of
supernatural beings created before man’ (Westerm
arck 1933: 5), and
more manifest threats such as people harbourin
g bad intentions. They
constitute a further way of creating a boundary
or threshold beyond
the use of bricks, mud or concrete. A third
mean
s of creating a
threshold or boundary is through visible deco
ration and calligraphy,

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

89

plastic or painted, which can serve to signal a ‘transition zone’ (Parker
Pearson and Richards 1994: 27), as with the stickers in the AfroAmerican Muslim apartments discussed earlier.
All three of these categories could be archaeologically visible, and
the frequent emphasis upon creating, defining and protecting spatial
domain-S within Islam means that they might also be widely found.
Angled entrance ways could survive in ground plans, and although
often regarded as unorthodox, charms and amulets can likewise sur
vive. Examples could include items placed in the house foundations,
as in Egypt where Campo records that a variety of objects were
buried: grain, salt, dates or small items in gold or silver (1991: 101).
Qur’anic or magical texts could be buried in a pot or a similar
container, or a sacrifice interred. In al-Rabadha (Saudi Arabia), one
of the centres on the hajj route, the Darb Zubayda (discussed in
chapter 4), a skeleton of a baby camel was found in a building of
apparently Abbasid origin. This, King argues, ‘was certainly a sacri
fice, pointing to a continuation of a pre-Islamic threshold-laying
ritual associated with a building’s foundation’ (1994b: 198). While
far removed in both time and space, Donley-Reid mentions that
the remains of a goat were found buried in the floor of an
ndani excavated in an eighteenthcentury Swahili coral house
(1990: 121), which might have served the same purpose. Other pro
tective charms found included cowry shells and an owl bone, and
imported Chinese porcelain which, especially if blue, was considered
effective protection against the ‘evil eye’ (Donley 1987: 187—8).
Again, context would have to be examined to state categorically
that the charms were Muslim, as their use has a long pre-Islamic
background, but their importance lies in the fact that such concerns
can be materially manifest, and frequently still are today in various
protective threshold rituals in Palestine, Syria and Turkey for example
(Petersen 1997).
Numerous other examples of the use and/or archaeological survival
of protective devices could be cited. In nineteenth-century Egypt,
aloe was hung over the door of a house to give both the house and
its occupants a long life (Lane 1895: 259), while in the Mzab area of
Algeria, an Ibadi stronghold, amulets and other prophylactic objects
could be hung above the door lintel for protection (Mercier 1922:
162—3; Roche 1970). Visible decoration might also survive, such as
protective religious inscriptions. The presence of a pilgrim returned
from hajj or pilgrimage to Mecca (discussed in chapter 4) can also be
proudly signalled around or on the door or on house exteriors in
various areas of the Muslim world (see, for example, Wenzel 1972:
60—1; Michot 1978; Campo 1991: 149—58).

90

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

But besides the threshold having significance as a device which
serves to demarcate and protect at a practical level, it can also be
invested with a more overt religious significance. Members of the
Bektashi Sufi order, for example, showed reverence to the threshold,
and would not step on one, because of its powerful religious symbol
ism, which is described by Birge (1937: 174): ‘[as] Ali is the Gateway
or Door of the city of knowledge any doorway is symbolic of Au’s
spiritual significance in life. One side of the door is said to represent
Hasan, the other Huseyin (Hussein); the top stands for Muhammed
and the bottom threshold for Fatma.’ Thus in this instance the thresh
old, whether in the domestic environment, a mosque or Sufi lodge, is
explicitly linked with religious considerations. However, this would
appear to be the exception rather than the nile; the threshold in
general functions as (within the context of the domestic environment)
the defining marker between the domestic, private, public, natural
and even supernatural worlds, and for this fact it is the key link
between many of the themes discussed in the chapter.
Summary and Conclusions
The preceding discussion has shown that the Muslim domestic envir
onment is remarkably diverse in form, and in underlying meaning,
which could lead us to determine that few general conclusions could
be drawn. Yet although great variety is apparent in layout, architec
ture and materials, the existence of demarcated public and private
domains, and a concern with gender segregation, can be seen to be
manifest through almost the entire spectrum of Muslim domestic
architecture, from nomads carrying their religious and social codes
and transiently fixing them with skin or cloth tents, to others who
more permanently anchor them in mud, brick and stone, ranging
from one-room structures to vast palatial complexes, and projected
through space both horizontally and vertically. Aspects of this might
be archaeologically visible; others will not. Religion can be of funda
mental importance in structuring the Muslim domestic environment
but, importantly, need not be. Explicit links between Islam and the
domestic environment do not exist in the same way as we saw with
the form of the mosque, structured as it was by the fundamental
obligation of prayer. The traditional domestic environment is the
result of the fusion of cultural and environmental factors, and social
and religious requirements, and owes a major debt to a substantial
pre-Islamic heritage. A religious element is present, but it is indirect,
though links can be seen to stretch back to the Prophet’s house, and

a

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

91

thus the domestic environment can be imbued with what Campo
(1991) terms a degree of ‘sacrality’.
A domestic environment structured according to traditional Mus
lim requirements might be archaeologically recognizable through a
variety of defining features, but to base our identification of the
former presence of a Muslim community upon house plans alone is
insufficient. It forms one element of a possible package which could
indicate the existence of a Muslim community archaeologically. To be
certain, various categories of material would need to be found in
association with each other. At the same time, it should be noted
that not all Muslims live in courtyard houses structured according to
a ‘traditional’ model. Muslims have never all lived in such houses and,
as we have seen, certainly do not today. But the existence of a
domestic environment which can be structured according to a Muslim
ethos is undeniable, and we should be aware that this can be manifest
in many different ways. Beyond questions of identification, various
other types of information might be retrieved: these included changes
in the structure of the family and of society over time, perhaps with a
shift from a communal to a more individualistic ethos; status and
display considerations as manifest in material culture patterning;
gender differentiation as a structuring agent for domestic space; and
how thresholds, boundaries and entrances might be created, protected
and maintained.
Consequently, having considered the implications of the domestic
environment for the archaeology of Islam, are there any further
implications for a more general ‘archaeology of religion’? Essentially,
it can be seen that another facet of material culture, not necessarily
considered by archaeologists within the rubric of religion, can in fact
be placed under this heading in certain instances. Although the con
nection need not be direct, and can range along a proverbial sliding
scale from overt to nothing at all, it is obvious that to reduce the
domestic structure per se to a mere shelter is banal and inaccurate. It
can and, in most instances, does structure, act upon and intimately
involve social life. Social life and religion are difficult to separate,
with the latter influencing the former to a greater or lesser degree.
Therefore, religion has to be considered as more than just a set of
conveniently pigeonholed beliefs, but rather it should be seen as an
agency which can act upon the whole of life and which can influence
many, if not all, aspects of material culture. Finally, it is also apparent,
as we saw with the mosque, and as we will see in future chapters, that
we are also dealing with dynamic ongoing processes. Unsuitable
house types might be introduced, and subsequently rejected, but
many new forms of domestic structure, ideally suited to traditional

92

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

Muslim social requirements, are also being designed and built in the
Muslim world, and wherever Muslim communities are found. Thus,
as with the mosque, evolution of material culture will again provide
further challenges for the archaeologist of the future.

4

Muslim Life

Children of Adam, dress well when you attend your mosques. Eat and
drink, but avoid excess. He does not love the intemperate.
Qur’an. The Heights 7: 31

It may be difficult to recognize archaeologically the religious element
in many everyday activities, but the archaeologist must be aware of
the possibility of its existence if we are ever to begin to achieve the
‘social archaeology’ sought in the past two decades. Many other
aspects of life can also be influenced by Islam, as the above epigraph
indicates, and being a Muslim supposes more than mosques and
domestic structures. These are not always considered by archaeol
ogists as being within the domain of the archaeology of religion,
whose interest often lies with the evidence of the ‘big issues’ of ritual,
death, the household and the rural or urban environment. However,
within a study such as this, which attempts to assess the possible
archaeological study of Islam in its totality, attention must be paid to
all areas of life in which complete or partial obedience to Islamic
precepts might be recognized, especially feasts and festivals, food and
drink, education and health, pilgrimage and travel, personal posses
sions and dress, magic and, finally, war. Each of these can be used in
many different ways to create the overall religious, and in turn social,
identities. As diverse as each of these categories may appear to be at
first glance, there are in fact many ways in which they are inter
linked. Besides the more obvious connections, the most important
link is that none of these categories can be classed as purely secular
activities for each is, or can be, influenced by Islam to a large extent.
Their importance (to the archaeologist) cannot be overemphasized, as
their existence again disturbs the notion that religion or ‘ritual’ can be

94

95

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

conveniently pigeonholed, with a neat dividing line from those clas
sified as secular.
Furthermore, once we begin to consider each of these aspects in
life, and as many of them show they can be used ‘actively’ to create
and maintain group identity, negotiate social position, establish gen
der relations, and legitimize political authority. All these areas will be
examined through a series of examples, both to illustrate how the
apparently secular can be imbued with an element of the sacred, and
to assess their archaeological implications. Thus although it must be
acknowledged that the lives of many Muslims are not and were never
structured by such considerations, the following examples serve to
illustrate the possibilities which can exist.

be acknowledged, and differences between the Islamic schools of law
recognized, but in general terms a number of binding rules exist. There
are three categories of food: halal, that which is lawful; haram, that
which is prohibited; and makruh, that which is reprehensible, but
which is not subject to the degree of prohibition as haram. Alcohol,
spilt blood, pork, dogs, excrement, carrion, and milk of animals whose
flesh is not eaten are forbidden, and a complex body of laws regulates
in great detail which food is considered lawful and when exceptions
concerning consumption can be made. Similarly, slaughter is subject to
religious law, and an animal must be killed facing the qiblah, the name
of God invoked and its throat cut (see Gibb and Kramers 1961: 43 1—2,
556; Pellat 1971 a: 304—9). Rules concerning hunting wild animals vary,
but often saying a prayer or muttering a basmala before dispatching
the arrow or bullet will suffice.
To the archaeologist studying a faunal assemblage it might theor
etically be possible to identify the remains generated by a diet struc
tured according to these Muslim dietary laws. Pertinent questions
which might be asked include:

Food and Drink

Diet and cuisine
Food and drink, as ‘the fuel of life’, make a convenient starting point,
yet almost simultaneously a distinction needs to be made between
diet and cuisine. It will be argued that there is no such thing as a
‘Muslim cuisine’, whereas there is a Muslim diet, structured by diet
ary laws, as set out in the Qur’an and hadith.
Cuisine Within the vast geographical area which is the Muslim
world great culinary variety exists, which renders the idea of a uni
form Muslim cuisine absurd. Certain similarities might be found, in
the use of spices or the preparation of similar breads in many regions,
or the common use of certain items of equipment, but there is no
‘Islamic kitchen’ or ‘Islamic dish’. Perhaps a common inheritance
might be evident in different regions. As Waines (1991: 807) notes,
the Muslim world inherited the chemistry and technology of cooking
from the ancient centres of the Middle East, an area where there
might be an element of ‘coherency’ in culinary cultures for whatever
reasons (see Tapper and Zubaida 1994). Yet how applicable is this
concept to Indonesia or West Africa where the culinary heritage
differs? It is not, and where conversion to Islam occurred, regional
cuisine was merely modified to the taboos of the new faith.

Diet More profitable for the archaeologist is the identification of
the Muslim diet, which is structured by religious law and provides a
further category of evidence which might allow the archaeological
recognition of a Muslim community. Issues of non-observance must

1 Are certain species absent in faunal assemblages, pigs and dogs for
example, and is this a result of dietary avoidance?
2 Is a halal diet noticeable, for example through special butchery
patterns, cut marks on bones, body parts and offal left over?
3 Are slaughter patterns different among herds owned by Muslims,
as opposed to those of other religious groups?
4 Is the composition of a ‘Muslim herd’ different, and can this be
recognized archaeologically?
Often subtle differences exist in what may or may not be eaten
between the different legal schools, and an ‘ideal’ faunal assemblage
could theoretically allow not only differentiation between the various
religious groups, Jews, Muslims and Christians, for instance, but
perhaps also within the Muslim community itself on the basis of
these differences. Three examples have been chosen which suggest
exciting, but as yet solely theoretical, interpretative possibilities.
Among adherents of the Hanafi school all marine creatures which
are not shaped like fish are unlawful, whereas the other legal schools
are not so strict; the Maliki school pronounce the hyena makruh, yet
they can eat birds of prey, which adherents of the other legal schools
do not, as all carnivores, whether birds or mammals, are forbidden
(Pellat 1971a: 306—7). Dietary differences are also evident between the
Sunni and Sbi’ah creeds. For example, Thesiger relates how in Iraq
Sunni Muslims would eat hares while Shi’ahs would not (1980: 81).

96

97

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

These are patterns which might theoretically be evident in a faunal
assemblage; they also illustrate that diversity is again evident, and that
entities such as dietary laws can be differently interpreted depending
on context and circumstances.

The other animal whose presence or absence might be informative
in differentiating a Muslim faunal assemblage is the dog. But this is
again by no means uniform. As regards the Jordanian sites, dog
remains are fairly common in Muslim period levels, where they
were not used as a food resource, but rather for herding, guarding
and hunting. Two factors indicate this: the absence of butchery marks,
which are ‘a fairly clear indicator of a food use, in particular if the cut
marks are found on the meat rich part of the carcass’ (Rielly 1996),
and the fact that most of the dogs found were represented by
partial or complete skeletons, clearly showing no post-mortem use.
Thus, it is not necessarily assured that certain species, notably pigs
and dogs, will be absent in faunal assemblages from Islamic sites.
Factors other than adherence to dietary law must be considered, but,
as the examples illustrate, in certain instances relevant patterning can
be found.

Archaeological reality: a case study from Jordan
Having outlined some of the theoretical possibilities which could be
considered when analysing faunal assemblages from Islamic sites, it is
worthwhile testing them against archaeological data from Jordan. The
sites which will be considered are Gadara, where occupation of a
major Roman and Byzantine city has been approximately continuous
up to the present; Pella, with specific emphasis upon the Umayyad
and Abbasid levels above and adjacent to the Byzantine city; Aqaba, a
Umayyad and Abbasid city; the Ayyubid and later occupation of the
village of Khirbet Fans; and, finally, the late Muslim occupation of
the three Crusader castles of Kerak, Shobak and el-Wueira. The
information in the following section is primarily drawn from the
detailed answers to my questions kindly provided by Louise Martin
on general issues (1996) and Kevin Rielly on the specific Jordanian
material (1996).
Absence of species The absence of certain species in faunal assem
blages can be meaningful, as long as consideration is given to other
factors (Martin 1996). These include excavation bias, differential dis
posal, and the possible local environmental constraints involved in
keeping species such as pigs. A possible approach is offered through
examining patterns across a series of sites, or changes through various
sequences. In Muslim period deposits few pig bones were found, ‘but
most of these could be interpreted as residual, i.e. mixed in from
earlier levels’ (Rielly 1996). An exception to this pattern was provided
by the small number of pig bones recovered from Pella, where con
text, according to Rielly, ‘strongly suggests the continued use of pig
(albeit as a minor food resource) well into the Muslim period’,
perhaps the result of toleration towards a small Christian or recently
converted Muslim population. Certainly, in other instances, the
presence or absence of specific species can be very informative. At
Q sar es-Seghir in Morocco the appearance of pig remains in
Christian Portuguese levels helped serve to differentiate this assem
blage from the preceding Islamic one, where cattle, sheep and goats
predominate (Redman 1986: 229—30). Similarly at Qasr Ibrim
(Egypt), pig bones were completely absent from the Ottoman levels
(Alexander 1997).

Halal diet Halal slaughter ‘involves a clean cut to the throat’, and it
is ‘highly unlikely that a skilled practitioner will cut down to the
bone (most likely the hyoid), thus leaving no trace’ (Rielly 1996) (see
plate 4.1). Even if this were done, the hyoid of a sheep or goat, for
example, is usually small in size and prone to fragmentation, which
further complicates the recognition process. Where hyoids were
found on Islamic period sites in Jordan, no cut marks were evident,
but in any case these could also have been made after death, for
example, while removing the head. In general, little differentiation
was evident between pre-Muslim and Muslim butchery methods,
while the practice of not eating certain offal would not be apparent
in the archaeological record ‘short of extremely good preservation’
(Reilly 1996). Although it can be seen that this example relates only
to Jordan, it is applicable elsewhere, and therefore it is unlikely that
halal diet would be recognizable archaeologically.
Muslim animal husbandry The third and fourth of our questions
above can be considered together as both are related to animal herds,
their slaughter and composition. As regards the former, Martin (1996)
suggests that a conceivable approach would be linking ‘slaughter
patterns to particular feasting times, for example, Ramadan’. How
ever, since Ramadan is movable rather than seasonal, ‘one would need
very good ageing data from animals’, and zoo-archaeology cannot get
anywhere near the resolution of ageing needed to address this issue at
present, though cementum banding may eventually help. However, id
al-adha perhaps offers better possibilities for recognition on account
of a ‘special’ lamb being preferred for the sacrifice: male, neither too

98

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

99

There would appear to be more camel bones (many with clear butch
ery marks) on Muslim sites relative to those of an earlier date. In fact
the finding of a camel bone can almost be used as a marker for a
Muslim period context.’
Therefore, we appear to have one animal, the camel, which can act
as the sort of ‘marker’ which we require, an archaeological indicator
of Jordanian Muslim diet. (Its wider applicability as an indicator
of Muslim diet will be considered below.) In general, however, it
appears that in many ways an ‘ideal’ faunal assemblage would be
required to answer the questions outlined. However, several possible
useful lines of enquiry have been suggested which at a practical
level might begin to allow Muslim diet to be recognized and investi
gated archaeologically in a regional study. Moreover, such questions
need to be asked because, as will be discussed later, diet, and therefore
the archaeological remains, are not solely the residue of logical
economic decisions; they too can be strongly affected by religious
reasoning.
Alcohol and vegetable crops

Plate 4.1
Library)

Halal butchers, Kom Ombo, Egypt (© Hutchison Picture

Can other elements of Muslim diet, drink and vegetable foodstuffs,
for example, be archaeologically associated or indeed identified with
Muslims? The ban on alcohol within Islam is well known, and this
might in certain instances be archaeologically visible. Sadan (1991:
721), for example, notes that the use of certain receptacles is forbid
den to Muslims ‘for ease with which they might be used to ferment
liquids’. However, observance of this proscription is by no means
uniform, as is frequently attested in The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam:
‘and David’s lips are lock’t; but in divine high-piping Péhlevi,
with “Wine! Wine! Wine! Red Wine!” the Nightingale cries to the
Rose, That yellow cheek of hers t’ incarnadine. Come fill the cup,
and in the fire of Spring the Winter garment of repentance fling’
(Fitzgerald 1970). Physical evidence for the infringement of the
prohibition on alcohol was found at Samarra in Iraq, where
several tall pottery vessels painted with Christian imagery and
dating from the mid-ninth century were found which were inter
preted as wine flasks, and which led to the inference ‘that there
was a wine hall near the Caliph’s harem at Samarra’ (Talbot Rice
1971: 37).
More complex even is the recognition of the vegetable component
of the Muslim diet. This is not subject to dietary law as is flesh
and associated products, and thus cannot begin to be an archaeolog
ical indicator of a Muslim community in the same way; staple
—

young nor too old, healthy and without broken horns (El-Rashedy
1997).

The composition of a Muslim herd as an aid to its recognition is
likewise complicated. The imprecise nature of the archaeological
record obscures things, and the archaeological assemblage can be
best described as a death assemblage, and rarely an accurate reflection
of the herd structure pertaining to the period under study (Rielly
1996). Certainly, with regard to the Jordanian sites, Rielly notes that
‘it would appear that the major food animals, i.e. sheep, goat and
cattle, suffered very little change in either their relative importance as
food items or their major uses, as this area shifted from a Christian to
a Muslim state.’ However, he continues, ‘one species is worth com
menting on with respect to a possible change in diet, i.e. the camel.

100

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

food crops often remained unchanged in regions to which Islam
spread. Botanical remains might, howevei indicate the spread of
crops associated with the Muslim world. Crops such as rice, sugar
cane and wheat were widely diffused, but obviously they do not take
on a Muslim identity! Rather, at a precise point in time they can be
said to be culturally associated with Islam, as Al-Hassan and Hill
(1992: 212—13) discuss. For example, wheat was a staple food in
Islamic agriculture in the medieval period, as compared to rye bread
common in northern Europe, and sugar is a basic commodity
which ‘owes much of its development and spread to the Islamic
civilisation’ (1992: 220). The significance of wheat was also rein
forced by taboos, as in Turkey where Leach and Leach make the
point that, ‘though lacking prominence in the Qur’an. wheat is
considered a blessing from God and offences against it are open
to divine retribution’ (1977: 64). Various prohibitions exist about
what one can or cannot do in a wheat field, with wheat, and when
eating bread in Turkey. Similarly, certain fruits are especially
esteemed through their being favourites of the Prophet Muham
mad; these include water melon, banana and pomegranate, each of
which is said to contain ‘a fecundating seed from Paradise’ (Lane
1883: 161).
But greater use of archaeobotany needs to be made in Islamic
archaeology before we can even begin to approach these issues. As
King notes, ‘very little has been done in the way of paleobotanical
research for the Islamic period as a whole, and it is hoped that more
attention will be given in the future to this subject by archaeologists’
(l994a: 6). One instance of its application is at Qasr Ibrim (Egypt), a
site already mentioned in the context of the domestic environment
and which will be referred to again on account of the exceptional
preservation conditions found there. This meant that abundant
botanical remains survived, and when sampled indicated that the
crops grown varied over time. Significantly, one of these changes
occurred at the interface of the late Christian and early Islamic
periods (c. 1500), when the bicolor variety of sorghum ceased to be
cultivated, though the cultivation of the durra variety continued. This
has been interpreted as due to the fact that bicolor was more suited to
the making of beer and ‘so the Islamic prohibition of the consump
tion of alcohol may be one possible reason for this (Rowley-Conwy
1989: 135).
Although only a cursory treatment of Muslim dietary law has been
provided here, the importance of this fundamental area of Muslim life
to the archaeologist interested in Islam has been emphasized, and is
one in which numerous possibilities for research exist.
.

‘

.

101

Food and society
Equally important as the practical recognition of Muslim diet from
archaeological remains is the manner in which the whole spectrum of
food and drink can function socially, both in the creation of Muslim
identity and within Muslim life. Grant (1991: 109) makes the import
ant point that too often the preoccupation of the archaeologist deal
ing with animal bones is with economic matters, herd management,
animal improvement and the like, with ritual and symbolic elements
separated out; however, she adds ‘the religious, the symbolic and the
economic are all inextricably combined’ (1991: 110). Faunal assem
blages need not be the residue of solely economic decisions, and this
is particularly true of pastoral communities of all kinds, including
Muslim ones. Abu-Rabia (1994: 90), for example, records that among
the Bedouin of the Negev desert (Palestine), the significance of the
flocks of animals kept is much more than merely economic. ‘The
flock is the connecting link not only between men but also between
men and God, prophets, saints and pious people.’ The faunal assem
blage, the residue of this ‘significant flock’ and of the subsequent
‘significant meals’, would not indicate that the animals had been taken
to saints’ tombs, or that they were perceived of as any more than
wealth on the hoof, but as archaeologists we should consider such
possibilities, otherwise we might again run the risk of losing some
thing of the rich tapestry of meaning which could underlie the
archaeological evidence. The following examples show that food,
drink and their raw materials can be of significance beyond being
palatable or even apparently logically chosen.
Pigs in China The Muslim Hui communities of China have already
been mentioned (see chapter 2), and it was noted that the creation and
maintenance of Hui identity was not straightforward. As with the
utilization and adaptation of mosque architecture in the relationship
between the Hui and the majority non-Muslim Chinese, so pork
avoidance is significant. This forms part of the concept of qingzhen,
‘pure and true’, which is described by Gladney as more than an
expression for the absence of lard or pork but a sacred symbol
‘marking Hui identity’ (1991: 9). China is one of the most important
pig-breeding nations in the world, and pork is a major source of
protein. Thus, to avoid it serves as a distinguishing sign from the
mass of the population. However, the degree to which pork is
avoided varies greatly. In areas where the Hui are less visibly Muslim,
the pork taboo ‘becomes the most distinguishing marker of identity’,

102

MUSLIM LIFE

separating them from their Han neighbours. In the north-west of
China the word for pig is even avoided, and euphemisms such as
‘black bug’ and ‘black bastard’ are used instead (Gladney 1991: 25,
185). Porcine euphemism, however, would appear to be highly flex
ible, as Simoons (1981: 27) notes that pork is often eaten if it is called
mutton, a more pragmatic response. In contrast, other Hui groups,
such as the Chendai Hui, who are virtually culturally indistinct from
their neighbours, are not at all scrupulous in maintaining pork avoid
ance, openly or otherwise. But this is more easily understood if the
overall cultural context of this Hui lineage is considered, among
whose practices Gladney describes the lighting of ‘incense to ances
tors in their lineage temple’, some going as far as not believing in
Islam (1991: 264).
Even within one ethnic group the range of behavioural variability,
religious observance and non-observance is immense. In this example,
it can be seen that, although pork avoidance is one of the fundam
ental
Muslim dietary laws, the degree to which it is upheld depends upon
the perceived degree of social need and how practical it is to maintain;
thus a pragmatic attitude exists. Although the prohibition on eating
pork is scrupulously observed by many Muslims and the circum
stances affecting this case study are somewhat exceptional, this beha
viour is far from confined merely to the Hui. Such general issues as
the perception and practice of religion by its adherents, and how the
accompanying social laws or requirements are followed, are subject to
both individual or group choice and external pressures, a fact which
has direct material culture implications as a primary structuring agent
for cultural diversity. Furthermore, supposed economic rationality as
a structuring factor can often be exposed as false. There is no con
nection in this instance between pig prohibition and, as Simoons
points out, ‘rational explanations’ of health (1981: 111). Here, food
avoidance is used as a sign of separate cultural and ethnic identity,
which concurs with a point made by Farb and Armelagos (1980: 118)
about Mosaic and Qur’anic dietary laws in general. Namely, the
emphasis put upon them was ‘in part because foods can serve as
badges that distinguish one people from another’. With regard to
the Hui this is true, but is obviously divorced from economic and
rational concerns, almost to the point of disadvantage, it can be
suggested, in China, the land of the pig.
The camel The camel is perhaps synonymous in many people’s
minds with Arabia and the heartlands of Islam. Although such associ
ations are clichéd, they do, however, contain a kernel of truth, and it
is useful to consider the camel as a ‘cultural symbol’ within Muslim

103

MUSLIM LIFE

society. The camel is mentioned several times in the Qur’an; for
example, The Heights 7: 40. The Prophet is also seen as ‘the Camel
Rider’, and the camel as the beast ridden by the Messianic Redeemer
(Bashear 1991: 74). Bulliet (1975) has also charted the near total
disappearance of wheeled vehicles in much of western Asia and
North Africa following the Arab conquests, with dominance passing
to a camel-riding elite. The camel also played an important role in
pre-Islamic sacrifice, and Pellat (1971b: 666) makes the point that it
was ‘one of the animals endued with baraka, and to eat its flesh
amounted to an act of faith’. Simoons (1981: 87) argues that the
slaughter and consumption of camels ‘has come to be regarded in
the Middle East as almost an Islamic rite, and a sort of profession of
faith’. Thus to many Muslims the camel has important associations,
possibly owing to its spiritual connotations (but this is far from clear),
but certainly to its ‘multi-functional’ nature in many geographical
regions as a source of meat and a beast of burden (see Bulliet 1975;
Wilson 1984). Owing to these strong Muslim—camel cultural associa
tions, non-Muslims in many areas avoid consuming camel meat;
Ethiopian Christians, for example, because ‘they regard this as a
Muslim habit’ (Simoons 1981: 42).
Archaeological research in Spain and Hungary, both areas once
occupied by Muslims, has provided unequivocal evidence for the
perception of the camel as a cultural symbol identified with Muslims
by non-Muslims. Only seven dromedary (one-humped camel) bones
have been found in Spain in Muslim contexts, two from caliphate
period levels of the tenth—eleventh centuries in Granada, and five
from Almohad period levels in Guadix dating from the twelfth cen
tury. Some of these bones exhibited saw and cut marks, as well as
traces of having been exposed to fire, which contrasted with camel
Roman levels suggesting that ‘the consump
remains recovered from
tion of dromedary meat in Iberia could have had ritual connotations
in affirming the Muslim condition of Andalusians. in this way,
eating dromedary became a sign of cultural identity’ (Muniz et al.
1995: 373). The dromedary is not found in Iberia today; this would
not appear to be due to ecological reasons (the absence of suitable
habitat, and the existence of viable alternatives such as oxen and
horses), but because they had been introduced as ‘signs of cultural
identity’ and were rejected once their importers left the peninsula
(1995: 374). Following the re-conquest, the Christians could neither
eat nor even ride camels, as animals too closely associated with the
previous Muslim residents. In Hungary, camels were introduced dur
ing the Ottoman occupation (fifteenth to seventeenth centuries), and
their absence today, according to the excavator of various Ottoman
.

.

104

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

105

period sites, is partly due to the same variety of reasons, including the
factor of ‘cultural resentment’ (Bartosiewicz 1996: 453) against a beast
associated with conquering peoples (both Roman and Muslim). These
examples show how it is possible for an animal, its by-products such
as meat, even its tractional advantages, to be rejected because of its
perceived cultural associations. Economic logic, though playing a
part, is not the dominant factor.
Patterns of communal and private consumption This offers a further
factor for the archaeologist to consider when interpreting archaeol
ogical material relating to Muslim food use. What is present need not
only reflect availability; more often than not a process of conscious
choice is behind what is consumed and, as with many of the areas of
material culture discussed in this volume, food can also be actively
used for a variety of purposes (Douglas 1984). Food can be used as an
active agent of communal inclusion or exclusion; perhaps, it can be
suggested, of special importance within Islam, the religion of com
munity (ummah), where the communal consumption of food is a
recommended activity according to a hadith, which records that the
Prophet remarked ‘eat together and do not eat separately, for the
blessed is with the company’ (Ali 1951: 356, quoted in Goody 1982:
206).
Communal purposes to which food can be put are many. In Old
Delhi (India), Murphy (1986: 111) describes how Muslims manipu
lated feasting foods for social purposes, to emphasize Muslim identity
by excluding others and to improve relations with different religious
groups, especially the Hindu community by ‘making special pro
visions for their food’. Obviously related to this is the issue of the
cow in Muslim—Hindu relations in India. The Muslim ruler Akbar,
for instance, banned the slaughter of the cow, not through reverence
for the animal but as a political gesture, as a means of building better
relations with the Hindus. Conversely, Hindus could be actively
encouraged to eat beef ‘so that they would thereby become outcast
from Hindu society and turn to the religion of Allah’, of greatest
effect in the lower strata of Hindu society where the cow was less
revered (Lodrick 1981: 65).
Food can also be used at an individual level for social purposes; for
example, in the relationship between the sexes, as Hastorf stresses:
‘food can express political, social, and economic relations as well as
nutrition, it also expresses the development and maintenance of gen
der relations in the past’ (1991: 132). Unfortunately, this is an area of
study which has been much neglected by archaeologists, as has the
whole area of food preparation and related technical systems in

Plate 4.2 Songhai women cooking in Gao, Mali (photo. R. Maclean)
general (Maclean 1997), possibly, as Hastorf notes, because it is
popularly perceived as a woman’s activity (see plate 4.2). Suitable
illustrative case studies based upon archaeological material are thus
few and far between, and it is anthropology and popular fiction that
provide the most interesting examples.
Maclagan’s (1994) research in the western highlands of Yemen
illustrates just how gender relations and food can be intertwined.
She describes how male and female obligations and relations were
negotiated in this area in terms of food, and how ‘women’s relation to
food is defined by their relation to men’ (1994: 159). Food could be
utilized as a means of female protest, by being withheld or badly
prepared. It could also be used in the forming of friendships between
women, and foods associated with men, such as meat, were usually
not eaten by women, unless there were men in the household. Food
was thus the very medium of discourse in this area of Yemen, and a
similar scenario is described in the Buddha of Suburbia, a novel
depicting the life of a half-English, half-Indian young man in 1970s
London. When, for example, the relationship between the main
character’s Muslim uncle and aunt breaks down, his auntie Jeeta uses
food subtly, as one means of expressing her anger with her husband.
She ‘cooked for him as before, but provided only plain food, the same
every day, and long after the expected time, bringing it to him when he

106

MUSLIM LIFE

107

MUSLIM LIFE

was asleep or about to pray’ (Kureishi 1990: 208).
She served food
designed to cause constipation, and when he complained,
the opposite, on a monumental scale. In both these she served
unconnected
examples, far removed in every context, food can be seen
as truly
socially significant and as actively used. It is not merely
a fuel for the
body, but functions within the social arena, within an
Islamic context,
yet at the same time without being specifically Muslim.
Stimulants A further dimension of food use in a social
context in the
Muslim world is provided by the consumption of
stimulants. There
has been much learned debate among Muslim scholars
use, but many are used in different communities. Qat, about their
an evergreen
shrub whose leaves and shoots are chewed to produce
a mild stimu
lating effect, and coffee have been the subject of recent
studies (Weir
1985; Hattox 1991). Initially both substances, which
originated in
Ethiopia and spread to Yemen in the fourteenth to fifteenth
centuries
though a recent find of three coffee bean fragments at
Kush in the
United Arab Emirates in contexts dated to the twelfth to
thirteenth
centuries will probably mean that the date of their
introduction to
Arabia will need revising; British Museum 1998), were
associated
with some religious men and Sufi orders as the effects
were thought
to bring ‘them closer to God and enhanced meditation
(Weir 1985: 76). However, over the course of time both capacity’
coffee and
qat underwent a definite change in status, they lost any
overtones, although they were never religious substances religious
in them
selves. The public coffee house and the private qat party
became,
as
they are today, social outlets, places to meet, gossip, and
even com
pete socially. Tea, coffee, tobacco, qat, hashish, opium, pan
substances which effect the mind might be forbidden, and although
the
stances themselves might vary, the Muslim world can hardly sub
be said
to be free of the consumption of stimulants, each of
which can
generate its own peculiar and recognizable material
culture, and
provide a further dimension of life which could be visible
archaeol
ogically.
—

Feasts and festivals Directly related to the subject of the
social use
of food and drink are feasts, fasts and festivals which form
an import
ant element in Muslim religious and social life, and are
thus of
relevance within a consideration of the possible archaeology
of
islam. Huge local variety exists, but four pre-eminent examples
can
be isolated: the Fourth Pillar of Islam, sawm or daytime
fasting and
nightly feasting, which takes place in Ramadan, the ninth
month of
the Muslim calendar; id al-fitr, the feast and festival to
celebrate the

end of the fast of Ramadan; id al-adha, the feast to celebrate the day
when hajj pilgrims sacrifice in the Valley of Mina near Mecca, which
is an obligation on every free Muslim who can afford to buy a
sacrificial animal, usually a sheep, camel or cow; and, finally, the
tenth of Muharram, of special importance to the Shi’ah, and also
significant to the Sunni as Ashura. This is an emotionally intense
culmination of a ten-day mourning process to commemorate the
death of Hussein at Karbala in 680 (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 47,
156, 409, 469; Von Grunebaum 1976).
These four examples differ immensely both in character and emo
tional tone, and it is difficult to assess what general implications feasts
and fasts hold for the archaeologist. Although certain categories of
specific material culture are utilized, such as special foods and dishes,
or certain specific relics might be generated (faunal remains resulting
from sacrifices or various types of artifact), it is extremely unlikely
that a particular festival, feast or fast could be recognized archaeol
ogically. The one exception to this might be Muharram, with its own
specific material culture such as the tazia, the replica of Hussein’s
coffin carried in procession, and the Karbala, the building in which
these replicas are sometimes buried, as well as the Imambara, a large
religious structure also used during Muharram (see Asher 1984: 89—90
for Bengali examples). Yet within the sum total of elements which
constitutes the archaeology of Islam this is of little importance. It is
the awareness of such events which is significant, as a further possible
(and probable) component of Muslim life, past and present.
Food and drink within the context of Muslim society can therefore
be seen to be more than just fuel for the body, and thus should be of
greater interest to the archaeologist than merely a source of economic
data. Food in itself was not explicitly religious, but through dietary
laws has been influenced by a religious component. At a practical
level, the existence of these dietary laws could allow the archaeol
ogical recognition of a Muslim diet, a further category of evidence
in the possible identification of a Muslim community. Furthermore,
we have seen that food, here meant in its broadest definition, can be
used in myriad ways manipulated, avoided, associated with and
can also serve a variety of purposes: as a cultural symbol, or a means
of communication or protest, for example. These are all things
for us to consider when examining faunal remains, pottery forms,
botanical samples, all the residue of food use. And once again the
privileged position of the archaeologist interested in Islam is appar
ent. We are able to see, from diverse historical, ethnographic and
anthropological evidence, the many dimensions of food use in
Muslim life.
—

—

108

MUSLIM LIFE

Education and Health

Education and health present further dimensions of life which can be
visible archaeologicaily. Education, for example, could be represented
materially by a wide range of evidence. The importance of education,
particularly religious education, in the Muslim world, both today and
in the past should be stressed (secular education is discussed in
chapter 5): ‘from its inception, indeed from the very first word of
the first revelation to Muhammad, Islam had the character of a
literary and, therefore, learned civilisation; in such a context the
acquisition of knowledge and its transmission were paramount’
(Dickie 1978: 38). The material manifestations of education could
range from a Qur’anic school set up in an open area, where boys
learnt to memorize the Qur’an from wooden boards, as described by
Lane (1895) in nineteenth-century Cairo (see plate 4.3), to purposebuilt madrasabs (religious colleges), which grew in importance from

MUSLIM LIFE

109

the tenth to eleventh centuries, to the great mosque universities such
as al-Azhar in Cairo or Zeitouna (Kairouan) in Tunisia, where
Qur’anic sciences (commentaries), hadith, law and theology were all
taught (Gardet 1970: 588). Lane also describes the form of the al
Azhar, a large building surrounding a central court with a place of
prayer on the side facing Mecca, and ‘on each of the three sides are
smaller porticoes, divided into a number of apartments called riwaks,
each of which is destined for the use of natives of a particular country,
or of a particular province of Egypt’ (1895: 213).
Madrasahs could frequently have a similar plan, though on a much
smaller scale, and which in their developed form combined the func
tions of the mosque (masjid) and hostel (khan) (Hillenbrand 1986:
1123). They are by no means universally found but were built in
many areas of the Muslim world. For a summary of their origins,
development and spread, see Pedersen (1986) and Hillenbrand (1986).
The külliye or building complexes constructed by the Ottomans
provide an example of what could be built incorporating a madrasah.
These structural complexes began to be built in a fairly simple form in
the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, combining a mosque and
madrasah, and perhaps a soup kitchen. One hundred years later
these could be much more elaborate, exemplified by the Yilderim
kulliye, which combined a mosque, madrasah, bath, soup kitchen and
hospital, all fortified and with two entrance gates (Kuran 1987: 134).
Although this example is obviously exceptional, it gives an idea of the
types of integrated structures which could be built. Furthermore,
health was represented in this instance by the hospital (maristan),
which could equally be found as a single structure, as could more
simple hospices (Dunlop 1958). The study of such buildings might
also allow the archaeological recognition of waqf or charitable
endowments. A hospital, hostel for travellers, religious college, com
plex such as the külliye, possibly even a bridge, could be supported
from waqf foundations, and indicated through inscriptions (see
Rogers 1976, for example), perhaps in certain instances along with
the architect’s name (see Mayer 1956: 21—2).
Pilgrimage and Travel

/

Plate 4.3

Qur’an school, Rakai District, Uganda (photo. T. Insoll)

Yet another element of Muslim life which has definite and recogniz
able archaeological implications is provided by travel in all its many
forms. Hajj, pilgrimage to Mecca, is possibly the best-known exam
ple, but many other manifestations exist. Travel for other types of
pilgrimage, migration, journeying for curiosity or trade, all have been

F
110

111

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

an important element of Muslim life since the very beginnings of
Islam, both for men, and with the first two at least, for women.
Muslim travel is, according to Netton (1993: x), ‘old as the religion
itself’, a process which began with the Prophet’s migration, the hijrah,
from Mecca to Medina, year one of the Muslim calendar. In its
broadest sense, ‘travel’ can be said to be imbued with a spiritual
significance, expressed thus by Gellens (1990: 53): ‘embedded deep
in Muslim consciousness is an identification of travel with pious
activity, an appreciation that achievement in such endeavour is a
sign of divine approval and munificence.’ The direct implication of
such sentiments means that it is often difficult, or impossible, to
separate one activity from another. As will be discussed in greater
detail below, trade could, and did, accompany pilgrimage; once again
leading to a blurring between the secular and sacred as is apparent in
so many other aspects of Muslim life.
All these types of travel can leave, to a greater or lesser degree,
material culture traces (the archaeology of pilgrimage at least has
recently been considered; see Graham-Campbell 1994). These can
be plotted diagrammatically in a simplified form, providing what
can be termed ‘circles of visibility’ and allowing the recognition of
different aspects of this journeying. This ranges from greater observa
tional clarity of hajy-related activities the closer one is to the Holy
Places, with correspondingly a blurring of definition with distance,
when local pilgrimage trails and centres become more easily recog
nizable. Each of these should be considered individually, beginning
with hajj.

which are wound around the body leaving one shoulder exposed.
This garment must be worn during ha;j or umrah in the sacred
territory as a symbolic gesture of the erasure of class and race dis
tinctions.
Alongside the creation of a feeling of community, the intermingling
of people during pilgrimage can lead to the spread of new ideas, and
have much political significance. Control of the Ka’bah, the sacred
sanctuary in Mecca, could aid secular power (Hawting 1993: 31—2),
and prestige accrue from the ownership of relics associated with it, as
the collection in the Topkapi Palace in Istanbul (the former Ottoman
court), attests. Here keys to the Holy Ka’bah, a fragment of its door,
the gilt waterspout of mercy from the Ka’bah, and the golden cover
of the black stone itself (probably a meteorite, and recorded as given
by the Angel Gabriel to Abraham, who is believed to have built the
Ka’bah) are all displayed. The possession of these items, along with
relics of the Prophet and his family, invested the Ottoman Sultan with
a certain legitimacy to rule, and were the ‘emblems of Islam’ (Wheatcroft 1995: 52), reinforcing the claim to be caliph (where used), the
highest political and religious authority in Islam, and the Prophet’s
successor as leader of the Muslims.
It is not necessary to repeat here the origins of, and ceremonies
involved in, hajj, which have been well covered elsewhere (Burton
1898; Peters 1994), but the centrality of Mecca and Medina as the hub
of a web of routes leading from all corners of the Muslim world
should be emphasized. The three major routes before the modern era
and the dominance of air transport were the Syrian route via Damas
cus, which also carried Anatolian, Balkan and some Central Asian
pilgrims; an Egyptian route from Cairo which also catered for pil
grims from the Maghrib and West Africa; and an Iraqi route which
carried pilgrims from Iraq, Iran and the East (see figure 4.1). Further,
less important, sea routes were followed by pilgrims from the East
African Coast, India and beyond (Petersen 1994: 48—9).
The archaeology of the hajj routes has been the subject of recent
interest (Petersen 1994). Archaeological studies of the Darb Zubayda,
which flourished under the patronage of the Abbasids, linking Kufa in
Iraq to Mecca, with a further trail to Medina, have shown that a
variety of installations exist. Thirteen hundred wells, 54 guard stations
and halting places, a hundred reservoirs, numerous cisterns, mosques
and milestones and in places a delimited trackway cleared of stones,
were recorded (al-Rashid 1980, 1986). Archaeology has also provided
information on the hijrah route between Mecca and Medina. A paved
roadway, up to 4 m wide, made of flat stones and cobbles filled with
gravel, was found, protected in the Ottoman period by fortified

Hajj and umrah
Pre-eminent among Muslim travels is ha;j, or pilgrimage to Mecca,
one of the Five Pillars of the Faith, and an obligation (with certain
exceptions) on every adult Muslim with the requisite means. Ideally,
bajj, with all its attendant ceremonies, should coincide with the
Festival of Sacrifice, id al-adha. Otherwise, lesser pilgrimage to
Mecca, umrah, can be undertaken at any time, with the same cere
monies, but minus the sacrifice, and with less religious benefit accru
ing (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 121,159; Petrushevsky 1985: 64—6).
Besides bringing individual religious merit, hajj is also significant in
strengthening the ummah, by acting as a unifying force bringing
together all Muslim ethnic groups, classes and cultures. Equality
between these often disparate groups is obtained by various means,
through, for example, the mandatory wearing by men of a simple
white robe, the ibram, made up of two seamless pieces of white cloth

112
MUSLIM LIFE

Figure 4.1

113

Pilgrimage routes in Arabia (after Peters 1994: xxv)

posts (Whalen et al. 1981: 53). Parts of another hajj route
from Tarim
in the Wadi Hadhramaut through the mountains to Aden
have been
recorded, as at Andar near Hureidhah (Whitcomb 1988:
182).
Away from the Arabian Peninsula, further archaeological
evidence
of the ha;j pilgrim traffic has been found, as at the former Red
Sea port
of Aidhab (Sudan) opposite Jeddah, the port for Mecca. This
port was
connected to the Egyptian route, and grew in importance
after the
land route through Sinai was closed by the Crusaders in the
twelfth
century (Peters 1994: 90—1). Visited by Ibn Battuta in the midfour
teenth century, it appears to have been a pretty miserable
place, but
extensive precautions were taken to ensure adequate supplies
of water
by digging cisterns and wells (see figure 4.2) (Elisséeff and
el Hakim
1981: 14). Extensive cemeteries were ‘ample reminder of the appalli
ng
death rate among the pilgrims’ (Paul 1955: 67), and included
a nonMuslim zone of burial, recognizable through grave orientation
(see
chapter 6), and interpreted as the burial place of Jews or
Coptic

Figure 4.2 Plan of Aidhab, Sudan (not to scale) (after Paul 1955: 65)
Christians (Elisséeff and el Hakim 1981: 41). A living legacy of hajj
traffic has also been left in the Sudan, with the significant numbers of
people of West African origin who have stayed there.
Ziyara, rihlah and hijrah
Pilgrimage to Mecca is not the only form of religious journeying
undertaken in the Muslim world (Eickelman and Piscatori 1990;
Netton 1993). Myriad shrines and holy places are visited continu
ally, in the process of ziyara. These range from major centres, such as

114

115

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

the Shi’ah foci of pilgrimage, the tombs of Hussein at Karbala and

character. Although ‘trade’ itself is examined in greater detail in
chapter 5, the mechanics of land-based caravan travel will be dis
cussed here because of its intimate relationship with pilgrimage. The
relevant categories of archaeological evidence will be broadly the
same as those already outlined for pilgrimage, with caravan trails
differing little from pilgrimage routes. An example of the mapping
of a major trade route is provided by the results of archaeological
survey in the Seistan region of Iran, through which a route ran linking
the Persian Gulf ports in Iran to Herat in Afghanistan, and on to
Pakistan and India. Exceptional preservation has allowed the study of
a variety of features indicating the former roads and tracks, dwelling
or watch towers between towns and forts, orange brick dust stains,
the residue of former way-markers, wells and bridges (Tate 1910;
Fischer 1973). Milestones may also be found. Welch describes a mile
stone dating from 685—705 from Palestine which bore the inscription:
‘the highway... Abdullah ‘Abd al-Malik, amir of the Faithful, Allah’s
mercy be upon him, this mile is eight miles (from Jerusalem)’ (1979:
44). A similar inscription from close to Aqaba (Jordan) is described
by Woolley and Lawrence (1936). Erected between 1500 and 1516, it
reads: ‘the cutting of this blessed road was ordered by our master the
Sultan al-Malik al-Ashraf Kansuh al-Ghuri, may his help be strong,
who also erected in this blessed khan towers for the deposits of the
pilgrims’ (1936: 161).
A further category of structure, specifically associated with Muslim
travellers of all types, which would be of great importance to the
archaeologist attempting to identify trade and pilgrimage routes, is
provided by the ‘caravanserai’ or khan, which has been likened in its
modern equivalent to a petrol station, ‘occurring at regular intervals,
ubiquitous, unremarkable and unremarked’ (Sims 1978: 98). The
usual architectural form was of a central walled courtyard, sur
rounded by lodgings for men and beasts, facilities for storing goods,
and perhaps a prayer area, baths, water-storage facilities, and a few
small shops or kiosks. Caravanserais could also be provided with
defences, and varied both in size and according to region (Sauvaget
1940: 1—4; Petersen 1994: 51). Numerous examples have been
recorded and investigated archaeologically all over the Muslim
world: from Central Asia, as at Talaihan-Ata in the Kara-Kum desert,
where a caravanserai dating from the eleventh to fourteenth centuries
was excavated on the trade route leading to Bukhara and Samarkand
(Fedorov-Davydov 1983: 401), to the Jaulan (Golan) in Syria, where
Schumacher (1888) recorded caravanserais ranging from the humble
to the well appointed. But among the most unexpected, though
clearly archaeologically visible, examples yet found (Insoll 1996c:

Au at Najaf, where almost parallel rituals of visitation to those of ha1j

have developed (Momen 1985: 182), to individual saints’ tombs,
important in local contexts. Criss-crossing the Muslim world are
vast networks of pilgrimage trails, as Ibn Battuta recorded during
his extended wanderings in the mid-fourteenth century (Gibb 1993).
As with hail, local pilgrimage is archaeologically recognizable on a
lesser scale. Instructive examples can be drawn from Central Asia,
where local pilgrimage to tombs is still of great importance. This was
especially the case, as Bennigsen and Enders Wimbush (1986: 23)
discuss, during the Soviet era, when they served as substitutes for
closed mosques and hayj was impossible. In this region the deep-seated
tradition of ‘parallel Islam’ (1986: 23) is better described as syncretism
with traditional beliefs. Among the semi-nomadic Uzbeks, for
instance, local pilgrimage was incorporated within the seasonal
cycle, and during the summer drive of the animals to new pastures
various shrines and holy places were visited by Uzbek herders. At
these, sacrifices and offerings would be made, and ‘thus, Islam and the
ancient belief in magic, were united’ (Emeijanenko 1994: 49). This
again illustrates how apparently secular activities, such as seasonal
transhumance, can also be placed within the overall religious frame
work. This is reinforced by an example from Sinai, where Marx (1977)
discusses how pilgrimage to saints’ shrines is an important feature of
social life through helping to create local community, as hajj serves to
create the world Muslim community. It also offers material advantages
to transact business for ‘they [the Bedouin] do not conceive of purely
spiritual or purely material occasions, as found in specialised industrial
societies’ (1977: 41). Thus, the inter-connectedness of many elements
spiritual, material, cultural is again apparent.
Many journeys were also made purely in the search of knowledge, or
rihlah, and promoted by the Prophet who, according to a hadith,
counselled his followers ‘that they should seek knowledge as far as
China’ (Netton 1993: x). There is also hijrah (migration), defined by
Eickelman and Piscatori as ‘the obligation to migrate from lands where
the practice of Islam is constrained to those where in principle no such
constraint exists’ (1990: 5). This is certainly something which could be
archaeologically visible as with the Andalusian Muslim refugees who
settled in Morocco, Tunisia and Algeria after the Christian re-conquest.
—

—

Commerce and travel
The final category of travel which will be considered here as having
archaeological implications is that which has an overtly commercial

116

117

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

486) was a structure recorded at Yendi Dabari in Ghana, deep in the
tropical forest zone of West Africa, where the remains of a two-storey
structure interpreted as the remains of ‘a strangers’ complex of ware
houses and paddocks for pack animals’ (Ozanne 1971: 55—6) were
investigated.
Thus, as with the other aspects of life discussed so far, it can be seen
that pilgrimage and travel are further important dimensions of Muslim
life; specific material culture is associated with these activities which
can be recognized by the archaeologist. Once again, direct connections
between the sacred and the secular exist, through actions such as
combining trade with pilgrimage, either in the local context or on
hajj. This inter-connectedness, apparent with many areas of Muslim
life, is a theme running throughout this chapter and throughout this
book. Further possible markers of Muslim identity, and potentially
important components of Muslim life, are provided by personal pos
sessions and dress.

the Prophet, it served a variety of purposes on a variety of levels.
Although rare today, seal rings were common and, through their
function as a form of signature, were used to seal goods and docu
ments. Inscriptions frequently consist of the name of the wearer and a
pious inscription engraved on a semi-precious stone, which was set in
a silver band, following the example of the Prophet. The quality
obviously varied, but the choice of materials was often deliberate, as
the Prophet did not approve of gold, although it was sometimes
employed, while ‘brass savoured of idolatry’ and iron was ‘emblem
atic of souls condemned to the eternal fire’ (Allan 1978: 1103—4; and
see also Juynboll 1986: 110—11). Carnelian was frequently used for
the seal (for examples, see Content 1987: 35—6), and Jenkins and
Keane suggest that among the qualities which recommended its use
were ‘availability, toughness, and resistance to abrasion’ (1982: 20). Its
popular use might also be connected with the tradition that the
Prophet advised everyone to wear an agate, a material which, accord
ing to Donaldson, was primary in the magical hierarchy (1939: 152).
Such an interpretation could in turn help in explaining the trade in
carnelian which took place across vast distances in the Muslim world
during the medieval period.
Examples have been found archaeologically. A seal ring, inlaid with
a disc of black jasper on which was cut an Arabic inscription in
reverse, was found at the site of Shanga on the Kenyan coast (Horton
1996: 357). This find, along with a variety of other evidence, allOwed
the suggestion that a Muslim community was present at this site from
its foundation in the late eighth century. Engraved seal stones of
carnelian, turquoise, lapis lazuli and hematite were recovered from
Nishapur in Iran (if the provenance is correct) and dated from the
tenth to eleventh centuries (Jenkins and Keane 1982: 19—21), while at
Ras al’Hadd in Oman a reverse-cut carnelian seal was found at this
Indian Ocean trade centre (Petersen 1997).

Personal Possessions and Dress
Both personal possessions and dress are intimate items which are
often invested with a meaning beyond their surface appearance, and
can convey a variety of socially important information, state Muslim
identity, and could be encountered archaeologically. Though perhaps
conceived of as ‘lesser items’ of life, they should not be ignored by
the archaeologist for this reason. However; it should be noted that the
examples chosen do not imply the existence of universals: that all
women were veiled, or that all Muslims wore seal rings and used
prayer beads, for instance. These are obviously interchangeable with
many other items, and though present in one area could well be
absent in another. Similarly, many of the items discussed are of little
relevance today. Rather, the chosen examples function as an illustra
tion that the archaeology of Islam is equally composed of large and
small alike, and favouring one at the expense of the other is to bias the
picture we present.
Personal possessions
The seal ring The seal ring can be seen to be an object combining
both secular and sacred significance, and certainly of utilitarian and
aesthetic value. Functioning both as a sign of individual identity, but
also of Muslim identity, and an item connected through tradition with

The rosary or prayer beads More overtly religious in character is the
rosary (subha), which has been described as a ‘visible example of the
passion for the words of God’ (Bravmann 1983: 21), and which is also
a comparatively rare example of Muslim religious paraphernalia, as in
many ways Islam lacks the trappings associated with other world
religions. The simplicity of worship in Islam precludes a large body
of ritual material culture. The rosary is a set of prayer beads usually
made up of 99 beads indicating the 99 beautiful names of Allah,
which are used in prayer or meditation. They can be made of many
materials: wood, semi-precious stones, ivory and, more recently,
plastic. Although they are not universally used, they can be both

118

MUSLIM LIFE

generally associated with Muslims, and more specifically with certain
movements, such as the Sufi orders where their use is very wide
spread. Indeed, Gellner (1981: 143) makes the point that they are,
‘so
characteristic of the religious fraternities that one can refer to
fraternity, or its distinguishing spiritual technique, as a wird (rosary a
)’.
Prayer beads thus provide another example of an object that is
both
intimate and yet specifically Muslim in character, individual
in
association, durable in nature and with definite archaeologica
l im
plications. At Gao (Mali), for example, the recovery of a large turned
wood central bead from a rosary dated to between the early eleven
th
and late fourteenth centuries helped prove that Muslims lived in
a
particular area of the city.

Miscellany Other items could help to denote the former presence of
a Muslim in the archaeological record, yet to define them as cate
gorically Muslim would be misleading, even though they might
be
intimately linked with Islam, Muslim culture or the Muslim world.
The direct religious association, as with prayer beads, or indirec
t, as
with the Arabic inscribed seal ring, is missing. Within this catego
ry
could be placed the miswak or siwak, a toothbrush or toothpick
made
from fragrant wood, valued by the Prophet Muhammad for hygien
e
purposes, and recommended for cleaning the mouth prior to prayer
(Gibb and Kramers 1961: 388—9). Owing to associations with
the
Prophet, it could take on a significance for which it was never
intended; Kalesi relates, for example, that pilgrims returning from
Mecca used to bring miswak back to the Balkans with them owing
to this association (1978: 374).
Similar are various female items such as kuhi or kohl pots and
applicators. The applicators, decorated or plain, were small probes
of wood, ivory or silver, and their containers were of glass or metal.
Kohl is still commonly applied as an eye cosmetic in many areas of
the Islamic world, especially the Arab lands; its use is described
in
detail by Lane (1895: 44—5, see also Wiedemann 1986). Such appli
cators were found in Islamic period levels at Qsar es-Seghir in Mor
occo, along with a variety of other personal items which clearly
differentiated the Muslim community from the subsequent Portu
guese Christian one (see chapter 7; Redman 1986: 129). Likewise
at
Nishapur in Iran, kohl applicators were found and, although they
have a pre-Islamic background, Allan records how decorated and
undecorated kohl sticks ‘were common throughout the Islamic
world in the early Islamic period’ (1982: 38). Other find spots he
lists include Fustat (Egypt), Hama (Syria), Rayy and Siraf (Iran) and
Samarra (Iraq). Unfortunately, an item such as a kohl container or a

MUSLIM LIFE

119

siwak cannot obviously be said per se to be an object which belonged
to a Muslim, yet a clear association with Muslim culture exists. Such
objects might, however, be of value depending on the context in
which they are found, as at Qsar es-Seghir.
A further illustrative example of the possible usefulness of personal
possessions in recognizing Muslim communities is provided by
material recovered from the Ottoman fortress at Qasr Ibrim in
Egyptian Nubia. Exceptional conditions meant that many of the
personal possessions associated with the garrison were preserved.
Distinctive male possessions included reed pens, wooden combs,
keys and spoons, iron razors, leather shoes, amulets, horse trappings,
musket parts and smoking pipes (see plate 4.4). None of these items
could be said to be specifically Muslim, but all are of types which can
be identified as coming from the Muslim world, though similar items
were found in late Christian levels (see Adams 1996). The same is true
of the female possessions found: multi-coloured glass bangles, kohl
accessories, sandals, jewellery and perfume containers. However, in
both instances the association with Islam is still indirect. The import
ance lies in the fact that such a diverse range of materials was found in
association with each other, and that these were found in conjunction
with other categories of evidence which directly indicated that the

Plate 4.4 Various personal items from Ottoman period levels at Qasr Ibrim,
Egypt (photo. T. Insoll, courtesy of the Egypt Exploration Society)

120

121

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

former owners of these items were Muslim. Therefore, a wealth of
information on often neglected aspects of life was obtained through
archaeological evidence, details which begin to allow Muslim life in
total to be reconstructed.

closely connected with Muslims as they ‘could barely perform their
prayers in draped or tied clothing, as the women needed a decent
covering from ankles to neck’ (1980: 109).
Certainly one of the most elaborate examples of the use of dress to
convey information concerning status in the Muslim world was pro
vided by the Ottoman court where, according to Wheatcroft, ‘colour
and form had their own eloquence, and costume possessed a subtle
grammar’ (1995: 39). For men, beard length, turbans, colour of robes
and shoes and the cut of the sleeves all defined social status according
to intricate codes (see, for example, Rogers and Ward 1988: 164—85).
Although women lacked public roles, Turkish dress styles were still
widely worn throughout the Ottoman provinces, and were ‘emulated
in the towns by any of the subject population who had aspirations
towards status and wealth’ (Scarce 1987: 14). Over the centuries, until
reforms in the early nineteenth century swept them away, this lan
guage of dress, though maintained, came to be somewhat less well
understood and was, as Wheatcroft puts it, ‘imperfectly spoken but
still eloquent’ (1995: 39). Dress codes were kept because they were
traditional (though they were also subject to fashion), even though
their symbolic meaning had ceased to be completely understood. This
raises the question of how much more material culture functions in
this way, and how much interpretative meaning in turn is lost,
removed as we are from the events themselves.

Dress
A second category of personal objects which might be of use to the
archaeologist in pursuing such issues are items of dress. Dress is a
medium which can be used to convey a variety of information, and
thus constitutes a further ‘actively used’ area of material culture (see,
for example, Cordwell and Schwarz 1979). Dress, like the domestic
environment, is an area of material culture which can be used to
uphold Muslim social codes, but can, like food, be used for a variety
of different social purposes: to signal status, gender, religious and
political affiliation, and class or caste. Within Islam, clothing has a
special significance; Watson (1983: 41) mentions how, ‘in practice if
not in doctrine. the faithful should be clothed, preferably from the
neck to the anicies, with only the face, neck, hands and feet showing’.
Obviously, great variety in types of dress is found, but at the same
time an underlying and recurrent concern with modesty is often
apparent across the Muslim world, especially as regards women’s
clothing. As well as a concern with modesty, the speed and extent
of the Arab conquests frequently led to the widespread adoption of
their fashions, and these could replace local costume or be amalgam
ated with it. Thus, quite apart from religious demands, elements of a
recognizable Muslim couture existed and could be identified archae
ologically from textile fragments.
.

.

Status and affiliation Although ideally it should not occur, as all
believers are meant to be equal, clothing can obviously be used to
emphasize status distinctions, and it would be foolhardy to deny the
often great divergence which exists between theory and practice in
many areas of Muslim life. In the Yemen, for example, Kirkman
(1976: 67) describes how clothing could serve ‘as a chosen marker
of social identity’. Religious scholars could set themselves apart
through their dress, affirming their position in society. Similarly,
female dress in the Yemen could also exhibit social distinctions, but
in a different form from that of men, reflecting not public role but
isolation from public life (though this in itself is an often-debated
point, and is discussed further below). Besides indicating status,
clothing could also set a Muslim apart from his or her neighbours.
In parts of India, Schimmel relates how tailored (sewn) clothing was

The turban and the veil Besides the more culturally specific
instances of the social role of clothing within Muslim society, other
factors must also be considered. A particularly instructive example is
provided by the turban, as the Prophet Muhammad is said to have
encouraged Muslims to wear a turban ‘as a badge of their faith’ (Miles
1952: 170). A hadith states that turbans are a mark of Islam and divide
believers from unbelievers, and wearing one, though not a religious
duty, is recommended for men (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 596). The
use of a turban representation on some Ottoman tombstones as a
means of stating religious affiliation will be discussed later (see chap
ter 6); the turban could serve a similar role in life. Turbans, through
their material, style and colour, could also be used to differentiate
between different religious groups within society. In nineteenth-cen
tury Cairo, for example, Lane (1895) describes how a Muslim was
distinguished from the Coptic and Jewish populations by the colour
of his turban, as well as through other aspects of dress. Green turbans
were reserved for the descendants of the Prophet, while Copts and
Jews were restricted to black, light-brown, blue and grey turbans and
‘generally dull-coloured dresses’ (1895: 43). Although the turban, as

122

MUSLIM LIFE

the seal ring, was by no means universal, it serves to illustrate
that
items of clothing exist which can serve as markers of religious
identity
For women, the headgear denoting Muslim identity is the veil and
headscarf. Many items can be subsumed within this category, from
the all-concealing chador to the more modest Western style headscarf.
The veil is of significance for two main reasons: it is intimately
connected with women, the ‘hidden’ 50 per cent of the population
(archaeologically at least); and it can be used to enforce Muslim social
codes concerning the privacy of females and of modesty in general.
But, again, universals should not be promoted; the extent to which
the veil was or can be used, if at all, varies greatly, and, as with
the
turban, need not be restricted to Muslims. Scarce (1987), for example,
describes how Orthodox Christian women in the Balkans could be
heavily influenced by Turkish traditions of dress, even as far
as
wearing a veil, and makes the important point that ‘it would be
a
naive simplification to assume that sartorial difference could be neatly
divided between Christian and Muslim women’ (1987: 99). The veil
could also take on an exaggerated significance. Remedius Prutky,
a
Franciscan missionary, recorded that, at Jeddah (Saudi Arabia) in the
mid-eighteenth century:
although the women guard their faces solicitously, that they may not
be seen, yet they pay little attention to the other parts of the body,
especially the poor: for it often happens, when they leave the house to
wash their shifts and ribbons, that, having no others save those they are
wearing, they stay at the river washing as naked as God made them,
with only their faces covered, and sit their while their washing dries in
the sun. (Arrowsmjth_Brown 1991: 33)
The degree to which veiling has been practised, and thus the
seclusion of females maintained, has often depended on social class.
In the Middle East, for instance, Keddie (1992: 48) makes the
point
that ‘except among the recent, modernised elite, veiling has been
widely regarded as a sign of status, showing that the husband and
wife can afford for her not to work.’ It can be seen that in many ways
the use of the veil is linked with the structuring notions which can
underlie the form of the traditional Muslim domestic environment,
namely, to protect the purity of the female members of the household
(see chapter 3). By the veil being worn outside, these concerns are
extended into the public domain. It is a further example of how
material culture can be used to convey the traditional norms and
requirements of a Muslim society. But, equally, the role of the veil

123

MUSLIM LIFE

is subject to many different interpretations as to the degree to which
it actually excludes women from society at large, or alternatively
includes them, though in a less obvious manner (see, for example,
Webster 1984). The veil can, in conditions where textiles survive, be
encountered archaeologically. At Quseir al-Qadim, for example, the
earliest known surviving woman’s face veil was recovered from
Mamluk period levels dated to between the mid-thirteenth and midfourteenth centuries in this Red Sea port (Vogelsang-Eastwood
1993: 87).

Colour Another dimension of clothing and its possible significance
within Muslim life is colour. Colour as a medium of information
display has already been touched upon in the context of the turban;
green is the colour connected with the Prophet’s descendants and has
been widely used in flags and banners. Athamina (1989) also describes
how colour in dress and banners was used by the Abbasid regime as a
means of manipulating and legitimizing power, a process which
began in the mid-eighth century when Caliph al-Mansur introduced
black garments for his courtiers and entourage. A deliberate back
ground with religious associations was created for this uniform with
reputed links back to the Prophet, who was said to have had a black
banner the day Mecca was conquered, and who foresaw salvation for
his family after his death coming from the east with people bearing
black flags. The black uniform became the official uniform of the
Abbasid regime, and symbolic of social class and power. Hence,
according to Athamina, ‘persons striving to improve their social
standing sought permission to appear in the black uniform’ (1989:
320). Likewise, as it became a symbol of loyalty to the regime,
traitors could be stripped of it, and on occasion made to wear
white, a colour adopted by the opposition ‘deliberately in contrast
to those of the Abbasids’ (1989: 322). But the meaning of colour is
not static; as with the seal ring, the veil or any other element of
material culture, it can be subject to the developmental process, to
fads and fashion, and meanings can change. The significance of the
colour black turned full circle in nineteenth-century Cairo, for
Edward Lane mentions how black dress and turbans were ‘character
istic, almost solely, of Christian and Jewish tributaries to the ‘Osmán
lee, or Turkish, Sultan’ (1895: 43).
In summary, the few examples which have been discussed have
been chosen from a vast range of possibilities, and are not meant to
be exhaustive; rather, they serve to show that even what could be
termed the ‘small items’ or ephemera of life the seal ring, the turban,
the veil can also help in serving to create or denote overall Muslim
—

—

124

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

identity. They are objects associated with the individual, and
illustrate
that the archaeology of Islam is more than mosques, palaces
and
elaborate funerary monuments. It is the sum total of all these ele
ments, both large and small. Yet, at the same time, it should also
be
realized that diversity must be acknowledged. Though seal rings
might have been popular in one area, they might be unheard
of
elsewhere, and black uniforms, for example, were certainly not uni
versal. To enumerate individually all the objects which could signify
Muslim, geographically and temporally, would run to several volumesa
and exhaustive cataloguing was not the point of this exercise.
The
chosen objects are readily interchangeable with many others; they
are
not in some way defining items of ‘Muslim culture’, but equally
these
‘lesser items’ of Muslim life, in all their many forms, should not
be
neglected. They provide a possible source of much useful
social
information for archaeologists, perhaps bunkered through the
pursuit
of the so-called ‘big issues’.
Magic and Talismanic Protection

A further area of Muslim life which could be of significance to
the
archaeologist is that of magic in general, and personal talismanic
protection in particular. A deep concern with magic is apparent in
many areas of the Muslim world, especially magic for protection,
fulfilling desires, health, potency in love or war. This can sometimes
be approached by the archaeologist through the artifacts involved.
‘Orthodox Islam denies the efficacy of amulets and other magico
religious devices, but these traditions have always been a vital
aspect of popular Islam, just as they have played a significant role
in the belief systems of many people throughout history’ (Silverman
1991: 19). Usually, a distinction is drawn between good magic,
which could aid Islam, and bad magic or sorcery. Numerous
media can be employed to protect, curse or destroy paper, metals,
water, textiles, leather but a common element is the efficacy of
the Qur’an, as a supremely powerful agent. This is due to the fact
that ‘the Qur’an differs from the other major scriptures of the
World in that it contains not reports about God by a Prophet or
his disciples, but his direct speech, the syllables, words and
sentences of Allah’ (Geertz 1976: 1489—90, cited in Bravmann
1983: 16). Besides verses from the Qur’an, notably the basmala
and the Fatihah, cabbalistic signs, magical formulas, the beautiful
names of God, numerical representations and various substances
can all be used for magical and protective purposes. The actual
—

—

125

material forms of protective or destructive magical items can be many,
and a universal type certainly does not exist, but generic categories
which might be encountered archaeologically may be briefly
considered.

Magic bowls
One such group of items, the so-called ‘magic bowls’, appear to
encompass not merely bowls, but plates and cups as well. These are
always made of metal, silver and copper most commonly, though iron
is infrequently used, and they date from the later medieval period into
the present. Formerly, according to Canaan (1936: 79), they were
found all over the Muslim world. However, Bates is more specific
in geographical attribution when she says that they are most common
in Turkey, but are also occasionally found in western Iran and India
(1991: 58). Magic bowls were used to cure poisoning, and reduce fear
or fright, as well as for divination. For the purposes of healing, water
is drunk from the bowl, the interior of which is usually inscribed with
Qur’anic verses, or various of the other devices already described
above, such as numerical combinations, magical squares, figural
motifs (Canaan 1936: 89, 94; Bates 1991: 56). The importance of
magic bowls is not that they are in anyway universally used, but
because they provide a specific example of the translation of Muslim
magic into durable material culture, and thus illustrate that a concern
with magic could be archaeologically visible.

Higab
The most common example of an item with magico-religious associa
tions, which might be archaeologically detectable, are amulets, or
higab, which are worn on the person. These were, and to a lesser
extent are, popular in certain areas, but absent altogether in others,
and can take many different forms, usually consisting of a written text
in two parts, the da’wa or spell and the jadwal, a magic square or
other geometric device (Silverman 1991: 22). These are often within a
leather, metal or cloth covering, and worn around the neck, waist or
arm, or sewn on clothing. They are usually written by a holyman for
a specific purpose: safety in travel or protection from disease or
attack. Among the Berti of the Sudan, for example, el-Tom (1987)
records that the higab are believed to contain immense power which
can be gained in various ways. These include physically keeping this
power on the person through wearing amulets, or less visibly through
internalizing the Qur’anic verses or other powerful formulas in the

126

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

127

head by memory or inside the body through drinking the text by
washing off the ink and swallowing the water (1987: 243). Amulets
have been found archaeologically, for example at Qasr Ibrim, where
many higab were excavated in various contexts dating from the
sixteenth to nineteenth centuries. They have leather outer covers,
and inside contained a further package made of cotton, which in
turn contained the sacred text (even a blank piece of paper) (see
plate 4.5). Other manifestations of amuletic protection occur, for
example in Shi’ah chain mail dating from the early nineteenth century
which adds spiritual protection through the incorporation of Arabic
invocations ‘requesting aid and assistance’ (Welch 1979: 106) in brass
links set within the steel jacket similar to, though more efficient
than, the inscribed cloth jackets of the Mahdi’s followers in the Sudan
in the nineteenth century. This is a dimension of Muslim magic which
is significant to the individual, rather than the group or household, as
was apparent in the protection of the domestic environment (see
chapter 3).
—

Bricks, crows’ beaks and carpets

Plate 4.5 Higab (amulet) contents from Qasr Ibrim, Egypt (Egypt Explora
tion Society)

The extensive body of ethnographic, anthropological and historical
sources dwelling, in whole or in part, upon the subject is of great use
to the archaeologist of Islam in recognizing magical items. An in
formative example is provided by a fragment of text in the Cairo
Genizab, a medieval synagogue archive, describing contexts for the
magical use of Arabic letters. Recorded instances include the use of
the letter Kaf, engraved on old red potsherds, then steamed until
blackened, the result being that vegetable matter will turn ‘from one
state to another’. Other contexts include fragments of brick inscribed
with the letter Mim to arouse fear in a person, or engraving the letter
Nun on a piece of white marble to foil robbers (Ebeid and Young
1974: 405). What at first could appear to be contradictions of normal
Muslim practice can also be of relevance within the domain of magic
and protection. One might expect, for example, that intimate contact
with the crow might be avoided, as it is one of the so-called five
nuisances, but it also possesses talismanic properties, and to carry a
crow’s beak on one’s person averts the evil eye (Pellat 1965: 1097).
Similarly, the number five, and representations of it, such as the hand,
were used to protect inanimate objects such as carpets, guns, bags and
pottery from the evil eye in Morocco (Westermarck 1933: 29—31),
while the same imagery, the hand, can have a totally different sig
nificance in Iran, where it signifies the five most sacred persons of the
Shi’ah faith: Muhammad, Ali, Fatima, Hassan and Hussein (Hastings

128

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

129

1911: 459). This again illustrates that meaning is by no means uni
form; there are no, or very limited, pan-Islamic interpretative mean
ings. A belief in magic might be widely found, clothing will certainly
be worn, but within each of these broad descriptive categories great
diversity exists, a situation broadly comparable to the notions of
structuring principles and cultural diversity discussed before. To
begin to approach the second level, reconstructing the rich tapestry
of Muslim life in all its dimensions, and basing this upon archaeolo
gical evidence, requires a variety of factors: an open mind, a rigorous
examination of context and analogy, and the consideration of other
possible sources of evidence.
War
The final aspect of Muslim life to be touched on here is war. This is a
contentious subject but cannot be excluded as it was often intimately
connected with the spread of Islam, and must therefore be included
within a consideration of the possible archaeology of Islam. Holy war,
jihad or ‘the spread of Islam by arms’, often the subject of fear and
stereotypes in the West, is, according to Gibb and Kramers, ‘a religious
duty upon Muslims in general’ (1961: 89), and the only type of war
authorized and regulated by Islamic law (Peters 1977: 3). Thus, it
should be considered as a further area of life which can be imbued
with religious significance. According to orthodox Muslim doctrine,
two major domains exist in the world: the cZar al-harb, the land or
abode of war, and the dar al-Islam, the land of Islam. Within the latter,
Muslim rule is established, Islamic law is in place, and non-Muslim
peoples have submitted to Muslim control. Creation of this was the
object of jihad, yet the existence of such a division does not mean that
advancing ‘the boundaries of the Faith until the whole World acknow
ledged Allah’ (Wheatcroft 1995: 47) is a practical proposition today.
Obviously it is not, and a compromise position has been reached. Yet,
similarly, the existence of a religious dimension to the pursuit of war
within parts of the Muslim world cannot be wholly discounted, even
today. Recent conflicts in Afghanistan, Bosnia and Chechnya attest to
this, where volunteers, perhaps physically divorced from the immedi
ate conflict, offered their services in aid of fellow Muslims (see plate
4.6). According to Bosworth (1976: 202), ‘religious enthusiasm should
not be underestimated as a motive all through Islamic warfare.’ Cer
tainly, such motivation could be suggested as a possible guiding light
behind many of the tragic events which have dominated the media in
recent years, including suicide bombings in the Middle East.

Plate 4.6 War scene from The Khamsa of Nizami (Browne no. 1424, St
John’s College, Cambridge)

r

130

131

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

But what implications does war hold for the archaeology of Islam?
First, it is necessary to distinguish somehow between jihad and ‘gen
eral’ warfare, which can be started for many reasons all too familiar to
us: political power struggles, greed, territorial ambitions. The latter
version of warfare was, and sadly is, endemic, but can hardly be
classified as religious, though such a label might be sought as a
propaganda or motivating device. However, such conflict is essen
tially secular in nature. Secondly, it is necessary to consider if there is
such a thing as a Muslim apparatus of war, thus setting it apart
from other conflicts materially. This is the only element possibly
approachable by the archaeologist and, indeed, the literature on Isla
mic weaponry, tactics, fortifications and the like is vast (see, for
example, Rahman Zaksv 1965; Parry 1970; Parry and Yapp 1975;
Nicolle 1976). Distinctive elements might be selected; types of
fortifications perhaps (Creswell 1952; Grabar 1978: 66—7) or wea
ponry or armour of different patterns (al-Hassan and Hill 1992:
96—8) and, of course, inscriptions. But it is impossible to generalize
about these within the space available, other than simply to state that
the diversity in types and forms was immense. In certain contexts and
historical situations, specific machinery of both warfare and defence
associated with the Muslim world of course existed, yet at the same
time it is necessary to avoid creating stereotypes, such as the Saracen
of Hollywood fame with his pointed helmet and curved scimitar.
Incidentally, the latter component, at least, is wholly erroneous;
according to Bosworth (1976: 208), this type of sword was not
common until the fifteenth century (see also Rahman Zakry 1965:
291).
However, one example of specific material culture which might in
certain instances prove useful in recognizing the pursuance of jihad,
or at least in reconstructing military frontier zones over time, should
be discussed: the ribat. This has been described as ‘a base from which
to prosecute Holy war’ (Hillenbrand 1994: 331), a type of ‘fortified
monastery’, and is found on many of the frontiers of the Muslim
world, as in Central Asia and North Africa, dating from the medieval
period. Grabar describes the ribat form as ‘square with halls around a
porticoed courtyard’ (1973: 180), with essentially the same plan being
used as can be found in many caravanserais, and a further example of
the interchangeability of Muslim building form often found in medi
eval Islam. These have been recorded in many areas. For example, an
exceptionally large ribat dating from the mid-twelfth century, and
one of a number of coastal ribats built, in the words of Basset and
Terrasse, to ‘defendre Ia terre d’Islam contre les debarquements pos
sible des infideles’ (1927: 119), was recorded close to Mazagan in

Morocco. This was one of the frontier districts, and besides the
enclosing wall, defensive towers, gateways and two minarets were
all partially preserved. Similar ribats on the North African coast are
also referred to by King, as at Ajdabiyah in Libya, where they were
‘initially associated with the wars of the Aghlabids against Sicily, Italy
and the Mediterranean islands’ (1989: 197).
Although we have only briefly considered one possible aspect of
material culture which might be linked with jihad, the ribat, the
essential point to consider is that the ghazi, the warrior of the
Faith, did, and perhaps does, exist, pursuing yihad for the expansion
of Islam. Thus, although we must remember that war is fought more
frequently in the name of many causes indistinguishable from those
fuelling conflicts perpetuated by non-Muslims, it is possible that
another element of Muslim life cannot be wholly separated out and
classified as secular. Many, if not all, aspects of life can be imbued
with a religious significance, something which we as archaeologists
should remember when looking at our evidence, whether fort or
faunal assemblage.

t

F

Summary and Conclusions
Thus, various areas of life, which are not perhaps always considered
by archaeologists, have been shown to be, in many instances, both
inseparable from the religious domain and approachable through
archaeology. This further enables us to begin to view the archaeology
of Islam as a complete entity, ranging from grand mosques and
palaces, through individual burials, down to the residue of a meal.
All can be, but need not be, affected by a religious element. Life need
not be seen as a series of purely economically driven or rationally
based decisions, factors which are perhaps increasingly coming to the
fore in an age when faith and religious practice are separated out, or
absent altogether, from everyday life for many people in the Western
world. The multi-disciplinary examples considered in this chapter
were drawn from a vast geographical, cultural and temporal range,
but serve to illustrate that religious ideals can be translated into
practical structuring codes for life. Therefore, the archaeological
study of religion should not be conceptualized as confined to a few
aspects of life. As was seen with much of the material discussed,
multiple interconnections are often evident, with the one running
into or influencing the other, as we saw with food and festivals,
pilgrimage, trade and travel. All can come together, until their bound
aries become blurred.

e

132

MUSLIM LIFE

To return to the concept of the ‘umbrella’, or superstructure, with
many component parts below it, Islam acts as the umbrella, with
beneath this our discrete categories of food, war, pilgrimage and so
on, with further diversity evident within each of these categories,
though still subject to the structuring codes of the religion. Thus
variety is produced within the overall entity, or what have been
termed structuring principles and cultural diversity. But limitations
in how far we can offer interpretations have also been exposed in the
face of the bewildering richness apparent. Clothing, food, personal
possessions, all can be invested with a social significance and meaning
which we can best perceive through ethnography or historical
sources; even taking into account the privileged position of the
archaeologist interested in Islam, these may be difficult, if not
impossible, to reconstruct archaeologically. However, we must be
aware of the available possibilities, if only to make us realize that
we will never know all the answers, and that archaeology suffers from
restricting factors. Finally, much of our discussion has been con
cerned with the ‘ideal’, as with the ideal faunal assemblage, but such
notions have to be pursued, if only to suggest possible interesting
directions of research for the future. The lesser areas of life can be of
equal significance to the popularly perceived ‘big issues’, within the
archaeology of Islam, the archaeology of religion and archaeology in
general.

5

Art, Trade and Ideas

Believers, do not consume your wealth among yourselves in vanity, but
rather trade with it by mutual consent

Q ur’an. Women 4: 29

We now turn our attention to what are, in many respects, much
broader categories: art, trade and ideas. Art is a loose term, defined
by the Oxford English Dictionary as ‘skill, esp. human skill as
opposed to nature; skilful execution as an object in itself; skill applied
to imitation and design, as in painting etc.’ (Fowler and Fowler 1952:
63). Even if we confine ourselves to the latter part of the definition,
techniques,
it can be seen that ‘art’ could cover a wide range of
could be applied in myriad contexts, and rendered in equally
diverse materials. In short, it is something which can be applied in
one form or another to many of the items already discussed, from
tombstones to swords. All can be influenced by art or even be art
objects in themselves, though not necessarily perhaps in the same
way as originally envisaged by the people who made or commis
sioned them. Therefore, we also come upon the problem of
differentiating between art objects per se, and those which are
regarded as such by contemporary observers. It can even be suggested
that academics often ‘create’ art objects through their researches,
where perhaps such original intentions were lacking, or such a
definition would not have been applied in the original context.
However, it is not the place here to define what constitutes an
art object. Instead, the following discussion will be concerned
with all items bearing decoration of one form or another, thus keep
ing to the pattern of broad categorizations followed throughout the
volume.

134

135

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

How then do trade and manufacturing enter into the same discus
sion as art? The link between the three is somewhat created, but at the
same time fairly obvious. The connection is the agency through
which ideas, including artistic ideas or conventions, and scientific
ideas and manufacturing techniques, are transmitted from one place
to another, often via trade. Conquest can and obviously did serve as
the agent for the spread of Islam and Islamization, but the peaceful
movement of ideas, including religious ones, through trade, is often of
even greater importance when the spectrum of Muslim history over
the centuries is considered. These issues will be discussed in greater
detail below; suffice it to say here that trade provides a convenient
framework to link a range of material not covered elsewhere, which
could, and indeed does, form part of the ‘package’ which might allow
the recognition of a Muslim or Muslim community in the archae
ological record.
In many respects this chapter deals with material which has suffered
the greatest contemporary disruption. The following discussion is
mainly concerned with material dating from before the late sixteenth
century and the rise of European power, and the ensuing fragmenta
tion and collapse of the Muslim ‘world system’. The form of a mosque
and Muslim burial, for example, though affected by modern influ
ences, are, as we have seen, still recognizable for what they are,
regardless of contemporary factors. In contrast, distinctive Muslim
coinages and sciences have largely ceased to be identifiable in the
manner in which they were recognizable in the medieval period. A
Muslim science, for instance, is now largely the same as a Western one,
though the relevant research might be carried out in a Muslim country.
Certainly, the trade patterns that were manifest in the medieval period
have long since disappeared. Thus the study of much of this material is
ideally approached through archaeology as one of the primary means
of furthering our understanding of both artifacts and processes. Art,
however, is perhaps the least affected, and contains recurring elements
which should allow its recognition as Muslim art today.

environment that many developments took place which later percola
ted down through society. A detailed examination of the processes by
which this occurred is beyond the remit of this volume, but has been
well covered elsewhere, both in general and region by region (see
Talbot Rice 1993; Brend 1994).
Nevertheless, briefly summarized, Oleg Grabar (1973) makes the
point that there is no absolute date for the creation of Muslim art. It
can be linked, not surprisingly, to the conquering of each region. As
each area was taken by the Muslims, pre-existing elements of Class
ical, Byzantine, Sasanian and even Central Asian art were then appro
priated and adapted in a long drawn-out process (Talbot Rice 1971:
5). An ensuing characteristic was the widespread diffusion of pre
viously restricted decorative motifs from one end of the newly
formed Muslim world to the other (Grabar 1973: 7, 208). General
defining characteristics of Muslim art, according to Philon (1980: 12),
are an ‘inherent ambiguity of purpose, function and meaning’ with a
universality of decorative forms, and the easy adaptability of build
ings for various purposes with only minor changes, leading to ‘an
intimate relationship between the monumental and the minor arts’.
What is apparent from this is that Muslim art is a mixture of local and
general components, and that there is no• one overall entity; it did not
appear in the saddlebags of the conquering Muslim armies, but was
subject to an evolutionary process.
But what, if any, are the defining characteristics of Muslim art? It is
easy to suggest the frequently cited, though erroneous, statement that
Muslim art is solely a reflection of religious requirements, and that
the primary recognition criterion, for this reason, is an absence of
figural representation. This is wrong, for Muslim art can and has
served both secular and religious purposes, and is by no means devoid
of figural images. At the same time, there are various components to
Muslim art, though they are no more than broad categories and can
be made to ‘function’ in many different ways. These are: a general
absence of figural representation, especially in overtly religious con
texts; a prevalence of calligraphy in the Arabic script; and geometric
and other motifs (arabesques), the latter usually derived from vegetal
prototypes, and both used in repeat forms (Grabar 1973; Ettinghau
sen 1976; Philon 1980). The existence of these categories could allow
the recognition of Muslim art in archaeological or other contexts, but
the manner in which the three major elements are manifest are
numerous (as is the case with all our categories in the archaeology
of Islam) in both styles and media, and it is worthwhile considering
each of these component parts in a little more detail, beginning with
the issue of figural representation.

Islamic Art or Art of Muslims: Background and Components
A consideration of what is Islamic or, perhaps preferably, Muslim art
is a frequently asked question which has been approached by various
scholars (see, for example, Ettinghausen 1944; Grabar 1973). How
ever, these studies are usually concerned with the luxury end of
production which, when considering a subject such as the formation
of Muslim art, is not overly surprising as it was in the courtly

136

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

Figural representation
To examine the issues surrounding figural representation is instructive
both to see how doctrine can be created and to dispute the popular
misconception that it does not exist in Muslim art. Within the first
two centuries of Islam figural images are found, for example, on
coinage, and therefore accessible to much of the population, until
the reforms of Abd al-Malik in the late seventh century (discussed
below). More frequently, as Arnold notes (1965: 19), it was used
within the private domain in the upper echelons of society. Notable
examples are provided by the frescos at the eighth-century palace of
Qusayr Amra (Jordan) where, among other things, the rulers con
quered by Islam are represented, including the Negus of Abyssinia
(Ethiopia), the Sasanian ruler and the king of the Visigoths (Talbot
Rice 1993: 2 6—7), and at the palace of Khirbat al-Mafjah (Palestine)
where hunting, love, horsemanship and athletics are all represented
(Hamilton 1959: 233). That figurative representation was not imme
diately repressed, or that people were not bothered by it in the early
years of Islam, is further reflected in an incident related by Juynboll:
when the Muslims assembled for prayers in the great hall of the royal
palace at newly conquered al-Mada’in (Ctesiphon), various statues
were still standing in it ‘which nobody thought of moving’, indicating
that ‘the prohibition against making images of living things had not
yet been formulated’ (1986: 108).
But it should be noted that an absence of figural art in mosques and
other religious buildings has almost universally been in effect, though
even in these contexts rare exceptions do exist, as in the carved stone
mihrab from Mosul (Iraq) described by Talbot Rice, decorated with
human figures and dating from the eleventh or twelfth centuries
(1993: 98—9). However, a reaction against figural representation did
appear, and has been explained as a Muslim reaction to their lack of
an effective symbolic vocabulary to counter Christian propaganda, or
as a parallel development to Christian iconoclasm. Hence Abd-al
Malik’s reforms formalized the attitude that ‘the prevailing specific
use of representations tended to idolatry and no understandable
visual system other than writing and of inanimate objects could
avoid being confused with the alien world of Christians and by
later extension of Buddhists or of pagans’ (Grabar 1973: 98). Support
for this proposition was sought in the Qur’an and hadith (see Isa
1955; Gibb and Kramers 1961: 554; Salman 1969, Ettinghausen 1976:
62) and, although the former ‘does not expressly forbid the making of
images, the hadith are more specific on this issue, and judgements

r

137

were pronounced against ‘all types of artistic creativity in which
representational forms are possible’ (Bravmann 1974: 15, 16). This
was translated into laws, and a condemnation of the representation of
living things, among both Sunni and Shi’ah, can be seen to be fully
effective by the ninth century. Iconoclasm is also something which
could be archaeologically recognizable by, for example, the beheading
of statues or the defacing of other figures, as is noticeable in Chinese
Central Asia and in parts of India.
Nevertheless, a separation between ideals and practice exists, and
figural representation is found in many spheres of Muslim art, though
almost totally confined to the secular domain and usually to the
upper strata of society. Painting and manuscript illustrations, espe
cially those produced in India and in Iran, are some of the bestknown examples of the genre (see, for example, Pinder-Wilson
1969). Subjects include portraits and illustrated epics such as Nizami’s
Khamsa (Five poems) or Firdausi’s Shahnama (Binyon 1930: 60—73).
Much more rare are depictions of Muslim religious history, including
pictures of Muhammad which, according to Arnold ‘are so rare that
some writers have even doubted the existence of any’ (1965: 91), but
they do exist, and Iranian examples dating from the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries are discussed by Soucek (1988). Otherwise, fig
ural representations could probably be found which have been pro
duced in almost all media at one time or another somewhere in the
Muslim world, and various further examples will indeed be referred
to later. However, although there are figural representations in Mus
lim art, they are, on the whole, infrequent, and one of the key
components of that loosely defined entity which is Muslim art is
their general absence, and this should form one of the criteria allow
ing its recognition.

Geometry, arabesques and abstract patterns
Further common features of Muslim art are the presence of geometric
patterns and designs incorporating miscellaneous abstract and veget
ally derived motifs, including the so-called arabesque, defined by
Philon as ‘based on the infinite leaf scroll’ (1980: 14). A certain
unity is lent to them as a group through their use in repeat designs,
often literally covering a surface in infinite patterns which ‘are visual
demonstrations of the Oneness of God and His Omnipresence’ (Phi
lon 1980: 14). Yet it should be noted that besides the more widely
found motifs, such as the star or arabesque, distinct regional styles
developed. Space again precludes a detailed discussion, but one repre
sentative example will be mentioned, the development of stylistic

138

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

r
ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

139

categories within the Ottoman design repertoire. Its five basic styles
described by Petsopoulos (1982: 8—9) are the plain tradition, literally
devoid of decoration; the formal and vegetally derived, Abraham of
Kutahya; another variant of this called Golden Horn; Saz, a further
naturalistic vegetal design; and finally, the mis-named Quatre Fleurs.
They are found on metalwork, ceramics, textiles and paper. In fact,
this emphasis on surface over shape (Grabar 1973: 194), and the
associated techniques developed for surface decoration within Mus
lim art, is widespread throughout the Muslim world and forms
another recognition criterion.
Calligraphy and epigraphy
The third component which should allow the recognition of Muslim
art is the use of calligraphy, and its close relation, epigraphy. They
will be examined in some detail with reference to case studies, as this
is the component of Muslim art which can be encountered on all
categories of material. Whereas, for example, the arabesque might be
(and largely is) absent in West Africa, calligraphy in the Arabic script
is used extensively on metals, paper, stone, ceramics and cloth. It is
the medium of Muslim art par excellence, encountered from the River
Senegal to the Syr Darya and, in fact, wherever Muslim communities
are found.
By far the most comprehensive survey of the basic history and
background to Muslim calligraphy is provided by Schimmel (1970,
1990). She notes that the importance of writing is stressed in the
Qur’an, where it is ‘considered to be of divine origin’, and, although
the Arabic script existed at the time of Muhammad, he was illiterate
(this latter point is disputed by other scholars; see, for example,
Guillaume 1954: 57). His pronouncements were written down on
any available material, and the first Qur’an was assembled during
the reign of Uthman, the third caliph, in the mid-seventh century.
The sacred character of writing encouraged its spread, and since the
language in which God’s message was transmitted was Arabic, the
Arabic script had precedence over all others, becoming ‘the distinc
tive feature of all Muslim peoples, from West Africa to Indonesia’
(Schimmel 1970: 1, 3). The two dominant styles of Arabic script are
kufic and cursive. (Note the difference between script and language;
other languages can and are rendered in the Arabic script, including
Malay, Swahili, Hausa, Persian, and Turkish.)
Kufic, which originated in Kufah (Roman 1990: ix), is angular in
appearance and was used for copying Qur’ans and extensively in
inscriptions on buildings and tombstones (see plate 5.1). Kufic

Plate 5.1 Tombstone, Dahiak Kebir, Eritrea (photo. C. Spence)

fr

inscriptions are almost without exception in Arabic, and various
regional styles developed (see figure 5.1). The style declined in
usage after the eleventh century, whenit either begins to be found
in co-existence with cursive scripts, as on the Qutb Minar in Delhi, or
is replaced altogether by cursive (Schimmel 1990: 25). Cursive scripts,
which are more rounded and easier to use, were developed in Mecca
and Medina, and were of use for everyday purposes. They co-existed
with kufic from the very beginning of Islam, but it was not until the
thirteenth to fourteenth centuries that the multitude of cursive
scripts which had developed were systematized into six styles: thu
luth, riqa, naskh, tauqi, muhaqqaq and rihani (Schimmel 1990: 22)
(see figure 5.2). Calligraphy in the Arabic script, therefore, provides a
further category, which is almost universally used, and which can
allow the recognition of Muslim art. But besides providing pleasing
decoration, art can function in many other, often subtle, ways. The
provision of information at various levels is one obvious example,
and much interesting research has been undertaken which directly
considers this issue with reference to the use of calligraphy and
inscriptions.
Sacred and powerful scripts
Beyond the extensive use of inscriptions in explicitly religious con
texts, they often transfer a sacred dimension into the secular sphere.
Through a deliberate religious invocation or the use of Arabic, the

140

Figure 5.1

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

141

Forms of basmala in kufic script (after Schimmel 1970: 17)

language of the Qur’an, an inscription might take on a sacred sig
nificance even where the meaning might not be understood. For
example, Ettinghausen describes a monumental kufic inscription on
the exterior of a mosque in Washington DC which was ‘incompre
hensible as verbal communication’ to most people, but was not really
a fact of any significance as the inscription still served an important
function in an area with many new converts, where ‘the lettering is
the message, rather than its content’ (1974: 306, 307).
The power of writing is a factor which appears to recur through
Muslim history, even where literacy was restricted, and knowledge of
Arabic confined to memorized prayers and a few verses from the

Figure 5.2 Three types of figural representation achieved through calligra
phy. Top, Muslim talisman from southern Thailand (after Forbes 1988: 1);
middle, face from Yugoslavia (after De Jong 1989: 25); bottom, glass painting
from Java (after Fischer 1994: 52)

142

143

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

Qur’an. What could occur was what Edwards (1991: 67) terms the
functioning of inscriptions as ‘orally revealed scripture’. This might
appear a contradiction as applied to epigraphy, but is not necessarily
so. Arabic calligraphy functions as a symbol of the faith, an accepted
visual image of Islam across the Muslim world, even though it might
not be understood or its use was infrequent. Why else would the
power of perceived holymen be so important in many areas? The
Scottish explorer Mungo Park, for example, though not a Muslim,
earned a living for himself writing charms or ‘saphies’ during his
extended travels along the River Niger at the end of the eighteenth
and beginning of the nineteenth centuries (see Park 1807). The very
fact that he could write was of importance, and the fragments of
script served as protective talismans ‘by virtue of presence rather
than content’ (Edwards 1991: 67).
But the meaning of epigraphy cannot, obviously, be discounted as
merely visual imagery. The messages carried by inscriptions could
serve many purposes, both sacred and secular. At the Dome of the
Rock in Jerusalem (see chapter 2), the power and triumph of
Islam over other faiths was spectacularly proclaimed, and epigraphy
could also be used to settle religious disputes. The series of 14
inscriptions recovered from the site of the harbour town of Daybul
(Banbhore) 60km east of Karachi in Pakistan (Anon 1964: 50—i;
Ghafur 1966: 65—9) are of special interest. Two were dated, and all
were interpreted as having been fixed to the façade of a central wall
in the main mosque ‘in a way that met the gaze of the person
who entered the mosque’ (Ghafur 1966: 89—90). But why was
this so? During the second and third centuries AH, one of the
intellectual and spiritual debates in the Muslim world was connected
with the so-called Mutazalite doctrine which stressed that God could
not be seen with the ‘physical eye’ either in this world or in paradise;
the latter belief conflicted with the beliefs of the majority of the
faithful and, as Guillaume (1954: 128) records, was ‘in spite of the
affirmation in the Qur’an’. Mutazilism was the accepted official
dogma under Abbasid rule, but during the reign of Mutawakkil this
policy was reversed and the Mutazalites were persecuted. The inscrip
tions, placed as they were in the main place of worship in a major
port, and thus open to view by ‘Muslims from all corners of the
Islamic world’ (Ghafur 1966: 90), were used by the orthodox Sunni
school to campaign against the Mutazalite doctrines. Hence, one
carefully chosen Qur’anic verse espoused the anti-Mutazalite view
on ‘the vision of God’, while a further inscription promoted
orthodoxy over the Mutazalite viewpoints concerning the ‘creation’
of the Qur’an.

This was also the case in the mosque of Abu Ma’ruf at Sharwas
(Libya), where the inscriptions were used for specific religious pur
poses, one of which may be Ibadi in character and records: ‘The
Qur’an is our Imam,/and the sunnah is our Path’ (King 1989: 205).
Another contains a surab (II, 130) which appears to have been
selected to appeal, by referring to the prophets of Judaism, Christian
ity and Islam, to the various religious communities which lived in the
area between the mid-tenth and twelfth centuries (Lowick 1974, cited
in King 1989). Thus these examples show that inscriptions are not
necessarily arbitrary additions of decorative interest placed with little
thought as to position.

I.

External symbols
Inscriptions of all types can function in many useful capacities for the
archaeologist, as chronological indicators, aids to identifying people
or places, but it is worthwhile adding a caution as the presence of
Arabic calligraphy and epigraphy need not necessarily signal the
presence of Muslims. An apt example of this is shown by the kisfic
or pseudo-kufic inscriptions found in churches in southern and cen
tral France (Watson 1972, 1989). These are obviously not Muslim
contexts, but the textile trade meant that Muslim motifs were copied.
Rigid borders do not always exist, and religious or political expansion
and contraction must be acknowledged, as noted with regard to the
use and adaptation of pre-existing places of worship in chapter 2. The
absence of defined boundaries means that various stylistic or cultural
elements could circulate and information and stylistic codes be
exchanged.
An example of the acceptance of Muslim art in a non-Muslim area
is provided by Sicily in the early twelfth century. Here, somewhat
surprisingly considering the Christian context, Arabic calligraphy
played a central role. Sicily, which had been under Muslim rule
until the Kalbids lost control in.the 1040s, was invaded by the Normans in the 1060s, but it was not until the early twelfth century that a
Norman monarchy was established (Ahmad 1975). In 1130 the new
king, Roger II, was crowned, but had ‘no trapping of monarchy in
which to robe himself’ (Johns 1993: 134), and chose those of the
Fatimid caliphate, from which he took the external symbols and
‘ignored or remained ignorant of their intrinsic significance’ (1993:
158). Two Arabic inscriptions which once adorned Roger’s palace
encouraged the visitor to adore the palace in a manner analogous to
the rites employed in circumambulating the Ka’bah, although it is
unlikely that these Muslim rites were ever actually followed at

144

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

Roger’s Christian court. Other facets of Muslim culture adopted
included the use of Muslim titles and the Arabic language in bureauc
racy; building palaces to architectural plans which mirror structures
in Muslim Ifriqiya (approximately equivalent to modern Tunisia); the
use of decorative elements such as muqarnas or stalactite vaulting;
and paintings replicating iconographic themes present in the Fatimid
western palace in Cairo. It also appears that Muslim dress was worn
not only in the court circle, but perhaps also by the general populace
of Palermo (Johns 1993).
Johns’ study (1993) shows how easily external symbols can be used
to mean different things to different people. Here, Muslim material
culture and symbols were being used in a manner which bore no
relation to their original context, even though Sicily was a direct heir
to over two centuries of Muslim heritage. Society was only trans
formed to a certain point by the Fatimid imports. However, it would
be impossible to mistake this for a true Muslim community even if we
only had the archaeological evidence to consider. Key components
are absent, which in totality act to construct and perpetuate society,
revealing that this was patently not a Muslim society, apparent once a
look below the surface is taken.

fr

Visual Imagery
Three general components have thus been isolated which could allow
the recognition of Muslim art: an absence of figurative representation,
the prevalence of abstract motifs, and calligraphy in the Arabic script.
Howevet the visual imagery of Muslim art is, in a number of regions,
drawn from the existing non-Muslim repertoire, which exceeds an
abstract or calligraphic vocabulary. Yet which elements might appeal
varies considerably, possibly, it can be suggested, according to the
specific pre-Islamic heritage. Case studies can be provided to illus
trate this from three geographically disparate areas, West Africa,
Indonesia and Pakistan.
Al-Buraq is the winged creature who reputedly carried the Prophet
on his night journey from Mecca to Jerusalem which is mentioned in
the first verse of surah 17 of the Qur’an, but the details of the al
Buraq legend were not consolidated until the formulation of the
hadith literature (Bravmann 1983: 75). The established representation
of al-Buraq usually comprises a crowned head, often of a young
woman, attached to a winged horse (see figure 5.3). The inspiration
for this, according to Arnold (1965: 119), was drawn from many
pre-Islamic representative traditions in western Asia, including the

145

Figure 5.3 A1-Buraq image (after Bravmann 1983: 73)

I

centaur of Babylon, the ‘man-headed bulls’ of Assyria and the
Sphinx. It was a powerful image among Sufis in Iran, but also of
particular popularity in both West Africa and Indonesia. In West
Africa, al-Buraq is represented on printed posters imported from
Egypt and North Africa, and in stylized amulet form, on masks,
and in one instance supporting an initiation drum of the non-Muslim
Baga people of coastal Guinea (Bravmann 1983: 82). Al-Buraq images
are also found in Indonesia, where the figure has been adapted to the
cultural context, ‘Indonesianized’ almost (Fischer 1994: 50).
Why is this image, which would appear not to be particularly
central to Muslim iconography, popular in regions of the Muslim
world separated by thousands of kilometres? This is perhaps due to
the existence in both regions of long-standing figurative traditions
prior to the arrival of Islam, and this had a direct bearing upon the
uptake of images and the conception of the strictures concerning
certain aspects of Muslim art. In West Africa, masking and sculptural
traditions connected with local cult and initiation activities are com
mon, and their inter-relationship with Islam is discussed in detail by

146

147

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

Bravmann (1974). In parts of Indonesia, Java in particular; the pre
Muslim Hindu legacy meant that figurative images had been exten
sively used and people, as in West Africa, were accustomed to their
existence, and continued to produce them once converted to Islam. In
Java, figurative art functions in the context of connecting what Geertz
(1968: 27) has termed ‘Indic Java’ with ‘Muslim Java’. These images
are representative of the syncretism between Islam and traditional
practices which occurred in both areas, and it is possible that there
was a need for this to occur if Islam were to succeed in appealing to
the population. When Islam first reached Java the Muslim mission
aries found it useful to use the Wayang, or shadow play, complete
with the Hindu deities ‘to spread the new religion’ (Boediardjo 1978:
112). These were gradually replaced by Muslim heroes (Tjandrasa
mita 1978: 153), thus indigenizing Islam.
Indeed, the vast range of figurative images in Javanese Muslim art is
amazing: brass statues, architectural decoration, wooden puppets,
ceramics and glass paintings, either wholly non-Muslim in inspira
tion, such as the depictions of the Panakawan, the attendants of
Arjuna and Kresna in the Javanese version of the Mahabharata, or
fusing these with Muslim elements such as calligraphy. They reflect
what Fischer terms ‘the openness, diversity, and ingenuity of a folk
art that uses history, indigenous tradition, and a foreign faith, and
extols them all’ (1994: 50). These are factors paralleled in Muslim
West Africa, and are evident historically and ethnographically, as seen
in accounts of the masked dance witnessed by Ibn Battuta at the
capital of the empire of Mali in the mid-fourteenth century, and in a
similar form over 600 years later among the Sanu clan of the Mande
Dafing in Bobo-Dioulasso (Burkina Faso) (Bravmann 1974: 49—52).
Moreover; this process is traceable archaeologically as syncretic tra
ditions developed to accustom the mass of the population, the sedent
ary agriculturists (Insoll 1996b: 91—2).
Yet the variations of Muslim art from the orthodox to the syncretic
can also be seen to function within relatively circumscribed geo
graphical areas. For example, in West Africa, one Muslim group
might have strong figurative traditions, while another might be
wholly devoid of them and utilize a more orthodox repertoire of
calligraphic, geometric and abstract elements. Likewise, in Indonesia
a locally constricted ‘spectrum of art’ can be seen to function; in
contrast to the Javanese figurative tradition, the art and design of
Biman, described as ‘a staunchly Islamic regency’ (Hitchcock 1987:
52), is much more orthodox. Although traces of older belief systems
with figurative traditions are found, the use of figurative elements is
extremely rare, and there is an emphasis upon geometric and vegetal

designs. Even the ancient Indonesian ‘ship of the dead’ and bird
designs are not used, though they are by neighbouring Muslim
peoples (Hitchcock 1987: 54). That Islam is an adaptable religion
is reflected in material culture, especially art, broadly defined as it
is here, and archaeologists are well placed to investigate this, for it in
turn sheds light on social issues, such as the varying impact
of orthodox as opposed to more diverse Muslim traditions.
The retention of pre-Muslim design elements, and the development
of a ‘spectrum of art’, which can indicate the flexibility of Islam to
adapt to particular local or regional circumstances, can be further
shown to operate in Swat-Kohistan (Pakistan). Here, the presence
of a maze or labyrinth symbol carved in mosques was recorded
(Scerrato 1981, 1983), in certain instances placed so as to be at eye
level when squatting (as when praying perhaps). This symbol is,
according to Scerrato, ‘fundamentally alien to Islamic culture’ (1983:
26) and, although this point can perhaps be disputed, the presence of
the labyrinth motif is of great interest. Islamization of the region
occurred in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and a syncretic
tradition evolved in this formerly Buddhist area. The hypothesis
proposed to account for the presence of these labyrinths by Scerrato
is that they are symbols of initiation into knowledge (1983: 28), and
possibly linked with Sufi tariqabs (brotherhoods) and kept hidden to
avoid the censure of the orthodox Mullahs. This scenario is conceiv
ably lent support by the existence of a Muslim mystic visited by
Scerrato, who ‘lives, apparently not by chance, in a semi-subterranean
and labyrinthine dwelling’ (1983: 28). By contrast, at the opposite end
of the ‘spectrum of art’, King relates how at the site of al-Faw (Saudi
Arabia) a deliberately smashed stone idol of a well-dressed man was
found, and though the date of the act of breaking it is unknown, he
remarks that ‘it is tempting to associate it with the onset of Islam’
(1994b: 212). Though uninvestigated, such acts might conceivably
have occurred on a large scale as Arabia was transformed ‘in a space
of some ten years from polytheistic paganism to a strictly monotheis
tic society’ (1994b: 212).
The importance of these examples is to show that Islam can be
adapted to suit local contexts, and that it can overlie and intermix
with a wide variety of pre-existing traditions; animism in West Africa,
Hinduism in parts of Indonesia, ancient traces of Buddhism in north
ern Pakistan. Although most, if not all, of the components of the
archaeology of Islam might be present, ‘cultural diversity’ can again
be seen to operate. Yet equally, no element of syncretism need exist,
and orthodox Islam can be wholly apparent. What is again evident is a
‘flexible Islam in thought and practice’ (Eickelman and Piscatori

p

148

149

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

1990: xiv). The marriage between the superstructure, Islam, its beliefs
and practices and local variety is here evident, and illustrated through
art, something which could be archaeologically visible elsewhere.

importance of trade: ‘the Qur’an not only shows an interest in it
throughout but uses a series of terms of the language of commerce to
reproduce religious ideas’ (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 56). Besides the
religious guidance for trade contained in the Qur’an and hadith, laws
promulgated dealt with coinage, fiscal administration, crafts, markets,
taxation and even economic principles (Lewis 1987: 124). Trade and
mercantile activity were thus hardly alien to the nascent Muslim
the initial
community, and traders followed in the wake of
Muslim armies serving to connect up the Muslim world as it took
shape in a more peaceable fashion. Traders could even be mission
aries, accompanied by missionaries, or preceded or followed by them.
Various interconnections could and did exist, both directly and indir
ectly, via numerous stages over phenomenal distances, periodically
during the medieval period. However, it is important to note that the
trade routes and commercial centres were not fixed, ‘their economic
fortunes were not constant unchanging entities in history’ (Chaud
hun 1985: 99). Dynasties came and went, merchants died, fashions
changed, ports silted up, numerous factors were forever changing;
excellent reviews have been provided by Chaudhuri (1985), Tampoe
(1989) and Hourani (1995) with regard to the Indian Ocean which
illustrate this in some detail. It is only necessary here to show that
such systems were in operation, the functions that they could serve,
and elaborate upon a few instances of the types of archaeological
evidence which might indicate their former presence.

The Transmission of Muslim Iconography and Other Ideas
The mechanisms behind the spread of Muslim iconography are many
and complex, and relate more to the spread of Islam itself than merely
the diffusion of artistic repertoire. One of the primary factors was
trade. The importance of trade has already been noted as an agent for
the spread of ideas including religious ones, and was not confined to
Islam; Buddhism, for example, was spread into Central Asia and
China partly through the actions of traders. Unfortunately, the
agency of trade as a medium for the spread of religion is often
neglected by archaeologists, who accentuate the economic aspect
and associated issues above all others, thus leading to a one-dimen
sional emphasis. Yet the investigation of trade mechanisms and pro
cesses in all their manifestations is an area to which archaeology can
make a significant contribution. Moreover, besides the possible link
age between trade and the initial spread and transmission of religion,
religious considerations can also go hand in hand with mercantile and
other economic activities on an everyday basis. Eaton provides an
example of this when he describes how many early Bengali Muslim
saints, represented materially by their shrines, ‘are associated with the
teaching of wet-rice agriculture, along with, of course, the preaching
of Islam’ (1984: 26). This is a topic which has already been touched
upon in the consideration of local pilgrimage and ha;j in chapter 4.
Islam and trade were linked from the very beginning. Conversion
to Islam could be facilitated through trade. For example, local mer
chants could benefit from better trade conditions and lower taxes
through converting (see Tampoe 1989: 128—9), and greater trust
between co-religionists might have been of significance for trade
purposes. Certainly, in both Indonesia and West Africa, trade was
one of the contributing factors to the initial introduction of Islam,
and its continuing spread and acceptance (see Tjandrasamita 1978;
Insoll 1996b). Muhammad himself was connected with trade, being
born into a trading milieu and trading family. Mecca, according to
Ahmed, ‘was a busy and wealthy commercial town almost monopol
ising the entrepôt trade between the Indian Ocean and the Mediter
ranean trading centres’ (1988: 17), and when Muhammad was young
he was in charge of a ‘trading enterprise of a widow, Khadijah, whom
he subsequently married’ (Waines 1995: 11). The Qur’an reflects the

r

Coinage
Coinage is not only a primary indicator and mechanism of trade, but
also provides a direct link back to topics already examined such as
figural representation and calligraphy. However, the significance of
coinage within the archaeology of Islam is even greater than this
because it came to be seen almost as a token of religious identity, as
well as a source of evidence which can indicate the very development
of Islam. But it should also be noted that, as is evident in many of the
other areas of material culture considered in this book, coinage was
not part of a fully formed package denoting Muslim identity, which
was opened in each newly conquered area. This did not exist, and a
transitional period is evident, when all aspects of Muslim material
culture were under development.
Coinage had long been in use in all the regions first conquered, and
the existing currency of the conquered areas was used. In former
Sasanian provinces, the primarily silver coinage underwent a change

150

151

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

in the dating system used, and the name of an Arab governor or a
pious inscription in kufic might be added. Otherwise, the Sasanian
issues still bearing the image of the former ruler alongside a fire-altar
with attendants were used. Likewise, in former Byzantine areas the
existing coinage were utilized; the gold and copper issues might
be slightly altered, the name of the emperor suppressed and a mint
name in Arabic and Greek added (Grierson 1960: 242). But on the
whole these coins were left largely unaltered, and it was not until
the reforms of Abd al-Malik that coinage was fully Islamized, with
the removal of the figurative images and a change from Greek/Persian
to Arabic epigraphy. These reforms took place at the end of the
seventh century and have been described by Darley—Doran (1986) as
coinciding with theological conflict which was going on between the
Umayyads and Byzantines. ‘The Islamic coinage reflected this by
stressing the unity of God to counter the Trinitarian precepts of
Christianity’ (Darley-Doran 1986: 10), reminiscent of how the con
temporary inscriptions in the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem were
used (see chapter 2). It again illustrates that the development of Islam,
and thus of Muslim material culture, was not an instantaneous event.
This issue has been examined by Hoyland, who states that prior to
72 AH (691) ‘the archaeological record is strangely silent about Islam,
and this despite the fact that we have a fair amount of material from
this time’ (in press: 4). But, after this date, the sources of evidence
multiply, with numerous public proclamations of faith rendered not
only on coins, but in inscriptions of many forms (Hoyland 1995).
That Abd al-Malik’s reform programme served to ‘Arabize’ govern
ment (Welch 1979: 44), and Islamize material culture is evident from
the coinage, and also the glass weights (dinar, dirham, uqiya and so
on) used to test coins (Miles 1948: 2—3, 1951). Coins provided an ideal
medium for expressing the new ideology, probably having a wider
impact than inscriptions inside mosques which might only be seen by
Muslims. Through coins used in trade a much wider audience was
reached, and the coin, in addition to serving its primary function as a
token of value, could also serve as a symbol for expressing religious
identity, alongside an obvious political role. Various messages were
carried and functions could thus be fulfilled, though not necessarily
all at the same time. Obviously, the uses and messages implied or
stated by coinage vary and need not be fixed, but, as Wasserstein
argues, the ‘family resemblance’ of Islamic coinage was there to
‘define Islamic coins as Islamic’ and ‘non-Islamic coins as nonIslamic’ (1993: 303).
Muslim coinage is also of interest as a further example to illustrate
the diversity which can exist within the spectrum of Muslim art and

design. Coins were probably ‘art objects’ which reached a much
larger audience than ever ate from a lustred ceramic bowl or perused
the pages of an illustrated manuscript. In this context it then seems
surprising that figurative images reappeared at all on coinage, albeit
rarely, after the imposition of Abd al-Malik’s reforms. One such
series of bronze coins bearing portraits and other similar images
were produced in Turkish-dominated areas in northern Syria, north
ern Iraq and eastern Anatolia in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
Of importance is the fact that the metal from which the coins were
struck seems to have influenced whether it bore an image or not.
Thus copper coins bore images as ‘copper coins in Islam have always
been less affected by the conventional taboo against images than have
gold and silver’ and as ‘first and foremost secular objects’, used in the
market by people of diverse background. In contrast, ‘the dinars and
scarce silver dirhams are the political manifestos of rulers who took
pride in their status as ghazis (warriors) on behalf of orthodox Islam’
(Lowick 1985: 160, cited in Wasserstein 1983: 316). Images which
appear to have been used concurrently included imitations of Byzan
tine coins bearing explicitly Christian motifs; representations of Mus
lim rulers, ‘first in the likeness of Greek, Roman and Sasanian
monarchs, later also in typically Islamic guise wearing up-to-date
styles of dress; and thirdly, astrological shapes (Lowick 1985: 172).
Thus it is obvious that even here, with an area of material culture
readily accessible to much of the population, and outside the private
courtly or aristocratic context usually associated with infringements
of this prohibition, supposed universals such as the ban on figurative
imagery can be shown to be invalid in certain instances.
Trade Routes and Trade Goods
Having briefly considered coins, not only as an agent of commerce,
but also as a vehicle for political and religious imagery, it is useful to
examine the trade routes and trade goods themselves as possible
sources of information. These illustrate how widely the Muslim
world was connected with regions beyond its frontiers, which in
themselves are often difficult to define. Here, as case studies, trade
by sea and land, and three examples of trade items Chinese cer
amics, silver coins and textiles will be considered.
Although the role of trade as an agent for the spread of ideas,
including religious ones, has already been mentioned, it is important
to re-emphasize that trade need not only function within the secular
economic domain. Many examples can be cited where trade has been
—

—

152

153

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

accompanied by the spread of ideas associated with ‘civilization’ or
religion, as with the mercantile ventures of the Portuguese in the late
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. However, this is not to say that all
trade was underlain by religious intent; it was not. Rather, such
impulses can co-exist, and trade need not necessarily be divest of
any sacred component, even if this is not explicit to the traders
themselves; by the very movement from region to region, colonies
and trading settlements might be established, leading to a ‘bridgehead’
being formed. Places of worship would be established, and over time
the religious belief would spread, perhaps even through no overt
agency, into the surrounding area. Even fleeting contact with traders
or trade goods can have lasting impact, as with the cargo cults of parts
of the Pacific region. Religious, technological and philosophical ideas
can be transmitted.

China; further segments in the western Indian Ocean connected the
East African coast, or later under Fatimid impetus the Red Sea to
Egypt (Whitcomb 1990—1: 56), and the lands bordering the Mediter
ranean (see figure 5.4). The concepts of unity and diversity over this
vast area are discussed by Chaudhuri (1985: 21—3); social and cultural
diversity was rooted in four different civilizations: Hindu, Chinese,
Irano-Arabic and Indonesian, with a ‘strong sense of unity’ lent by
the sea trade and the caravan trade in Central Asia. Although Muslim
sailors might, and did, sail as far as China, where they founded
colonies (the descendants being the Hui, who have been mentioned
before, see chapters 2 and 6), this did not mean that they controlled
the whole area of the trade route. Various trade centres and their
surrounding areas did form parts of the Muslim world but these were
not contiguous: ‘the political and religious frontiers of Islam ran
across trade routes, kingdoms of non-believing princes, and
natural boundaries made by deserts, mountains and seas’ (Chaudhuri
1985: 21).

Sea trade: the Indian Ocean and beyond
Obviously, trade by sea was not a Muslim invention, but trade via sea
routes was of fundamental importance to the Muslim world. Besides
the evident trade requirements which were fulfilled, this trade acted
as a means of connecting up the various regions of the Muslim world
and beyond. One of the most important of these trade systems was
centred in the Indian Ocean, the Bay of Bengal and the South China
Sea. Many Indian Ocean trade centres, as well as the trade systems
themselves, have been examined by historians and archaeologists, and
the most convenient study, primarily because it has been recently and
extensively updated to include relevant archaeological data, is a study
of Arab seafaring (Hourani 1995). Indian Ocean trade was cyclical,
and it should not be thought that the same routes operated continu
ously in the centuries between the beginning of Islam and the dis
ruption caused by the arrival of European merchants in the late
fifteenth century. However, when trade connections flourished and
trading conditions were good the continuity in the system over
centuries, and the sheer geographical distances involved in the trade
systems, were phenomenal.
Mechanisms One such period was between the late seventh and
early tenth centuries, with direct sailing via a series of stages from
the Persian Gulf to Canton. This sea route was, according to Hou
rani, ‘the longest in regular use by mankind before the European
expansion in the sixteenth century’ (1995: 61). This route stretched
from Siraf and other ports on the Persian Gulf, via Pakistan and India
to Sri Lanka, across to Malaysia and Indonesia, and then round to

/

The living legacy Before examining the archaeological evidence, it is
as well to note that ample living testimony to Indian Ocean trade is
provided by the descendants of traders, adventurers, slaves and pil
grims, dispersed around the various regions and often far from their
original homelands. The Hui have been mentioned, and Possehl
(1981) refers to the ‘living legacy’ of the agate miners of the Narmada
mines in Gujarat, western India, who are of African descent. These
Siddis ‘are actually more common than one might suspect in western
India and Pakistan, especially the coastal areas This is a result of
the lively commerce between India and Africa for at least the past
two thousand years’ (Possehl 1981: 41). The Arab Muslim commu
nities of southern Thailand show a similar legacy, where Farouk notes
that small communities of Arabs of predominantly Hadrami
(Yemeni) and Saudi descent are settled and maintain family connec
tions ‘with other Arabs across the border in Malaysia’ (1988: 7). Arab
communities are also found settled in the vicinity of Samarkand in
Central Asia (Bennigsen and Enders Wimbush 1986: 125). Though
the original ‘wave’ of Arab immigrants came as conquerors in the
eighth century, we can speculate that subsequent influxes were per
haps trade related.
.

.

.

The archaeological legacy Archaeological evidence attesting to the
operation of Indian Ocean trade and the connection which existed
between the ‘different worlds’, which is sometimes represented by,
for example, ‘made to order goods’, is abundant. It illustrates both the

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

g

s

ç

155

earlier ‘direct’ Indian Ocean trade system and the later ‘segmented’
one which developed as its successor. The trade centres themselves are
archaeological indicators of the trade communities, the trade itself,
the goods and the interaction, co-existence and impact of social,
religious and political systems which came into contact through the
mechanism of trade. Various of these centres which have been archae
ologically investigated have already been used as case studies. These
have included Siraf on the Persian Gulf (Whitehouse 1968, 1970,
1974), Daybul/Banbhore close to Karachi (Anon 1964; Ghafur
1966), and Shanga on the Kenyan coast (Horton 1996). To these can
be added, for example, Mantai on the north-western tip of Sri Lanka
(Carswell and Prickett 1984), and other trade centres in Sri Lanka, on
the coast of India (Carswell 1979a) and on the Maldive Islands
(Carswell 1977). Sohar on the Omani side of the Persian Gulf (Wil
liamson 1974), Kish 200 km south of Siraf (Whitehouse 1976), Kilwa
and Manda on the East African Coast (Chittick 1974, 1984), and
much further east, Laem Po in Thailand (Dasheng 1995).
Other examples of trade centres which have been archaeologically
investigated with varying degrees of competence could be cited. Thus
a body of data exists which could, and should, allow an examination
not only of economic-related trade process, but also of the accom
panying interaction, or lack of it, between the different religious and
social traditions as already outlined. Unfortunately, from an archae
ological perspective at least, this has hardly yet begun. Preoccupation
is still predominantly with the ‘harder’ economic issues. However
one example can be provided in glazed Chinese pottery of an mdicator not only of trade, but also of the interaction and fusion of
different cultural elements.
Sherds of Chinese pottery obtained via Indian Ocean trade (ships
are admirably suited to the transport of such bulky and fragile corn
modities) are found scattered on the shores surrounding the South
China Sea, Indian Ocean, the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea. They are
found at many if not all of the trade centres already mentioned (see
also Wijayapala and Prickett 1986; Tampoe 1989, for discussion of
Chinese pottery at Mantai and Siraf). Chinese pottery of various
types white wares, celadons, stonewares has been recorded at
numerous other sites dating from the tenth to the sixteenth centuries.
Examples connected with the Red Sea coasts, for instance, include
Bach on al-Rih Island off the Red Sea coast of the Sudan (Kawatoko
1993), Dahiak Kebir further south on the Dahiak Islands in Eritrea
(Insoll 1996d) and, to the north, Quseir al-Qadim in Egypt (Whit
comb 1979; Carswell 1982), and beyond at Fustat in Egypt (Scanlon
197Db; Mikami 1980—1). Chinese pottery has also been recovered
—

—

156

157

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

from various locations on the opposite, Arabian shore (Mathew 1956;
Whitcomb 1988) as at Ayla, the early Islamic town at Aqaba in Jordan
(Whitcomb 1990—i). Sherds have been recorded at some distance
from the Red Sea (though probably indirectly sourced via this region)
at Timbuktu in Mali (Insoll 1996a) and at Douma and other locations
in Syria (Carswell 1977, 1979b).
Yet, besides the more obvious economic information which can be
derived from this particular source of evidence, Chinese pottery
recovered from archaeological contexts has been informative with
regard to specific ‘Islamization’ of products for distinct markets. At
Siraf, for example, among the several hundred sherds of imported
Chinese stoneware dating from the ninth to eleventh centuries, a
fragmentary ‘Dusun’ stoneware jar was recovered which bore the
names Yusuf and either Mansur or Maymun ‘incised before the vessel
was glazed’ (Whitehouse 1973: 244). The presence of these Muslim
names indicates that ‘the jar was made to order for a Muslim trader
with contacts, or possibly a factory, in a Chinese port’ (1973: 244).
This is not a unique instance; Dasheng (1995) mentions Chinese
ceramics being made specifically for Muslim markets, and at Laem
Po in southern Thailand, a bowl made at the Changsha kilns in
Hunan and dating from the ninth century bore an ‘Arabic-inspired
design’ (1995: 55). A water bottle found in Yangzhou in China, of the
same date and of Chinese production, also had an underglaze Arabic
inscription, interpreted as a ‘writing of double Allah in symmetry’,
but ‘clearly painted by ceramic workers who did not know the Arabic
script’ (1995: 59). Other Chinese wares produced for export markets
were also influenced by Muslim forms and decorative motifs. The
reverse was also true; Chinese vessel forms and ceramic types like the
large white-ware spittoons found at Fustat (Mikami 1980—1: 77) were
variously imitated in the Muslim world.
These examples are of importance as they illustrate that there was
an element of cultural understanding between the different civiliza
tions and societies involved in Indian Ocean trade. But what does this
imply for less visible aspects? Although this remains hypothetical and
difficult to test, it can be suggested that producing ‘foreign’ items for
trade might mean that in the process one could get used to these
materials oneself, even if only to a slight degree. The ‘rub-off’ of
cultural elements could thus occur, which returns us to the point that
we cannot always think in terms of distinctly polarized entities or
blocks, the Muslim world as opposed to China, for example. Com
merce meant interaction; no matter how strictly one might attempt to
control this, trade meant the flow of ideas, and once again complexity
is evident and must be allowed for. Thus we can begin to infer and

suggest less tangible contacts and influences which a sherd of pottery
might indicate.
Land trade: the Scandinavian connection and beyond
The tentacles of Islamic medieval commerce stretched elsewhere by
land; for example, north to Europe, in particular to Scandinavia. Such
a trade existed, especially in silver coinage from the Muslim world
being exchanged for slaves and furs, primarily in the ninth and tenth
centuries (Noonan 1981). However, unlike parts of China, India or
elsewhere at various Indian Ocean trade centres, there is as yet no
evidence that communities of Muslim merchants themselves were
established. Thus this trade was not accompanied by conversion to
Islam, by all or even part of the population, or it appears by Islamiza
tion to any degree.
This Scandinavian trade and the ‘Viking contacts’ followed routes
which either stretched north from Baghdad and the Mesopotamian
region or as northern branches of the Central Asian caravan trail, the
Silk Road to China. Both of these routes are considered by Herrmann
(1991), who describes how the latter branched along the Amu Darya
to Urgench, east of the Caspian Sea, and to Bulgar at the confluence
of the rivers Kama and Volga, while the former branched north along
the western shore of the Caspian via Itil, ‘the Khazar Emporium’
(Lieber 1981: 25), to Bulgar (see figure 5.4). The furthest the Muslim
merchants penetrated was to the Khazar region; beyond this, trade
was in the hands of the Vikings, although Arab visitors reached the
Upper Volga in the tenth century. The Arabs, according to Noonan
(1981: 52—3), developed a pragmatic attitude to the Khazars, and trade
flourished when military conflict over control of the Caucausus had
subsided. This in itself was important as Noonan notes that ‘the
Arabs managed to participate in an active trade with a Khazar leader
ship whose representatives had abjured Islam and then turned to
Judaism’ (1981: 52).
The most common archaeological evidence of the Viking trade with
Muslim lands are the thousands of Islamic silver coins which have
been recovered, predominantly in the form of hoards, at various
locations in Scandinavia, Russia and on the Baltic coast. Lieber
records that nearly 105,000, mostly silver, Islamic coins of various
types, all dating from before 970, have been found in Scandinavia
(1981: 21—2). The Iraqi origins of this trade are signalled by a hoard
unearthed near Zakho in northern Iraq, buried in the early ninth
century, and containing 3,306 coins. This hoard contained numerous
different issues, including 37 coins from Umayyad Spain and 129
-

158

159

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

Idrisid Moroccan coins. Rather than representing a hoard buried for
future use in Iraq itself, it can be suggested that it was gathered
together for onward trade to Scandinavia, where a voracious appetite
for silver existed. Glass beads from Muslim areas and dating from the
late eighth century are also found in northern and eastern Europe.
These, according to Cailmer (1995: 51), ‘entered the Baltic region
from the east, to appear in Finland, the Aland Islands and central
Sweden’. Thus here long-distance trade, albeit of little significance
compared to the commerce of the Indian Ocean, was in operation,
but without any accompanying ideological change.

general importance within the Muslim world for numerous purposes
in all social strata (Ettinghausen 1976: 71—2). To quote Golombek, it
became ‘a world submerged in textiles, where textiles played a role in
every facet of life, for everyone rich and poor’ (1988: 33). In certain
advantageous conditions, as at Fustat where 3,000 textile fragments
were excavated from rubbish heaps dating to the eleventh century
(Mackie 1985: 23), or Quseir al-Qadim, also in Egypt, where nearly
4,000 pieces of Mamluk textiles were found (Vogelsang-Eastwood
1993: 87), extensive collections of textiles have been recovered, and
the information derived from their analysis has proved of great use in
reconstructing trade routes, the significance of the textiles, their uses
and the manufacturing techniques employed. But in many areas this
profitable avenue of research, like those of paper, perfumes, spices
and even slaves, is closed by the lack of evidence.
Secondly, as with certain commodities, so with the means of their
transport, which are known mainly from secondary evidence, manu
script illustrations, historical sources, and facilities such as ports and
caravanserais; much more rarely are the ships or caravans encoun
tered archaeologically. However, instances do exist, as with the
eleventh-century shipwreck excavated at Serçe Liman on the
southern Turkish coast. This ship, of apparently Muslim origin, con
tained a mixed cargo of Byzantine amphora and Islamic glass, as well
as glass cullet (refuse glass for re-use) also of probable Byzantine
origin. This is of importance as it again attests to the links between
Muslims and non-Muslims, ‘trade, even in times of war, seldom
stopped between Muslim countries, or even between Byzantine and
Muslim ports’ (Bass and Van Doorninck 1978: 131). Further evidence
for the operation of maritime trade between the Muslim world and
Christian Europe was recently found off the coast of Devon (Eng
land) where a cargo of gold Moroccan coins and jewellery dating
from the 1630—40s was discovered by marine archaeologists (Alberge
1997: 3). Similarly, direct evidence for land-based caravan trade has
also been found (see plate 5.2). At the ‘lost caravan’ site in the Ijafen
dunes in Mauritania, several thousand cowry shells, once in sacks,
along with 2,085 bars of brass were found (Monod 1969). These
items, dating from the twelfth century, had been buried for safe
keeping by a caravan crossing the desert to the Western Sahel and
never recovered.

Land trade: the West African connection
In contrast, several thousand kilometres to the south, the situation
was very different. Land-based trade which operated across the
Sahara from North Africa to the trade centres of the Western Sahel
region of West Africa was accompanied by conversion to Islam and
Islamization in general, starting in the late eighth century. Indigenous
states, such as the empire of Ghana whose capital was in Mauritania
(where only the merchant’s quarter, Koumbi Saleh, has so far been
found), and indigenously founded towns such as Gao on the eastern
Niger bend in Mali, attracted Muslim merchants in pursuit of gold,
ivory and slaves to ship north to the wider Islamic world (Thomassey
and Mauny 1951, 1956; Insoll 1996b). In return, these merchants
brought manufactured luxury goods, glazed pottery, glass and semi
precious stone beads, glass vessels, items of metalwork, textiles, paper
and commodities such as cowry shells, one of the currency items in
use during the medieval period, and brass (Insoll 1995).
Archaeological limitations An assessment of this type of trade also
allows two general archaeological implications to be noted. Differ
ential survival means that this trade, perhaps inevitably, is skewed in
favour of the more durable items. This can lead us to undervalue the
importance of certain commodities, especially textiles. In the Western
Sahel region no imported textiles have been recovered from the trade
centres, yet the corpus of medieval Arabic sources and later European
travellers’ accounts both tell us how important the textile trade was
(see Barth 1965; Levtzion and Hopkins 1981); silk, gauze and linen
are all recorded as being imported from North Africa, as well as
unspecified cloth from Al-Andalus, and turbans from Ifriqiya during
the medieval period (Levtzion and Hopkins 1981: 97). As we saw in
chapter 4, clothing, and its obvious links with modesty concerns, are
of particular importance within Islam, and textiles were of great

I
r

Trade and social processes Archaeology, in combination with an
analysis of existing historical, sociological and anthropological stud
ies, is also beginning to allow amodel to be developed to chart the
actual processes and rates of conversion to Islam over time in the

F

160

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

161

p

Plate 5.2 Salt caravan, Gao, Mali (photo. A. Bennett)
Western Sahel (Insoll 1996b: 90—1, 1997b). This owes a debt to
Fisher’s three-stage model of Islamic conversion (1973, 1985), but
equally draws its impetus from trade, and thus we are able to begin
to move beyond merely economic concerns, and to consider factors
of social relevance, as was argued for earlier.
Islam was brought to the Western Sahel region by Muslim Arab
and Berber traders. The primary converts, along with the foreign
merchants’ local partners in trade, were the local rulers who accepted
Islam for a variety of reasons. These included genuine belief (of
obvious importance but difficult to assess archaeologically); the
advantages conversion might bring in the spheres of magic, ritual
and prestige; wealth in trade; and better administration through the
adoption of the Arabic script and Muslim officials (Levtzion 1979:
214; Hunwick 1985). Town-dwellers appear to have been early con
verts, a fact attested archaeologically. Islam may have been attractive,
as has been suggested by Trimingham (1959) because, by being uni
versalistic in outlook, it had the power to bring together the different
ethnic groups which often made up the population of towns in
this region. Often concurrent with townspeople, nomads were early
converts, again for a variety of reasons, dominant among which
Trimingham (1959) has suggested was the appeal of a lack of a
hierarchical priestly system, and the ease of worship Islam enjoys.
Lewis (1980: 24) also suggests that the usual pattern of early

Figure 5.5 Cemeteries in the Niger bend region, Mali (from De Gironcourt
1920: 161)

conversion to Islam by nomadic populations was because they ‘found
in long-distance trade an attractive and profitable supplement to
pastoralism’. This interpretation might help in explaining the cemet
ery patterning seen in the Niger bend and Adrar des Iforas regions
bordering the Sahara (see De Gironcourt 1920), with Muslim cem
eteries clustered along trade routes and in areas formerly (and cur
rently) inhabited by nomads (see figure 5.5).
The final group to convert to Islam were usually the sedentary
agriculturists, the bulk of the population. Various ideas have been
proposed to account for the fact that this group was often last to
convert to Islam. It has been suggested that conversion involved more
of a fundamental wrench from older systems and ties, with animism
and traditional religious cults furnishing the means by which the
pressing problems of existence, such as the ensuring of rain, could
be comprehended and resolved, turning around the cycle of tending
crops, livestock and children (Trimingham 1959: 25; Bravmann 1974:
31). Eventually, through the development of a syncretic Muslim
tradition incorporating elements of traditional religious practice and,

162

163

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

it should not be forgotten, by the sword as well, conversion among
the sedentary agriculturalist population increased (similarly, educa
tion and the growth of Sufism were also factors which aided the
spread of Islam in West Africa). This, however, was not an instan
taneous process, but drawn out over many centuries, and in certain
instances is not yet complete, as Islam continues to gain converts
among the sedentary populations of West Africa, both in the forest
regions, as among the Yoruba, and also in the Sahel, as with the
Dogon.
Although the model just presented is local in context and, inevi
tably, much generalized and simplistic, it is at least providing a start at
trying to draw in the archaeological evidence within the frameworks
provided by studies utilizing different sources of evidence, as with
those already mentioned. It is certainly specific to the West African
region, but it would be of interest to see if similar processes are
evident elsewhere in the Muslim world, where it is possible that in
many instances an implicit link with trade, as in the Western Sahel,
existed as the agent of initial Muslim contact.

fourteenth to fifteenth century date which was found near Tel Beth
saida, north of the Sea of Galilee, in Palestine.
Philosophical, technological and all types of scientific ideas can be
transmitted through traders. With sciences, for example, the exchange
of ideas both across the Muslim world and with other non-Muslim
areas, such as China and Europe, was complex and has been much
studied (see, for example, Needham 1954— ; Sabra 1976; al-Hassan
and Hill 1992). Muslim contributions in many areas of science and
technology were great, not only as inheritors and developers of the
Graeco-Roman heritage, but also as active innovators (al-Hassan and
Hill 1992: 9), and through the unity lent by the existence of Islam
across a wide area. Islamic knowledge filtered through to the West via
centres of translation such as Cordoba; Greek, Indian, Persian, Arab
and Chinese ideas were all transmitted to Europe from the Muslim
world (Gabrieli 1970). Add to this the fact that Muslim provinces
such as Transoxania bordered scientific ‘hot-houses’ such as China
(and indeed, as we have seen, trade centres were established within it),
and a picture of the vitality of Muslim science and technology
becomes clear. Elements of this are archaeologically recognizable.
Vardjavand (1979), for example, excavated an observatory dating
from the thirteenth century at Maraqe in the Azerbaijan region,
including what was perhaps the library, a central tower with a dia
meter of 45 m, and a foundry interpreted as the workshop where
astrological instruments were made.
The contribution that archaeological research can make to our
understanding of Muslim manufacturing and processing technology
is equally significant, but has so far been little pursued, either in
investigating relevant sites or bringing modern scientific analytical
techniques to bear upon archaeological materials. However, an exam
ple of the archaeological investigation of a processing site is provided
by recent research near Eilat in southern Palestine. Here, in the Wadi
Tawahin (millstone wadi) extensive evidence for the processing of
gold-bearing quartz ores was found. This included various structures,
a storage pit, outlines of tents and work stations containing tools and
millstones dating from between the eighth and tenth centuries. The
quartz ore was crushed using anvils and two sizes of hammer before
being ground to a powder using the millstones. Subsequently, the
gold-bearing dust would have been washed to separate the gold in a
complicated process, though no direct evidence was found for this
stage of processing (Gilat et al. 1993).
Exciting results were also obtained at Raqqa in northern Syria
where a major manufacturing centre has recently been investigated.
Conquered by the Muslims in 639—640, it became the Abbasid capital

The Transmission of Islamic ‘Civilization’
Trade can also function as the agent of transmission for many other
ideas besides religious ones. Visual art has already been discussed and
music is another art form which can be transmitted via trade and
other cross-cultural connections. Although there is evidently no such
thing as a single style of Islamic music, and indeed the legality of
listening to music has been much debated by Islamic scholars (Farmer
1929: 22), similarities exist across the Muslim world in both musical
styles and certain types of instruments. According to Jenkins and
Olsen, ‘the musical culture area of the Islamic world stretches for
thousands of miles and Moroccans travelling to Turkestan would feel
at home with the music despite all local differences (particularly in
instruments)’ (1976: 85). Yet obviously the types of music are many,
‘from learned and sophisticated types of music elaborated in the
context of supra-national Islamic civilization, to simple forms of
sacred music and nomad or sedentary folk musical traditions’ (Shi
loah 1995: xv), as are the styles and categories of instrument, and
music’s varying cultural importance. But this is also a category of
evidence which has an archaeological dimension; the discovery of
musical instruments in archaeological contexts is well attested in
many areas and over various periods. Arav (1993), for example,
describes a decorated brass Mamluk conical drum, of probable

164

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

and home of Caliph Harun al-Rashid in the late eighth century.
There, between 796 and 808, he built a new palatial and industrial
complex (Henderson 1996: 59). Excavations within the industrial
complex have provided information on glass technology, with a com
plete glass workshop dated to c.804. It was here that a major change
in Islamic glass technology took place with the development of
common Islamic soda lime glass, a glass composition ‘which was to
last relatively unchanged for about 600 years and which was used
throughout the Islamic world’ (Henderson 1996: 69). Other industrial
evidence found included the site of a pottery industry, and evidence
for sugar production, including discarded moulds, and a series of
basins and channels which might have been the remains of a sugar
factory.
The connection between the development of sugar as a traded
commodity and the spread of Muslim civilization has already been
referred to (see chapter 4), and it makes an interesting case study.
Archaeological evidence for sugar production is not restricted to
Raqqa. Whitcomb (1992) mentions the remains of a sugar industry
in the southern Ghors region of Jordan, where several sites had the
remains of pots and moulds used in the manufacturing process, and at
Feifa, the mud-brick walls of a sugar mill itself were recorded (1992:
114—15). At Susa in Iran, further conical sugar moulds, pierced at the
base, were found along with the remains of a sucrerie (Boucharlat and
Labrousse 1979); and Von Wartburg (1983: 313) draws attention to a
variety of relevant research which has been conducted elsewhere.
Thus the evidence recovered from Raqqa and other sites has made a
direct contribution to our understanding of Muslim manufacturing
and processing technology in many ways, another dimension which
can be approached through archaeology. Technology was not
restricted to one site, but was transmitted around the Muslim
world, owing in part to the unity provided by a common religion,
and through the agency of trade. Much more could be learnt from
excavating and recording sites linked with all aspects of Muslim
science and technology, and from examining the objects which fill
our museums and stores from past seasons. Similar summaries could
be offered of archaeological research on ceramics, metals and textiles,
and further information could undoubtedly be derived from the
analysis or re-analysis of many categories of item, as with the exam
ples discussed by Henderson (1996): information on enamels (Hen
derson and Allan 1990), glass composition (Brill 1970; Gratuze and
Barrandon 1990; Henderson 1995), source analysis of beads (Saito
witz et al. 1996), study of metals and metallurgy (Weisgerber 1980)
and pottery (Frierman and Giauque 1973; Mason and Keall 1990).

I

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

165

These are just a selection of relevant studies which have been under
taken, and numerous further possibilities exist for the application of
modern scientific techniques to whole categories of material which
have been largely neglected in this respect. There is no reason why
style should be privileged over fabric.
Summary and Conclusions
The material discussed in this chapter art, trade, science and manu
factures appears initially to be only loosely connected, if at all, but
as the discussion progressed it became apparent that interconnections
between these seemingly disparate subject areas are in fact evident
across the Muslim world. Essentially, this is due to the movement of
similar modes of thought across great distances through the processes
of Islamization: conquest, missionary activity and trade, singly or
combined. As a result a certain unity was created. This does not
mean that a ‘standard Muslim’ was created, drawing from a limited
pooi of binding requirements and ideas; on the contrary, great diver
sity exists. However, something functioned to allow similarities to be
manifest, in music, symbolically in art motifs or with the presence of
calligraphy in the Arabic script from Timbuktu to Djakarta; this is
Islam, and thus again we return to the point that a Muslim does exist
in a recognizable form across the Muslim world, and that this can be
evident materially, and therefore approachable by the archaeologist.
Why else would common features be found? Why else would sales of
‘Islamic art’ take place? Yet within this vast entity, this overall frame
work of structuring principles, myriad diversity is evident, adapting
and transforming components of Muslim law and thought, but this is
still undeniably Muslim diversity.
Certain implications for the general archaeology of religion also
exist. Art is frequently acknowledged as being either wholly religious
in intent or having a sacred dimension, whereas trade is not, but this
need not be the case. As was shown, trade need not be categorized as
entirely secular; it can be associated with the spread of ideas, includ
ing religious ones. In the next chapter we will turn to a more ortho
dox preoccupation of archaeologists in general, death and burial, as a
possible further indicator of the former presence of a Muslim
community.
—

—

DEATH AND BURIAL

6

Death and Burial

Every soul shall taste death. We will prove you all with evil and good.
To Us you shall return.
Qur’an. The Prophets 21: 35

No one escapes death, and theoretically all Muslims should be buried
in accordance with specific rites. Thus the burial is another category
of evidence, and one of primary importance, which might allow the
recognition of a Muslim in the archaeological record. Moreover,
the investigation of funerary evidence allows us to examine further
the social dimension which, as has already been stated, is often much
neglected within Islamic archaeology. Tarlow and Boyd (1992: 4)
make the relevant general point that historical archaeology, of
which Islamic archaeology clearly forms a part, has been notoriously
poor in its development of sophisticated social analyses. While it is
not suggested that the following discussion provides the ‘sophisti
cated social analysis’ required, it is hoped that it will show that
Muslim burial, and the often accompanying commemorative struc
ture, constitute more than just a typology of monuments. Both the
burial itself and the funerary monument can have a meaning and
significance which, if unlocked, can provide a wealth of information
on the development and diversity of Islam and the Muslim world and,
of course, on the individuals buried.
Furthermore, it should be remembered that the Muslim commun
ity, both past and present, was and is made up of people, individuals
and communities, not merely of ‘unquestioning machines’ blindly
following the tenets of their religion. This point appears to be often
forgotten. Islamic funerary archaeology is the residue of these indi
viduals and communities and, as with other societies, a desire for

167

commemoration, to assuage grief, replicate social position and hier
archies in death as in life, to attain piety, establish identity, as well as
struggles over authority, can all be manifest in Islamic funerary
archaeology and architecture. By studying the patterns of death we
can learn much about life.
In the light of contemporary funerary archaeological and anthro
pological theory (see, for example, Hodder 1982a: 139—46; Metcalf
and Huntingdon 1991; Tarlow and Boyd 1992; Parker Pearson 1993),
a more complex view of Islamic funerary archaeology and architec
ture needs to be taken, acknowledging the diversity which exists and
utilizing it to the full for the purposes of interpretation. The rich
texture of detailed ethnographic and archaeological evidence available
to the archaeologist interested in Islam enables not only information
on property, social status and prestige (the usual preserves of the
archaeologist dealing with funerary evidence) to be obtained, but
also information on possible non-orthodox ritual and beliefs, and
perhaps even on the individual, the person who has been buried (an
interesting examination of this is provided by Simpson 1995, with
regard to the late Islamic Near East).
Within the framework of Islam, where the sacred and secular
spheres of life are interwoven until they are inseparable, the archae
ologist cannot succumb to the charge levelled at them by Renfrew
(1994: 52) whereby ‘the disposal of the dead is generally considered,
by archaeologists, under a different rubric from that of religion’.
Within Islam, as with most if not all religions, religious belief has
an influence over death, its conceptualization, understanding and
practicalities (the funerary practices and monuments). Likewise
death influences religion, with ideas of resurrection and rebirth after
death being a recurring theme. As part of introducing the ‘social’ into
Islamic archaeology, we cannot divorce religion and the disposal of
the dead, and thus we have to look at Islamic funerary practices,
archaeology and architecture anew, as more than bricks and mortar,
but as being of greater social significance. This chapter will thus
explore the social dimension of Islamic funerary archaeology, and
burial as a category of evidence indicative of the Muslim community
in the archaeological record.
Muslim Burial: Ideals and Origins

The origins of Islamic concepts of death, funerary practices and of the
earliest commemorative structures have often been discussed (see, for
example, Grabar 1966; Ragib 1970), and are the subject of debate. The

168

169

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

Qur’an, though discussing death, contains nothing about funerals or
funerary monuments, the details of which are dealt with in the hadith
and legal texts (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 91; Smith and Haddad 1983;
Bowker 1991). Attitudes towards funerary architecture in the shari’ah
have been examined by Leisten, who makes the point that funerary
monuments were not widely used before the ninth century, with
common burial practices prior to this date consisting of interment
under a pile of stones, or the grave was simply left uncommemorated

face towards Mecca (sometimes supported in this position by bricks
or by a narrower grave-shaft). A confession of faith is said to the
deceased which is believed to enable it to answer the questions posed
by the interrogating angels Munkar and Nakir, and thus gain entry to
paradise. The grave itself should be reasonably shallow to allow the
deceased to hear the muezzin’s call, but also deep enough to allow
the corpse to sit up for its interrogation by Munkar and Nakir.
Only the place where the head of the deceased is laid may be com
memorated with a marker stone or piece of wood, the shahid (in this
context meaning witness). However, in reality great variety with
regard to grave markers is found according to the Islamic legal school
or sect followed and geographical area (Hastings 1911: 501—2; Gibb
and Kramers 1961: 89—90, 515—17; Dickie 1978: 44—6; Simpson 1995:

(1990: 12—13).

Early prohibitions on funerary architecture and commemoration of
the dead possibly reflected opposition to the pre-Islamic cult of the
dead in the Arabian peninsula, and the fact that ornate tombs were
considered ‘symbols of worldly pomp’ (Leisten 1990: 18). No special
attention should be paid to the place of the dead, and they should not
become the focus of worship, for all should be equal in death. Such
ideals were retained by some sects until today but for others were
relatively short—lived, even if disapproval for an ornamented or
inscribed gravestone might persist in Muslim law (Simpson 1995:
247). A variety of factors contributed to a growth in the use of
funerary architecture; these included the expansion of Islam beyond
the Arabian peninsula and the ensuing cultural admixture, pre-Islamic
survivals and the desire to express power and authority, both secular
and sacred (Hillenbrand 1994: 253—4). The widening gulf between
ideals and reality which developed in urban Egypt is commented
upon by Edward Lane (1895: 508), who observed a number of fu
nerals in Cairo in the early nineteenth century and remarked that ‘it is
astonishing to see how some of the precepts of the Prophet are every
day violated by all classes of modern Muslims, the Wahabys alone
excepted’.
Throughout the Muslim world an essentially uniform funerary rite
should be employed and should be straightforward, unostentatious
and simple: ‘the body is treated with a ceremonial which varies little
in different parts of the Muslim world, and is nearly the same for men
and women’ (Hastings 1911: 501). The funerary rites should entail
washing the corpse immediately following death, sealing the body
orifices and perfuming the body, which is then enveloped in the
shroud or grave clothes. Burial is rapid and the ritual prayer or salat
for the deceased is said either in the open in the cemetery or the
mosque (frequently in the cemetery) or sometimes in the house of
mourning. The stretcher or bier is carried to the place of burial by
men, followed by the funeral procession. The corpse is lifted out of
the bier and placed in the grave (a coffin is not usually used), the head
in the direction of the qiblah, so that it lies on its right side with the

241—2, 244—5).

While certain exceptions have to be acknowledged (discussed
below), the treatment of the corpse prior to burial, the procedures
for its actual interment, and its position within the grave, are fairly
uniform and vary little throughout the Muslim world. These should,
theoretically, allow the archaeological recognition of a Muslim burial.
It is above ground that ideals and realities diverge, and it is the means
of commemorating the dead the funerary monument and the way
in which these structures are manipulated by the living, which offer
us an insight not only into death but also into life, and are thus of
great importance.
—

—

The Place of the Dead
Within Islam, understandable prohibitions on disturbing Muslim
graves exist and these must be respected. Hence, the discussion of
sub-surface Muslim graves remains largely hypothetical. (The general
ethical dilemmas of disturbing the dead have been well covered else
where; see, for example, Webb 1987; Day 1990.) It could also be
argued that there is little to be gained from the study of individual
Muslim graves, due to the pan-Islamic methods of burial employed;
theoretically at least, princes and paupers should be buried according
to the same rites, and within the grave nothing should be found to
differentiate them.
Nevertheless, having emphasized the sensitivities associated with
this issue, it must also be stated that the importance of individual
interment to the Islamic archaeologist is great, and hence should be
included in this discussion. The reasons for this are various; first,
obvious useful paleo-pathological and anthropoiogical data can be

170

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

171

recovered as, for example, Prominska’s study of a thirteenth—four
teenth century Muslim cemetery at Kom el-Dikka in central Alexan
dria (1971). Secondly, the investigation of burials may allow the
recognition of a Muslim in the archaeological record. Thirdly, in
most cases the placing of the dead is the result of a conscious decision
(excepting accidents and casualties in war) and the logic behind these
decisions can tell us much about Muslim life. In order to explore this
concept, three levels of analysis will be discussed: the position and
treatment of the individual corpse, internal cemetery patterning and
intra-cemetery patterrnng.

The position and treatment of the individual corpse
The concept of the corpse as contaminating, impure and dangerous
appears to be almost universal, and Islam makes no exception. The
passage or transition of the corpse from this stage to the next has been
charted by Leach (1976, summarized in Parker Pearson 1993: 204).
He proposes a three-stage framework for the treatment of the dead,
with the first phase in the transitory process being the corpse in this
pre-burial and dangerous state. This useful framework can equally be
applied to the Muslim burial.
The probable absence of direct archaeological evidence for this first
and important phase means that without the ethnographic and
historical sources our understanding of such concepts within Islam
would be limited, thus restricting interpretative possibilities from the
beginning. Rites such as washing and perfuming the body would not,
obviously, be archaeologically detectable, but clues to the existence of
rites of purification might be found. One such indication would be
the shroud or grave clothes. Opinion varies as to the number of cloths
which should be used one, two, three or five but in general they
should be simple and usually white (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 89—90).
However, in practice, great variety is found. Hillenbrand (1994: 253),
for instance, mentions that the use of richly worked silk shrouds was
one of the first infringements of the original simple Muslim funerary
rites. In itself this possibly reflects the need to move beyond the
strictures of an essentially uniform rite, a recurring factor in the
elaboration of Islamic funerary practices.
The use of grave clothes could conceivably have opened up another
avenue for the display of social status. In Palestine, complete sets of
grave clothes, different for men and women, were used (see figure
6.1), which were sometimes prepared by the living ready for their
death (Granqvist 1965: 58—9). These are far removed from the simple
shroud or shrouds, but still do not reflect the opulence of the ornate
—

—

Figure 6.1 Grave clothes formerly used in Palestine. Top, men; bottom,
women (after Granqvist 1965: 60—1)

172

173

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

grave clothes of the rich of Egypt, where muslin, cotton and silk were
all used (Lane 1895: 506). However, in general, this first stage of the
transition of the dead will always be difficult to reconstruct in its
entirety based upon archaeological evidence.
The second stage might be of greater importance to the archaeol—
ogist; namely, the progress of the corpse into the ‘liminal zone’ which,
according to Parker Pearson (1993: 204), is physically manifest as a
cemetery, shrine or temple, where the funeral takes place and where
the corpse is separated from the living through burial or other forms
of disposal. It is the ritual activities associated with this stage that
could allow the recognition of a Muslim burial. The characteristics of
Muslim burial have already been outlined, and recognition criteria for
the archaeologist could be:

Broomhall mentions further infringements in Muslim burials in
China where the corpse was sometimes placed in a sitting position
(1910: 230). Islamic prohibition on interfering with the corpse were
also broken in Malawi, where the Muslim Yao prepared the body for
burial by cutting a hole in the neck and squeezing the intestine empty
(Bone 1982: 132). Although flouting Muslim law, such exceptions can
be due to the survival of pre-Islamic practices or a lack of religious
knowledge, and, though far from exhaustive, these examples indicate
that exceptions do exist. But, equally, certain generalities in how the
Muslim dead were and are treated can allow the archaeological
recognition of a Muslim burial.
The third and final stage in Leach’s framework, the passage of the
dead into the other world once the ritual activities are over, is of
course archaeologically unrecognizable. Nevertheless, material in
dications as to how the concept of the afterlife might be envisaged
could be found, and within the context of Islam these are discussed in
the final section of this chapter.

1 The position of the corpse within the grave (right-hand side, face to
qiblab), and the orientation of the grave pit.
2 The lack of grave goods.

3 The use of single interments, with gender segregation in separate
vaults.
This has greater than merely theoretical importance and such cri
teria have been found to operate in many places. For example, one of
the earliest explorations of the archaeology of the Jaulan in south
western Syria found that it was grave orientation that set Muslim
Bedouin tombs clearly apart from earlier, and very similar, stone-built
‘dolmens’. Both were built of stone slabs and surrounded by stone
circles, but the Muslim tombs were oriented differently, ‘incumbent
upon them from religious motives, whilst the general character of the
dolmen has been retained’ (Schumacher 1888: 130).
Exceptions to the recognition criteria can be found in all parts of
the world. Examples include: the placing of grave goods with Muslim
burials dated to between the mid-fourteenth and early eighteenth
centuries at Vohemar on the north-east coast of Madagascar (Verin
1986: 221—2; Dewar and Wright 1993: 444), and more occasionally
with burials in Palestine (Granqvist 1965: 56, 84, 249; see also Simp
son 1995: 245—7, for other examples of grave goods placed in Muslim
burials in the Near East). Communal graves were in use in Palestine
and the Punyal region of northern Pakistan (Jettmar 1967: 69—72).
Burckhardt (1830: 281) records that it was a custom of some of the
Bedouin of the eastern provinces of Egypt to ‘bury with the dead man
his sword, turban and girdle’. At Kossaima (Egypt) the dead man’s
shirt, head cloth, pipe, camel stick and cap were all left as offerings
on, rather than in, the grave (Woolley and Lawrence 1936: 44).

r

c

Internal cemetery patterning
Beyond the treatment of the individual corpse, the patterning of
the burials within the cemetery can also provide us with information
on Muslim communities. While the general archaeological theory
and methodology concerning spatial patterning within cemeteries
is, of course, applicable to Islamic funerary archaeology (see, for
example, Chapman et al. 1981; O’Shea 1984), it should be remem
bered that there is not always a simple equation between patterns of
life and those of death; they are not ‘mirror images of life’ (Hodder
1982a: 140). What, then, could be specifically gained within the
‘archaeology of Islam’ from a study of internal cemetery patterning,
aside from possible information on population size and descent
groups?
Dickie (1978: 46) makes the important point that Muslim cem
eteries ‘expand as a process of organic growth around a focus of
grace, baraka’, which in many cases is a saint’s tomb. This is because
it is thought that ‘proximity to a holy person will help protect the
grave from disturbance and increase the amount of blessing in the
afterlife’ (Simpson 1995: 244). Similar locational stimuli for burial
round a mosque can be provided by the qiblah, proximity to which
can also be desired. This notion of ‘sacred geography’ is of impor
tance, and could in certain instances over-ride the presumed logic of
inter-cemetery patterning, whereby familial groups congregate
together in a manner which perhaps suits the archaeologist more

174

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

than reality. Religious desires can provide the impetus to cemetery
use to such an extent that burial within the vicinity of a more
important saint’s tomb can lead to severe over-crowding and frequent
changing of the occupants of graves in closest proximity to the source
of baraka (see Gibb and Kramers 1961: 357 for a discussion of this
among the Sbi’ah). The archaeological recognition of suicides’ graves
could also be possible. The Prophet disapproved of suicide, and it is
forbidden in Islam (Rosenthal 1971: 1246). Therefore, it could be
asked whether the graves of suicides are accorded special treatment,
perhaps placed in a discrete section of the cemetery, or in another area
altogether? This is certainly of relevance as regards children; Simpson
records that separate areas or distinct cemeteries for children are
frequently found in the Near East (1995: 244).
A further question of increasing relevance within the contemporary
world is the archaeological recognition of Muslim space within nonMuslim environments. An instructive example can be provided in the
Cambridge city cemetery. The growth in the Muslim community
(discussed in chapter 2) dictated the need for a burial ground. This
has had obvious material culture implications, clearly visible in
figure 6.2, where the Muslim section of this cemetery is both
spatially separated and oriented in a different direction from the
blocks of non-Muslim and, in the majority, Christian graves. This
would be recognizable archaeologically, even if all surface indications
had gone, and the presence of a Muslim community would be
recognizable.

Muslim burial area

Figure 6.2 Alignment of Muslim burial section in comparison to the pre
dominantly Christian burials in the Newmarket Road Cemetery, Cambridge
(after the cemetery burial plots plan)

175

Intra-cemetery patterning
A third level of analysis is the patterning of cemeteries themselves. An
interesting example of this can be provided from an ethnographic
study in Timbuktu (Mali), where it was found that ‘the ecological
pattern of the dead strongly reflects that of the living’ (Miner 1953:
221). The city was enclosed on three sides by burial grounds (all
Muslim), with each cemetery having definite ethnic and quarter iden
tities. The Bela, formerly the vassals of the Tuareg, lived and buried
completely separately from the rest of the population. The Arabs also
tended to bury their dead in separate cemeteries, with different Arab
groups being further buried apart near their paternal kin. However,
some burial in the same cemeteries of Arab and Songhai (another major
ethnic group in the region) also occurred (Miner 1953). This illustrates
that correlations between territorial patterns of life can exist in death,
and that in certain contexts ethnic identity and residential patterns
might be reconstructed from funerary data. But within Muslim socie
ties, as in all societies, such patterns cannot be taken for granted.
Variation in cemetery patterning can also be found according to
region within the Muslim world. For example, in the Arabian penin
sula and the Near East, cemeteries were frequently located at the foot
or on the slopes of mountains at sites ‘imbued with an atmosphere of
sanctity’ (Ory 1991: 123), and Jewish and Christian cemeteries should
not be placed too near ‘those of the faithful’ (1991: 121). Burton-Page
also relates how, in certain areas of India, Muslim cemeteries are
situated south of the settlements, ‘possibly an extension of the south
as the quarter of Yama, the God of death’ (1991: 126). Simpson, in
considering cemetery location in western Asia, states that where
cemeteries are placed outside city walls, as at Mosul, they can become
‘the focus of certain other activities considered hazardous or “anti
social”, such as pottery production or car-repair garages’ (1995: 243).
Indirectly, cemetery patterning might also tell us something about
migration, pilgrimage and trade routes, and the borders of the Muslim
world as they changed over time. Cemeteries can grow up at nodal
points along these routes, perhaps where a saint’s tomb, meeting place
or caravanserai might have been located (Petersen 1994: 53—4). At the
frontiers of the Muslim world, Hillenbrand (1994: 264) mentions that
there appears to be a correlation between martyrs’ tombs. At Aswan
in Egypt, which bordered Christian Nubia, 50 or so Fatimid (969—
1171) mausoleums were found clustered in a vast cemetery, and were
apparently erected for ghazis, warriors who had died fighting for
Islam. Similar patterns were also apparent in Central Asia. A more

176

177

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

detailed analysis of such cemetery patterning might be of use in
charting the fluidity of the frontiers of Islam over the centuries.
The three levels of analysis discussed show that examining the place
of the dead in Islam provides a possible starting point for new
research. They also begin to hint at the variability which exists, and
the variety of information on Muslim society which might be recov
ered by the archaeologist through examining funerary data. Perhaps
most significantly, it was shown that, theoretically at least, a universal
and archaeologically recognizable Muslim burial exists, another cat
egory of evidence which might allow the archaeological recognition
of a Muslim and a Muslim community.

architecture, and the interpretative possibilities which exist as regards
its social function.

Tombs for the Living and the Dead
As well as ‘below ground’ aspects of Muslim burial, it is also neces
sary to consider the Islamic commemorative structure as a medium
for conveying a variety information about the deceased, but also
about those left behind. Fleming (1973) has described European
megalithic tombs as ‘tombs for the living’, and this notion is transfer
able to many Islamic funerary monuments which, as well as com
memorating the dead, were often designed to impress or convey
information to the living. They could become, according to Mujeeb
(1967: 183), ‘a symbol unifying life, death and eternity’. Moreover,
through the use of marble, fired-brick or other materials, a statement
could be made concerning power, grief, sanctity or love, and hence,
by constructing a funerary monument, the dead could be ‘brought to
life’ and, as Metcalf and Huntingdon (1991) discuss, used to reinforce
or legitimize the claims of the living.
There exists no uniform ‘meaning’ or ‘role’ for Muslim funerary
architecture; it varies regionally, according to doctrinal or sectarian
affiliation and to factors such as personal choice and wealth (many
people are not at all affected by building mausoleums and a simple
tombstone could suffice as a marker, if one is used at all). Among the
Shi’ah, for example, there is an emphasis on martyrdom, and pil
grimages to tombs and veneration of martyrs are of importance. In
North Africa, the ‘cult of the saints’ is of significance, and funerary
architecture, or rather the saint within, can form a focus for commu
nal identity and belief. Among the Wahhabis of Saudi Arabia, the
reverse is true, and the doctrines of early Islam are restored, with
simplicity being the essence of funerary practices, and with no
veneration of saints. Thus the following examples serve to illus
trate some of the diversity which exists within Islamic funerary

Display
Often primary among the factors underlying the construction of a
funerary monument are notions of display. Building a tomb is of
greater visibility to the living than merely ornate graveclothes,
which after burial would soon be forgotten, and offers another way
of moving beyond the strictures of the formal Muslim burial rites.
Above ground imagination could be freed, and architectural expres
sion and the architect’s creativity exploited. Furthermore, the tomb
provides a means of creating a lasting legacy, through monumentalis
ing the deceased, and even, it can be argued, placing them within
history. Various dimensions are possible and three will be discussed
here.
Status The first factor which might be of importance is the demon
stration of status, religious or otherwise, and in India such concepts
were taken to their extreme. Here, the ultimate secular monuments
were created (Taphoo 1974, 1975), a process which culminated in the
Mughal period (1626—1858). During this time, single-chambered
tombs were replaced by tombs consisting of one large central cham
ber set within a garden divided into four by axial waterways, the
chahar-bagh, with a subsidiary pavilion at each corner of the garden
(1975: 24). These Mughal garden tombs served as ostentatious sym
bols of wealth and prestige, indicated by the fact that they were often
built by their ultimate occupants well before death, and were used as
places for feasting and celebrations prior to fulfilling their primary
function (Jellicoe 1976: 112), as a capsule for the dead.
After death, the garden tomb could continue to serve as a symbol
of the deceased’s wealth and status, but a change in symbolic function
sometimes occurred. If the care of the tomb complex was entrusted
into the guardianship of a Muslim holyman (as often happened), the
occupant of the tomb might thus also take on a more pious identity,
more so than in life, and a form of ‘legitimization’, as discussed by
Metcalf and Huntingdon (1991), took place. A social statement might
also be made, literally saying ‘I am pious’, and achieved through
utilizing an existing tradition of architectural form and an endow
ment process, both of which were connected with such ideas of piety.
Gibb and Kramers (1961: 334) note that it became a custom for the
powerful to prepare a tomb and an adjoining funerary mosque for
themselves while alive because ‘just as the qubba under which the

178

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

179

saint lay and the mosque adjoining it was sanctified by him so viceversa a qubba and a mosque could cause a deceased person to become
considered a saint’. The benefits of investing in a monumental tomb
might therefore be gained twice: first, in life, as a worldly symbol of
wealth, and a place to party; and, secondly, after death, by continuing
as a symbol of wealth, but perhaps also of piety. Therefore different
identities could be created through the use of funerary architecture
and accompanying endowments.
Love A second possible dimension associated with building a funer
ary monument is to display love, and again India offers a fine exam
ple, the Taj Mahal on the outskirts of Agra, built by Shah Jahan
between 1632 and 1654 for his wife, Arjumand Banu Begam, better
known as Mumtaz Mahal. Vast resources were poured into the build
ing of this monumental tomb complex, not for pious reasons, or
solely for the purposes of displaying wealth, but, more importantly,
as an act of remembrance of, and as a testimony to his love for, his
wife. No expense was spared in building the Taj Mahal. Brick, not
wood—scaffolding was used, and a ramp over 3 km long was built to
lift material to the dome. Both craftsmen and materials were imported
not only from different regions of India, but also from other areas of
the Muslim world, including Baghdad, Shiraz and Samarkand. White
marble set with inlays of precious and semi-precious stones, forming
inscriptions and decorative motifs, was used on the exterior, while the
interior was equally sumptuously finished with marble filigree
screens surrounding the replica tombs (the actual burials were
below ground), and furnishings including gold lamps and Persian
carpets (Davies 1989: 193—5; see also Nath 1970; Volwahsen 1970;
Qaisar 1988). The finished monument is truly magnificent (see plate
6.1). Indeed, it has been described as having ‘sexual appeal. a seduc
tive building’ (Tillotson 1990: 101), owing to its flesh-like surface of
marble. This perhaps could be further interpreted as testimony to
Shah Jahan’s physical, as well as spiritual, love for the woman who
bore him 14 children.
However, it is when dealing with emotion in all its many forms that
the process of interpretation becomes most difficult, and thus a con
sideration of all the intense emotions which inevitably accompany
something as traumatic as death is often neglected by archaeologists.
Perhaps within the context of such a substantive monument as the Taj
Mahal it is easy to begin to say something about the emotions
accompanying death, grief for a lost lover perhaps (see Begley 1979
for an alternative and less-convincing interpretation of the Taj
Mahal), but equally, with lesser monuments, such emotions could
.

.

Plate 6.1

The Taj Mahal, Agra (photo. T. Insoll)

also be relevant. The person buried was once in all certainty some
one’s relative, perhaps their lover, but it is often easier (and safer) to
concentrate on the socio-political domain, thus de-personalizing what
is after all a very personal event. The fact that emotion of all sorts
must be inextricably linked with Islamic death and burial, as with any
other, need not be reiterated. Emotion can be displayed on many
levels, from the mass emotion which was visibly apparent on our
television screens when Ayatollah Khomeini was buried in 1989 to
that of numberless family burials which have occurred over the
centuries. When considering such a sensitive and personal subject,
the archaeologist should bear in mind that funerary evidence is
undoubtedly imbued with an ‘emotional legacy’, unapproachable as
that might be.
Muslim identity A third type of information which might be
displayed through building a funerary monument is Muslim identity.
As we saw with the Taj Mahal, the very materials used in funerary
architecture can also serve as a means of conveying information.
These materials can range from the more obviously costly, such
as the semi-precious stone inlays and white marble of the Taj
Mahal, to the less obvious, such as the use of fired-brick in the

180

181

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

central and western Sudanic regions of Africa, where its symbolic
status depended upon the context in which it was employed.
Although it was not imported, it still served as a highly obvious
indicator of social status through the amount of resources, primarily
water and fuel, which had to be invested in its manufacture in
this often resource-poor environment. Thus, fired-brick appears to
have served as a ‘material of power’ in both funerary and other
contexts. This is indicated by a comment by Ibn Sa’id (died
c. 1286—7) who reported that in Barisa (Senegal) ‘none builds with
plaster and baked bricks except a ruler or a person of wealth and
distinction to whom he has given permission to do so’ (Levtzion and
Hopkins 1981: 185).
This has been recorded archaeologically in the cemetery at
Gao-Saney (Mali) where various fired-brick tombs were found
(twelfth—thirteenth centuries) (Mauny 1951; Insoll 1996b). The use
of fired-brick in this region in the ‘palace buildings’ at Ouara (Chad)
and at Garoumele (Niger) (Binet 1956; Bivar and Shinnie 1962: 4;
Lebeuf and Kirsch 1989: 25—6) suggest that fired-brick was a visible
material symbol of social status, but possibly also of Islamization.
There certainly appears to be a correlation between the use of firedbrick, often only for a short-lived period in selective contexts (tombs,
mosques and palaces), and the initial acceptance of Islam by the
indigenous rulers. Thus it can be seen that Islamic funerary architec
ture, both materials and structures, can serve not only to commem
orate the deceased but can also display and convey a variety of
information to the living.

monument as that of someone of great material worth, perhaps an
important secular figure, which would obviously be completely
inaccurate.
In direct contrast to this are the Wahhabi sect (described in chapter
1), whose essential doctrine Niezen describes as ‘true Islam [is] that of
the first generation of Muslims, the Prophet and his immediate suc
cessors’ (1987: 2). They are opposed to ‘the cult of saints’, and
Wahhabi burial is in keeping with the original Muslim custom of
commemorating the grave, if at all, by a pile of rocks, a practice
originally intended to protect the corpse from wild animals (Laqueur
1992: 284). Kings and paupers should thus be buried in the same way,
theoretically at least, which gives rise to the interesting mental picture
of the Saudi prince, living in a luxurious house, with a garage full of
expensive cars, being indistinguishable in death from the person who
burns or collects his rubbish. Thus, it can be seen that the absence of a
substantial funerary monument need not always imply that the per
son buried necessarily lacked social status or material wealth. Diver
sity and complexity are again the keywords.

Inversions of reality
What is displayed, however, can equally be misleading. For example,
the presence or absence of a monumental tomb need not be a true
reflection of the worldly status of the deceased. Treatment in death is
not necessarily consistent with position in life, and doubts are
thus cast on any claims for the existence of certainties as regards
funerary architecture as a metaphor for social status. This is illus
trated by considering a hypothetical case study contrasting the
treatment of Sufi saints and Saudi princes after death. The former
may have led hermit-like or ascetic existences, perhaps shunning
worldly goods, and devoting themselves to a life of contemplation,
of reading the Qur’an and religious devotion. Through their saintly
reputation, followers might erect a funerary monument totally dis
proportionate to their worldly status. The archaeologist, lacking any
additional information, such as inscriptions, could interpret such a

Multiple meanings
But just as the meaning of funerary architecture can be misleading, it
can equally be very complex. We return again to the fact that many
aspects of Islamic material culture can have various meanings depend
ing upon the observer or interpreter. An interesting case study,
demonstrating the existence of ‘multiple meanings’ in funerary archi
tecture, is provided by the local tradition of building ‘pillar tombs’ on
the East African coast. These are so called because the deceased is
commemorated by a large pillar (up to 6 m), usually made of coral,
which is often inset with imported porcelain dishes. They are asso
ciated with the Swahili (see chapter 3) and are found from southern
Somalia down the coast into Tanzania, and date from between the
fourteenth and seventeenth centuries (Kirkman 1966; Prins 1967;
Sanseverino 1983). A group of these monuments on the northern
coast of Kenya was analysed by Wilson who found that they seem
to have served a variety of functions beyond merely providing ‘a
suitable resting place for the earthly remains of worthy or wealthy
persons’ (1979: 33).

They functioned, first, as symbols of ancestry and lineage, or
Waungwana status, representing people with deep roots in the com
munity who were usually wealthy and in positions of authority, but
not necessarily of religious authority. For example, the founder of the
madrasab in Lamu (Kenya), though revered as a saint, was denied a

182

DEATH AND BURIAL

funerary monument built of permanent materials earlier in this cen
tury because he never attained the required Waungwana status (Wil
son 1979: 34). The possession of this status appears to have over
ridden religious considerations. Thus, both funerary architecture and
‘the ancestors’ appear to be used to legitimize social and political
claims in this specific context. However, it would also appear that it is
the claims of the living that are being pursued, rather than those of
the deceased by reinforcing the possession of the all-important
Waungwana status.
As well as their secular importance to the living, the tombs were
also imbued with religious significance, and could be used within
rituals of ancestor and spirit worship, which co-existed with orthodox
Muslim practice (and in certain instances continue to do so). Archae
ological evidence attesting to these non-Muslim rituals has been
found, including incense burners, and a pillar tomb, which had
what appeared to be a chimney at its centre, was possibly used in
sacrificial rites. This evident lack of Islamic orthodoxy has been
further indicated by the orientations of certain tombs, which are
often many degrees off the almost due north required on the
East African coast. This led Wilson (1979: 41) to suggest that the
tombs were built by people ‘who were outside the firm grip of Islam
or who were innocently ignorant of the finer points of orthodoxy or
geography’.
Thus, in this example, a variety of functions and meanings appear
to underlie the Swahili pillar tombs. These in turn appear to be logical
within the context of Swahili society which is a blend of Indian
Ocean and African elements, of Islam and traditional beliefs. Physi
cally, the pillar tombs stretch the idea of the Muslim marker stone or
shahid to its absolute limits, and this is incorporated within, and
adapted to, the needs of Swahili society. Undoubtedly, the meaning
of these monuments within Swahili society was even more compli
cated than has been suggested, but part of their former meaning might
now be lost forever. How would the interpretative possibilities have
been restricted without an understanding of the concept of Waung
wana status? This was largely gained from historical and ethno
graphic sources, and would have been difficult, if not impossible, to
reconstruct from archaeological data alone. The Swahili tombs were
imbued with multiple meanings which could vary according to status
and the participant or observer involved. They served to commemor
ate the dead and, perhaps more importantly, function for the living.
Furthermore, the Swahili tombs also provide a salutary lesson as to
the interpretative possibilities of funerary architecture, but which
equally may elude us.

DEATH AND BURIAL

183

Tombs as a focus
Muslim funerary architecture may also have social significance in
acting as a focus for religious devotion or for the community. Primary
among these are the range of structures associated with the mystical
and saintly aspects of Islam. Though often strictly opposed by the
orthodox and condemned by fatwa (formal legal pronouncements
such as that made by Ibn Taymiya in the fourteenth century), saints’
tombs and the ‘cult of saints’, Sufi orders and mystical Islam are of
great importance in many areas of the Muslim world to both Sunni
and Shi’ah, and Islam had to yield to a need for practices such as the
veneration of saints. Saints’ tombs and ‘re-incorporated pre-Islamic
sanctuaries’ (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 324, 629) became of prime
importance in many areas of the Muslim world. To the archaeologist
interested in Islam this category of structure is of significance, not
least in their abundance. They act within ‘sacred geography’, becom
ing almost ‘sacred markers’ within the landscape. Innumerable exam
ples of funerary architecture forming the focus of pilgrimage or the
physical or spiritual centres of communities could be cited, and a
wide variety of local types of commemorative structure is found, too
many to be discussed in detail here. Hence only a couple of examples
will be cited to illustrate their importance and the role they can play
in the lives of many Muslims by acting not only as tombs for the
dead, but also as focal points of great importance to the living.
Saints and Sufis Without parallel as examples of this phenomenon
are the tombs of saints and Sufis, but (as noted in chapter 1) to define
the saint and Sufi as completely separate entities in every instance is
perhaps to categorize them too rigidly. A Sufi is a Muslim mystic who
is usually a member of a religious order or tariqah (but need not be).
A saint is a holy person who need not be a Sufi and can be anyone of
sufficient spiritual status. Similarly, a Sufi leader or founder of an
order could often acquire saintly status, thus a certain interchange
ability of role is possible, though how the funerary monuments are
materially manifest might differ. Generally (though, of course, excep
tions exist), a Sufi tomb will form part of a larger complex of build
ings, a monastery, convent or lodge, while a saint’s tomb can be (but
need not be) isolated within the landscape.
The appeal of a saint’s tomb, Sufi or otherwise, is due to the notion
that the soui of the saint lingers around the tomb, baraka is present
and will aid people who seek the intervention of the saint through
petitions, prayers and offerings of various kinds. Typically, around a

184

DEATH AND BURIAL

Sufi/saint’s tomb a complex of buildings will grow up or, if already
extant, the tomb of the founder will be centrally placed. These com
plexes have many forms and names, zawiyah (North Africa), khana
qah (Central Asia), dargah (India), tekke (Turkey), depending on
where in the Muslim world they are found (the concern here is
only with the types of structure which incorporate a tomb). The
complex can be composed of a variety of buildings: the tomb of the
founder and perhaps of his descendants, a mosque, madrasab, public
baths, library, accommodation for the resident members of the order,
their families and servants, and for pilgrims and travellers, the whole
often enclosed by a surrounding wall (Trimingham 1971: 176; Brett
1990: 35; Baha Tanman 1992: 147). Numerous examples of Sufi com
plexes which incorporate at their centre a saint’s tomb could be
provided. Golombek (1974), for example, records one at Natanz
which was in existence in Iran in the fourteenth century. The shrine
was centred around the tomb of a Sufi shaykh, with a mosque, cistern,
lodgings, minaret, and the corridors and vestibules ‘connecting the
various parts of the complex’ (1974: 420). Of importance is the fact,
noted by Golombek, that the focus upon the shaykh occurred after
his death. ‘It is as if the shaykh were deemed a more “valuable” asset
in his tomb than alive and teaching’ (1974: 422).
In contrast to the complete complex is the single tomb or com
memorative structure. The qubba, or domed tomb, found throughout
the Muslim world, is a good example of this type of monument (see
plate 6.2), and can range in both design and materials from the
humble to the magnificent. The dome is a sign of veneration, but
does not itself have a specific funerary attribute (Grabar 1966: 44).
Qubbas can mark either the actual burial place of the saint or holy
person or something associated with them or simply act as a memor
ial shrine (Trimingham 1949: 142). No binding rules exist, but it
should be noted that the domed tomb, and indeed all other types of
saints’ tombs, can function as a focus of community attention and
become the object of pilgrimage.

Martyrs Another class of Islamic funerary monument which can
become objects of pilgrimage are martyrs’ tombs and shrines. These
range from humble piles of stones to vast soaring edifices. As was
discussed in the context of jihad (see chapter 4), the significance of
martyrdom within Islam should not be understated and is of parti
cular importance for the Shi’ah, with Hussein, the grandson of the
Prophet, who was slaughtered at Karbala in 680, ‘the shahid par
excellence’ (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 516). Burial at martyrs’ shrines
is considered an honour, and corpses are brought from afar for

F

DEATH AND BURIAL

185

Plate 6.2 Qubbas from the air, Old Dongola, Sudan (Institute of Archae
ology, London)
interment at the shrines of the most important martyrs. Lassy (1916:
146—9), for example, relates how in Azerbaijan successive burial
was sometimes practised: first, in a shallow, temporary grave to
allow the flesh to decay; then, once this was complete, the clean
bones would be transported to Karbala for reburial in the company
of the ‘beloved Hussein’. Besides the obvious significance of a vast
build-up of funerary remains at certain popular locations, this exam
ple also presents the interesting scenario of certain areas devoid of
whole strata of people in the funerary archaeological record; namely,
those wealthy enough to arrange transport of their remains to sites
such as Karbala.

The political role of tombs A further factor of possible importance is
the political role that these structures, or rather their contents, can
sometimes play in Muslim communities; the saint can function as a
focus of religious devotion or communal identity hostile to and
beyond the control of the ‘accepted’ religious or secular authorities,
represented by the government and the ulama, the Muslim learned
class of the cities. Similarly, Sufis could also be regarded with
suspicion. Being ‘mystics’, and often thought to espouse ‘semi-social-

186

187

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

ist’ doctrines or to possess loyalties transcending national or ethnic
boundaries, they were often seen as ‘rebel figures’ (Ahmed 1988: 91).
Indeed, one of the first acts of the new secular Turkish republic on
assuming power in the early years of this century was to close the
dervish lodges and to forbid public manifestations of dervish life
(Lifchez 1992: 6). Similarly, within the former Soviet Union, Sufi
tariqab were condemned as ‘fanatical anti-Soviet, anti-social, reac
tionary force[s]’, and shrines and tombs were turned into antireligious museums, as, for instance, the Shah-i-Zenda in Samarkand
(Bennigsen and Enders Wimbush 1986: 22, 62).
The role of funerary architecture in politico-religious strife would
be difficult to reconstruct archaeologically, but the anthropological
and historical literature abounds with examples illustrating this often
contentious aspect of the cult of saints and Sufism. In North Africa,
the ‘cult of the saints’, centred on tombs or shrines, is often an
important part of religious life, especially significant in rural areas
(Montet 1909; Dermengheim 1954; Gellner 1969). In Tunisia, an
example is provided by the centrality of the cult of saints in the
village of Sidi Ameur, where tombs form not only the physical
focus of the community, with the clustering of the habitations of
the descendants of the saints around the zawiyah or tomb, but also
the spiritual focus of pilgrimage and sacrifice (Abu Zaria 1982).
Saints’ tombs played a major role in life to the extent that the national
political party attempted to replace the zawiyah and the cult of
saints with local party branches, and through education tried to
develop a national ideology standing against ‘archaic customs’
(1982: 194, 201).
Another example in late eighteenth-century Algeria was a conflict
between the urban based authorities and a rural Sufi order over the
‘baraka-producing remains’ of a Sufi-saint. The saint’s corpse was
actually stolen from the Kabyles of the Jurjura and taken to Algiers as
the burial ceremonies for the saint in the Kabyle zawiyah would,
according to Clancy-Smith, ‘attract large crowds of pilgrims to the
tomb seeking divine favours through the saint’s intercession, some
thing that could lead to unrest among a fractious population located
on the boundaries of Turkish authority’ (1993: 167) (Algeria then
being under Ottoman control). Eventually a miracle was proclaimed,
and the saint, his body duplicated, became the ‘man with two tombs’,
each exuding the all-important baraka one in Algiers and the other
in the Jurjura.
But how is this of importance to the archaeologist? For several
reasons: first, because we are witnessing the active utilization and
manipulation of funerary architecture and funerary remains in the

struggle for religious and political loyalties and power. Thus, this
provides another example of the potency of funerary architecture as
actively, and not passively, constituted, not solely a dead tomb for a
dead individual but a tomb acting both for the living and the dead.
Furthermore, such conflicts remind us of the ‘different Islams’ which
can exist, urban and rural, orthodox and mystical. But how it might
be recognized archaeologically is not at all certain. What, then, are the
general implications which can be drawn from this consideration of
Islamic funerary architecture for archaeologists? Our examination of
the way tombs can function for both the living and the dead
has shown that these structures function within Islam at a much
deeper level than that of merely providing an attractive resting
place for the deceased. In many contexts it might be feasible for the
archaeologist to interpret something of the social role and significance
of a Muslim tomb, since a rich body of ethnographic, sociological
and historical data exists which can help in formulating ways of
considering the archaeological data and in suggesting options which
might otherwise be neglected. Yet, besides the burial itself and the
possible accompanying commemorative structure, a third source of
evidence exists: funerary epigraphy and iconography, the ‘language of
death’.

—

Funerary Epigraphy: the Language of Death

Although decorated or inscribed gravestones are disapproved of in
Muslim law, the fact remains that the use of funerary epigraphy and
iconography as a means of signalling a variety of information is a
widespread phenomenon, and within Islam much can be learnt from
this source of evidence. De Moraes Farias (1990: 69), for example,
describes how a common genre of Muslim funerary epigraphy exists:
opening with the basmala formula, followed by the name of the
deceased, the date of death, and ‘one or more quotations from, or
paraphrases of, or allusions to, the Qur’an’. In many regions, how
ever, the use of Qur’anic inscriptions is rare, the reason being that
they might be trodden on or disturbed (Simpson 1995: 247). What is
present will vary, and the existence of funerary epigraphic traditions
throughout the Muslim world provides a rich source of evidence
which is much more varied than merely stating that so-and-so was
buried in such-and-such. Funerary inscriptions are used for many
purposes: to signal gender, social status, occupation, religious piety,
and for claiming origins and ethnicity, ownership or use of something
or somewhere through descent, to express religious beliefs, and even

188

189

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

to ‘indigenize’ Islam, bridging the gap between Muslim and nonMuslim practice.
The very existence of an inscribed tombstone can tell us something
about the deceased, besides the information gained from reading it.
Not everyone could afford an engraved or inscribed tombstone, so
often what we are seeing are the wealthier or revered members of
society. The ‘top-heavy’ archaeology of Islam is again apparent,
working in favour of the upper echelons, both secular and sacred.
Even the crude scratched inscription on an unworked marker stone
implies a degree of literacy, which might have been beyond the
abilities of a percentage of the population, possibly a sizeable percent
age, in an age when literacy could have been restricted.

ogists, as well as the need to utilize general archaeological tools such
as relational analogy and the other contextual interpretative meth
odologies developed over the past 15 years or so (see, for example,
Hodder 1982a,b, 1986).

Symbols
Symbols are one means of overcoming this problem. Among the Lurs
of western Iran, for example, complex iconography was employed on
funerary stelae dating from the late eighteenth to mid-twentieth
centuries. These included figural representations symbolizing both
the religious beliefs of this Shi’ah ethnic group, and also providing
more practical information on gender and, indirectly, on migration
routes. Mortensen (1991: 81—6, 1993: 136—44) isolated a variety of
motifs, including a geometric garden design, invoking a mental image
of paradise, strings of prayer beads, combs and prayer stones, used by,
and so representing, men. Most interesting was an image of a riderless
horse, which appears to be a representation of the martyrdom of the
Imam Hussein, who is of central importance to the Shi’ah faith. This
image served two purposes: to focus attention on the day of judge
ment and the afterlife and, on a more worldly level, to indicate the
pious intentions of the deceased (Mortensen 1991: 86). The combina
tion of pictorial and written information perhaps also served to
inform both the literate and the illiterate.
A variety of information is conveyed by these tombstones with
their ‘value-laden symbols’ (Hodder 1982a: 213). However, in this
case the code to these highly informative material symbols is being
lost through disruptive policies such as the forced sedentarization of
the Lurs, which is upsetting the equilibrium of their way of life, and
which has led to discontinuation in the erection of pictorial tomb
stones (Mortensen 1991: 86). This begs the question of how much we
are now unable to translate in the repertoire of Islamic iconography
and symbolism? There is certainly still much to decode, with a partial
solution offered through closer working contacts between ‘Islamic’
archaeologists, art historians, architects, historians and anthropol

Piety, doctrines and human nature
Less overtly symbolic, but equally informative, are the funerary stelae
of the Gao region of Mali. In certain instances, both the gravestones
and the scripts were imported into this region. Five of the tombstones
found at the site of Gao-Saney were imported, ready carved with
name and date, across the Sahara from Muslim Spain (probably from
Almeria) in the early twelfth century (Sauvaget 1950; Vire 1958; de
Moraes Farias 1990; Insoll 1996b). The very presence of these stelae
in the Gao Region meant that the Almoravid dynasty then control
ling Al-Andalus had overcome its scruples about using commemorat
ive funerary stelae in providing these items for export. De Moraes
Farias (1990: 76) has suggested that the religious austerity of the
southern Alnioravids evident in their home territories of the western
Sahara, was transferred north, hence the dearth of funerary inscrip
tions dating from their period of control of Spain (1056—1147). But a
desire for such commemorative devices obviously existed at Gao, and
this was fulfilled as the Almoravid appetite for the commodities
which could be sourced from this region (discussed in chapter 5)
was stronger than their religious scruples. Thus, human nature, in
the form of greed, might be expressed in the presence of these stelae.
It would also appear that the funerary stelae at Gao were used for
purposes other than merely commemorating the dead. One of the
factors behind the initial conversion to Islam by local rulers in the
Western Sahel and Sudan, including those at Gao, was prestige, and
even after death the new-found faith could be proclaimed. Three of
the kings commemorated on stelae, including two of the imported
Spanish examples dating from the early twelfth century, in the cem
etery at Gao-Saney were recent converts to Islam. Their new identity,
and indeed their piety, were clearly shown by successively adopting
the name of the Prophet, and of the first two caliphs, Abu Bakr and
Umar (Flight n.d.: 1). A century later, other funerary inscriptions in
the Gao region show that Islam had been ‘indigenized’, with the use
of local names present. For example, one tombstone dated to 1210
and recovered from the cemetery at Gorongobo, bears local Songhai
female names, the dominant sedentary ethnic group in the region.
Thus, we can learn much more from ‘the language of death’ than
merely who was buried where and when.

190

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

191

Ethnic identity: ‘us’ and ‘you’
The Hui, on the coast of southern China, continue to use Islamic
funerary inscriptions in subtle ways. The Chendai Hui, who form
part of the Hui ethnic minority, use gravestones bearing inscriptions
in Arabic as proof of their ‘otherness’, their identity, ‘etched in stone’
(Gladney 1991: 265), in their struggle to create a cultural and ethnic
identity and to differentiate themselves from their Han Chinese
neighbours with whom they are virtually culturally indistinct (see
Dasheng and Kalus 1991, for a list of the inscriptions). This raises the
interesting question why, if they are so far removed from Islam and
Muslim practices, would Muslim tombs, funerary inscriptions and
other Islamic monuments be so important to the Chendai Hui?
Gladney (1991) eloquently approaches this issue with reference to
the Ding lineage of the Chendai Hui. She suggests that a variety of
reasons contributed to the importance placed on the Arabic funerary
inscriptions (and other material culture). For example, under the
communist government historical cultural traits were essential for
proving ethnic identity, and achieving this brought benefits such as
economic assistance for an ‘underprivileged minority’ (1991: 274).
Thus, it would make sense to utilize funerary and other monuments
pro-actively in such a situation. But it would also appear that the
importance of the monuments has altered over time. In periods of
stress or need, they could be employed, literally, as historical texts,
attesting to the rights, obligations and foreign ancestral traditions of
the Hui; equally, they could be quietly forgotten.
The complexities involved in the relationship between the Chendai
Hui and their legacy of funerary inscriptions is evident when funer
ary epigraphy can be seen to function ‘the other way’, so to speak.
While gravestones could be used to affirm different ethnic identity, in
this case, Islamic, they could also reflect the problem of being a
‘foreign’ minority within the midst of a sometimes hostile majority.
Hence Arabic and Chinese texts were often combined, possibly as a
means of justifying that the Hui also belong, they are not so different
as to warrant persecution. In Quanzhou (Canton), an interesting
example of an early stage in this process has been recorded, where
an inscription dating from the tenth—eleventh centuries has, at the top
of the stele, a standard Arabic inscription and, below, a Chinese
inscription reading ‘grave of the barbarian guest’ (Gladney 1991:
191): a juxtaposition of foreign Muslim tradition with what must be
a Chinese reflection on the deceased (see figure 6.3). Also in Quan
zhou, a trilingual inscription in Arabic, Persian and Chinese dating

Figure 6.3 Bilingual tombstone in Chinese and Arabic from Quanzhou,
China, probably dating from the tenth or eleventh century (after Gladney
1991: 191)

from 1750 was recorded set into a tomb. The terminology applied to
the deceased differs between the languages; in Arabic he is referred to
as ‘this feeble man, the deceased’, while in Chinese he is the ‘pioneer
sage’ (Broomhall 1910: 113—14).
Yet perhaps the most informative example of the pragmatic and
complex interplay between foreign, Islamic and Chinese tradition and
terminology is provided by another inscription from Quanzhou.
Here, members of the Pu Hui lineage changed their name from the
foreign sounding ‘Pu’ to the Chinese ‘Wu’ to escape persecution and

192

193

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

this was reflected on their tombstones: on the front of their tombs
would be inscribed ‘Wu’s tomb’ and on the back, secretly, ‘Pu’s tomb’
(Gladney 1991: 273). This secretive, almost subversive, juggling of
Muslim and Chinese tradition, of ‘otherness’ and ‘belonging’, is far
from fossilized and has been shown to alter over time. The relation
ship between the two traditions of Islamization and Sinicization, and
the resultant implications for Chinese Hui Muslim culture, are encap
sulated by Israeli when he remarks: ‘the Proposition that Muslims in
China have simply become Chinese Muslims is thus, and indeed turns
out in historical perspective to be, a superficial observation at worst, a
reckless generalisation at best’ (1979: 169). More than the outward
Sinicization of Islam is apparent, but its intricacies can be approached
through material culture, and preserved for the archaeologist, in this
instance through funerary inscriptions.

grams to commemorate dates. For example, 1622 is represented on a
tomb in Drajat by a carved panel depicting a sea with waves, above
which an arrow is extended, symbolism which Ambary interprets as
‘segara umob panab tunggal’ or 1544 saka (1986: 34). Hence, in
eastern Java, where circumstances are wholly different from those
experienced by the Hui, Islamic identity could be much more openly
proclaimed and, importantly, indigenized without accompanying
fears and pressures.

Indigenizing Islam
A group of funerary inscriptions from eastern Java provides an
apparently more straightforward instance of the indigenization of
Islam in Asia, but without the accompanying subterfuge. Indonesia
is today home to the largest Muslim population in the world, with the
majority living on the island of Java (Ricklefs 1979: 100). Muslim
contacts began when foreign, as opposed to local, Muslim trading
communities were established in northern and eastern Java by the
eleventh century (Woodward 1989: 58; see also Tjandrasamita 1978).
The spread of Islam from these trading communities and its accept
ance by the local community has been charted by Ambary (1986)
through an analysis of funerary epigraphy. The earliest stele dating
from the eleventh century at Leran was imported for a foreign
Muslim, but by the fourteenth century local groups were inscribing
tombstones in Arabic in a simple form, sometimes incorrectly, as at
Tralaya. Dates given in Javanese script indicate the local connection,
for instance at Trawulan, where a stone of 1368 was dated saka
1290 (Damais 1968), which is of significance, according to Ricklefs,
as ‘the use of the saka era strongly suggests that this is the oldest
surviving gravestone of a Javanese, rather than a foreign, Muslim’

Status and religious affiliation
A final example of the Islamic ‘language of death’ are the anthro
pomorphic gravestones of Ottoman Turkey. In the Ottoman empire,
with its complex bureaucracy (Inalcik 1973; Wheatcroft 1995), rank
and social position were signalled in death as in life. Elaborate icon
ography and calligraphy carved on to the stones were used to denote
secular status and religious affiliation from the sixteenth century
onwards. Secular tombstones were carved and painted, with those
on men’s graves topped with a turban denoting their rank (see plate
6.3), probably derived from pre-Islamic Turkic tradition, while
women’s were decorated with flowers and children’s were made in
miniature versions (Goodwin 1988: 62; Laqueur 1992: 284).

(1979: 103).

Towards the end of the fourteenth century, the local Javanese script
had become more conspicuous, and the use of Arabic declined, a
process which continued: ‘once Islam had firmly taken root in Java
nese society about the beginning of the sixteenth century, local ele—
ments once more are prominent in the calligraphy’ (Ambary 1986:
25). This is also reflected in the reappearance of pictograms or chrono

Plate 6.3 Ottoman tombstones, Hadarpasha cemetery, Istanbul (photo.
T. Insoll)

195

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

One of the best studied aspects of Ottoman funerary iconography
is that connected with the Sufi or dervish orders. The stelae used on
dervish graves were used to denote membership of a specific dervish
order and even lodge (tekke) (De Jong 1989; Lifchez 1992). Laqueur
(1992: 286—91) has shown how this art form developed from the
sixteenth century, and expanded in the eighteenth century in Istanbul.
Representations of the dervish’s headgear were carved in the round or
incised, in certain cases, the gui or rosette design crowning the head
gear allowed the specific tariqat (Sufi order) to be recognized, with
even the internal hierarchy of the tekke being sometimes indicated.
De Jong notes that tombstones of the Bektashi order (referred to in
chapter 5) were easily recognizable owing to the representation of
their distinctive twelve-sided felt headgear (hüseyni tac) (1989: 11).
Though primarily confined to male graves, examples of female der
vish graves are also found.
With the Ottoman dervish tombstones, although an orthodox
monument was employed, orthodoxy was stretched to its limits (or
beyond) through the use of complex epigraphy and figural iconogra
phy. These symbolic devices can be used to replicate after death two

major, and often conflicting, themes of Ottoman life: the secular
order of status concerns and bureaucracy, and religious affiliation.
Once again, funerary epigraphy and iconography can be seen to act at
a deeper level than purely commemorating a deceased Muslim. But, at
the same time, the over-riding link is still there; these tombstones,
from those of the Lur in Iran to West Africa, China, Indonesia and
Turkey, are all indisputably and recognizably Muslim (see plate 6.4).
Great diversity is apparent, but they are of one family; both structur
ing principles and cultural diversity are evident.

194

Plate 6.4 Muslim cemetery, Borneo (Haddon Collection, Cambridge)

The Apple and the Olive
So far we have seen that the significance and symbolism of the burial,
the tomb, the gravestone and the ‘language of death’ in Islam can go
far beyond the merely functional. A similar symbolic significance,
again very revealing, can be seen in much of what can be associated
with death and funerary rituals in various areas of the Muslim world.
In much of the Muslim world that is dry and inhospitable there is a
preoccupation with water, symbolically and practically, as a source of
life (Lings 1968). As will be discussed below, water is intricately
linked with Qur’anic imagery of paradise, and the Islamic garden,
an earthly paradise, was created as a reflection of this. At a more
mundane level (obviously not everyone was buried in a tomb set in a
formal garden or even had access to such a garden), the ideas of water,
fertility and verdure are frequently linked with both life and death. In
opposition to the concept of life-giving water, there is another, of heat
and dryness oppressing the dead. The person who neglected their
prayers in life would have to atone for this after death, by making
their ablutions with fire: ‘all that is done here with water, must be
done there (eternity) with fire’ (Granqvist 1965: 69). Although such
concepts are not, however, confined to Islam (Humphreys 1981: 10),
the association between water, particularly moving water, and life,
and dryness and death, serve as a lesson in contextual associations
which could be of use to the archaeologist concerned with a fuller
understanding of all facets of Muslim societies.
Within Islam, the heat—death association had a direct influence
upon the materials used in tOmb construction. Leisten (1990: 15—16)
describes how, in the early Islamic period, it was believed that a tomb
should not be made of brick and sealed with lime mortar as these
materials had been in contact with fire and would dry out the grave, a
continuation of certain pre-Islamic beliefs that the soul of the dead
would suffer thirst. An archaeological example of the need to cool the

196

DEATH AND BURIAL

corpse is provided by the grave shafts which were linked to aboveground brick tomb towers found in Rayy in Iran and dated to
between the tenth and twelfth centuries (Adle 1979, cited in Leisten
1990: 21). These perhaps served to provide ventilation for the dead, as
wind towers do for the living. Similarly, in Turkey, Goodwin (1988:
66) relates how by the end of the seventeenth century there was a
fashion for having open ironwork domes on the Ottoman türbe
(tomb or mausoleum). This, according to one legend, served to
‘admit the fire-quenching rain’, a ‘vehicle of purification [and] a
source of nourishment’ (Dickie 1978: 45).
The reverse of the heat—death association, that of water/verdure—
life, is of equal significance, and both are tied together. An example of
this is provided by considering the apple and the olive, two trees of
importance to the Shi’ah Turkic peoples of Azerbaijan. These trees
provide fruit and hence sustain life, and on another level they, along
with the willow, symbolize life. Lassy (1916: 143, 147) describes how
the olive, with its green leaves throughout the year, actually repre
sents life, and how the willow through its blossoming in spring,
exhibits a new vitality, as people also do at that time of year. Green,
the colour of the leaves and of Islam, as well as signifying life, can also
signal purity: ‘my father’s house is green’, meaning the family was
blameless, was a phrase used in Palestine (Granqvist 1965: 63). But
green can also be the colour of death, of grave clothes for example, as
well as reminding people of paradise, and thereby acting as the ‘last
and highest colour in the gamut of mystical experience’ (Schimmel
1976: 29). The apple also assumed significance in a funerary context
among the Azerbaijan Turks. This was due to its ‘extraordinary
fruitfulness’, a vital power which the dead needed, and its association
with Hussein, whose ‘wonderful apple’ never decreased in size no
matter how much he ate it (Lassy 1916: 150).
At a practical level this information is of use to the archaeologist
interested in Islam. The significance of a colour such as green can be
seen, and the physical survival of green-coloured clothing, shrouds
and the like in funerary contexts is obviously possible. Secondly, the
fact that corpses can be interred, as in Azerbaijan, with material
symbols or parts of life-giving or vitalizing substances is of import
ance. Stones representative of apples, ‘apple-smelling’ sand from the
tomb of Hussein, and willow sticks could all be placed with the
corpse. Furthermore, such ideas and practices are not confined to
the Shi’ites of the Caucausus. In North Africa, the exceptional ver
dure of trees planted on saints’ tombs is attributed to their baraka,
and sacred trees often indicate the burial place of a saint, with offer
ings left at these trees and pieces of cloth tied into their branches as a

197

DEATH AND BURIAL

form of supplication (Lassy 1916: 143—9), something frowned upon
by the orthodox as incompatible with monotheism, but as Guillaume
notes, neither Judaism nor Christianity has been able to get rid of
such practices ‘so it need not surprise us if Islam has not been more
successful’ (1954: 9). Simpson also records that aloes, myrtle and palm
fronds were frequently placed above graves in various areas of the
Near East, and that flowers were grown over graves in Turkey and
Iran (1995: 247).
Besides the practical importance of such information, perhaps of
greatest significance to the archaeologist is that it can be seen how all
aspects of death and funerary rites in Islam can be imbued with a deep
significance, beyond the act of merely disposing of the dead. They can
be tied with, and inextricable from, life. But how could the signifi
cance of the apple or the colour green in a funerary context be
guessed at without the ethnographic and historical accounts? When
does a pebble become an apple, for example? The truth is that it
would be extremely difficult, if not impossible, to reconstruct this
solely from archaeological evidence.
The Archaeology of Paradise
The final aspect of material culture associated with death and burial
which will be touched upon here is the Islamic garden. Although the
archaeology of paradise might seem a strange concept, within Islam
man-made versions exist in the Islamic garden. This is more than a
random collection of plants, buildings and watercourses; it is struc
tured by ‘sacred geography’ and concepts of the afterlife, and can, as
we have seen with the Taj Mahal, form the setting for a tomb. The
significance of the garden as a metaphor for paradise is shown in the
Qur’an, where gardens are frequently alluded to, or explicitly
described, as in surah 55 (The Merciful), where the four gardens of
paradise are described thus: ‘But for those that fear the majesty of
their Lord there are two gardens planted with shady trees.. Each
is watered by a flowing spring. And besides these there shall be two
other gardens of darkest green. A gushing fountain shall flow in
each.’ The origins of the paradise garden predate Islam and, as Moy
nihan notes, ‘the English word “paradise” is simply a transliteration
of the old Persian word “pairidaeza” referring to a walled garden’
(1980: 1). The ancient Persian belief in the world divided into four by
two axes with a pooi at the intersection, the ‘spring of life’, gave rise
to the chahar-bagh or ‘fourfold’ garden (Dickie 1976). This is a motif
found represented on ceramics dating from as early as 4,000 BCE
.

.

.

.

..

.

.

.

.

.

198

199

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

(Wilber 1979: 3), with the earliest Persian garden or park yet known
dating from around the sixth century B CE at the palace of Pasargadae
near Isfahan (Brookes 1987: 31).
The incorporation of Persia into the Muslim world ‘allowed the
concept of the Persian garden to be carried to Syria, Egypt and the
Maghrib’ (Pinder Wilson 1976: 73). Thus similar gardens developed in
many regions of the Muslim world (see studies in MacDougall and
Ettinghausen 1976), with a physical form usually consisting of a
square or rectangular unit divided into four by two crossing axes,
often watercourses. At the centre, if a funerary garden, would be the
tomb, so that the deceased could continue to enjoy the pleasures of
the garden and also ‘foretaste heavenly bliss’ (Dickie 1976: 90—i,
1978: 47; Schimmel 1976: 18). Otherwise a pavilion might be placed
in the same position. Perhaps the greatest examples of Islamic gardens
dating from the medieval period are those of Persia, India and Spain;
some survive to this day, others have been excavated and recon
structed. An example of the latter is provided by the excavations in
the Alcazar in Seville where, Dickie notes, pollen analysis showed
that orange trees had been planted in each corner of the four flowerbeds (1976: 98), which were themselves sunk to a level of 2 m below
the height of the walkways (Ruggles 1993: 167). This use of elevated
walkways between the quadrants of the garden created the impression
of walking on a floral carpet ‘with flowers instead of threads’ (Dickie

understanding of paradise, which can be entertained by all classes of
society throughout the Muslim world.

1976: 100).

The creation, maintenance and even access to gardens was
obviously beyond much of the population. Rulers such as Babur,
the founder of the Mughal dynasty, might create gardens almost
wherever they went (Moynihan 1980), but this was not an option
open to everyone. Therefore gardens were created on carpets which
could contain representations of all the features of real gardens:
plants, poois, watercourses, birds and fish (Ellis 1982: 15—17).
According to Goody, ‘gardens became a standard theme of the Orien
tal carpet used by nomads, peasants and city-dwellers alike. Few
could have gardens; most could have carpets, which do not need
watering and flower all year round’ (1993: 112). The Islamic garden
as a metaphor for paradise functioned so successfully for all strata of
society partly as a reaction to the arid environment found across
much of the geographical range of the Muslim world. As Dickie
notes (1976), the Arabs amplified the Persian idea through their fear
of death, dryness and desert. Moreover, the garden can be seen to
signify much more than just a physical setting for displaying plants
and elegant architecture. In this instance it is something to enjoy, but
can also be a physical reflection of the commonly held Muslim

Summary and Conclusions
The preceding examples, drawn from the archaeological, ethno
graphic and historical literature, have shown the diversity which
exists, both in meaning and form, in Muslim funerary practices
which certainly involve more than just disposal of the dead. The
living, the deceased and their myriad varieties of funerary monuments
can be inextricably interlinked in ways more complex than an archae
ologist, for reasons of interpretative simplicity, would perhaps like to
acknowledge. The deceased can be used by the living, and the living
can be used by the deceased, not for any single reason, but for many
economic, religious, political and social. Numerous agendas, needs,
hopes and emotions are expressed and, one trusts, fulfilled through
the medium of funerary ceremonies and monuments.
What, then, does this contribute to our understanding of funerary
archaeology in general? In short, it is apparently impossible to assign
any one ‘universal’ interpretation to a burial, even within a suppos
edly ‘clear-cut category’, such as Islam. The burial cannot be neatly
categorized or separated as something clinical, as merely a way of
disposing of the dead or as only an arena for the display of social
status, removed from the individual, either the dead or living. As we
have seen, death forms a part of life: the corpse can form a communal
focus; imagery of the afterlife can serve as an instructive device;
tombs are built to serve a variety of purposes; and funerary epigraphy
is utilized in many different ways. The diversity found in one exam
ple of funerary archaeology, within the spectrum of Muslim death
and burial, is quite phenomenal, and this perhaps should be more
frequently remembered by archaeologists concerned with the appli
cation of cross-cultural ‘catch-all’ models.
Within the context of the archaeology of religion, what has been
learnt? The point made by Renfrew (1994) that the study of the
disposal of the dead is too often divorced from religion by archae
ologists, was referred to in the first section. Death and funerary
practices are in most cases ‘serviced’ by some form of religious rite,
or are incorporated within the religious whole, for, as part of the
human condition, we usually require something more than just dis
posing of what fast becomes a putrefying and distasteful hazard to
health. This object was once personalized, as relative or friend, and
religion can provide a means of coming to terms with grief and loss.
—

200

DEATH AND BURIAL

To adopt a polarized approach, whereby the disposal of the dead and
religion are separated out, is wrong. It severely restricts interpretative
possibilities and does not reflect reality.
Finally, what conclusions are there to be drawn from a study of
funerary practices within the archaeology of Islam? It can be seen
that ‘diversity’ and ‘complexity’ are again the keywords, and the
recognition of this diversity supports the notion that within our
conceptual frameworks we need to incorporate the ‘multiple centres
of Islam’, rather than a defined ‘core and periphery’ (see chapter 1).
But within the range of Muslim death and burial practices there are
common identifying characteristics and a unifying structure; Muslim
tradition and dogma tend to act over the whole, and orthodoxy is
apparent. To the archaeologist, the overall recognition criteria would
be the essentially uniform treatment of the corpse within the grave. A
Muslim burial should be recognizable in the archaeological record. It
is above ground that we begin to see the egalitarian nature of Muslim
burial become corrupted in certain instances; yet below ground one is
still a good Muslim.
What of this diversity today? What are the lessons for the Islamic
archaeologist looking at funerary practices in the future? The
increased ‘franchise’ of Islam means that its material culture correlates
can now be found in a wider geographical area than ever before:
Muslim burials will be encountered in Berlin, London and Washing
ton. Yet, it is possible that the regional identity which has character
ized much of this discussion will not be encountered by the
archaeologist of the future. In certain respects it might be easier to
identify a Muslim buried in the 1990s, eight hundred years hence,
than one buried eight hundred years ago. Increasing standardization
of material culture has occurred, reflecting a general world-wide
trend facilitated by easier communications and a homogeneous global
media, allied with a desire to present a unified face to a more hostile
non-Muslim world and increased Islamic revivalism and fundament
alism (Ali 1996). Thus, though dogma might be fixed, the all-import
ant material culture remains resulting from Muslim death and burial
cannot be regarded as static and unchanging.

7

The Community Environment

‘I swear by this city (and you are a resident of this city), by the begetter
and all whom he begot: We created man to try him with afflictions.
Qur’an. The City 90: 1—4

A consideration of the kinds of environment in which Muslim life
finds expression, and its possible archaeological implications, will
bring together many of the elements discussed in preceding chapters,
for a settlement is a conglomeration of domestic and other structures.
All of these have been considered in some detail, and are here placed
in context, settlements varying from villages to cities and the wider
landscape as well.
Rapoport makes the important point that ‘houses, settlements, and
landscapes are products of the same cultural system and world view,
and are therefore parts of the single system’ (1969: 73). Just as we
viewed the domestic environment as a social construct, so should we
see the settlement. This does not necessarily mean that a ‘culturally
deterministic’ approach is being proposed; on the contrary, the factors
which can underlie settlement form are many environmental, eco
nomic and so on but a social component must also be included.
Somewhat surprisingly, archaeological studies of settlements, land
scaoes and environments have until recently infrequently considered
such social, sacred or symbolic factors as of great importance (see
Bender 1993). This is in ou ous contrast with the archaeological
studies of the domestic environment which have already been dis
cussed (see, for example, Locock 1994; Parker Pearson and Richards
1994, and chapter 3); to quote Rapoport, ‘man lives in the whole
settlement of which the house is only a part’ (1969: 69). To neglect
this area emphasizes what Rykwert has termed ‘the poverty of much
—

—

202

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

urbanistic discourse’, whereby occupied space is studied only ‘in
physical terms of occupation and amenity’ and the ‘psychological
space, the cultural, the juridical, the religious’ are neglected (1976: 24).
Relevant archaeological studies might consider spatial patterning
with reference to economic geography (Fletcher 1977; Hodges 1987)
or to geography in general (Wagstaff 1987), but until recently it was
again anthropologists, historians, geographers and art historians who
frequently emphasized the possible social, symbolic and sacred
aspects of settlements; iconography of landscape (Cosgrove and
Daniels 1988); cosmological reasoning underpinning settlement form
(Lebeuf 1967); the place of the settlement within sacred geography
(Ortiz 1969); the possible significance of the centrality of either
settlements or components thereof (Wheatley 1971) (see also Rapo
port 1969: 50; Parker Pearson and Richards 1994: 12—19, for other
examples). Recently, however, archaeologists have come to consider
settlements and the whole environment as more than products of
economic decisions, but as social constructs (Hodder 1990).

203

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT
Cemetery

Muslim Cities and Settlements

Study of the Muslim city
As the Muslim urban settlement is one of the best-studied aspects of
Muslim material culture, it is given prominence in the following
discussion. However, at the same time it is recognized that to reflect
only on the city, at the expense of the town, village or camp, is wrong,
but it is hoped that this will in part be excused by the large-scale
absence of archaeological studies concerned with these other settle
ment types.
The Muslim city has in the past provided a convenient unit of
study and, based upon a limited number of examples, mainly drawn
from North Africa and the Near East, wide-ranging generalizations
were made as to the overall character of the Muslim city everywhere.
These studies were one of the first manifestations of the orientalist
approach, whereby the structure of the city was defined in terms of
religious requirements, and a similar form was said to exist from
Morocco to Indonesia. This process of the creation of a stereotypical
Muslim city has been examined by a number of scholars, most
notably by Bonine (1977) and Abu-Lughod (1987) and, more
recently, region by region across the Muslim world (excluding sub
Saharan Africa and south and South-east Asia) by Haneda and Miura
(1994). The stereotype created, based on North African or sometimes

Figure 7.1 Stereotypical city layout based on Tunis (after Hakim 1986: 59)

Syrian examples, comprised a standard kit of elements: the medina, or
central urban entity, within which was the casbab or walled citadel, a
city within the city containing the ruler’s residence, mosque, barracks,
stores and so on. The medina would be walled with several gates, and
perhaps surrounded by rabad or rabat, outer suburbs. The inhabi
tants lived in distinct quarters according to ethnic or economic back
ground in groups of courtyard houses connected by winding
alleyways and narrow streets, supposedly characteristic of the ‘orien
tal’ or Islamic city (see figure 7.1). The medina would also contain a
number of core elements: the Friday mosque, other local mosques,
suq or suqs (markets) arranged spatially according to the goods sold,
baths, hostels for travellers, schools, shops, cemeteries perhaps
(usually outside the city) and all the other prerequisites of urban life.
The process by which this was achieved has been aptly described by
Abu-Lughod (1987: 155) as an isnad, a chain of transmitters, in this
instance a succession of Western scholars. W. Marcais (1928), accord
ing to Abu-Lughod, initiated this approach, followed by G. Marcais
(1945) and, most influentially, G. Von Grunebaum (1955), who used
the North African examples in a generalized way and applied these to
the creation of an idealized ‘Islamic city’. This process has perpetuated

204

205

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

to this day in many respects, as in Hakim’s (1986) volume on Arabic
Islamic cities (admittedly North African in focus). Various reasons to
account for this ‘created’ Muslim city have been proposed: ‘to attempt
to explain everything in terms of a dichotomy between an advanced
Europe and a stagnant Islamic World’ (Haneda 1994: 4) or, alterna
tively, as Bonine reports (but does not agree with), as a model which
evolved with a central premiss that ‘Islam is an urban religion because
only in a town can faithful Muslims adhere to all requirements of the
Qur’an and shari’ah’ (1977: 148).
The view that Islam is only truly at home in an urban setting is
often held; for instance, Sopher remarks on ‘the strong predilection
for the city which runs through Islam’ (1967: 28). This is often based
upon notions of legalistic interpretation; for example, the requirement
of certain legal schools that valid Friday prayers must take place with
a congregation of over 40 people, which, as Lapidus notes, is non
sensical, as neither 40 nor two ‘make a place a city as opposed to a
village or other settlement’ (1973a: 60). Lapidus adopts a sensible
approach to urbanism, both in its place within the wider environ
ment, and also on the question of Islam being only an urban religion;
nomads or village dwellers are no less good Muslims for their settle
ment types. It is due more to ‘historical circumstance’ (Lapidus
1973a) that Islam and cities became the environment in which the
legal schools were established, and the surroundings in which the
early Muslim conquerors initially settled, either in newly founded
cities or pre-existing conquered ones.
But is it necessary to deny completely the existence of any common
features within Islamic cities or Muslim settlements, and to deny
religion as a structuring principle to a greater or lesser degree? As
with much ‘revisionist’ scholarship, there is the danger that the oppo
site to the equally inaccurate generalizing approach is achieved and
diversity is pushed to the fore to the exclusion of any common
patterns. Perhaps a ‘mix and match’ approach is best here, whereby
certain common features could be expected, but these will by no
means be the same in every situation (if anything, questions of scale
will rule this out: a village will obviously not have all the facilities of a
city). A complex of factors underlie the structuring of a Muslim
settlement, and these will be discussed in greater detail below.
To press wholly for specific local circumstances as the primary
agent behind the establishment and structure of the larger Muslim
city would appear to be flawed. Topography, climate, economy and
pre-Islamic traditions were all of obvious importance, and the city
was not structured solely according to religious requirements, but nor
need they play an insignificant part. If we accept that a domestic

environment can be structured according to religious or resultant
social requirements, why not the larger city as well? If the domestic
environment can be regarded as both the outcome and perpetuator of
social codes and requirements (see chapter 3), so the city or settle
ment can be so regarded, in many instances, on a larger scale. To use a
general point made in another context by Gilsenan, ‘space is crucial in
thinking about culture and ideology because it is where ideology and
culture take on physical existence and representations’ (1982: 187).
The Muslim settlement is an ordered and created space, and not
neutral from society or individuals, but it is not an isolated entity
either. Obviously, the settlement is defined or bounded, and how this
is achieved varies, but at the same time it is also an integral part of its
surroundings. Too often this has been ignored from an archaeological
perspective, and settlement examined as somehow divorced from its
surroundings. What we need is a ‘total approach’ whereby the settle
ment is considered as part of the whole, connected physically to the
landscape and the environment.
There is also the issue of ‘regionalism’ which is a factor in much
research into Muslim urbanism. Archaeological research has contrib
uted greatly to the debate on Muslim urbanism in Central Asia thanks
to several decades of research by Soviet scholars (Komatsu 1994),
whereas in Turkey, until very recently, the opposite was true. What
is fashionable in terms of research in one area need not be in another,
leading to a frequent lack of a comprehensive overview, or what has
been termed the absence of common paradigms in favour of particu
larist studies (Haneda and Miura 1994).

p

Definition and origins of the Muslim city
Definitions of what constitutes a city, a town or a village vary
immensely. Is it size, number of inhabitants, administrative nature,
facilities? General definitions do not always seem to apply (see, for
example, Weber 1958) in the Muslim world. Kisaichi (1994: 66), for
instance, argues that certain Muslim Uighur ‘towns’ in China lack
clear boundaries between themselves and the surrounding farm lands
so that ‘it might be more accurate to call it [sic] an enormous rural
village’. However, Hakim (1986: 56) uses more orthodox definitions
based upon administrative criteria and drawn from Arabic historical
sources such as al-Maqadisi (died 990) who differentiates the misr
(plural amsar), metropolis, qasabah, (plural qasabat), provincial capi
tal, medina (plural mudun), provincial or market town, and qaryah
(plural qura), village. Hakim also considers, that urban settlements
should include a Friday mosque, a suq, and a governor and/or qadi.

206

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

General common sense would appear to be a fairly straightforward
guide to the type of settlement being considered; size is obviously
important, but beyond this it would seem that any type of restrictive
definition as to settlement form could be challenged with examples
that do not conform. However, many larger Muslim towns and cities
prior to the modern age can be recognized on the basis of certain
criteria, and these have been divided into various types in the Near
and Middle East. These include the created cities (often garrisons) of
the early Muslim conquests; the amsar, Fustat and Kufah for example,
and the adapted pre-existing cities of antiquity, such as Jerusalem and
Damascus (Stern 1970: 30; Elisséeff 1980: 91). This created/adapted
model is simple but in many ways effective, as it can equally be
applied outside the heartlands, and thus provides a generalizing ele
ment within a mass of diversity.
Yet a Muslim city in West Africa has different local antecedents
from those of Arabia, as does one in Central Asia or Indonesia (for
the latter see Behrend 1984). In Arabia, Whitcomb has suggested that
the city ‘may be an urban type based on tribal organization and its
structure, like the tribal society which produced it, was an important
element in the spread of Islam’ (1996: 46). The form of the Muslim
city does not owe its origins solely to Islam even in Arabia; it has a
pre-Islamic heritage. The walled citadel, a recurring feature already
mentioned, is not a Muslim creation but found in earlier cities in the
Byzantine and Sasanian worlds. Similarly, the frequently encountered
central cluster of religious and administrative buildings is a focus of
power which predates Islam. Habitation in quarters according to
ethnic affiliation or social category was not an Islamic invention,
nor could a seemingly random town plan of myriad winding alleys
be accepted as the result of Qur’anic injunction or the implementa
tion of shar’iah. Islamic cities were not new phenomena as regards
their form, but the result of a variety of factors, new and old, and
were not solely dictated by religious requirements.

Archaeological recognition of Muslim cities and settlements
Could there then be said to be a Muslim city? And is this archae
ologically recognizable? There is, or can be, but this does not mean
that the sort of criteria outlined by Hakim (1986: 60—90) will be
found in every instance, though they can allow the archaeological
recognition of Muslim cities. Typological approaches are weak: not
every city will have a walled citadel, surrounded by a medina and
outer suburbs, defined by quarters of courtyard houses with an
emphasis upon inward orientation, alongside ward mosques, with a

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

207
central mosque/palace and administration complex either inside or
outside of the citadel. Suqs need not be centrally placed and graded
according to the trades or goods being sold and the degree to which
they might be considered polluting; madrasabs (religious schools),
cemeteries, water-storage facilities, caravanserais, hammams (baths)
and maristans (hospitals) need not all be present. Only in a few
selective contexts, as in North Africa and Islamic Spain where a
great degree of uniformity in city type appears to have existed, may
near-complete examples of the model be found.
Yet it is true to say that many of these elements can be present, and
that these constitute a Muslim city, as opposed to a non-Muslim one.
It cannot be disputed that core characteristic elements exist, even if
only reduced to the simplest form of a mosque and Muslim burials in
a settlement (the burials more usually surrounding it). It is these more
basic criteria, which are more likely to be applicable to smaller towns
and villages, which have been neglected thus far in the discussion, and
which could allow their archaeological recognition. Certain criteria
do exist which set apart a Muslim settlement from a non-Muslim one
from Senegal to Saudi Arabia, from Kazakhstan to Indonesia. They
are far from mirror images of each othei and are subject to many
structuring factors other than religious requirements, but at the same
time exhibit certain aspects in common which relate to a mutual
religion.
A much looser structure is needed in assessing the Muslim settle
ment, and its archaeological recognition; some core features will be
present, but a pre-ordained blue-print does not exist. Possible keys to
identification might include all or any of the above, but even these
changed over time. For example, it might be possible to say that
narrow streets and alleyways with courtyard houses having largely
blank façades and multiple dead ends were due to Muslim concerns
with privacy and the protection of the family, but in some instances
this might be due to the climate (providing shade) or, as Bulliett
(1975: 224) has suggested, to the existence of a society without
wheels, rendering wider streets unnecessary. The invocation of a
single factor to explain structuring features behind Muslim settle
ments is often impossible, but neither should economic or practical
necessity be given precedence over social or religious needs.
Social Dimension of the Muslim Settlement

The settlement can act both as a mirror and sustainer of social codes.
It is an active area of material culture and may provide information

208

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

209

on the societies it maintains and replicates, something which may be
approachable by the archaeologist. Once again utilizing archaeologi
cal and other sources of evidence, we will see that the settlement, our
final area of the archaeology of Islam, need in no way conform to a
mundane stereotype, but can be informative, vibrant and, unfortun
ately, elusive.
Authority at a central core

The relationship between sacred and secular authority in Islam, fre
quently referred to, and its importance stressed, especially in the
Early Islamic period, is manifest in the Muslim city and, much less
frequently, in other forms of settlement as well (perhaps understand
ably, as rulers tended towards inhabiting, or having grow up around
them, larger settlements). Yet more than just a simple juxtaposition of
mosque and palace as a focal point of sacred and secular authority is
sometimes apparent. A significant, but not typical, example of a
central core is provided by Caliph al-Mansur’s round city at Baghdad.
This circular city, which though only occupied between 762 and 766,
and reconstructed from historical data (excavation has yet to be
carried out), provides an ‘image of rule’, of how al-Mansur perceived
his authority and how this changed over time. The city was a circular
double walled ‘citadel’, surrounded by a moat, with at its centre the
caliph’s palace and the congregational mosque, expressing ‘the inti
mate relationship between religion and state’ (El-Ali 1970: 93) (see
figure 7.2). Surrounding this was an inner ring of buildings with the
offices of state, and the residences of the Caliph’s children, slaves and
bodyguards, and a further outer ring, the details of which are hazy,
but which would have been occupied by other functionaries and
soldiers (Lassner 1970a,b).
Although this complex was recognizably Muslim, expressed if any
thing by the congregational mosque, it was also the continuation of
pre-Islamic traditions. Lassner (1970b) records that the general fea
tures of the round city are found at pre-Islamic sites in both Iraq and
Iran, while Beckwith (1984) suggests that it was the culmination of
the fusion of a mix of traditions, most notably Iranian royal ones,
with the design being the work of a converted Central Asian priest
(see also Creswell 1952: 94—9). Leaving aside its ancestry, the central
notion of the mosque/palace core was not new in Baghdad. It is
found in certain Umayyad government palaces, as at Kufah (Lassner
1970b: 133), but the concept of centralizing authority is almost a
universal; in the ancient Chinese city, the seat of secular authority
was likewise placed centrally (Wheatley 1971: 462). The theme of

p

Large
arcades

S

Figure 7.2 Reconstruction of the round city, Baghdad (from Lassner 197Db:
207)

amalgamating power in a central core occurs through history, and to
give it an Islamic identity is wrong, though an Islamic version of it
was certainly developed.
What is also of importance is that the round city in Baghdad was
used as a means of unifying the disparate ethnic groups which formed
the population. Large suburbs spread in all directions, containing
Arabs (sedentaries and nomads), Africans and Persians, with the
round city as the core, separate, but ‘vocal’ at the same time. To
achieve this, the pre-Islamic heritage was skilfully utilized by al
Mansur. The circular plan and other aspects of ‘visual language’
which the local population understood were used to aid his search
for legitimacy and as a ‘tangible’ expression of authority (Lassner
1970b: 131). The focus of authority both spiritual and secular was
centred in the round city, and the caliph welded both secular and
temporal power in himself through the fusion of palace and mosque,
a further factor which helped in creating unity in the population.
Grabar explained the round city as ‘a conscious attempt to make an

210

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

/

7-..

/

II

-j

N

Figure 7.3 The Octagon of Husn al-Qadisiyya (after Northedge and Falk
ner 1987: 152)

entity that would symbolize the total rule of the Muslim prince’
(1973: 71). This was perhaps of some success as a round plan was
also used at the town of Qsar es-Seghir in Morocco, and the so-called
‘octagon of Husn al-Qadisiyya’ at Samarra, built by Harun al-Rashid
at the end of the eighth century, also drew upon al-Mansur’s round
a walled octagonal enclosure of over 1,500
city for inspiration
metres in diameter, with a gate set in each side (see figure 7.3). But
it was the interior where parallels with Baghdad were to be seen:
‘with its large area, avenues, central square, mosque and palace, the
Octagon can be seen to be a copy of the arrangements of Mansur’s
Round City of Baghdad’ (Northedge and Falkner 1987: 155; see also
Northedge et al. 1990).
The concept of power represented as an architectural component
has been studied as a mirror of historical changes in Muslim society
by Bacharach (1991), who has charted three phases in how the ‘loci’
—

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

211

of power changed over time. In the first administrative and mosque
complexes of the early Islamic period, physical proximity of the dar
al-imara and the mosque illustrated ‘the inter-related importance of
the roles of governor and religious leader’ (1991: 126). These centres
were located within and on the same ‘geographic plane’ as the areas of
population, a factor which altered in the second phase when the
religious, social and educational requirements of the population
began to be met by the main urban mosques. Authority began to
change, with the ulama becoming responsible for guiding the ‘Islamic
way of life’ especially in the cities; palace complexes were now placed
at some distance from the population (as at Samarra in the ninth
century) and, according to Bacharach (1991: 121), this ‘second era
coincides with the transformation of urban centres into Muslim
cities’.
The third phase in the late eleventh and twelfth centuries sees the
appearance of the citadel as ‘a major locus of Muslim rule’. This was
perhaps related to the fact that the users of the citadels were often
‘ethnically alien’ to those they ruled, the Seljuks in Anatolia for
example. The factor of height as well as distance also appears to
become important; rulers were now often above the ruled, as at the
Alhambra in Granada. Thus Bacharach’s analysis has shown that
changes in authority and even the nature of society can be manifest
in settlement form, with distance and topography utilized as a sig
nifier of power in a manner which could be archaeologically distinct,
and which also exposes the flaws in models which state the existence
of a citadel as a given everywhere from the first appearance of the
idealized ‘Islamic city’.

Class, society and ethnicity
To take this analysis one stage further, beyond examining the role and
manifestations of authority, it is necessary also to consider the settle
ment as a metaphor for society. As with many of the areas considered
in this volume, there is usually a departure point between ideals and
reality, and in this instance the ideal is represented by ummah, the
whole Muslim community devoid of class or racial distinctions.
The existence of this seems to conflict with practical realities. From
the outset, Muslim cities were composed of disparate ethnic groups,
as at Baghdad, but also manifest at Fustat, one of the amsar or
garrison cities founded in 640 and the predecessor of Cairo. A hier
archy existed in the first conquest situation: at the top were members
of the Prophet Muhammad’s tribe, the Quraysh, and the Ansar, the
Prophet’s supporters, then the other Arab Muslim tribes, and below

I

212

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

them non-Arab Muslims (Persians, blacks and so on), and finally
non-Muslims. These patterns were visible in the great semi-circular
camp city of tents and reed and clay huts grouped into 30—40 tribal
and multi-tribal units, which quickly grew more permanent (Abu
Lughod 1971; Kubiak 1982). To help create ummab, the Umayyad
rulers practised a ‘conscious policy to level tribal differences’ (Kubiak
1982: 216), as apparent in residential patterns, through, for example,
the promotion of a multi-tribal central quarter, Ahl ar-Raya, the place
of government and the congregational mosque.
However, it can be argued that this did not usually proceed much
beyond an ideal. People usually live with those they know best or feel
at ease with, ethnically, socially or as co-religionists, and it is likely
that residence according to ethnic or other affiliation is probably to
be expected in many cases, but whether this will always be manifest
in distinct quarters cannot be certain without evaluating each parti
cular case. Nevertheless, this type of residence pattern is to be found
frequently in the archaeological record and attested in historical
sources. At Otrar in Kazakhstan, for example, where Tamerlane
died in 1405, excavations in levels dated to between the sixteenth
and eighteenth centuries uncovered distinct quarters composed of
units of between six and 15 houses inhabited by people of different
social groups and, according to the excavator, perhaps grouped by
family (Baipakov 1992: 108). In certain instances, tribal marks on the
pottery even allowed a reconstruction of the ethnicity of the inhabi
tants.
Numerous other examples could be provided, and anthropology
offers more to show notions of class, ethnicity or family impinging
upon the ideal of uminah in settlement patterns. Gerhoim’s research
in the town of Manakha in the Yemen has already been mentioned in
the discussion of the domestic environment, and is equally pertinent
to the settlement, with the townscape described as ‘a mirror of the
social order’ (1977: 161). Topography and elevation were used to
express both authority and social distinctions (reminiscent of the
way the tower house in Yemen functioned in the vertical axis), with
the noble families in Upper Manakha, the rank and file or ‘middle
strata’ in Lower Manakha, and the low-ranking townspeople, not
considered as part of tribal society, even further below, a material
construct of society across the settlement. Similar patterning was
evident in the form of the traditional Palestinian village up until the
1930s. Amiry and Tamari (1989) relate how each village was made up
of a number of separate quarters named after patrilineal descent
groups, with again the more influential groups inhabiting the elevated
areas, and the others in the lower quarters.

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

213

What is apparent from these examples is that, once again, to isolate

one over-riding reason why people should live with their peers does
not work. In one instance, it could be due to religion (Christians
living apart from Muslims, for example); in another, by ethnicity or
class in an all-Muslim settlement. It could also be because of stigma
attached to occupation, as with blacksmiths or tanners frequently
living in their own distinct area on the edge of a settlement because
they are subject to fears and prejudices or because of the polluting
aspects of their work. Various factors underlie residential patterning
within the Muslim settlement, which often shows that a religiously
egalitarian Muslim community is more of an ideal than a practical
reality. This is something which archaeology is ideally suited to
investigating.
Spatial domains
The notion of spatial domains public, semi-private and private
spheres can be of great importance as we saw with the domestic
environment. In the idealized ‘Islamic city’ rigidly defined boundaries
between different spatial domains exist: the public mosque and mar
ket, the semi-private quarters with their lockable gates, and the
private domestic environment of the houses themselves, separated
into public and private areas. This idealized model has, as with
most generalizations, exceptions. Differences in settlement form, as
have been described for Yugoslavia and India, will preclude the uni
form existence of semi-private quarters in every instance, and even
the suq does not always qualify as a wholly public space, but is
sometimes gender restricted as at Riyadh (Saudi Arabia), where in
1917 Philby recorded a female suq alongside the ruler’s palace (1920:
162) (see figure 7.4). Which space can be considered as falling within
the category of private or public can, as was discussed in chapter 3,
depend upon gender.
It is perhaps not surprising that if a public/private spatial divide is
evident in the domestic environment, it should also be visible on a
larger scale in the community environment composed of agglomera
tions of these units. These larger units, while they signal an evident
spatial concern, could not then be expected to sit neutrally in their
relationship with the other components of a settlement. A great
degree of spatial coding does or did exist in many Muslim settle
ments, and is manifest archaeologically, as well as recorded by
anthropologists and historians.
Gerhoim (1977) gives an anthropological perspective on these
issues. He describes how in his study area in the Yemen the public
—

—

214

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

0

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

250yd

fr

Dhuhairi Gate

Thamairi

Figure 7.4 Plan of Riyadh, Saudi Arabia (after Philby 1920: 162)
sphere (male) is associated with the congregational mosque, the suq,
the administrative buildings, the mafraj (described in chapter 3), and
even the football field. Within this public sphere, status considera
tions are important, and gradations emerge between, for example, the
market, where social status is linked with how little you are seen to
do, and the mosque, which is less hierarchical (1977: 176); this infor
mation could not be deduced from the archaeological record alone. A
similar case exists for semi-private and private space. Gated town
quarters could be used to demarcate spatial domains, and Akbar
(1993) relates how gates could be used to maintain privacy and
identity. Even subquarters within the larger entity could themselves
be shut off to create a kind of communal living room for residents
(Akbar 1993: 145). The sequence of gates from the public one in the
city wall, to the quarter gate which is less public, to the subquarter
gate which is in turn semi-private, and, finally, to the house entrance

215

which is regarded as private, all demarcate different spatial zones,
patterning which should be kept in mind when considering a Muslim
settlement.
Archaeologically, the existence of spatial demarcation in Muslim
settlements has been well recorded, a particularly useful example
being the walled town of Qsar es-Seghir in Morocco. Here the
Muslim occupation levels of the twelfth to mid-fifteenth centuries
are overlain by a period of Portuguese occupation dated to between
the mid-fifteenth and mid-sixteenth centuries, therefore providing
two distinct settlement patterns for comparison. According to Redman, ‘the Qsar es-Seghir sequence provides a fascinating glimpse of a
stepwise series of modifications ultimately leading to the total trans
formation of an Islamic town into a European-Portuguese town’
(1986: 165). These included a greater concern by the Portuguese
with public space, represented by a 25 per cent increase in area
covered by streets and plazas. Focus was placed upon decorating
house entrance ways in comparison to the plain Muslim ones. The
centralized core of the Muslim town, consisting of the congregational
mosque, public bath and market, while the buildings obviously chan
ged, was also de-emphasized in the Portuguese town. This was inter
preted as reflecting a more individualized and segmented system,
‘probably resulting from a diminished sense of shared values and
less centralised tradesmen’ (Redman 1986: 246).
The example from Qsar es-Seghir illustrates that a Muslim settle
ment plan when juxtaposed with a Christian one can be archaeologi
cally recognizable. As with the mosque, so with settlement form,
archaeology can enable differentiation between different ‘religious
layers’. Interestingly, such a change in the nature of public and private
space was also recorded in Spain after the Christian re-conquest,
where Violich mentions that more direct access to the church, plaza
and market was often opened up (1962: 174). But it should also be
noted that a correlation between the presence of a Muslim commun
ity and an emphasis upon private.space at the expense of public space
does not always hold true. Changes in the use of space before the
Muslim conquest were evident at Baysan (Bet Shean) in Palestine,
with a decline in the use of public space evident with the abandon
ment of the amphitheatre. Pre-Muslim ‘Christianization’ had an
impact upon urban life and was also ‘reflected by the city plan and
architecture’ (Tsafrir and Foerster 1994: 101).
Having seen that a Muslim settlement overlain by a Christian one
was archaeologically recognizable, it is interesting to look at the
reverse process to ensure that we are not observing any peculiar
anomalies. The second case study is Bierman’s (1991) architectural

216

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

analysis of how Ottoman occupation transformed Venetian Crete.
The capital, Heraklion (Candia, Qandiye), was founded by the
Arabs in 827, captured by the Byzantines, and sold by the Franks
to the Venetians in 1204, who occupied it until the Ottomans took the
city in 1669, following on from their successful capture of the towns
of Khania and Retimo. The Venetians had literally ‘Venetianized’
Retimo and Candia by building ‘provincial versions’ of the Basilica,
Piazza San Marco and the Palazzo Ducale; thus, in Bierman’s words,
‘the central monumental core of these Cretan cities was developed to
replicate that of Venice itself, thereby reinforcing and perpetuating
Venetian political and religious values and attitudes by their presence
and their spatial relationships’ (1991: 57).
Prior to the Ottoman occupation a distinct spatial system was in
place. This was not in itself indigenous, and was certainly at odds
with Ottoman concepts of spatial construction. Hence the Venetian
spatial overlay was in turn ‘Ottomanized’ in what Bierman terms an
‘external’ and ‘internal’ manner. The former was effected most prom
inently through the siting of the Sultan’s cami, the main mosque
complex, visible from afar, which in both Candia and Retimo corre
lated with the position of former Christian buildings, a Franciscan
monastery church and a San Marco replica respectively. Conspicuous
spatial positioning was not an Ottoman prerogative, but the focus of
the cities was altered to centre on the Sultan’s marker. Cemeteries,
fountains, church to mosque conversions and madrasabs were all used
in the process of spatial transformation, especially through the altera
tion of the Venetian piazza system, thereby allowing access and sight
of the Grand Vezir’s mosque, the former Greek Orthodox cathedral
(Bierman 1991: 66). Thus it can be seen that spatial alteration to
reflect prevailing religious belief and social/cultural requirements
can obviously be a two-way process. Yet it should also be noted
that, although a Muslim spatial system was being created, this was
also very much a specifically Ottoman construct, with their distinct
ive cami and cemeteries proclaiming both Ottoman and the individual
identity of the founders.
Nomad settlements
So far the discussion has created an imbalance in favour of sedentary
city-dwellers. These, along with the inhabitants of towns and villages,
do not have a monopoly on settlement and Muslim society. Nomads,
as has been discussed already, are widespread in the Muslim world
and their settlements should be studied just as much as cities, towns
and villages, even if they are often more ephemerally fixed. The

I
L

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

217

archaeological recognition of nomadic settlements has already been
touched upon with reference to the domestic environment (see chap
ter 3), and besides tent outlines and the other evidence already men
tioned, wells, corrals, storage facilities, all could indicate their former
presence (see Cribb 1991). The frequently cyclical nature of nomadic
pastoralist activities of larger base camps and smaller way stations
might be recognizable; differences between camel, cattle and horse
keepers might equally be evident (see Cribb 1991). It is not my aim
here to exhaust the possibilities which a Muslim nomadic community
might suggest for archaeology. Rather, two examples of settlement
types with nomadic associations will be considered, as interesting case
studies with a social emphasis: a ‘Bedouin station’, and the enigmatic
qusur (singular qasr) or so-called ‘desert castles’, which are a feature
of the Early Islamic period in parts of Syria and Jordan. Both have
been suggested as having functioned in a variety of ways in nomadic
society, symbolically and practically, and the two archaeologically
investigated examples suggest possible frontier relationships between
states and nomads.
The first site is ar-Risha in Jordan, separated by a distance of 3 km
into ancient and modern, but surprisingly similar in character.
Ancient ar-Risha, founded perhaps as early as 650 and lasting until
the eleventh—twelfth centuries, is made up of a variety of structures: a
mosque, houses of varying sizes, one with a reception area, and
stables, about which tents must have been erected. It has been
described as a ‘steppic reflection’ of the ideal Islamic city, containing
all the necessary urban components and of approximately the same
date as the first amsar, and it is claimed to offer an insight through
architecture and settlement structure into Bedouin politics and pol
ities (Helms 1990: 5, 131). It functioned, like its modern counterpart,
where garages replace stables, as a service centre and stopping point
but, more importantly, as physical testimony to ‘direct diplomacy
between the state and the tribes’ (1990: 170). It drew upon pre-Islamic
models, such as that provided by neighbouring Qasr Burqu, but used
these in new ways through the transfer of diplomacy from the
boundaries of the previous Byzantine state to the tribal territory.
Thus, it can perhaps be suggested, it wholly rather than partially
included a group of nomadic Bedouin within the new Umayyad
state and its successors.
The second site is that of Qasr al-Hayr East in Syria, which,
though differing in several respects from ar-Risha, has also been
claimed to illustrate a concern with including the nomadic population
within the larger Muslim community and state. Excavated over a
number of years (Grabar et al. 1978), Qasr al-Hayr East was found

r
218

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

to contain a variety of distinct components. These included a walled
outer enclosure, 15km in perimeter, and containing evidence of an
attempt to ensure a permanent water supply through the use of
underground channels leading to a water supply 25 km away. Within
this was a ‘large enclosure’, interpreted as a medina containing several
residences and a mosque, and a ‘small enclosure’ interpreted as a
caravanserai. Created originally in the eighth century, and thus
another Umayyad foundation, it was partially abandoned in the
tenth century, reoccupied in areas in the twelfth century, abandoned
again in the fourteenth century, with thereafter intermittent smallscale use continuing.
If the interpretations of the excavators are believed, it was created
as ‘a means for controlling and settling turbulent tribes’ (1978: 157).
This, it was suggested, was achieved through providing, besides facil
ities for travellers, a medina, which was a role model of central
authority, a mosque, the symbol of a unified Muslim community,
and a source of income from the water supply and the outer enclosure
which could be used for pastoral activities. It could have become a
focal point for periodic gatherings of nomads. The second phase of
occupation was apparently divest of the symbolic function, if that is
the correct term, as it became a ‘motel town’, with the service
components coming to the fore. Therefore it is with the former
phase that the greater interest would appear to rest, if Qasr al-Hayr
did indeed function as an imprint of government within a tribal
territory. Indeed, it is this visual imagery which would then
appear to be of great significance, the ‘transference’ of stone archi
tectural components from the urban centre, whose function is encap
sulated, in a point made by Whitcomb, ‘as definitional elements for
an urban entity, rather like towered walls used as the symbol for cities
on early maps’ (1995: 491). It provided an image of the state, if
anything, and, although it is only a hypothesis, it provides an inter
esting scenario regarding possible relations between nomads and
the state.
A Total Approach: the Landscape
A settlement should not be divorced from its overall context, its
surrounding physical environment. Nomadic populations, for exam
ple, are not autonomous. Relations with either rural or urban seden
tary communities are common and mutual obligations and trading
networks between these groups exist. Protection was often provided
to caravans and town-dwellers by nomads, as in areas of Saudi Arabia

)

219

until recently (Cole 1975). Town or city-dwellers can be linked to
their rural sedentary counterparts through marketing networks, and
the larger settlements can act as market and service centres (see
chapter 5). Numerous permutations are possible, but the point is
that these links exist and, although not specifically Muslim, their
importance lies in the fact that the archaeology of Islam must be
viewed as the sum, the totality of all these elements. To separate
one element out, urban studies for instance, and to examine it on its
own is frequently restricting, as is privileging the urban environment
at the expense of looking at its place within the landscape.
Lapidus recognized that emphasizing dichotomies between city
and country are not a useful paradigm (1973b: 21), and it is in
evaluating these links that archaeologists can make a contribution
(see Sjöström 1993; King and Cameron 1994). Physical links between
settlement and surrounding area will exist in many instances, provid
ing a body of material for the archaeologist. These can range from
irrigation and water supply systems to field systems, nomad, trade
and pilgrimage routes, and fortifications. All mechanisms by which
the landscape can be tied together, settlement to settlement, nomads
to sedentaries, feature to feature deserve study. Connecting landscape
features are many, and we can look at water supply as an example. It
is important as a necessity of life, subject to much technical ingenuity
in its provision, as a ‘landscape element’ and also because it has a
significance beyond the purely practical in Islam as was shown in the
Muslim concept of paradise (see chapter 6).

Water supply
Many areas of the Muslim world are arid or semi-arid, and access to
an adequate water supply is of particular importance; a variety of
mechanisms have been developed to supply and store water.
Although much of this technology predates Islam and cannot be
said to be Muslim in character, it is intimately linked with a
large part of the Muslim world from North Africa to Central
Asia. Notable among the available traditional technologies are the
‘horizontal wells’, the qanat, foggara, karez and falaj, where water
from a ‘mother well’, a vertical shaft, is channelled, often over a
considerable distance, by a horizontal channel or conduit (slightly
sloping and usually covered) to source. Secondary shafts are usually
dug at measured intervals along the covered shafts for removal of
debris and for ventilation, as with the qanat, for example, common
in Iran (Cressey 1958; Goblot 1979; al-Hassan and Hill 1992).
These are often highly visible in aerial photographs and provide

220

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

a prime example of links between settlement and environment,
with tentacles of qanats and roads stretching out from the larger
settlements.
The very visibility of these systems lends them particularly to
archaeological investigation. A good example is the study of the
falaj and associated structures in various parts of Oman by Costa
(1983), and the work by Wilkinson (1975, 1976, 1977) in the vicinity
of the ninth—tenth century trade centre of Sohai a site already men
tioned in the context of Indian Ocean trade (see chapter 5). The stated
aims of the latter project, in particular ‘to describe the methods of
water supply used and in general to understand how the land was
used by the inhabitants of medieval Sohar’ (1975: 159—60), are pre
cisely what are often needed to tie Muslim settlements to their
surroundings in a ‘a total approach’. Also of interest would be relat
ing the type of information provided by Brookes (1987) to the
archaeological evidence derived from settlement studies. He describes
the ‘strict system of priorities’ (Brookes 1987: 193) enforced as to
water access from the falaj in Oman. Drinking had universal first
priority both inside and outside a settlement; after drinking, inside a
settlement, male bathing took priority, followed further downstream
by female bathing, in turn succeeded by the place for washing the
dead (mosques may have had their own access to water from the
falaj), and finally for agricultural use.
Add to the hydraulic systems already described, waterwheels and
equipment such as the Egyptian shaduf, a lever-type mechanism used
to draw water, along with the range of options available for storing
water tanks, cisterns, wells and poois and the material remains of
this one aspect of settlement ‘periphery’ are many. Indeed, in one case
the analysis of water technology has helped in totally rethinking the
role of a settlement; the study of the settlement devoid of this com
ponent would have been wholly misleading. The site in question is
Dahiak Kebir situated on the island of the same name off the Eritrean
coast of the Red Sea. Dahiak Kebir is located in an extremely arid
environment, yet functioned as a trade centre for several hundred
years, and thus would have had not inconsiderable demands for
water (Insoll 1 996c, d). These were met by over a hundred cisterns
cut out of the coral, of varying dimensions, and often linked to rockhewn channels functioning as catchment systems to collect the
sparse rains. Surprisingly, although the existence of this site has
been known for many years, only one aspect has been adequately
studied, the Arabic funerary inscriptions (Bassat 1893; Schneider
1983), thus providing a far from unique example of skewed analysis
in favour of a single privileged component, divorced from context,

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

221

and leaving the observer perhaps thinking that Dahlak Kebir
functioned only as a city of the dead. Obviously it was wholly
dependent on its surroundings for its very existence but this fact
seems to have been ignored.
The significance of water beyond the practical in Islam is some
thing a number of scholars allude to. At Qsar es-Seghir (Morocco),
for example, alongside the evident spatial differences between the
Muslim and Portuguese occupations, it was noticeable how the
Portuguese did not display in the surviving evidence the same con
cerns for latrines, drains, sewers and washing facilities evident in the
Islamic period (Redman 1986: 243). This does not necessarily mean
that the Portuguese were particularly dirty, but could be connected
with the emphasis upon cleanliness and purity which is a recurring
feature in Islam, exemplified by ritual cleansing prior to prayer, which
should take place five times a day (see chapter 2). A general preoccu
pation with hygiene is also something remarked upon by the excava
tors of Daulatabad, ancient Devgiri, in India (see plate 7.1). Wellconstructed drains, latrines and pipes were all recorded, both to
supply and dispose of water, leading Mate to remark that ‘if cleanli
ness was next to godliness, here was a society that strove after it’
(1983: 337).
The hammam, or bath-house, is a well-known feature of urban
Muslim society indicative of the concern with cleanliness and copied
or continued from Byzantine or Indian traditions. Examples have
been found archaeologically, and are well attested architecturally in
many areas of the Muslim world, though many are falling into disuse

—

—

Plate 7.1 The citadel and later town, Daulatabad, India (photo. T. Insoll)

222

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

today. Various types exist, though a similar plan might be followed
(for details on all aspects of the hammam, see Sourdel-Thomine
1971). Public baths were frequently built, as attested in areas which
were formerly part of the Muslim world, in Ottoman Bulgaria, for
example (Kiel 1974: 652) or in many areas of Spain (de Epaiza et al.
1989). Besides their obvious hygiene purposes, baths could serve ‘as a
meeting place for relaxation and communication’ (Grabar 1973: 155)
(see plate 7.2). Al-Janabi (1978: 190) also describes a further type of
bath, which he interprets as one used for the ablution of corpses, at
Kufah in Iraq and which dates from the Ilkhanid period (1258—1337).
Private baths could also exist. Recently, the so-called ‘Moorish baths’
in Gibraltar have been given just such an attribution, having possibly
formed part of the governor’s residence (Finlayson 1997). Excavations
revealed the presence of the plunge bath in the hot room, as well as
part of the hypocaust found to be filled with a thick deposit of black
sludge, residue from the furnace (Benady 1988: 8—10; see also Torres
Balbás 1942: 206—10). Numerous other examples illustrating the
importance of cleanliness and an adequate water supply could be
provided. The main point to emphasize is that the discussion of
water-related structures is only one example of possible settlement—
landscape links, but it illustrates how important it is to apply a ‘total
approach’ in considering all aspects of settlement and their possible
interconnections.

I

223

-.

Sacred geography
A final question to consider within the context of landscape studies or
settlement positioning is what actually constitutes sacred geography.
The networks of pilgrimage trails, local and international, have
already been discussed (see chapter 4), and these could be said to
form a part of ‘sacred geography’; similarly, the role of tombs within
this has also been described (see chapter 6). But what of other
elements? Do these exist? Even city orientation, as Bonine (1990)
has shown, is not necessarily reflective of qiblah direction but more
the result of topography, and, as Sopher (1967) remarks, Islam does
not impress cosmological representations upon the landscape: explicit
sacred connotations, aside from the obvious centrality of the holy
places of Mecca and Medina, are restricted to saints’ and martyrs’
tombs. Exceptions nevertheless exist, as at In-Teduq in Niger, a pre
sixteenth century site, which has been interpreted as indicative of
Sufism and monumentalization of the qiblah, through the clustering
of the stone-built tombs, houses and shops around the mosque
(Cressier 1992: 75—7).

Plate 7.2 Bathing scene from The Khamsa of Nizami (Browne no. 1424,
St John’s College, Cambridge)

F—
224

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

Yet this is an under-researched field, and the environment itself is
certainly not a sterile concept in Islam, but considered as something
entrusted to mankind by God, which should be maintained in a
sustainable way (Pedersen 1995: 263). Similarly, Schimmel (1991)
has illustrated how the landscape and environment can be represented
in spiritual terms in mystical poetry, and a study by Lahiri (1996) has
gone one stage further and managed to tie together various elements
of Muslim sacred geography in the landscape of late medieval Bal
labgarh, north of Delhi. Here, ‘shared social norms and tolerances’
(1996: 263) led to a homogeneity of Hindu and Muslim religious
geography. In summary, sacred geography, as with physical or
human geography, should surely be considered more fully in future,
even if only to be discounted as of little relevance within the archae
ology of Islam, once we are more certain of its importance. This is a
further component of the ‘total approach’ towards settlement studies.

but this is not the essential point. Rather, it raises the question of how
such issues could be examined by archaeologists interested in Islam in
the future. Are issues such as changes in ownership of property and
their possible fundamental societal consequences approachable by the
archaeologist through material culture? In this instance they are
related to material culture; Akbar (1988) goes on to define five
‘forms of submission of property’. Again the validity of the categories
is open to debate but the importance of such models is to illustrate
what might be considered through moving beyond a limited corpus
of standard archaeological paradigms. The Muslim settlement is not
(and never was) a fossilized entity, and if it is considered as a mirror
or result of society, as it is here, recent behaviours and their possible
material outcomes must also be considered.

225

Summary and Conclusions
The Contemporary and Future Situation

The relevance of much of the above for archaeologists of the future
dealing with the material residue of the present can be questioned. As
with many other areas of life and aspects of material culture, Muslim
settlements have recently undergone radical change. A situation exists
whereby, on the one hand, increasing diversity might be manifest in
certain matters and an increasing uniformity in others. Fundamental
agents of change are many and include prosperity, secularism and
Westernization, the impact of the motor car, the availability of new
materials and new technologies. No one cause is wholly responsible,
but it is undeniable that change has been felt across the Muslim
world. Riyadh, as described by Philby (1920) within living memory,
has gone forever.
Yet the pace of change is so quick and the impact so far reaching
that rapid changes in society will offer challenges to the archaeol
ogists of the future. A single example will be mentioned here. Akbar
(1988) has offered an interpretation to account for certain recent
changes in Muslim cities concerning issues of control and ownership
of property. Basically, he suggests that the traditional settlement is an
‘ordered’ one, with more people having a stake in society through
ownership or control of property, whereas a modern society is more
‘organized’ and, consequently, ‘people who neither own nor control
are irresponsible and dissipate the resources of the society’ (Akbar
1988: 200). Whether this is true is debatable (and is in many ways
reminiscent of a certain spectrum of current British political thought),

Settlements have been considered here as a facet of the material
culture which in totality constitutes the archaeology of Islam, and,
although certain commonalties appear, a generalizing model along the
lines of the once-popular ‘orientalizing’ approach is not acceptable;
too much emphasis has to be given to factors such as environment
and topography. The Muslim city has developed as an environment
for those following the requirements of their faith. Yet the direct
religious component within the Muslim city is negligible beyond a
notion of public/private spatial considerations which as a social con
cern are a by product of religious convention. (We can disregard the
central mosque/palace core as being wholly religious; as we have seen,
this appears to owe its origins in part to a pre-Islamic heritage of
power symbolism.) Nevertheless, there was something definable as a
Muslim city, and recognizable as such, regardless of the opinions of
the proponents of diversity to the extent that no uniformity is sup
posed to exist, even if it is only reduced to the core elements of
mosques and cemeteries. But frequently, as has been discussed,
much more than this will be found, which will entail the archaeologi
cal recognition of a Muslim city. Manifest patterns are apparent
which can differentiate it from other settlement types, best exempli
fied in juxtaposition as was illustrated using the Moroccan and Cretan
examples. Villages and pastoral encampments have fewer possible
recognition criteria, and were perhaps less affected, but again mos
ques and burials might allow their recognition as Muslim settlements.
If Islam is to be regarded as a complete system for life, it could be
expected that this would be apparent in the settlement. Muslim

r
226

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

identity could not be expected to be wholly exempt from this impor
tarn aspect of material culture. It is how this is achieved which is
subject, as with all the categories of material culture discussed, to
great diversity.

8

An Archaeology of Islam?

God creates you weak: after weakness He gives you strength, and after
strength infirmity and grey hairs.
Qur’an. The Greeks 30: 54
The conclusions which can be drawn from this study are varied, and
are certainly both positive and negative in terms of their implications.
On the positive side, and in answer to the fundamental question raised
at the very beginning of this volume, it can be seen that many
categories of material culture which can be recognized as specifically
Islamic are present cross-culturally. These can also be manifest archae
ologically, and can range from a city structured according to specific
spatial requirements down to items such as a seal ring. However, it
must also not be forgotten that much of what has been presented is an
ideal scenario, an ideal Islamic material culture, and it is very unlikely
that such a ‘suite’ of evidence would ever be found in totality. Excep
tions to every proposed structuring principle can and will occur, in all
probability outweighing the residue of orthodox behaviour. People
will be buried with grave goods, not all Muslims lived in courtyard
houses, mosques can be mis-aligned and built without a mihrab,
turbans might be rare, alcohol was drunk, the list continues. Equally,
traditional criteria are of little validity in many areas of the modern
Muslim world, but people are still Muslims, and it is possible to be a
Muslim with few outward manifestations. Archaeology can and does
attest to this, and comparative studies illustrate how flawed it is to
create an ideal Muslim, who just does not exist, except perhaps in the
Arabian Nights or in a Hollywood stereotype where the landscape is
studded with minarets and peopled with characters wearing turbans,
baggy trousers and shoes with pointed curling toes.

228

AN ARCHAEOLOGY OF ISLAM?

AN ARCHAEOLOGY OF ISLAM?

Many Muslims do not live life according to Qur’anic prescript or
the injunction of the shar’iah. The notions of ideals and realities are
both plainly apparent. The concept of ummah, or community, for
example, is in effect an ideal: glance around Muslim societies today
and it can be seen that they are beset with the same problems of
inequality and the like which are found in any other society or
community. Add to this the huge cultural diversity found, and the
problems involved in identifying an archaeology of Islam seem
immense. Further limitations are apparent. The geographical empha
sis in this volume has had to be selective, and in fact concentrates
on certain areas. Many of the examples of material culture given do
not apply, or have never applied, outside certain specific contexts.
Likewise, the masculine emphasis is noticeable: male rulers, male
artisans, soldiers and scholars predominate, and the female dimen
sion, where acknowledged, is often considered in what could be
termed clichéd contexts, relating to the domestic environment and
food preparation. This imbalance reflects much of the current litera
ture, and it is highly probable that archaeologists will be able to
define the female presence within the archaeology of Islam in a
more credible manner in the future, once greater attention is paid to
this area of study.
Thus, in the face of the problems outlined, the purpose of the
exercise could be questioned if, for example, one of the main conclu
sions is the recognition that the gulf between ideals or ‘structuring
principles’ and reality or ‘cultural diversity’ is largely insurmounta
ble. This makes us consider the positive points which have also been
isolated not least the practical advantages of illustrating that it is
possible to consider religion as exerting a potential influence over all
areas of life, and thus the archaeology of religion as constituting the
residue of this ‘total picture’. All aspects of life, from birth in the
domestic environment to death and burial, can be structured accord
ing to religious, and the resultant social, codes. The archaeology of
Islam must be regarded as a complete system, not an abstracted set of
‘princely’ artifacts or vague statements based upon a few grand
monuments, but the residue of millions of individuals spread over
time and space. In this respect it is perhaps easier to approach the
study of Islam as a distinct entity compared with many other world
religions; for example, Christianity, of which, according to one
involved party, a priest, it may be better ‘to talk more about family
resemblances rather than an essential essence’ (Shakespear 1995).
Islam is perhaps more easily defined, and this would certainly appear
to be correct as regards the categories of relevant material culture
which are related to it.

Yet it also needs to be remembered that religion is not merely a
monolithic entity superimposed according to divine will. The indivi
dual is again of great importance and individual religious experience
varies. According to Geertz, ‘for one man, his religious commitments
are the axis of his whole existence. for another man, not necessarily
less honestly believing, his faith is worn more lightly’ (1968: 111—12).
This has obvious implications for material culture and, in turn,
archaeology. Muslim and other religious interpretation is subject to
many different meanings at various scales. At a group level, for
instance, as was noted in chapter 1, these can include the different
legal schools, the two main Muslim traditions of Sunni and Shi’ah,
esoteric Sufi Islam, and many other interpretations and manifesta
tions. Within these each individual can bring his or her own perspec
tive to bear, creating further diversity but diversity, it is argued,
within a Muslim framework.
Similarly, what material culture ‘means’ can vary, Of all the case
studies cited in this volume, the one examining the Norman court in
Sicily perhaps provides the best example of the different meanings
which can be inherent in material culture with Islamic associations
(see chapter 5). But this was an extreme example, contrasting what
was in the end a Christian court composed of people who held a
specific vision of Muslim material culture as it had connotations of
how they perceived a court should appear. Yet similar diversity in the
meaning of material culture was apparent within a wholly Muslim
context, as was seen with the role of epigraphy. Inscriptions can mean
different things to different people: as a symbol if the viewer is
illiterate or cannot read it for other reasons, or as an instructive device
at a much more fundamental level if the message can be read. Add to
this context, remove our inscription from the hypothetical mosque,
say, place it in a museum and its meaning can change again depending
upon the observer. Notions such as plurality in meaning and inter
pretation, and contextual examination as an interpretative device are
well-trodden theoretical paths jn recent years and are not worth
travelling further down just for the sake of it. Archaeologists should
now be aware of such fundamental issues, and that Islamic archae
ology should in any way be exempt from such considerations is
insupportable. In fact this aspect of the ‘post-processual’ approach
has direct and fundamental practical implications for many aspects of
Islamic archaeology. An awareness that material culture can function
in different ways at different levels would appear obvious, but
neglected. Why else could Austin and Thomas raise the question:
‘how and why has it been possible for medieval historians to system
atically ignore the work of medieval archaeologists?’ (1990: 47).

—

. .

—

229

230

AN ARCHAEOLOGY OF ISLAM?

Replace ‘medieval’ with ‘Islamic’, and the sentiments are
the
and the simple answer is that they could because much of the same,
research
was irrelevant.
Besides an improved theoretical awareness, contributions
can also
be made to Islamic archaeology at a more practical level. It
was noted
in chapter 1 that the individual is often denied, as are
freque
whole strata of society; what was not mentioned is the relatio ntly
nship
between Muslims and archaeology. This might seem strange
,
like
considering a particular relationship between Hindus and
the past
for example, but in the context of Islam this is important
because of
the concept of jahiliyyah, the ‘age of ignorance’, which existed
before
Islam. At one end of the scale it might then be thought
that Muslim
interest in the past, at least before Islam, was and is
likely to be
negligible, but this is a false conception. As both Trigger
(1989: 183)
and Lindholm (1996: 33) note, the pre-Islamic past and archae
ology
can be of importance to Muslim peoples. The Shah’s celebra
tion at
Persepolis for the supposed anniversary of 2,500 years of
the
kings in 1971, or Arabs reciting the poetry of the warrio Persian
rs of the
jahiliyyah, are prime examples. Similarly, in Libya the
government
was responsible for starting a major archaeological project
, The
UNESCO Libyan Valleys Archaeological Survey, as it was
thought
that lessons from the past might be learnt to benefit
agricultural
practices today (Barker 1996: 1).
Yet how conceptions of the past and of archaeology exist
will
depending on cultural context and, of course, from individ vary
ual to
individual. An interesting, and rare, study of such issues is
provided
by Blau (1995), who examines attitudes towards the past
in the
United Arab Emirates. Elsewhere such studies are lacking
, even
though reviews of the relevant archaeology in different
region
might be undertaken or varying attitudes to the past consid s
ered
(see, for instance, the studies on the Near East, Soviet archaeology,
Israeli archaeology, and Indian archaeology in Trigger and
Glover
1981, 1982; also Layton 1989; Masry 1994; Insoll 1996c). Such
a study
or studies would be of great interest for comparative purpos
es in
assessing the relationship between archaeology, the general
study of
the past and of Islam.
This in turn leads to a consideration of the possible practic
significance of archaeology for the study of the very origins al
Islam. Archaeology can and has contributed to our understandinof
g
of the component parts, the structuring principles of material culture
the Muslim burial, the mosque, the domestic environment. In respec:
t
of these a largely orthodox position has been followed in the previo
us
pages, but the origins of the mosque, for example, are currently
the

AN ARCHAEOLOGY OF ISLAM?

231

subject of a re-evaluation (Johns 1995), a process of review based on
archaeological and historical evidence. Much more controversial is
the examination of direct events associated with the origins of Islam,
Qur’anic ‘history’ almost, through archaeology, although it is extre
mely unlikely that this will ever take place to any significant degree;
for example, archaeological research in Mecca and Medina, obvious
key sites, is impossible. Furthermore, from a Muslim perspective it is
not necessary; nothing will be found that will add to the religion, no
equivalent of the Dead Sea Scrolls or a hidden gospel will appear (al
Sharekh 1995). The truth is already revealed and material culture, and
therefore archaeology, cannot confirm or deny the faith of believers.
In this respect there are differences from other areas of religious
archaeology; biblical archaeology, for example, in which there some
times appears to be an emphasis upon proving or disproving actual
events (see, for example, Keller 1965; Bartlett 1997).
Such a viewpoint returns us to questions of faith touched upon in
chapter 1. How far should one probe when examining something as
personal as religious experience? This is perhaps for the individual to
decide but some sort of threshold of restraint surely needs to be
observed. Similar issues are considered by Waines (1995: 267—79)
with reference to the historical study• of Islamic origins, and he
provides a convenient summary of the pertinent research trends.
These fall into two main groups: first, that of the faithful, the ‘insider’
Muslim perspective, and, secondly, that of secular, Western, usually
European scholars. He notes that, until recently, a ‘dovish’ perspect
ive was adopted by scholars in treating the Arabic sources relating to
Islamic origins, but within the past two decades a much more ‘hawk
ish’ school has appeared, exemplified by, for example, Crone and
Cook (1977) and Wansbrough (1977, 1978). The Qur’an was sub
jected to ‘literary analysis’ in the latter study, for instance, where it
was seen as ‘salvation history’, presenting not a history of events but
‘simply theological rationalizations of those events’ (Waines 1995:
277).
Archaeology could have a significant role to play in assessing the
development of Islam and the validity of the Qur’an as a historical
source for those who think such an approach permissible. But essen
tially we are as yet in no position to achieve this, not only because of
the practical impossibility of attempting it, but also because the
theoretical and even moral implications have to be considered further.
Yet it is also necessary to accept, as the material culture makes plainly
apparent, that Islam and Islamic civilization did not emerge fully
fledged, but were subject, as with most things, to a developmental
process. This is especially obvious when Muslim material culture in

232

AN ARCHAEOLOGY OF ISLAM?

the first conquest situation is considered. In Spain, for example, most
of which was conquered in 711, Grabar (1973) notes that no Muslim
monument or text has been found until the formation of the
Umayyad caliphate in 756, with the Cordoba mosque, construction
of which started in 785—6, the first building ‘of any sort of signifi
cance in Muslim Spain’ (1973: 20—1). Whether this information is
now
out of date, as is likely in the light of 25 years further archaeologica
l
research, is largely irrelevant because the importance of this examp
le
lies in the fact that it illustrates that the pack of material culture
‘cards’ was not instantaneously laid out each time a new territor
y
was taken by the Muslim armies. Rather, as we have seen,
this
material culture was itself developing; moreover, buildings could
be
adapted and re-used and ephemeral materials employed leaving
little
or no visible traces. The ninth century would appear to be the turning
point when it could be said that many typically Islamic features
had
developed in a recognizable form. This prompts the question
of
whether it was coincidental or connected with fundamental religio
us
issues, such as the standardization, transcription and evaluation of the
hadith in the ninth century?
It is pertinent to finish this volume by re-stating that, although
great complexity and diversity, ethnic, cultural, geographical, is evi
dent, it is obvious that structuring principles are in operation which
create categories of material culture identifiable cross-culturally
as
Muslim. This unity can in part be attributed to the existence of the
Qur’an, which should structure the life of all Muslims. Yet to say this
does not mean that an ‘other’ is created, reminiscent of past orientalist
approaches; rather, this material culture is now part of the contem
porary ‘world picture’, from Mecca to Cambridge, and this has been
shown. The archaeology of Islam is of relevance for us all, not only in
offering a further dimension of material culture of which to be aware,
but also because of the conceptual implications in an era where we are
constantly reminded of the globalization processes at work around
us. The archaeology of Islam is not a Muslim archaeology but every
one’s archaeology.

References

Abdulak, S. 1977: Tradition and Continuity in Vernacular Omani Housing.
Art and Archaeology Research Papers 12, 18—26.
Abu Zaria, N. 1982: Sidi Ameur: a Tunisian Village. London: Ithaca.
Abu-Lughod, J. L. 1971: Cairo: 1001 Years of the City Victorious. Princeton,

NJ: Princeton University Press.
Abu-Lughod, J. L. 1987: The Islamic City

—

Historic Myth, Islamic Essence,

and Contemporary Relevance. International Journal of Middle Eastern
Studies 19, 155—176.
Abu-Rabia, A. 1994: The Negev Bedouin and Livestock Rearing: Social,

Economic and Political Aspects. Oxford: Berg.
Adams, N. 1990: Life in Ottoman Times at Qasr Ibrim. In C. H. Bonnet

(ed.), Seventh International Conference for Nubian Studies: Pre-publica
tion of Main Papers. Geneva: University of Geneva, pp. 1—16.
Adams, W. Y. 1987: Islamic Archaeology in Nubia: an Introductory Survey.
In T. Hagg (ed.), Nubian Culture Past and Present. Stockholm: Almqvist
and Wiksell, pp. 327—61.
Adams, W. Y. 1996: Qasr Ibrim: the Late Medieval Period. London: Egypt

Exploration Society.

Adle, C. 1979: Constructions Funéraires a Rey: Circa Xe—XIIe Siècle. Akten

des VII Internationalen Kongresses für Iranische Kunst und Archaologie.

Berlin: Dietrich Reimer Verlag, pp. 511—15.
Ahmad, A. 1975: A History of Islamic Sicily. Edinburgh: Edinburgh Uni
versity Press.
Ahmed, A. S. 1984: Religious Presence and Symbolism in Pukhtun Society.
In A. S. Ahmed and D. M. Hart (eds), Islam in Tribal Societies: from the

Atlas to the Indus, London: Routledge, pp. 3 10—30.
Ahmed, A. S. 1988: Discovering Islam: Making Sense of Muslim History and
Society. London: Routledge.
Ahua, S. 1979: Indian Settlement Patterns and House Designs. Art and
Archaeology Research Papers 15, 32—8.

r
234

REFERENCES

Akbar, J. 1988: Crisis in the Built Environment. the
Case of the Muslim City.
Singapore: Concept Media.
Akbar, J. 1993: Gates as Signs of Autonomy in Muslim
Towns. Muqarnas 10,
141—7.
Al-Azzawi, S. H. 1969: Oriental Houses in Iraq. In
P. Oliver (ed.), Shelter
and Society, London: Barrie and Jenkins,
91—1 02.
pp.
Alberge, D. 1997: Curious Diver Struck Gold from
17th Century. The Times,
8 November, p. 3.
Alexander, J. 1979: The Archaeological Recognition
of Religion: the Exam
ples of Islam in Africa and the Urnfield in Europe.
In B. Burnham and
J. Kingsbury (eds), Hierarchy and Settlement (BAR. S59), Oxford: British
Archaeological Reports,
pp. 215—28.
Alexander, J. 1988: The Saharan Divide in the Nile Valley
: the Evidence from
Qasr Ibrim. African Archaeological Review 6, 73—90.
Alexander, J. 1994: Islamic Archaeology: the Ottom
an Frontier on the
Middle Nile. Sudan Archaeological Research Society Newsl
etter 7, 20—6.
Alexander, J. 1997a: Qalat Sai: the Most Southerly
Ottoman Fortress in
Africa. Sudan and Nubia 1, 16—20.
Alexander, J. 1997b: Personal communication, 20 May.
Al-Hassan, A. Y. and Hill, D. R. 1992: Islamic Techno
logy: an Illustrated
History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Au, M. M. (ed.) 1951: A Manual of Hadith (Sahib
Bukhari). Lahore: The
Ahmadiyya Anjuman Ishaat Islam.
Ali, T. 1996: Personal communications, 14 March and
11 September.
Al-Janabi, T. 1978: A Ruined Ilkhanid Bath at Kufa.
Sumer 34, 189—95.
Al-Janabi, T. 1983: Islamic Archaeology in Iraq:
Recent Excavations at
Samarra. World Archaeology 14, 305—27.
Allan, J. 1978: Khãtam, Khatim. In The Encyclopedia
of Islam, vol. 4, 2nd
edn. Leiden: E. J. Brill, pp. 1102—15.
Allan, J. W. 1982: Nishapur: Metalwork of the Early Islami
c Period. New
York: Metropolitan Museum of Art.

Al-Rashid, A. 1980: Darb Zubaydah: the Pilgrim Road from
Kufa to Mecca.
Riyadh: University Libraries.
Al-Rashid, A. 1986: Al-Rabadhah: a Portrait of Early Islami
c Civilisation in
Saudi Arabia. Riyadh: King Saud University.
Al-Sharekh, A. 1995: Personal communication, 26 Octobe
r.
Ambary, H. A. 1986: Epigraphical Data from l7th—l9th
Century (AD)
Muslim Graves in East Java. In C. D. Grijns and
S. 0. Robson
(eds), Cultural Contact and Textual Interpretation, Dordre
cht: Foris, pp.
25—3 7.
Amiry, S. and Tamari, V. 1989: The Palestinian Village
Home. London:
British Museum.
Andrews, P. A. 1971: Tents of the Tekna, South-wester
n Morocco. In
P. Oliver (ed.), Shelter in Africa, London: Barrie
and Jenkins, pp.
124—42.
Andrews, P. A. 1987: The Generous Heart or the Mass of Clouds
: the Court
Tents of Shah Jahan. Muqarnas 4, 149—65.

REFERENCES

235

Andrews, P. A. 1995: The Hassaniya-speaking Nomads, Tekna, Trarza, and
F

F

Brakna. In L. Prussin (ed.), African Nomadic Architecture: Space, Place
and Gender. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, pp. 66—73.
Anon. 1964: Excavations at Banbhore. Pakistan Archaeology 1, 49—55.
Arav, R. 1993: A Mamluk Drum from Bethsaida. Israel Exploration Journal
43 (4), pp. 241—5.
Arnold, T. W. 1965: Painting in Islam. New York: Dover.
Arrowsmith-Browfl, J. H. (ed.) 1991: Prutky’s Travels to Ethiopia and Other
Countries. London: Halduyt Society.
Asher, C. B. 1984: Inventory of Key Monuments. In G. Michell (ed.), The
Islamic Heritage of Bengal. Paris: Unesco, pp. 37—140.
Asher, M. 1986: In Search of the Forty Days Road. London: Penguin.
Athamina, K. 1989: The Black Banners and the Socio-political Significance of
Flags and Slogans in Medieval Islam. Arabica 36, pp. 307—26.
Austin, D. 1990: The ‘Proper Study’ of Medieval Archaeology. In D. Austin
and L. Alcock (eds), From the Baltic to the Black Sea: Studies in Medieval
Archaeology, London: Unwin Hyman, pp. 9—42.
Austin, D. and Alcock, L. (eds) 1990: From the Baltic to the Black Sea:
Studies in Medieval Archaeology. London: Unwin I-lyman.
Austin, D. and Thomas, J. 1990: The ‘Proper Study’ of Medieval Archae
ology: a Case Study. In D. Austin and L. Alcock (eds), From the Baltic to
the Black Sea: Studies in Medieval Archaeology, London: Unwin Hyman,
pp. 43—78.
Bacharach, J. L. 1991: Administrative Complexes, Palaces and Citadels:
Changes in the Loci of Medieval Muslim Rule. In I. A. Bierman, R. A.
Abou-El Haj and D. Prezoisi (eds), The Ottoman City and its Parts. New
York: Caratzas, pp. 111—28.
Baha Tanman, M. 1992: Settings for the Veneration of Saints. In R. Lifchez
(ed.), The Dervish Lodge. Los Angeles: University of California Press, pp.
130—71.
Baipakov, K. 1992: Les Fouilles de la Ville d’Otrar. Archeologie Islamique 3,
87—110.
Banning, E. B. and Köhler-Rollefson, I. 1992. Ethnographic Lessons for the
Pastoral Past: Camp Remains near Beidha, Southern Jordan. In 0. Bar
Yosef and A. Khazanov (eds), Pastoralism in the Levant: Archaeological
Materials in Anthropological Perspectives. Madison: Prehistory Press, pp.
18 1—201.
Barker, G. (ed.) 1996: Farming the Desert: the UNESCO Libyan Valleys
Archaeological Survey, vol. 1. London: Society for Libyan Studies.
Barth, H. 1965: Travels and Discoveries in North and Central Africa. Lon
don: Frank Cass.
Bartlett, J. R. (ed.) 1997: Archaeology and Biblical Interpretation. London:
Routledge.
Barton, S. W. 1986: The Bengali Muslims of Bradford. Leeds: University of
Leeds.
Bartosiewicz, L. 1996: Camels in Antiquity: the Hungarian Connection.
Antiquity 70, 447—53.

236

237

REFERENCES

REFERENCES

Bashear, S. 1991: Riding Beasts on Divine Missions: an Examination of the
Ass and Camel Traditions. Journal of Semitic Studies 356, 37—75.
Bass, G. F. and Van Doorninck, F. H. 1978: An Eleventh Century Shipwreck
at Serce Liman, Turkey. International Journal of Nautical Archaeology and
Underwater Exploration 7, 119—32.
Bassat, R. 1893: Les inscriptions de L’Ile de Dahiak. Journal Asiatique 9,
77—111.
Basset, H. and Terrasse, H. 1927: Sanctuaires et fortresses Almohades: le
Ribat de Tit. Hesperis 7, 117—56.
Bates, U. 1991: The Use of Calligraphy on Three-dimensional Objects: the
Case for ‘Magic’ Bowls. In C. G. Fisher (ed.), Brocade of the Pen: the Art
of Islamic Writing. Michigan: Michigan State University,
pp. 55—61.
Beck, L. 1978: Women among Qashqa’i Nomadic Pastoralists
in Iran. In
L. Beck and N. Keddie (eds), Women in the Muslim World. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, pp. 351—73.
Beckwith, C. 1. 1984: The Plan of the City of Peace: Central Asian Iranian
Factors in Early Abbasid Design. Acta Orientalia Academiae Scientiarium
Hungaricae 38, 143—64.
Begley, W. E. 1979: The Myth of the Taj Mahal and a New Theory of its
Symbolic Meaning. The Art Bulletin 61, 7—37.
Behrend, T. E. 1984: Kraton, Tamon, Mesjid: a Brief Survey and Biblio
graphic Review of Islamic Antiquities in Java. Incknesia Circle 35,
29—55.
Benady, T. (ed.) 1988: Guide to the Gibraltar Museum. Grendon: Gibraltar
Books.
Bender, B. (ed.) 1993: Landscape: Politics and Perspectives. Oxford: Berg.
Bennigsen, A. and Enders Wimbush, S. 1986: Muslims of the Soviet Empire: a
Guide. London: Hurst.
Betts, A.V.G. 1990: Ancient ar-Risha: Stone Implements. In S. Helms (ed.),

Bloom, J. 1989: Minaret: Symbol of Islam. Oxford Studies in Islamic Art,
vol. 7. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
BoediardjO, S. 1978: Wayang: a Reflection of the Aspirations of the Javanese.
In H. Soebadio and C. A. du Marchie Sarvaas (eds.), Dynamics of Indo
nesian History. Oxford: North-Holland, pp. 97—121.
Bone, D. S. 1982: Islam in Malawi. Journal of Religion in Africa 13, 126—38.
Bonine, M. E. 1977: From Uruk to Casablanca: Perspectives on the Urban
Experience of the Middle East. Journal of Urban History 3, 141—80.
Bonine, M. E. 1990: Sacred Direction and City Structure: a Preliminary
Analysis of the Islamic Cities of Morocco. Muqarnas 7, 50—72.
Bosworth, E. 1976: Armies of the Prophet. In B. Lewis (ed.), The World of
Islam. London: Thames and Hudson, pp. 201—12.
Boucharlat, R. and Labrousse, A. 1979: Une sucrerie d’epoque Islamique sur
la rive droite du Chaour a Suse. Cahiers de la Delegation Archéologique
Fran çaise en Iran 10, 155—76.
Bourdieu, P. 1973: The Berber House. In M. Douglas (ed.), Rules and Mean
ings: the Anthropology of Everyday Knowledge. London: Penguin, pp.
98—110.
Bourdieu, P. 1977: Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bowker, J. 1991: The Meanings of Death. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Braudel, F. 1972: The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the
Age of Phillzp II. London: Collins.
Bravmann, R. 1974: Islam and Tribal Art in West Africa. Cambridge: Cam
bridge University Press.
Bravmann, R. 1983: African Islam. London: Ethnographica.
Brend, B. 1994: Islatnic Art. London: British Museum.
Brett, M. 1990: Islam in North Africa. In P. Clarke (ed.), The World’s
Religions: Islam, London: Routledge, pp. 23—47.
Brill, R. H. 1970: Chemical Studies of Islamic Lustre Glass. In R. Berger
(ed.), Scientific Methods in Medieval Archaeology. Berkeley, CA: Univer
sity of California Press, pp. 351—77.
British Museum 1998: Art and Culture of the Islamic World: Newsletter 1.
London: British Museum.
Brookes, J. 1987: Gardens of Paradise: the History and Design of the Great
Islamic Gardens. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Broomhall, M. 1910: Islam in China. London: Morgan and Scott.
Brown, K. and Palmer, M. 1987: The Essential Teachings of Islam. London:
Rider.
Bruce, S. 1995: Religion in Modern Britain. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Bulliet, R. W. 1975: The Camel and the Wheel. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Bulliet, R. W. 1992: Annales and Archaeology. In A. B. Knapp (ed.), Archae
ology, Annales and Ethnohistory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
pp. 131—4.

Early Islamic Architecture of the Desert: a Bedouin Station in Eastern

Jordan, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press,
pp. 159—68.
Bierman, I. A. 1991: The Ottomanization of Crete. In L. A. Bierman, R. A.
Abou-El Haj and D. Prezoisi (eds), The Ottoman City and its Parts. New
York: Caratzas, pp. 53—75.
Binet, Capitaine. 1956: Notes sur les ruines de Garoumele (Niger). Notes
Africaines 53, 1—2.
Bintliff, J. 1991: The Contribution of an Annaliste/Structural History
Approach to Archaeology. In J. Bintliff (ed.), The Annales School and
Archaeology. Leicester: Leicester University Press,
pp. 1—33.
Binyon, L. 1930: Painting. In E. Denison Ross (ed.), Persian Art. London:
Luzac, pp. 60—73.
Birge, J. K. 1937: The Bektashi Order of Dervishes. London: Luzac.
Bivar, A.D.H. and Shinnie, P. 1962: Old Kanuri Capitals, Journal of African
History 3, 1—10.
Blau, S. 1995: Observing the Present Reflecting the Past: Attitudes towards
Archaeology in the United Arab Emirates. Arabian Archaeology and
Epigraphy 6, 116—28.
—

238

REFERENCES

Burckhardt, J. L. 1830: Notes on the Bedouins and Wahabys. London:
Colburn and Bentley.

Burton, R. F. 1898: Personal Narrative of a Pilgrimage to Al-Madinah and
Meccah. London: George Bell.
Burton-Page, J. 1991: Ma1bara (India). In The Encyclopedia of Islam, vol.
6.
2nd edn. Leiden: E. J. Brill, pp. 125—8.
Cailmer, J. 1995: The Influx of Oriental Beads into Europe during the Eighth
Century AD. In M. Rasmussen, U. Lund Hansen and U. Nädman (eds),
Glass Beads: Cultural History, Technology, Experiment and Analogy.
Lejre: Historical—Archaeological Experimental Centre,
pp. 49—54.
Campo, J. E. 1991: The Other Sides of Paradise: Explorations
into the
Religious Meanings of Domestic Space in Paradise. Columbia: University
of South Carolina Press.
Canaan, T. 1936: Arabic Magic Bowls. Palestine Oriental Society Journal 16,
79—127.
Carmichael, D., Hubert, J., Reeves, B. and Schanche, A. (eds) 1994: Sacred
Sites, Sacred Places. London: Routledge.
Carsten, J. and Hugh-Jones, S. (eds) 1995: About the House. Levi-Strauss and
Beyond. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carswell, J. 1977: China and Islam in the Maldive Islands. Transactions of the
Oriental Ceramic Society 41, pp. 121—98.
Carswell, J. 1979a: China and Islam: a Survey of the Coasts of India and
Ceylon. Transactions of the Oriental Ceramic Society 42,
pp. 24—58.
Carswell, J. 1979b: Sin in Syria. Iran 17, 15—24.
Carswell, J. 1982: Imported Far Eastern Wares. In D. S. Whitcomb and H.
J.
Johnson (eds), Quseir al-Qadim 1980: Preliminary Report. Malibu:
Undena, pp. 193—9.
Carswell, J. and Prickett, M. 1984: Mantai 1980: a Preliminary Investigation.
Ancient Ceylon 5.
CEN 1973: Moslems Plan Mosque in City House. Cambridge Evening
News, 26 January.
CEN 1976: Terraced House is Mecca for City’s Islamic Faith. Cambridge
Evening News, 6 July.
CEN 198 Ia: Moslems in City Can Keep Spiritual Home. Cambridge
Evening News, 12 February.
CEN 1981b: Cash Available for Building Mosque in City. Cambridge
Evening News, 21 July.
CEN 1982: Muslims Find New Home. Cambridge Evening News,
6
September.
CEN 1985: Peaceful Haven where Muslim Faithful Meet. Cambridge
Evening News, 29 November.
CEN 1988: Small Building is Spiritual Centre for County Muslims. Cam
bridge Evening News, 9 June.
CEN 1990: Untitled. Cambridge Evening News, 13 September.
Champion, T. 1990: Medieval Archaeology and the Tyranny of the Historical
Record. In D. Austin and L. Alcock (eds), From the Baltic to the Black
Sea: Studies in Medieval Archaeology, London: Unwin Hyman,
pp. 79—95.

REFERENCES

239

Chapman, R., Kinnes, I. and Randsborg, K. (eds) 1981: The Archaeology of
Death. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chatty, D. 1978: Changing Sex Roles in Bedouin Society. In L. Beck and N.
Keddie (eds), Women in the Muslim World. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, pp. 399—415.

Chaudhri, R. A. 1982: Mosque: its Importance in the Life of a Muslim.
London: London Mosque.
Chaudhuri, K. N. 1985: Trade and Civilisation in the Indian Ocean. Cam
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chittick, H. N. 1974: Kilwa: an Islamic Trading City on the East African
Coast. Nairobi: British Institute in Eastern Africa.
Chittick, H. N. 1984: Manda: Excavations at an Island Port on the Kenya
Coast. Nairobi: British Institute in Eastern Africa.
Clancy-Smith, J. 1993: The Man with Two Tombs: Muhammad Ibn ‘Abd Al
Rahman, Founder of the Algerian Rahrnaniyya, c.1715—l798. In G. M.
Smith and C. W. Ernst (eds), Manifestations of Sainthood in Islam. Istan
bul: Isis Press, pp. 148—69.
Cole, D. P. 1975: Nomads of the Nomads: the Al Murrah Bedouin of the
Empty Quarter. Chicago: Aldine.
Conkey, M. and Gero, J. 1991: Engendering Archaeology: Women in Pre
history. Oxford: Blackwell.
Conkey, M. and Spector, J. 1984: Archaeology and the Study of Gender.
Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory 7, 1—38.
Content, D. J. (ed.) 1987: Islamic Rings and Gems: the Benjamin Zucker
Collection. London: Phillip Wilson.
Cordwell, J. M. and Schwarz, R. A. (eds) 1979: The Fabrics of Culture: the
Anthropology of Clothing and Adornment. The Hague: Mouton.
Cosar, F. M. 1978: Women in Turkish Society. In L. Beck and N. Keddie
(eds), Women in the Muslim World. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, pp. 124—40.
Cosgrove, D. and Daniels, S. (eds) 1988: The Iconography of Landscape:
Essays on the Symbolic Representation, Design and Use of Past Environ
ments. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Costa, P. M. 1983: Notes on Traditional Hydraulics and Agriculture in
Oman. World Archaeology 14, 273—95.
Cressey, G. B. 1958: Qanats, Karez, and Foggaras. The Geographical Review
48, 27—44.
Cressier, P. 1992: Archéologie de la devotion Soufi. Journal des Africanistes
62, 69—90.
Creswell, K.A.C. 1932: Early Muslim Architecture, vol. 1. Oxford: Claren
don Press.
Creswell, K.A.C. 1952: Fortification in Islam before AD 1250. Proceedings
of the British Academy (unnumbered), pp. 89—125.
Creswell, K.A.C. 1958: A Short Account of Early Muslim Architecture.
London: Penguin.
Cribb, R. 1991: Nomads in Archaeology. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

240

241

REFERENCES

REFERENCES

Crone, P. and Cook, M. 1977: Hagarism: the Making of the Islamic World.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cunningham, A. 1880: Report of Tours in the Gangetic Provinces from
Badaon to Bihar: Archaeological Survey of India, vol. 11. Calcutta: Super
intendent of Government Printing.
Cunningham, C. E. 1964: Order in the Atoni House. Bzjdragen tot de taal-,
land-en Volkenkunde 120, 34—68.
Damais, L-Ch. 1968: L’Epigraphie Musulmane dans le Sud-Est Asiatique.
Bulletin de l’Ecole Française d’Extrême Orient 54, 567—604.
Darley-Doran, R. 1986: Centuries of Gold: the Coinage of Medieval Islam.
London: Zamana Gallery.
Dasheng, C. 1995: Chinese Islamic Influence on Archaeological Finds in
South Asia. In R. Scott and J. Guy (eds), South East Asia and China: Art,
Interaction and Commerce. London: Percival David Foundation,
pp. 59—63.
Dasheng, C. and Kalus, L. 1991: Corpus d’inscriptions Arabe et Persanes
en
Chine, vol. 1: Province de Fujian (Quanzhou, Fuzhou, Xiamen). Paris:
Geuthner.
Davies, P. 1989: The Penguin Guide to the Monuments of India, vol. 2:
Islamic, Rajput, European. London: Penguin.
Dawood, N. J. (trans.) 1993: The Koran. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Day, M. 1990: Archaeological Ethics and Treatment of the Dead. Anthro
pology Today 6, 15—16.
De Epalza, M., Liobregat, E. A., Azuar Ruiz, R., Lauado, P.
J., Bevià,
M., Irars Perez, J., Gisbert, J. A., Boigues, C. and Gonzalez Baldovi, M.
1989: Banos Arabes en el Pais Valenciano. Valenciano: Conselleria de
Cultura, Educacio I Ciencia.
De Gironcourt, G. R. 1920: Missions De Gironcourt en Afrique Occidentale,
1908—1909, 1911—1912. Paris: Société de Geographie.
De Jong, F. 1989: The Iconography of Bektashiism: a Survey of Themes and
Symbolism in Clerical Costume, Liturgical Objects and Pictorial Art.
Manuscripts of the Middle East 4, 7—29.
Denny, W. B. 1990: Saff and Sejjadah: Origins and Meaning of the Prayer
Rug. Oriental Carpet and Textile Studies 3(2),
pp. 93—104.
Dermengheim, E. 1954: Le culte des saints dans l’Jslam Maghrebin. Paris:
Gallimard.
Dewar, R. E. and Wright, H. T. 1993: The Culture History of Madagascar.
Journal of World Prehistory 7, 417—66.
Dickie, J. 1976: The Islamic Garden in Spain. In E. B. MacDougall and
R. Ettinghausen (eds), The Islamic Garden. Washington: Dumbarton
Oaks, pp. 89—105.
Dickie, J. 1978: Allah and Eternity: Mosques, Madrasas and Tombs. In
G. Michell (ed.), Architecture of the Islamic World. London: Thames and
Hudson, pp. 15—47.
Donaldson, B. A. 1939: The Wild Rue. London: Luzac.
Donley, L. 1982: House Power: Swahili Space and Symbolic Markers. In
I. Hodder (ed.), Symbolic and Structural Archaeology. Cambridge: Cam
bridge University Press, pp. 63—73.

Donley, L. 1987: Life in the Swahili Town House Reveals the Symbolic
Meaning of Spaces and Artefact Assemblages. African Archaeological
Review 5, 181—92.
Donley-Reid, L. 1990: A Structuring Structure: the Swahili House. In S. Kent
(ed.), Domestic Architecture and the Use of Space. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 114—26.
Douglas, M. 1966: Purity and Danger: an Analysis of Concepts of Pollution
and Taboo. London: Routledge.
Douglas, M. (ed.) 1984: Food in the Social Order: Studies of Food and
Festivities in Three American Communities. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Dunlop, D. M. 1958: Bimãristãn. In The Encyclopedia of Islam, vol. 1, 2nd
edn. Leiden: E. J. Brill, pp. 1222—4.
Eaton, R. M. 1984: Islam in Bengal. In G. Michell (ed.), The Islamic Heritage
of Bengal. Paris: UNESCO, pp. 23—36.
Ebeid, R. Y. and Young, M.J.L. 1974: A Fragment of a Magic Alphabet from
the Cairo Genizah. Sudhoffs Archiv 58, 404—8.
Edwards, H. 1991: Text, Context, Architext: the Qur’an as Architectural
Inscription. In C. G. Fisher (ed.), Brocade of the Pen: the Art of Islamic
Writing. Michigan: Michigan State University, pp. 63—75.
Ehrenberg, M. 1989: Women in Prehistory. London: British Museum.
Eickelman, D. F. and Piscatori, J. (eds) 1990: Muslim Travellers: Pilgrimage,
Migration, and the Religious Imagination. London: Routledge.
El-Au, S. A. 1970: The Foundation of Baghdad. In A. H. Hourani and S. M.
Stern (eds), The Islamic City in the Light of Recent Research. Oxford:
Bruno Cassirer, pp. 87—101.
Elisséeff, N. 1980: Physical Layout. In R. B. Serjeant (ed.). The Islamic City.
Paris: UNESCO, pp. 90—103.
Elisséeff, N. and el Hakim, R. 1981: Mission Souclano-Francaise dans Ia
Province de Mer Rouge (Soudan). Lyon: Maison de l’Orient Méditerranéen.
Ellis, C. G. 1982: Garden Carpets and their Relation to Safavid Gardens.
Hali 5, pp. 11—17.
El-Rashedy, F. 1997: Personal communication, 20 October.
El-Tom, A. 0. 1987: Berti Qur’anic Amulets. Journal of Religion in Africa
17, 224—44.
Emeijanenko, T. 1994. Nomadic Year Cycles and Cultural Life of Central
Asian Livestock Herders before the Twentieth Century. In C. Van Leeu
wen, T. Emeijanenko and L. Popova (eds), Nomads in Central Asia.
Amsterdam: Royal Tropical Institute, pp. 37—68.
Engestrom, T. 1959: Origin of Pre-Islamic Architecture in West Africa.
Ethnos 24, 64—9.
Ettinghausen, R. 1944: The Character of Islamic Art. In N. A. Fans (ed.),
The Arab Heritage. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ettinghausen, R. 1974: Arabic Epigraphy: Communication or Symbolic
Affirmation. In D. K. Kouymjian (ed.), Near Eastern Iconography, Epi
graphy and History: Studies in Honour of George C. Miles. Beirut: Amer
ican University of Beirut, pp. 297—317.

242

243

REFERENCES

REFERENCES

Ettinghausen, R. 1976: The Man-made Setting. In B. Lewis (ed.), The World
of Islam. London: Thames and Hudson, pp. 57—72.
Evans, J. M. 1975—6: The Traditional House in the Oasis of Ghadames.
Libyan Studies 7, 31—40.
Ewert, C. 1971: El Mihrab de la Mezquita Mayor de Almeria. Al-Andalus 68,
pp. 391—460.
Faegre, T. 1979: Tents: Architecture of the Nomads. London: John Murray.
Fage, J. D. 1978. An Atlas of African History. London: Edward Arnold.

Frishman, M. 1994: Islam and the Form of the Mosque. In M. Frishman and

Farb, P. and Armelagos, G. 1980: Consuming Passions: the Anthropology of
Eating. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Farmer, H. G. 1929: A History of Arabian Music to the XIIIth Century.
London: Luzac.
Farouk, 0. 1988: The Muslims of Thailand: a Survey. In A.D.W. Forbes (ed.),
The Muslims of Thailand, vol. 1: Historical and Cultural Studies. Bihar:
Centre for Southeast Asian Studies, pp. 1—30.
Fedorov-Dav-ydov, G. A. 1983: Archaeological Research in Central Asia of
the Muslim Period. World Archaeology 14, 393—405.
Feilberg, C. C. 1944: La Tente Noire. Copenhagen: National Museum of
Ethnography.
Fentress, E. 1987: The House of the Prophet: North African Islamic Hous
ing. Archeologia Medievale 14, 47—68.
Fernández-Puertas, A. 1994: Spain and North Africa. In M. Frishman and
H-U. Khan (eds), The Mosque: History, Architectural Development and
Regional Diversity. London: Thames and Hudson, pp. 101—17.
Finlayson, C. 1997: Personal communication, 10 April.
Fischer, J. 1994: The Folk Art ofJava. Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press.
Fischer, K. 1973: Archaeological Field Surveys in Afghan Seistan. In
N. Hammond (ed.), South Asian Archaeology. Park Ridge: Noyes Press,
pp. 131—55.
Fisher, H. J. 1973: Conversion Reconsidered: Some Historical Aspects of
Religious Conversion in Black Africa. Africa 43, 27—40.
Fisher, H. J. 1985: The Juggernaut’s Apologia: Conversion to Islam in Black
Africa. Africa 55 (2), pp. 153—73.
Fitzgerald, E. (trans.) 1970: The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam. London: The
Folio Society.
Fleming, A. 1973: Tombs for the Living. Man 8, 177—93.
Fletcher, R. 1977: Settlement Studies (Micro and Semi-micro). In D. L.
Clarke (ed.), Spatial Archaeology. London: Academic Press, pp. 47—162.
Flight, C. n.d.: Thoughts on the Cemetery at Sane. Unpublished paper,
Centre of West African Studies, University of Birmingham.
Forbes, A.D.W. (ed.) 1988: The Muslims of Thailand, vol. 1. Historical and
Cultural Studies. Bihar: Centre for Southeast Asian Studies.
Fowler, H. W. and Fowler, F. G. 1952: The Concise Oxford Dictionary of
Current English. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Frierman, J. D. and Giauque, R. D. 1973: Saljuq Faiënce and Timurid Earth
ernware from Tammisha: Some Preliminary Technological Notes. Iran 11,
180-4.

H-U. Khan (eds), The Mosque: History, Architectural Development and
Regional Diversity. London: Thames and Hudson, pp. 17—41.
Frishman, M. and Khan, H-U. (eds) 1994: The Mosque: History, Architec
tural Development and Regional Diversity. London: Thames and Hudson.
Gabrieli, F. 1970: The Transmission of Learning and Literary Influences to
Western Europe. In P. M. Holt, A. Lambton and B. Lewis (eds), The
Cambridge History of Islam, vol. 2b. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, pp. 851—90.
Gardet, L. 1970: Religion and Culture. In P. M. Holt, A. Lambton and
B. Lewis (eds), The Cambridge History of Islam, vol. 23. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 569—603.
Garlake, P. 1978: An Encampment of the Seventeenth to Nineteenth Cen
turies on Ras Abaruk, Site 5. In B. de Cardi (ed.), Qatar Archaeological
Report: Excavations 1973. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 163—71.
Garwood, P., Jennings, D., Skeates, R. and Toms, J. 1991: Preface. In
P. Garwood, D. Jennings, R. Skeates and J. Toms (eds), Sacred and Pro
fane. Oxford: Oxbow Books, pp. v—x.
Gassong, S. 1987: Turkoman Prayer Rugs. Oriental Carpet and Textile
Studies 3 (1), pp. 83—95.
Geertz, C. 1966: Religion as a Cultural System. In M. Banton (ed.), Anthro
pological Approaches to the Study of Religion. London: Tavistock, pp.
1—46.
Geertz, C. 1968: Islam Observed: Religious Development in Morocco and
Indonesia. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Geertz, C. 1976: Art as a Cultural System. Modern Language Notes 91,
1473—99.
Gellens, S. I. 1990: The Search for Knowledge in Medieval Muslim Societies:
a Comparative Approach. In D. F. Eickelman and J. Piscatori (eds),
Muslim Travellers. Pilgrimage, Migration, and the Religious Imagination.
London: Routledge, pp. 50—65.
Gellner, E. 1969: Saints of the Atlas. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Gellner, E. 1981: Muslim Society. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gerholm, T. 1977: Market, Mosque and Mafraj: Social Inequality in a
Yemeni Town. Stockholm: University of Stockholm.
Ghafur, M. A. 1966: Fourteen Kufic Inscriptions of Banbhore: the Site of
Daybul. Pakistan Archaeology 3, 65—90.
Gibb, H. A. R. and Kramers, J. H. (eds) 1961: The Shorter Encyclopedia of
Islam. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Gibb, H. A. R., Kramers, J. H., Levi-Provencal, E. and Schacht, J. 1960: The
Encyclopedia of Islam. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Gibb, H.A.R. (trans.) 1993: The Travels of Ibn Battuta. Delhi: Munshiram
Manoharlal.
Giddens, A. 1979: Central Problems in Social Theory. London: Macmillan.
Gilat, A., Shirav, M., Bogoch, R., Halicz, L., Avner, U. and Hahlieli, D. 1993:
Significance of Gold Exploitation in the Early Islamic Period, Israel.
Journal of Archaeological Science 20, 429—37.

r
244

245

REFERENCES

REFEREN CES

Gilsenan, M. 1982: Recognizing Islam. London: Tauris.
Gladney, D. C. 1991: Muslim Chinese: Ethnic Nationalism in the People’s
Republic. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Goblot, H. 1979: Les Qanats: une technique d’acquisition de l’eau. Paris:
Mouton.
Golombek, L. 1974: The Cult of Saints and Shrine Architecture in the
Fourteenth Century. In D. K. Kouymjian (ed.), Near Eastern Iconography,
Epigraphy and History: Studies in Honour of George C. Miles. Beirut:
American University of Beirut, pp. 419—30.
Golombek, L. 1988: The Draped Universe of Islam. In P. P. Soucek (ed.),
Content and Context of Visual Arts in the Islamic World. University Park:
Pennsylvania University Press, pp. 25—49.
Goodwin, G. 1988: Gardens of the Dead in Ottoman Times. Muqarnas 5,
61—9.
Goody, J. 1982: Cooking, Cuisine and Class. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni
versity Press.
Goody, J. 1993: The Culture of Flowers. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Grabar, 0. 1959: The Umayyad Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem. Ars Orient
alis 3, 33—62.
Grabar, 0. 1966: The Earliest Islamic Commemorative Structures. Ars
Orientalis 6, 7—46.
Grabar, 0. 1971: Islamic Archaeology an Introduction. Archaeology 24 (3),
197—9.
Grabar, 0. 1973: The Formation of Islamic Art. New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press.
Grabar, 0. 1976: Islamic Art and Archaeology. In L. Binder (ed.), The Study
of the Middle East. New York: John Wiley, pp. 229—63.
Grabar, 0. 1978: Palaces, Citadels and Fortifications. In G. Michell (ed.),
Architecture of the Islamic World. London: Thames and Hudson,
pp. 65—79.
Grabar, 0., Holod, R., Knustad, J. and Trousdale, W. 1978: City in the
Desert: Qasr al-Hayr East. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Graham-Campbell, J. (ed.) 1994: Archaeology of Pilgrimage. World Archae
ology 26.
Granqvist, H. 1965: Muslim Death and Burial: Arab Customs and Traditions
Studied in a Village in Jordan. Helsinki: Helsingfors.
Grant, A. 1991: Economic or Symbolic? Animals and Ritual Behaviour. In
P. Garwood, D. Jennings, R. Skeates and J. Toms (eds), Sacred and Pro
fane. Oxford: Oxbow Books, pp. 109—14.
Gratuze, B. and Barrandon, J-N. 1990: Islamic Glass Weights and Stamps.
Archaeometry 32, 155—62.
Greenlaw, J. P. 1995: The Coral Buildings of Suakin. London: Kegan Paul.
Grierson, P. 1960: The Monetary Reforms of Abd al-Malik. Journal of the
Economic and Social History of the Orient 3, 241—64.
Guillaume, A. 1954: Islam. London: Penguin.
Hakim, B. S. 1986: Arabic-islamic Cities: Building and Planning Principles.
London: Kegan Paul.

Hallet, S. I. and Samizay, R. 1980: Traditional Architecture of Afghanistan.
London: Garland.

Hamilton, R. W. 1959: Khirbat al-Mafjah: an Arabian Mansion in the Jordan
Valley. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Haneda, M. 1994: Introduction: an Interpretation of the Concept of the
Islamic City. In M. Haneda and T. Miura (eds), Islamic Urban Studies:
Historical Review and Perspectives. London: Kegan Paul, pp. 1—10.
Haneda, M. and Miura, T. (eds) 1994: Islamic Urban Studies: Historical
Review and Perspectives. London: Kegan Paul.
Hastings, J. 1911: Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics. Edinburgh: T. and
T. Clark.
Hastorf, C. 1991: Gender, Space and Food in Prehistory. In M. Conkey and
J. Gero (eds), Engendering Archaeology: Women in Prehistory. Oxford:
Blackwell, pp. 132—59.
Hattox, R. S. 1991: Coffee and Coffeehouses: the Origins of a Social Beverage
in the Medieval Near East. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Hawting, G. R. 1993: The Hajj in the Second Civil War. In I. R. Netton (ed.),
Golden Roads: Migration, Pilgrimage and Travel in Medieval and Modern
Islam. Richmond: Curzon Press, pp. 31—42.
Helms, 5. 1990: Early Islamic Architecture of the Desert: a Bedouin Station in
Eastern Jordan. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Henderson, J. 1995: Investigations into Marvered Glass II. In J. W. Allan
(ed.), Islamic Art in the Ashmolean Museum. Oxford Studies in Islamic
Art, vol. 10. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 31—50.
Henderson, J. 1996: New Light on Early Islamic Industry: Excavations in
Raqqa, Syria. In R. J. A. Wilson (ed.), From River Trent to Raqqa,
Nottingham: University of Nottingham, pp. 59—71.
Henderson, J. and Allan, J. W. 1990: Enamels on Ayyubid and Mamluk Glass
Fragments. Archaeomaterials 4, 167—83.
Herrmann, J. 1991: Some Remarks on Eastern European Branches of the Silk
Road. Pakistan Archaeology 26, 241—50.
Hillenbrand, R. 1986: Madrasa: Architecture. In The Encyclopedia of Islam,
vol. 5, 2nd edn. Leiden: E. J. Brill, pp. 1136—54.
Hinton, D. A. (ed.) 1983: 25 Years of Medieval Archaeology. Sheffield:
University of Sheffield.
Hitchcock, M. 1987: Islamic Influences on Indonesian Design. In A. Al-Shahi
(ed.), The Diversity of the Muslim Community: Anthropological Essays in
Memory of Peter Lienhardt. London: Ithaca Press, pp. 51—7.
Hodder, I. 1982a: The Present Past. London: Batsford.
Hodder, I. 1982b: Symbols in Action. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Hodder, I. 1986: Reading the Past. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Hodder, I. 1990: The Domestication of Europe. Oxford: Basil BlackwellY
Hodges, K. 1987: Spatial Models, Anthropology and Archaeology. In J. M.
Wagstaff (ed.), Landscape and Culture: Geographical and Archaeological
Perspectives. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 118—33.

r
246

REFERENCES

Horton, M. 1991: Primitive Islam and Architecture in East Africa. Muqarnas
8, 103—16.
Horton, M. 1996: Shanga: the Archaeology of a Muslim Trading Community
on the Coast of East Africa. London: British Institute in Eastern Africa.
Hourani, A. 1991: Islam in European Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Hourani, G. F. 1995: Arab Seafaring (expanded and rev. edn by
J. C.
Carswell, with additional notes from H. Frost, M. Horton, D. King,
G. King, P. Morgan, G. Scanlon and H. Wright). Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Hoyland, R. 1995: Personal communication, 1 December.
Hoyland, R. (in press): Seeing Islam as Others Saw It: a Study of the NonMuslim Sources Relating to Early Islamic History. Princeton, NJ: Prince
ton University Press.
Hubert, J. 1994: Sacred Beliefs and Beliefs of Sacredness. In D. Carmichael,
J. Hubert, B. Reeves and A. Schanche (eds), Sacred Sites, Sacred Places.
London: Routledge, pp. 9—19.
Hugh-Jones, S. 1985: The Maloca: a World in a House. In E. Carmichael,
S. Hugh-Jones, B. Moser and D. Taylor (eds), The Hidden Peoples of the
Amazon. London: Museum of Mankind, pp. 78—93.
Humphrey, C. 1974: Inside a Mongolian Tent. New Society 31, 273—5.
Humphreys, S. C. 1981: Introduction: Comparative Perspectives on Death. In
S. C. Humphreys and H. King (eds), Mortality and Immortality.’ the Anthro
pology and Archaeology of Death. London: Academic Press,
pp. 1—13.
Hunwick, J. 1985: Songhay, Borno and the Hausa States, 1450—1600. In F.
J.
A. Ajayi and M. Crowder (eds), The History of West Africa, vol. 1.
Harlow: Longman, pp. 323—71.
Inalcik, H. 1973: The Ottoman Empire. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Insoll, T. 1995: A Cache of Hippopotamus Ivory at Gao, Mali; and a
Hypothesis about its Use. Antiquity 69, 327—36.
Insoll, T. 1996a: Archaeological Research in Gao and Timbuktu: October
and November 1996, Preliminary Report. Unpublished paper, University
of Cambridge.
Insoll, T. 1996b: Islam, Archaeology and History: Gao Region (Mali) C.AD
900—1250. Cambridge Monographs in African Archaeology 39. BAR
International Series 647. Oxford: Tempus Reparatum.
Insoll, L 1996c: The Archaeology of Islam in Sub-Saharan Africa: a Review.
Journal of World Prehistory 10 (4), 439—504.
Insoll, T. 1996d: A Report on an Archaeological Reconnaissance Made to the
Dahiak Islands. Unpublished paper, University of Cambridge.
Insoll, T. 1997a: Mosque Architecture in Buganda, Uganda. Muqarnas 14,
179—88.
Insoll, T. 1997b: Medieval Gao: an Archaeological Contribution. Journal of
African History 38 (1): 1—30.
Isa, A. M. 1955: Muslims and Taswir. The Muslim World 45, 250—68.
Israeli, R. 1979: Islamization and Sinicization in Chinese Islam. In N. Lev
tzion (ed.), Conversion to Islam. London: Holmes and Meier, pp. 159—76.

REFERENCES

247

Jellicoe, S. 1976: The Mughal Garden. In E. B. MacDougall and R. Etting
hausen (eds), The Islamic Garden. Washington: Dumbarton Oaks, pp.
109—24.
Jenkins, J. and Olsen, P. R. 1976: Music and Musical Instruments in the World
of Islam. London: Horniman Museum.
Jenkins, M. and Keane, D. 1982: Islamic Jewellery in the Metropolitan. New
York: Metropolitan Museum.
Jettmar, K. 1967: The Middle Asiatic Heritage of Dardistan (Islamic Collec
tive Tombs in Punyal and their Background). East and West 17, 59—83.
Johns, J. 1993: The Norman Kings of Sicily and the Fatimid Caliphate.
Anglo-Norman Studies 15, 133—59.
Johns, J. 1995: Personal communication, 1 December.
Juynboll, G. H. A. 1986: The Attitude towards Gold and Silver in Early
Islam. In M. Vickers (ed.), Pots and Pans: a Colloquium on Precious Metals
and Ceramics in the Muslim, Chinese and Graeco-Roman Worlds, Oxford
1985. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 107—15.
Kalesi, H. 1978: Oriental Culture in Yugoslav Countries from the 15th
Century till the End of the 17th Century. Dissertationes Orientales 40,
359—404.
Kawatoko, M. 1993: On the Tombstones Found at the Badi Site: the Al-Rih
Island. Kush 16, pp. 186—224.
Keddie, N. R. 1992: Material Culture, Technology, and Geography: Toward
a Holistic Comparative Study of the Middle East. In R. Cole (ed.),
Comparing Muslim Societies: Knowledge and State in a World Civilisation.
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, pp. 31—62.
Keller, W. 1965: The Bible as History: Archaeology Confirms the Book of
Books. London: Hodder and Stoughton.
Kent, S. (ed.) 1990: Domestic Architecture and the Use of Space. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Kessler, C. 1970: Abd Al-Malik’s Inscription in the Dome of the Rock: A
Reconsideration. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (unnumbered), pp.
2—14.
Khan, H-U. 1994: An Overview of Contemporary Mosques. In M. Frishman
and H-U. Khan (eds), The Mosque: History, Architectural Development
and Regional Diversity, London: Thames and Hudson, pp. 247—67.
Khan, S. F. 1976: Pakistani Women in Britain. New Community 5, 99—108.
Khuri, F. I. 1990: Imams and Emirs: State, Religion and Sects in Islam.
London: Saqi Books.
Kiel, M. 1974: Some Early Ottoman Monuments in Bulgarian Thrace. Belleten 38, 635—54.
King, G. R. D. 1983: Two Byzantine Churches in Northern Jordan and their
Re-use in the Islamic Period. Damaszener Mitteilungen pp. 111—36.
King, G. R. D. 1989: Islamic Archaeology in Libya, 1969—1989. Libyan
Studies 20, 193—207.
King, G. R. D. 1994a: Introduction. In G. R. D. King and A. Cameron (eds),
The Byzantine and Early Islamic Near East, II: Land Use and Settlement
Patterns, Princeton, NJ: Darwin Press, pp. 1—15.

248

REFERENCES

King, G. R. D. 1994b: Settlement in Western and Central Arabia and the
Gulf in the Sixth—Eighth Centuries AD. In G. R. D. King and A. Cameron
(eds), The Byzantine and Early Islamic Near East, II: Land Use and
Settlement Patterns, Princeton, NJ: Darwin Press, pp. 181—212.
King, G. R. D. and Cameron, A. (eds) 1994: The Byzantine and Early
Islamic Near East, II: Land Use and Settlement Patterns. Princeton, NJ:
Darwin Press.
Kirkman, J. 1966: Men and Monuments on the East African Coast. London:
Lutterworth.
Kirkman, J. 1976: City of San’a. London: World of Islam Festival Trust.
Kisaichi, M. 1994: The Maghrib. In M. Haneda and T. Miura (eds), Islamic
Urban Studies: Historical Review and Perspectives. London: Kegan Paul,
pp. 11—82.
Komatsu, H. C. 1994: Asia. In M. Haneda and T. Miura (eds), Islamic Urban
Studies: Historical Review and Perspectives. London: Kegan Paul,
pp.
181—328.
Kuban, D. 1974: Muslim Religious Architecture. Leiden: E. Brill.
J.
Kubiak, W. 1982: Al-Fustat: its Foundation and Early Development. Warsaw:
University of Warsaw.
Kuran, A. 1987: Form and Function in Ottoman Building Complexes.
Journal of the Islamic Environmental Design Research Centre 5—6, 132—9.
Kureisbi, H. 1990: The Buddha of Suburbia. London: Faber and Faber.
Lahiri, N. 1996: Archaeological Landscapes and Textual Images: a Study of
the Sacred Geography of Late Medieval Ballabgarh. World Archaeology 28,
244—64.
Lane, E. W. 1883 (1987): Arabian Society in the Middle Ages. London:
Curzon Press.
Lane, E. W. 1895 (1989): Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians.
London: East and West.
Lapidus, I. M. 1973a: Traditional Muslim Cities: Structure and Change. In
L. Carl Brown (ed.), From Madina to Metropolis: Heritage and Change in
the Near Eastern City, Princeton, NJ: Darwin Press,
Pp. 51—69.
Lapidus, I. M. 1973b: The Evolution of Muslim Urban Society. Comparative
Studies in Society and History 15, 21—50.
Lapidus, I. M. 1988: A History of Islamic Societies. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Laqueur, H-P. 1992: Dervish Gravestones. In R. Lifchez (ed.), The Dervish
Lodge. Los Angeles: University of California Press,
Pp. 284—95.
Lassner, J. 1970a: The Caliph’s Personal Domain: the City Plan of Baghdad
Re-examined. In A. H. Hourani and S. M. Stern (eds), The Islamic City in
the Light of Recent Research. Oxford: Bruno Cassirer,
PP. 103—18.
Lassner, J. 197Db: The Topography of Baghdad in the Early Middle Ages.
Detroit: Wayne State University Press.
Lassy, I. 1916: The Muharram Mysteries among the Azerbeijan Turks of
Caucasia. Helsinki: Helsingfors.
LaViolette, A. 1994: Masons of Mali: a Millennium of Design and Techno
logy in Earthern Materials. In S. T. Childs (ed.), Society, Culture and

REFERENCES

249

Technology in Africa: MASCA Research Papers in Science and Archaeology,
vol. 11. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology
and Anthropology, pp. 86—97.
Layton, R. 1989: Who Needs the Past? Indigenous Values and Archaeology.
London: Unwin Hyman.
Leach, E. 1976: Culture and Communication: the Logic by which Symbols
are Connected. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Leach, M. and Leach, J. 1977: Meydiha’s Kisir: a Wheat Dish from Southern
Turkey. In J. Kuper (ed.), The Anthropologists’ Cookbook. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, PP. 61—8.
Lebeuf, A. M. D. 1967: Bourn Massenia: Capitale de l’Ancien Royaume du
Baguirmi. Journal des Africanistes 37, 214—44.
Lebeuf, J. P. and Kirsch, J. H. I. 1989: Ouara, Ville Perdue (Tchad). Paris:
Editions Recherche sur les Civilisations.
Leisten, T. 1990: Between Orthodoxy and Exegesis: Some Aspects of
Attitudes in the Shari’a toward Funerary Architecture. Muqarnas 7,
12—22.
Levtzion, N. 1979. Patterns of Islamization. In N. Levtzion (ed.), Conversion
to Islam. New York: Holmes and Meier, Pp. 207—16.
Levtzion, N. and Hopkins, J. F. P. 1981: Coi7us of Early Arabic Sources for
West African History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lewcock, R. and Serjeant, R. B. 1983: The Houses of San’a. In R. B. Serjeant
and R. Lewcock (eds), San’a: an Arabian Islamic City. London: World of
Islam Festival Trust, PP. 436—500.
Lewis. B. 1987: Islam from the Prophet Muhammad to the Capture of Con
stantinople, vol. 2: Religion and Society. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, I. M. 1980: Introduction. In I. M. Lewis (ed.), Islam in Tropical
Africa. London: Hutchinson, PP. 4—98.
Lewis, P. 1994: Islamic Britain: Religion, Politics and Identity among British
Muslims. London: I. B. Tauris.
Lieber, A. E. 1981: International Trade and Coinage in the Northern Lands
during the Early Middle Ages: an Introduction. In M. A. S. Blackburn and
D. M. Metcalf (eds), Viking Age Coinage in the Northern Lands (BAR
S122). Oxford: British Archaeological Reports, pp. 1—34.
Lifchez, R. (ed.) 1992: Introduction. In R. Lifchez (ed.), The Dervish Lodge.
Los Angeles: University of California Press, Pp. 1—12.
Lindholm, C. 1996: The Islamic Middle East: an Historical Anthropology.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Lings, M. 1968: The Qoranic Symbolism of Water. Studies in Comparative
Religion 2, 153—60.
Locock, M. (ed.) 1994: Meaningful Architecture: Social Interpretation of
Buildings. Aldershot: Avebury.
Lodrick, D. 0. 1981: Sacred Cows, Sacred Places. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.
Lopez, J. B. 1992: The City Plan of the Alhambra. In J. D. Dodds (ed.),
Al-Andalus: the Art of Islamic Spain. New York: Metropolitan Museum,
pp. 153—61.

250

251

REFERENCES

REFERENCES

Lowick, N. 1974: The Arabic Inscriptions on the Mosque of Abu Ma’ruf at
Sharwas (Jebel Nefusa). Libyan Studies 5, 14—19.
Lowick, N. 1985: The Religious, the Royal and the Popular in the Figural
Coinage of the Jazira. In J. Cribb (ed.), Coinage and History of the Islamic
World. London: Variorum, pp. 159—74.
Lyons, D. 1996: The Politics of House Shape: Round vs Rectilinear Domestic
Structures in Déla Compounds, Northern Cameroon. Antiquity 70, 351—67.
McCloud, A. B. 1995: African American Islam. London: Routledge.
MacDougall, E. B. and Ettinghausen, R. (eds) 1976: The Islamic Garden.
Washington: Dumbarton Oaks.
Mackie, L. W. 1985: Covered with Flowers: Medieval Floor Coverings
Excavated at Fustat in 1980. Oriental Carpet and Textile Studies 1, 23—35.
Maclagan, I. 1994: Food and Gender in a Yemeni Community. In S. Zubaida
and R. Tapper (eds), Culinary Cultures of the Middle East. London:
Tauris, pp. 159—72.
Maclean, R. 1996: Personal communication, 10 March.
Maclean, R. 1997: Personal communication, 14 January.
Marcais, G. 1945: La conception des villes dans l’Islam. Revue d’Alger 2,
517—33.
Marcais, G. 1965: Dar. In The Encyclopedia of Islam, vol. 2, 2nd edn. Leiden:
E. J. Brill, pp. 113—15.
Marcais, W. 1928: L’Islamisme et la vie urbaine. L’Académie des Inscriptions
et Belles-Lêttres, Comptes Rendus (January—March), 86—100.
Martin, L. 1996: Personal communication, 31 July.
Marx, E. 1977: Communal and Individual Pilgrimage: the Region of Saints’
Tombs in Southern Sinai. In R. P. Werbner (ed.), Regional Cults, London:
Academic Press, pp. 29—51.
Mason, R. B. and Keall, E. J. 1990: Petrography of Islamic Pottery from
Fustat. Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt 27, 165—84.
Masry, A. H. 1994: Archaeology and the Establishment of Museums in Saudi
Arabia. In F. E. S. Kaplan (ed.), Museums and the Making of ‘Ourselves’:
The Role of Objects in National Identity. London: Leicester University
Press, pp. 125—67.
Mate, M. 5. 1983: Daulatabad: Road to Islamic Archaeology in India. World
Archaeology 14, 335—41.
Mathew, G. 1956: Chinese Porcelain in East Africa and on the Coast of
Southern Arabia. Oriental Art 2, 50—5.
Mauny, R. 1951: Notes d’archeologie au sujet de Gao. Bulletin de l’Institut
Francais d’Afrique Noire (B) 13, 837—52.
Mawdudi, S. A. 1986: The Islamic Way of Life, ed. K. Ahmad and K. Murad.
Leicester: The Islamic Foundation.
Mayer, L. A. 1956: Islamic Architects and their Works. Geneva: Albert Kundig.
Mercer, J. 1976: Spanish Sahara. London: Allen and Unwin.
Mercier, M. 1922: La civilisation urbaine au Mzab. Algiers: University of
Algiers.
Metcalf, P. and Huntingdon, R. 1991: Celebrations of Death: the Anthropol
ogy of Mortuary Ritual. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Michot, J. 1978: Les fresques du pelerinage au Caire. Art and Archaeology
Research Papers 13, 7—21.
Micklewright, N. 1991: Tiraz Fragments: Unanswered Questions about
Medieval Islamic Textiles. In C. G. Fisher (ed.), Brocade of the Pen: the
Art of Islamic Writing. Michigan: Michigan State University, pp. 31—45.
Mikami, T. 1980—1: China and Egypt: Fustat. Transactions of the Oriental
Ceramic Society 45, 67—89.
Miles, G. C. 1948: Early Arabic Glass Weights and Stamps. New York:
American Numismatic Society.
Miles, G. C. 1951: Early Arabic Glass Weights and Stamps: a Supplement.
New York: American Numismatic Society.
Miles, G. C. 1952: Mihrãb and ‘Anazah: a study in Early Islamic Iconogra
phy. In G. C. Miles, Archaeologica Orientalia in Memoriam Ernst Herz
feld. New York: J. J. Augustin, pp. 156—71.
Miner, H. 1953: The Primitive City of Timbuctoo. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Momen, M. 1985: An Introduction to Shi’i Islam: the History and Doctrines
of Twelver Shi’ism. Oxford: George Ronald.
Monod, T. 1969: Le ‘Ma’den Ijafen: une epave caravaniere ancienne dans la
Majabat Al-Koubra. Actes du ler Colloque International d’Archéologie
Africaine, 1966, Fort Lamy. Fort Lamy: Institut National Tchadien pour
les Sciences Humaines, pp. 286—320.
Montet, E. 1909: Le culte des saints Musulmans dans l’Afrique du Nord.
Geneva: University of Geneva.
Moore, H. L. 1986: Space, Text and Gender: an Anthropological Study of the
Marakwet of Kenya. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
de Moraes Farias, P. F. 1990: The Oldest Extant Writing in West Africa.
Journal des Africanistes 60 (2), 65—113.
Mortensen, I. D. 1991: From Ritual Action to Symbolic Communication. In
P. Garwood, D. Jennings, R. Skeates and J. Toms (eds), Sacred and Pro
fane. Oxford: Oxbow Books, pp. 80—7.
Mortensen, I. D. 1993: Nomads of Luristan: History, Material Culture and
Pastoralism in Western Iran. London: Thames and Hudson.
Moynihan, E. B. 1980: Paradise as a Garden in Persian and Mughal India.
London: Scolar Press.
Mujeeb, M. 1967: The Indian Muslims. London: Allen and Unwin.
Muniz, A. M., Riquelme, J. A. and Von Lettow-Vorbeck, C. L. 1995: Drom
edaries in Antiquity: Iberia and Beyond. Antiquity 69, 368—75.
Murphy, C. 1986: Piety and Honour: the Meaning of Muslim Feasts in Old
Delhi. In R. S. Khare and M. S. A. Rao (eds), Food, Society and Culture,
Durham: Carolina University Press, pp. 85—119.
Nasr, S. H. 1991: Islamic Spirituality, vol. 2: Manifestations. London: SCM
Press.
Nasr, A. M. 1993: The Structure of Society in Pre-Islamic Arabia and the
Impact of the Hijra: a Traditional Archaeology. In I. R. Netton (ed.),
Golden Roads: Migration, Pilgrimage and Travel in Medieval and Modern
Islam. Richmond: Curzon Press, pp. 3—10.

252

253

REFERENCES

REFERENCES

Nath, R. 1970: Colour Decoration in Mughal Architecture. Bombay: Tara
porevala.
Needham, J. 1954: Science and Civilisation in China. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Netton, I. R. 1993: Preface. In I. R. Netton (ed.), Golden Roads: Migration,
Pilgrimage and Travel in Medieval and Modern Islam. Richmond: Curzon
Press, pp. x—xv.
Nevett, L. 1994: Separation or Seclusion? Towards an Archaeological
Approach to Investigating Women in the Greek Household in the Fifth
to Third Centuries BC. In M. Parker Pearson and C. Richards (eds),
Architecture and Order: Approaches to Social Space. London: Routledge,
pp. 98—112.
Nicolaisen, J. 1963: Ecology and Culture of the Pastoral Tuareg. Copenha
gen: National Museum.
Nicolle, D. 1976: Early Medieval Islamic Arms and Armour. Madrid: Insti
tuto de Estudios Sobre Armas Antiguas.
Nicolle, D. 1993: Armies of the Muslim Conquest. London: Osprey.
Nielsen, J. 1995: Muslims in Western Europe. Edinburgh: Edinburgh Uni
versity Press.
Niezen, R. W. 1987: Diverse Styles of Islamic Reform among the Songhay of
Eastern Mali. Unpublished PhD dissertation, University of Cambridge.
Noonan, T. 1981: Ninth Century Dirham Hoards from European Russia: a
Preliminary Analysis. In M. A. S. Blackburn and D. M. Metcalf (eds),
Viking Age Coinage in the Northern Lands (BAR S122). Oxford: British
Archaeological Reports, pp. 47—118.
Northedge, A. and Falkner, R. 1987: The 1986 Survey Season at Samarra.
Iraq 49, 143—73.
Northedge, A., Wilkinson, T. J. and Falkner, R. 1990: Survey and Excava
tions at Samarra 1989. Iraq 52, 121—47.
Nuseibeh, S. and Grabar, 0. 1996: The Dome of the Rock. London: Thames
and Hudson.
Oliver, P. 1987: Dwellings: the House across the World. Oxford: Phaidon.
Ortiz, A. 1969: The Tewa World: Space, Time, Being, and Becoming in a
Pueblo Society. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Ory, S. 1991: Malbara (Central Arab Lands). In The Encyclopedia of Islam,
vol. 6, 2nd edn. Leiden: E. J. Brill, pp. 122—3.
O’Shea, J. 1984: Mortuary Variability: an Archaeological Investigation. New
York: Academic Press.
Ozanne, P. 1971: Ghana. In P. L. Shinme (ed.), The African Iron Age.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 36—65.
Papanek, H. 1973: Purdah: Separate Worlds and Symbolic Shelter. Corn
parative Studies in Society and History 15, 289—325.
Park, M. 1807: Travels in the Interior Districts of Africa, 1795, 1796 and 1797.
London: W. Bulmer.
Parker Pearson, M. 1993: The Powerful Dead: Archaeological Relationships
between the Living and the Dead. Cambridge Archaeological Journal 3,
203—29.

Parker Pearson, M. and Richards, C. (eds) 1994: Architecture and Order:
Approaches to Social Space. London: Routledge.
Parry, V. J. 1970: Warfare. in P. M. Holt, A. Lambton and B. Lewis (eds), The
Cambridge History of Islam, vol. 2b. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, pp. 824—SO.
Parry, V. J. and Yapp, M. E. (eds) 1975: War, Technology and Society in the
Middle East. London: Oxford University Press.
Paul, A. 1955: Aidhab: a Medieval Red Sea Port. Sudan Notes and Records
36, 64—70.
Pedersen, J. 1986: Madrasa. In The Encyclopedia of Islam, vol. 6, 2nd edn.
Leiden: E. J. Brill, pp. 1123—34.
Pedersen, P. 1995: Nature, Religion and Cultural Identity: the Religious
Environmentalist Paradigm. In 0. Bruun and A. Kalland (eds), Asian Percep
tions ofNature: a Critical Approach. Richmond: Curzon Press, pp. 258—76.
Peilat, Ch. 1965: Ghurab. In The Encyclopedia of Islam, vol. 2, 2nd edn.
Leiden: E. J. Brill, pp. 1096—7.
Pellat, Ch. 1971a: Hayawn. In The Encyclopedia of Islam vol. 3, 2nd edn.
E. J. Brill, pp. 304—9.
Leiden:
Pellat,
Ch. 1971b: Ibil. In The Encyclopedia of Islam, vol. 3, 2nd edn. Leiden:
E. J. Brill, pp. 665—8.
Peters, F. E. 1994: The Hajj: the Muslim Pilgrimage to Mecca and the Holy
Places. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Peters, R. 1977: Jihad in Medieval and Modern Islam. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Petersen, A. 1994: The Archaeology of the Syrian and Iraqi Hajj Routes.
World Archaeology 26, 47—56.
Petersen, A. 1996: Dictionary of Islamic Architecture. London: Routledge.
Petersen, A. 1997: Personal communication, 11 December.
Petherbridge, G. T. 1978: The House and Society. In G. Michell (ed.), Archi
tecture of the Islamic World. London: Thames and Hudson, pp. 193—208.
Petrushevsky, I. P. 1985: Islam in Iran. London: Athione Press.
Petsopoulos, Y. 1982: Introduction: the Ottoman Style. in Y. Petsopoulos
(ed.), Tulzps, Arabesques and Turbans: Decorative Arts from the Ottoman
Empire. London: Alexandria Press, pp. 6—9.
Philby, H. St J. B. 1920: Southern Najd. The Geographical Journal 55 (3),
161—91.
Philon, H. 1980: Islamic Art. Athens: Benaki Museum.
Pinder-Wilson, R. (ed.) 1969: Paintings from Islamic Lands. Oxford: Bruno
Cassirer.
Pinder-Wilson, R. 1976: The Persian Garden. In E. B. MacDougall and R.
Ettinghausen (eds), The Islamic Garden. Washington: Dumbarton Oaks,
pp. 71—85.
Possehl, G. L. 1981: Cambay Beadmaking. Expedition (summer), pp. 39—47.
Prins, A. H. J. 1967: The Swahili-speaking Peoples of the East African Coast.
London: International African Institute.
Prominska, E. 1971: Paleopathology According to Age at the Moslem
Necropoles at Kom el-Dikka in Alexandria (Egypt). Africana Bulletin
14, 171—3.

254

255

REFERENCES

REFEREN CES

Qaisar, A. J. 1988: Building Construction in Mughal India. the Evidence from
Painting. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Ragib, Y. 1970: Les premieres monuments funeraires de l’Islam. Annales
Islamologiques 9, 21—36.
Rahman Zakry, A. 1965: On Islamic Swords. In Geddes, C. L. (ed.) Studies
in Islamic Art and Architecture in Honour of Professor K A. C. Creswell.
Cairo: American University in Cairo Press,
pp. 270—91.
Rapoport, A. 1969: House Form and Culture. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pren
tice-Hall.
Rapoport, A. 1980: Vernacular Architecture and the Cultural Determinants
of Form. In A. D. King (ed.), Buildings and Society: Essays on the
Social Development of the Built Environment. London: Routledge,
pp.
283—305.
Rathjens, C. 1957: Jewish Domestic Architecture in San’a, Yemen. Jerusalem:
Israel Oriental Society.
Raza, M. S. 1993: Islam in Britain: Past, Present and the Future. Leicester:
Volcano Press.
Redman, C. L. 1986: Qsar es-Seghir: an Archaeological View of Medieval
Life. London: Academic Press.
Renfrew, C. 1994: The Archaeology of Religion. In C. Renfrew and
E. Zubrow (eds), The Ancient Mind: Elements of Cognitive Archaeology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 47—54.
Reygasse, M. 1950: Monuments funeraires pre-Islamiques de l’Afrique du
Nord. Paris: Arts et Métiers Graphiques.
Ricklefs, M. C. 1979: Six Centuries of Islamization in Java. In N. Levtzion
(ed.), Conversion to Islam. New York: Holmes and Meier,
pp. 100—128.
Rielly, K. 1996: Personal communication, 15 September.
Roche, M. 1970: Le M’zab: Architecture Ibadite en Algerie. Paris: Arthaud.
Rogers, J. M. 1976: Waqf and Patronage in Seljuk Anatolia: the Epigraphic
Evidence. Anatolian Studies 26, 69—103.
Rogers, J. M. and Ward, R. M. 1988: Suleyman the Magnificent. London:
British Museum.
Roman, 5. 1990: The Development of Islamic Library Collections in Western
Europe and North America. London: Mansell.
Rosen, S. A. and Avni, G. 1993: The Edge of the Empire: the Archaeology of
Pastoral Nomads in the Southern Negev Highlands in Late Antiquity.
Biblical Archaeologist 56, 188—99.
Rosenthal, F. 1971: Intilr. In The Encyclopedia of Islam, vol. 3, 2nd edn.
Leiden: E. J. Brill, pp. 1246—48.
Rowley-Conwy, P. 1989: Nubia AD 0—550 and the ‘Islamic’ Agricultural
Revolution: Preliminary Botanical Evidence from Qasr Ibrim. Archeologie
du Nil Moyen 3, 131—8.
Rudofsky, B. 1981: Architecture without Architects. London: Academy
Editions.
Ruggles, D. F. 1993: The Gardens of the Albambra and the Concept of the
Garden in Islamic Spain. In J. D. Dodds (ed.), Al-Andalus: the Art of
Islamic Spain. New York: Metropolitan Museum, pp. 163—71.

Rykwert, J. 1976: The Idea of a Town. London: Faber and Faber.
Saad, E. N. 1983: Social History of Timbuktu: the Role of Muslim Scholars
and Notables 1400—1900. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sabra, A. I. 1976: The Scientific Enterprise. In B. Lewis (ed.), The World of
Islam. London: Thames and Hudson, pp. 181—92.
Sadan, J. 1991. Mathrubät. In The Encyclopedia of Islam, vol. 6, 2nd edn.
Leiden: E. J. Brill, pp. 720—3.
Said, E. W. 1978: Orientalism. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Saitowitz, S. J., Reid, D. L. and Van der Merwe, N. J. 1996: Glass Bead Trade
from Islamic Egypt to South Africa c.AD 900—1250. South African Journal
of Science 92, 101—4.
Sakhai, E. 1991: The Story of Carpets. London: Studio.
Salim, S. M. 1962: Marsh Dwellers of the Euphrates Delta. London: Athione
Press.
Salman, I. 1969: Islam and Figurative Art. Sumer 25, 59—96.
Samson, R. (ed.) 1990: The Social Archaeology of Houses. Edinburgh: Edin
burgh University Press.
Sanogo, K. 1991: La mission d’inventaire dans la zone de retenue du barrage
de Manantali. In M. Raimbault and K. Sanogo (eds), Recherches arché
ologiques au Mali. Paris: Karthala, pp. 151—63.
Sanseverino, H. 1983: Archaeological Remains on the Southern Somali
Coast. Azania 18, 151—64.
Sauvaget, J. 1940: Caravansérais Syriens du Moyen Age, II: Caravansérais
Mamelouks. Ars Islamica 7, 1—19.
Sauvaget,J. 1950: Les epitaphes royales de Gao. Bulletin del’Institut Fran cais
de l’Afrique Noire 12, 418—40.
Scanlon, G. T. 1970a: Housing and Sanitation: Some Aspects of Medieval
Egyptian Life. In A. H. Hourani and S. M. Stern (eds), The Islamic City in
the Light of Recent Research. Oxford: Bruno Cassirer, pp. 185—94.
Scanlon, G. T. 1970b: Egypt and China: Trade and Imitation. In D. S.
Richards (ed.), Islam and the Trade of Asia. Oxford: Bruno Cassirer, pp.
8 1—95.
Scarce, J. 1987: Women’s Costume of the Near and Middle East. London:
Unwin Hyman.
Scerrato, U. 1981: Survey of Wooden Mosques and Related Wood Carvings
in the Swat Valley: ISMEO Activities. East and West 31, 178—81.
Scerrato, U. 1983: Labyrinths in the Wooden Mosques of North Pakistan: a
Problematic Presence. East and West 33, 21—9.
Schacht, J. 1954: Sur la diffusion des formes d’architecture religeuse Musul
mane a travers le Sahara. Travaux de l’Institut de Recherches Sahariennes
II, pp. 11—27.
Schacht, J. 1961: Further Notes on the Staircase Minaret. Ars Orientalis 4,
pp. 137—41.
Schacht, J. 1964: An Introduction to Islamic Law. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Schimmel, A. 1970: Islamic Calligraphy. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Schimmel, A. 1975: Mystical Dimensions of Islam. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press.

256

REFERENCES

Schimmel, A. 1976: The Celestial Garden in Islam. In E. B.
MacDougall and
R. Ettinghausen (eds), The Islamic Garden. Washington:
Dumbarton
Oaks, pp. 13—39.
Schimmel, A. 1980: Islam in the Indian Subcontinent. Leiden:
E. Brill.
Schimmel, A. 1990: Calligraphy and Islamic Culture. London: J.
I. B. Tauris.
Schimmel, A. 1991: Sacred Geography in Islam. In Scott and
P. Simpson
J.
Housley, (eds), Sacred Places and Profane Spaces: Essays
in the Geo
graphics ofJudaism, Christianity and Islam. New York:
Greenwood, pp.
163—75.
Schneider, M. 1983: Steles funeraires Musulmanes des lies
Dahiak (Mer
Rouge). Cairo: Institut Français d’Archeologie Orientale.
Schumacher, C. E. 1888: The Jauldn. London: Bentley.
Serjeant, R. B. 1959: Mihrab. Bulletin of the School of
Oriental and African
Studies 22, 439—53.
Serjeant, R. B. and Lewcock, R. (eds) 1983: San’a: an Arabian
Islamic City.
London: World of Islam Festival Trust.
Shakespear, S. 1995: Personal communication, 7 November.
Shah, S. L. 1993: Kashmir: History and Archaeology through
the Ages. Delhi:
Indus.
Shawesh, A. M. 1995: Traditional Settlement in the Oasis of
Ghadames in the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. Libyan Studies 26, 35—47.
Sheriff, A. 1992: Mosques, Merchants and Landowners in
Zanzibar Stone
Town. Azania 27, 1—20.
Sherratt, A. 1992: What Can Archaeologists Learn from Annalistes?
In A. B.
Knapp (ed.), Archaeology, Annales and Ethnohistory.
Cambridge: Cam
bridge University Press, pp. 135—42.
Shiloah, A. 1995: Music in the World of Islam: a
Socio-Cultural Study.
Aldershot: Scolar Press.
Silverman, R. 1991: Arabic Writing and the Occult. In C.
G. Fisher (ed.),
Brocade of the Pen. the Art of Islamic Writing. Michigan:
Michigan State
University, pp. 19—30.
Simoons, F. J. 1981: Eat Not this Flesh. Westport, Conn.:
Greenwood.
Simpson, St J. 1995: Death and Burial in the Late Islamic
Near East: Some
Insights from Archaeology and Ethnography. In S. Campbell
and A.
Green (eds), The Archaeology of Death in the Ancient Near East.
Oxford:
Oxbow Books, pp. 240—51.
Sims, E. 1978: Markets and Caravanserajs. In G. Michell (ed.),
Architecture of
the Islamic World. London: Thames and Hudson,
97—111.
pp.
Sjöström, I. 1993: Trzolitania in Transition: Late Roman to Early
Islamic
Settlement. Aldershot: Avebury.
Smith, J. I. and Haddad, Y. Y. 1983: Islamic Understanding
of Death and
Resurrection. New York: State University of New York Press.
Sopher, D. E. 1967: Geography of Religions. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: PrenticeHall.
Soucek, P. P. 1988: The Life of the Prophet: Illustrated Versions.
In P. P.
Soucek (ed.), Content and Context of Visual Arts in the
Islamic World.
University Park: Pennsylvania University Press,
pp. 193—219.

REFERENCES

257

Soundara Rajan, K. V. 1980: Ahmadabad. New Delhi: Archaeological Survey
of India.
Sourdel-Thomine, J. 1971: Hammãm. In The Encyclopedia of Islam, vol. 3,
2nd edn. Leiden: E. J. Brill, pp. 139—44.
Stephen, C. 1876 (1967): Archaeology and Monumental Remains of Delhi.
Allahabad: Kitab Mahal.
Stern, S. M. 1970: The Constitution of the Islamic City. In A. H. Hourani
and S. M. Stern (eds), The Islamic City in the Light of Recent Research.
Oxford: Bruno Cassirer, pp. 25—50.
Stowasser, B. F. 1984: The Status of Women in Early Islam. In F. Hussain
(ed.), Muslim Women. London: Croom Helm, pp. 11—43.
Talbot Rice, D. 1971: Islamic Painting: a Survey. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Talbot Rice, D. 1993: Islamic Art. London: Thames and Hudson.
Talib, K. 1984: Shelter in Saudi Arabia. London: Academy.
Tampoe, M. 1989: Maritime Trade between China and the West (BAR mt.
S555). Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
Taphoo, R. 1974: The Origin and Development of Islamic Tombs in India (I).
Quarterly Review of Historical Studies 14, 173—82.
Taphoo, R. 1975: The Origin and Development of Islamic Tombs in India
(II). Quarterly Review of Historical Studies 15, 20—30.
Tapper, R. and Zubaida, S. 1994: Introduction. In S. Zubaida and R. Tapper
(eds), Culinary Cultures of the Middle East London: Tauris, pp. 1—17.
Tarlow, S. and Boyd, B. 1992: Editorial. Archaeological Review from Cam
bridge 11(1), pp. 1—9.
Tate, G. P. 1910: Seistan: a Memoir on the History, Topography, Ruins and
People of the Country. Calcutta: Superintendent Government Printing.
Thesiger, W. 1954: The Marshmen of Southern Iraq. Geographical Journal
120, pp. 272—81.
Thesiger, W. 1980: The Marsh Arabs. London: Penguin.
Thomassey, P. and Mauny, R. 1951: Campagne de Fouilles a Koumbi Saleh.
Bulletin de l’Institut Francais de l’Afrique Noire (B) 13, 438—62.
Thomassey, P. and Mauny, R. 1956: Campagne de Fouilles de 1950 a Koumbi
Saleh. Bulletin de l’Institut Français de l’Afrique Noire (B) 18, pp. 117-40.
Thompson, J. 1993: Carpets from the Tents, Cottages and Workshops of Asia.
London: Laurence King.
Tillotson, G.H.R. 1990: Architectural Guides for Travellers: Mughal India.
London: Penguin.
Tjandrasamita, U. 1978: The Introduction of Islam and the Growth of
Moslem Coastal Cities in the Indonesian Archipelago. In H. Soebadio
and C. A. du Marchie Sarvaas (eds), Dynamics of Indonesian History.
Oxford: North-Holland, pp. 141—60.
Torres Balbás, L. 1942: Gibraltar: Ilave y Guarda de Espãna. Al-Andalus 7,
168—216.
Triano, A. V. 1992: Madinat al-Zahra: the Triumph of the Islamic State. In
J. D. Dodds (ed.), Al-Andalus: the Art of Islamic Spain. New York:
Metropolitan Museum of Art, pp. 27—39.

258

259

REFERENCES

REFEREN CES

Trigger, B. G. 1989: A History of Archaeological Thought. Cambridge: Cam
bridge University Press.
Trigger, B. G. and Glover, I. (eds) 1981: Regional Traditions of Archae
ological Research 1. World Archaeology 13 (2).
Trigger, B. G. and Glover, I. (eds) 1982: Regional Traditions of Archaeolo
gical Research 2. World Archaeology 13 (3).
Triniingham, J. S. 1949: Islam in the Sudan. London: Oxford University
Press.
Trimingham, J. S. 1959: Islam in West Africa. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Trimingham, J. S. 1971: The Sufi Orders in Islam. London: Oxford Univer
sity Press.
Tsafrir, Y. and Foerster, G. 1994: From Scythopolis to Baysan: Changing
Concepts of Urbanism. In G.R.D. King and A. Cameron (eds), The
Byzantine and Early Islamic Near East, II: Land Use and Settlement
Patterns. Princeton, NJ: Darwin Press, pp. 95—115.
Vardjavand, P. 1979: La découverte archeologique du complexe scientifique
de l’Observatoire de Maraqe. In Akten des VII Internationalen Kongresses
für Iranische Kunst und Archaaologie. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer Verlag, pp.
526—36.
Vercoutter, J. 1958: Excavations at Sai 1955. Kush 6, 144—69.
Verin, P. 1986: The History of Civilisation in North Madagascar. Rotterdam:
A. A. Balkema.
Verity, P. 1971: Kababish Nomads of Northern Sudan. In P. Oliver (ed.),
Shelter in Africa. London: Barrie and Jenkins, pp. 25—35.
Vickers, M. 1995: Arab Mosques Call Albanians Back to Prayer. The Euro
pean Magazine, 28 September 4 October, 3.
Violich, F. 1962: Evolution of the Spanish City. Journal of the American
Institute of Planners 28 (3), 170—9.
Vire, M. M. 1958: Notes sur trois epitaphes royales de Gao. Bulletin de
l’Institut Fran çais de l’Afrique Noire (B) 20, 368—76.
Vogelsang-Eastwood, G. 1993: Unearthing History: Archaeological Textiles
from Egypt. Hali 15, 85—9.
Volwahsen, A. 1970: Living Architecture: Islamic Indian. London: Mac
Donald.
Von Grunebaum, G. E. 1955: The Structure of the Muslim Town. In Islam:
Essays in the Nature and Growth of a Cultural Tradition (American
Anthropological Association Memoir 81). Ann Arbor: American Anthro
pological Association.
Von Grunebaum, G. E. 1976: Muhammadan Festivals. London: Curzon
Press.
Von Wartburg, M-L. 1983: The Medieval Cane Sugar Industry in
Cyprus: Results of Recent Excavations. The Antiquaries Journal 63,
298—314.
Wagstaff, J. M. (ed.) 1987: Landscape and Culture: Geographical and Archae
ological Perspectives. Oxford: Blackwell.
Waines, D. 1991: Maba. In The Encyclopedia of Islam, vol. 6, 2nd ed.
Leiden: E. J. Brill, pp. 807—9.

Waines, D. 1995: An Introduction to Islam. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer
sity Press.
Wansbrough, J. 1977: Quranic Studies: Sources and Methods of Scrzjttural
Interpretation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wansbrough, J. 1978: The Sectarian Milieu: Content and Composition of
Islamic Salvation History. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wasserstein, D. J. 1993: Coins as Agents of Cultural Definition in Islam.
Poetics Today 14, 303—22.
Watson, A. M. 1983: Agricultural Innovation in the Early Islamic World.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Watson, K. 1972: French Romanesque and Islam: Influences from Al-Andalus
on Architectural Decoration. Art and Archaeology Research Papers 2, 1—27.
Watson, K. 1989: The Kufic Inscription in the Romanesque Cloister of
Moissac in Quercy: Links with Le Puy, Toledo and Catalan Woodworkers.
Arte Medieval 3 (1), pp. 7—27.
Webb, S. 1987: Re-burying Australian Skeletons. Antiquity 61, 292—6.
Weber, M. 1938: The City. New York: Free Press.
Webster, S. 1984: Ijarim and IIijab: Seclusive and Exclusive Aspects of
Traditional Muslim Dwelling and Dress. Women’s Studies International
Forum 7, 251—57.
Weir, S. 1985: Qat in Yemen: Consumption and Social Change. London:
British Museum.
Weisgerber, G. 1980: Patterns of Early Islamic Metallurgy in Oman. Proceed
ings of the Seminar for Arabian Studies 10, 115—26.
Welch, A. 1979: Calligraphy in the Arts of the Muslim World. Folkestone:
Dawson.
Wenzel, M. 1972: House Decoration in Nubia. London: Duckworth.
Westermarck, E. 1933: Pagan Survivals in Mohammedan Civilisation. Lon
don: Macmillan.
Whalen, N., Killick, A., James, N., Morsi, G. and Kamel, M. 1981: Saudi
Arabian Archaeological Reconnaissance 1980: Preliminary Report on the
Western Province Survey. Atlal 5, 43—58.
Wheatcroft, A. 1995: The Ottomans: Dissolving Images. London: Penguin.
Wheatley, P. 1971: The Pivot of the Four Quarters: a Preliminary Enquiry
into the Origins and Character of the Ancient Chinese City. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Whitcomb, D. 5. 1979: Imported Far Eastern Wares. In D. S. Whitcomb and
J. H. Johnson (eds), Quseir al-Qadim 1978: Preliminary Report. Cairo:
American Research Centre in Cairo, pp. 108—9.
Whitcomb, D. S. 1988: Islamic Archaeology in Aden and the Hadhramaut.
In D. T. Potts (ed.), Araby the Blest: Studies in Arabian Archaeology.
Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, pp. 177—263.
Whitcomb, D. S. 1990—1: Glazed Ceramics of the Abbasid Period from the
Aqaba Excavations. Transactions of the Oriental Ceramic Society 55, 43—65.
Whitcomb, D. 5. 1992: The Islamic Period as Seen from Selected Sites. In B.
MacDonald (ed.), The Southern Ghors and Northeast Arabah Archaeolo
gical Survey. Sheffield: J. R. Collis, pp. 113—18.

—

260

REFERENCES

REFERENCES

Whitcomb, D. S. 1995: Islam and the Socio-cultural Transition of Palestine:
Early Islamic Period (638—1099 CE). In T. E. Levy (ed.), The Archaeology of
Society in the Holy Land. London: Leicester University Press, pp. 488—98.
Whitcomb, D. S. 1996: Urbanism in Arabia. Arabian Archaeology and Epigraphy 7, 38—51.
Whitehouse, D. 1968: Excavations at Siraf: First Interim Report. Iran 6,
1—22.
Whitehouse, D. 1970: Siraf: a Medieval Port on the Persian Gulf. World
Archaeology 2, 141—58.
Whitehouse, D. 1971: The Houses of Siraf, Iran. Archaeology 24 (3), 255—62.
Whitehouse, D. 1972: Staircase Minarets on the Persian Gulf. Iran 10,
155—58.
Whitehouse, D. 1973: Chinese Stoneware from Siraf: the Earliest Finds. In
N. Hammond (ed.), South Asian Archaeology. Park Ridge: Noyes Press,
pp. 241—55.
Whitehouse, D. 1974: Excavations at Siraf: Sixth Interim Report. Iran 12,
1—30.
Whitehouse, D. 1976: Kish. Iran 14, 146—7.
Whitehouse, D. 1980: Siraf III: the Congregational Mosque and Other
Mosques from the Ninth to the Twelfth Centuries. London: British Insti
tute of Persian Studies.
Wiedemann, E. 1986: al-Kuhl. In The Encyclopedia of Islam, vol. 5, 2nd ed.
Leiden: E. J. Brill, pp. 356—7.
Wijayapala, W. and Prickett, M. E. 1986: Sri Lanka and the International
Trade: an Exhibition of Ancient Imported Ceramics found in Sri Lanka’s
Archaeological Sites. Colombo: Archaeological Department.
Wilber, D. N. 1979: Persian Gardens and Garden Pavilions. Washington,
DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
Wilkinson, T. J. 1975: Sohar Ancient Fields Project: Interim Report no. 1.
Journal of Oman Studies 1, 75—8 0.
Wilkinson, T. J. 1977: Sohar Ancient Fields Project: Interim Report no. 3.
Journal of Oman Studies 3, 13—16.
Williamson, A. 1974: Harvard Archaeological Survey of Oman 1973, III:
Sohar and the Sea Trade of Oman in the Tenth Century. Proceedings of the
Seminar for Arabian Studies 4, 78—95.
Wilson, R. T. 1984: The Camel. Harlow: Longman.
Wilson, T. 1979: Swahili Funerary Architecture of the Northern Kenya
Coast. Art and Archaeology Research Papers (December), 33—46.
Woodward, M. R. 1989: Islam in Java: Normative Piety and Mysticism in the
Sultanate of Yogyakarta. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Woolley, C. L. and Lawrence, T. E. 1936: The Wilderness of Zin. London:
Jonathan Cape.
Xiaowie, L. 1994: China. In M. Frishman and H-U. Khan (eds), The Mosque:
History, Architectural Development and Regional Diversity. London:
Thames and Hudson, pp. 209—23.
Young, G. and Wheeler, N. 1977: Return to the Marshes: Life with the Marsh
Arabs of Iraq. London: Collins.

Zeyadeh, A. 1994: Settlement Patterns: an Archaeological Perspective. Case
Studies from Northern Palestine and Jordan. In G.R.D. King and A.
Cameron (eds), The Byzantine and Early Islamic Near East, II: Land
Use and Settlement Patterns. Princeton, NJ: Darwin Press, Pp. 117—31.
Ziadeh, G. 1995: Ethno-history and ‘Reverse Chronology’ at Ti inmk, a
Palestinian Village. Antiquity 69, 999—1008.

261

F
INDEX

Index

Abbasids, 40, 67, 96, 111, 123, 142,
163
ablutions, 32, 33, 55, 57
Abraham, 111
Abu Dawad, 18
Abu-Lughod, J., 202, 203
Abu Rabia, A., 101
Aden, 112
Adrar des Iforas, 161
aerial photographs, 219
Afghanistan, 15, 115, 128
African Americans, 71
Aghlabids, 131
Agra, 178
agriculturalists, 6, 161, 162; see also
sedentaries
agriculture, 100, 196, 220, 230; apple
trees, 196; wheat, 100; see also food
Ahmed, A., 11, 148
Ahuja, S., 83
Aidhab, 112
Ajdabiyah, 131
Akbar, J., 214, 224
il-Andalus, see Spain
Aland Islands, 158
Al-Azzawi, S., 79
Albania, 59
Al-Bukhari, 18
Al-Buraq, 144—5; see also Night
Journey
alcohol, 12, 18, 99, 100, 227; see also
drink

Alevi, 21
Alexandria, 170
Al-Faw, 147
Algeria, 67, 86, 114, 186
Algiers, 186
Alhambra, 69, 211
Al-Hassan, A., 100
Au, 20, 21, 90, 114, 127
Al—Janabi, T., 67, 222
Allah, see God
Al-Maqdisi, 205
Almeria, 189
Almohads, 103
Almoravids, 189
alms giving, 18—19
Al-Nasai, 18
Al-Rih Island, 155
altars, 31
Al-Tirmidhi, 18
Ambary, H., 192
Amiry, S., 212
amsar, 211
Amu Darya, 157
amulets/charms, 88, 89, 124—7, 142;
see also magic
Anatolia, see Turkey
Andrews, P., 73
Angel Gabriel, 18, 111
angels, 169
animism, 15, 146, 147, 161; see also
paganism
Annales theory, 12—13, 27

anthropology, 4, 85, 87, 105, 107,
127, 159, 169, 186, 188, 202, 213
Aqaba, 96, 115, 156
arabesques, 53, 135, 137—8
Arabia, 14, 15, 17,20,62,72, 102, 106,
111—12, 147, 156, 168, 175, 206
Arabic language, 3, 22, 153, 231;
scripts, 127, 135, 138, 144, 150,
155, 160, 165, 187—95
Arabs, 14, 15, 51, 76, 103, 118, 153,
157, 160, 163, 175, 198, 209, 211,
216, 230
archaeobotany, 100, 107, 198
archaeological recognition, 1, 2,
24—5; daily life, 93, 124; diet, 94—9,
101, 103, 104, 107; domestic
environment, 61, 62, 65—76, 80,
90—1; Five Pillars, 19; gender,
81—4; iconoclasm, 137; Islam and
the Muslim community, 26, 39,
134, 144, 165, 174, 176, 185; magic,
88—90, 124, 128; manufacturing
and technology, 164—5; mosques,
26—7, 30, 32, 35—49, 57—8, 60;
Muslim art, 135, 139, 144, 148;
Muslim burials, 167—76, 185, 199,
200; Muslim dress, 120; Muslim
schools and sects, 40; Muslim
settlements, 39, 201—2, 206—7,
215—18, 225—6; nomads, 46, 47, 61,
72—6, 216, 217; non-Muslim
burials, 112—13; personal
possessions, 116—20; pilgrimage,
110—13, 114; prayer, 32, 36;
religion, 58, 91, 131—2, 165, 199;
status, 81; stimulants, 106;
syncretism, 146; trade, 149, 153—62;
travel, 88—90, 124—8; war, 128—31
archaeology: biblical, 231;
demographic, 5; economic, 5;
environmental, 5; historical, 53,
166; landscape, 5, 201, 218—24;
marine, 159; medieval, 4, 5, 6, 53,
229; social, 93, 94, 147, 159—62,
166—7, 187, 201—2, 205; see also
archaeological recognition
archaeozoology, 96—9, 101, 103
architecture, study of, 4, 8, 53, 61,
62; funerary, 167, 168, 176—87,

263

195, 196; impermanent, 72—6, 212;
pre-Islamic, 62, 74; vernacular, 61,
79; see also tombs
Armelagos, G., 102
armour, 127, 130
Arnold, T., 136, 137, 144
Ar-Risha, 47, 217
art, 133, 134—5, 162, 165; classical,
135; Muslim, 2, 4, 5, 134—48, 150
art history, 5, 8, 53, 134—5, 188
Ashura, see Muharram
Assyria, 64
Aswan, 68, 175
Athamina, K., 123
Austin, D., 229
Ayatollah Khomeini, 179
Ayyubids, 96
Azerbaijan, 163, 185, 196
Babur, 198
Babylon, 145
Bacharach, J., 210—11
Baga, 145
Baghdad, 40, 157, 178, 208—11
Balkans, 15, 111, 122
Ballabgarh, 224
Baltic, 157
Baluchistan, 21, 47
Banbhore/Daybul, 142, 155
Bangladesh, 83—4
baraka, 23, 103, 173, 174, 186, 196
Basra, 40, 46
Basset, H., 130
Bates, U., 125
baths, 68, 115, 184, 203, 207, 221—2
Baysan/Bet Shean, 215
beads, prayer, 117—18, 158, 164
Beckwith, C., 208
Bedouin, 47, 72, 101, 114, 172, 217
beit/bayt, 62, 68; see also domestic
architecture/environment
Bela, 75
belief systems, 7, 15
Bengal, 107, 148, 152
Bennigsen, A., 114
Berbers, 86—7, 88, 160, 186
Berti, 125
biblical archaeology, 231
Bierman, I., 215, 216

264

INDEX

Biman, 146
blacksmiths, 213
Blau, S.. 230
Bobo-Dioulasso, 146
Bonine, M., 202, 204
Bosnia, 128
Bosworth, C., 128, 130
botanical remains, 5, 100, 107
Boyd, B., 166
Bradford, 83—4
brass, 158, 159
Braudel, F., 12
bridges, 109
Britain, 13, 54, 55, 83, 224
Brookes, J., 220
Broomhall, M., 173
Buddhists, 8, 13, 37—8, 136, 147,
148
Bukhara, 115
Bulgaria, 222
Bulliet, R., 27, 207
Burckhardt, J., 172
burials, 2, 8, 15, 76, 131, 134, 149,
165, 225, 227, 228, 230;
archaeological recognition of,
112—13, 167—76, 185, 199, 200; see
also cemeteries; death; tombs
Burkina Faso, 146
Burton-Page, J., 175
Byzantines, 38, 51, 64, 68, 96, 135,
150, 151, 159, 206, 217, 221
Cairo, 68, 81, 108, 109, 111, 121, 123,
127, 144, 168, 211
caliphs, 17, 20, 36, 40, 83, 99, 111,
143, 208; Abd al-Malik, 49, 115,
136, 150, 151; Abd al-Rahman III,
35; Abu Bakr, 189; al-Mansur,
123, 208, 209; Harun al-Rashid,
164, 210; Mu’awiya, 38;
Mutawakkil, 142; Umar, 189;
Uthman, 138
calligraphy, 71, 88, 135, 138, 144,
146, 149, 165, 192
Callmer, J., 158
Cambridge, 27, 54—8, 83, 174, 232
camel, 98, 99, 102—4
Cameroons, 78
Campo, J., 91

Canaan, T., 125
Canton, see Quanzhou
caravanserais, see hostels
carpets, 48, 81, 178, 198; see also
prayer rugs; textiles
Carsten, J., 61
casbab, see citadels
Caspian Sea, 157
caste, 83, 104, 120
Caucausus, 15, 157, 196
cemeteries, 112, 161, 168, 170, 173—6,
203, 207, 216, 225; see also burials;
death; tombs
Central Africa, 180
Central Asia, 15, 47, 48, 51, 68, 115,
175, 184, 205, 206; art, 135, 137; as
frontier zone, 17, 130; pilgrimage
in, 111, 114; and trade, 115, 148,
153, 157
Chad, 180
chapels, 11
charitable endowments, 19, 109
Chatty, D., 85
Chaudhuri, K., 149, 153
Chechnya, 128
China, 15, 163, 173, 205, 208; Hui
community in, 5 1—3, 101—2, 190—2;
and trade, 148, 152—3, 157
Christendom, 13
Christianity, 8, 50, 51, 150, 197, 228
Christians, 11, 38, 64, 66, 95, 99, 114,
118, 122, 123, 136, 143—4, 151, 213,
229; cemeteries, 174, 175; Coptic,
112, 121; diet, 95, 98, 103;
settlements, 215, 216
churches, 8, 9, 11, 24, 30, 35—7, 51,
55, 58, 216
citadels, 61, 203, 206, 208—11
cities, 2, 6, 15, 202—11, 217, 225, 227;
see also settlements; urbanism
Clancy-Smith, J., 186
clothing, see dress
coffee, 73—4, 81, 106
coins, 76, 134, 136, 148, 149—51,
157—8, 159
colour, 121, 123—4
commerce, see trade
community (ummah), 10, 26, 29,
104, 211—13, 228; origins of, 17,

INDEX

24; and pilgrimage, 110, 111, 114;
see also Muslim community
Conkey, M., 85
Cook, M., 231
copper, 125, 150, 151
Cordoba, 163, 232
Cosar, F., 82
cosmetics, 118
Costa, P., 220
courtyard houses, 63—4, 67, 74, 78,
80, 83, 203, 206, 207, 227
cowry shells, 89, 158, 159
Creswell, K. A. C., 36
Crete, 216
Crone, P., 231
crops, see agriculture
Crusaders, 96, 112
Ctesiphon, 136
cuisine, see food
cult, 8
cultural specifics/diversity, 27, 28,
33, 41, 64, 67, 102, 128, 131—2, 147,
150, 165, 181, 199, 200, 204, 224,
228
cursive, see Arabic language, scripts

I

Dahlak Islands, 155, 220
Damascus, 40, 111, 206
dar, 62; see also domestic
architecture/environment
dar al-barb, 128
dar al-Islam, 128, 176
Darb Zubaydah, 89, 111
dargah, 184; see also Sufis, lodges
Darley-Doran, R., 150
dating systems, 15, 110, 150, 192
Daulatabad, 221
death, 2, 6, 93, 165, 220, 228; see also
burials; cemeteries; tombs
De Jong, F., 194
Delhi, 38, 104, 139, 224
demographic archaeology, 5
design, 2, 50, 52, 88, 89, 127, 135,
138—9, 144, 146—7, 150, 156, 178,
188; see also arabesques; art
dhikr, 22
dhimmi, 38
Dickie, J., 108, 173, 198
diet, 2, 12, 76, 94—107; see also food

265

dietary laws, 95—6, 97, 102, 107
dikka, see mosque, furnishings
djinn, 88
Dogon, 162
dogs, 97
Dome of the Rock, 15, 49—51, 53, 78,
142, 150
domes, 31, 57, 196
domestic architecture/environment,
12, 15, 23, 93, 122, 149, 201, 204—5,
213, 217, 228, 230; archaeological
recognition of, 61, 62, 65—76, 80,
90—1; impermanent structures,
72—6; orientation, 77; underlying
concepts, 63—4, 68—9, 72—3, 79—80,
84, 91
Donley-Reid, L., 85, 89
Douglas, M., 82
Douma, 156
dress, 12, 18, 93, 110, 116, 120—4,
128, 132
drink, 12, 93, 94-1 07
East Africa, 19, 20, 21, 44, 45, 54,
111, 153, 155, 181—2; see also
Kenya Tanzania; Uganda;
Zanzibar
economic archaeology, 5
education, 107—8; see also schools,
religious; universities
Edwards, H., 142
Egypt, 17, 45, 68, 89, 109, 145, 168,
172, 175, 198, 220; pilgrimage, 111,
112; and trade, 153, 155, 159; see
also Fustat; Qasr Ibrim; Quseir
al-Qadim
Eickelman, D., 10, 11, 114
Eilat, 163
El-Tom, A., 125
El-Wueira, 96
Empty Quarter, 47
Enders-Wimbush, S., 114
endowments, 19, 109
environment, 224; see also landscapes
environmental archaeology, 5
epigraphy, see inscriptions
Eritrea, 44, 155, 220
Ethiopia, 103, 106, 136
ethnicity, 51—2, 53, 190—2, 211—13

266

ethnography, 6, 46, 54, 73, 85, 87,
107, 127, 132, 146, 167, 170, 182,
187, 197, 199
Ettinghausen, R., 140
Europe, 3, 9, 15, 20, 54, 79, 84, 100,
134,152,158,159,163,176,204,231
family structure, 66, 77—80, 91, 173,
207, 212; of Muhammad, 62, 79
Farb, P., 102
Farias, P., 189
Farouk, 0., 153
fasting, 18, 106—7
Fatima, 20, 90, 127
Fatimids, 20, 143, 144, 153
fatwa, 183; see also law
faunal remains, 5, 96—9, 101, 107, 132
feasts and festivals, 57, 93, 104,
106—7, 110, 132
Feifa, 164
Fentress, E., 78
figural representation, 135, 136—7,
144—8, 149, 151
Finland, 158
Fischer, J., 146
Fisher, H., 160
Five Pillars, 18, 19, 20, 26, 28, 58,
106, 110
flags, 18, 123
Fleming, A., 176
food, 12, 93, 94—107, 120, 131, 132;
see also diet
forts, 68, 69, 96, 111, 115, 130—1, 219
France, 143
Frishman, M., 33
funerary monuments, see tombs
Fustat, 40, 48, 68, 118, 155, 156, 159,
206, 211
Gadara, 96
Gao, 118, 158, 180, 189
gardens, 53, 177, 188, 195, 197—9
Garlake, P., 74
Garoumele, 180
Geertz, C., 146, 229
Gellens, S., 110
Gellner, E., 10, 11, 23, 118
gender, 65, 71, 76, 77, 79, 82—8, 90,
91, 104—5, 172, 188, 193—4, 213,

INDEX

INDEX

228; archaeological recognition of,
81—4; see also women
geography, 202, 224; see also sacred
geography
Gerholm, T., 212, 213
Ghadames, 81
Ghana, 158
ghazi, see soldier/warriors
Gibb, H. A. R., 128, 148, 177
Gibraltar, 36, 222
Gilsenan, M., 81, 205
Gladney, D., 101—2, 190
glass, 164; production, 150, 158, 159,
164
God, 26, 95, 100, 101, 104, 106, 115,
117, 124, 128, 137, 138, 142, 156,
224
gold, 89, 117, 150, 151, 158, 159, 163
Golombek, L., 159, 184
Goodwin, G., 196
Goody,J., 198
Grabar, 0., 5, 31, 50, 130, 135, 209,
232
Granada, 69, 103, 211
grave clothes, 170—2, 176—7; see also
textiles
gravestones, 168, 169, 187—96; see
also burials; tombs
Greece, 64
Greeks, 31, 38, 150, 151, 163, 216
green (colour), 18, 121, 196, 197
Guillaume, A., 142, 197
Guinea, 145
Gujarat, 38, 153
Gulf, the, 20, 21, 115, 152, 155

hadith, 1, 9, 18, 28, 62, 94, 104, 109,
114, 121, 136, 144, 148, 168, 232
Hagia Sophia, 36
hajj, 18, 19, 23, 28, 89, 109—13, 114,
148; see also pilgrimage
Hakim, B., 204-6
halal, see diet
Hama, 118
Hamar, 76
hammam, see baths
Hanafi, 19, 20, 32, 95
Hanbali, 19, 20
Han Chinese, 102

Haneda, M., 202

haram, see mosque, sanctuary
harem, 63, 99; see also privacy
Hassan, 20, 90, 127
Hastorf, C., 104
health, 93, 107—8, 125; see also
hospitals
Henderson, J., 164
henna, 18
Heraklion/Candia, 216
Herat, 115
heresy, 21
Herrmann, J., 157
higab, see amulets/charms
hzrah, see migration
Hill, D., 100
Hillenbrand, R., 68
Hindus, 8, 13, 37—8, 66, 146, 147,
153, 224, 230; diet, 104; places of
worship, 37—8
historical archaeology, 53, 166; see
also medieval archaeology
historical evidence/sources, 46, 85,
107, 127, 132, 147, 158, 159, 170,
182, 187, 197
historical perspective, 5
history of art, 5, 8, 53, 134—5, 188
Hoggar, 47
holymen, 15, 22—3, 125, 147, 177
holy places, see Mecca; Medina
hospitals, 19, 109, 207
hostels, 19, 109, 115—16, 159, 175,
203, 207, 218
Hourani, A., 10
Hourani, G., 149, 152
houses, see domestic architecture/
environment
Hoyland, R., 150
Hugh-Jones, S., 61
Hui, 15, 51, 53, 101—2, 153, 190—2
Hungary, 103-4
Huntingdon, R., 176
Hureidhah, 112
Hussein, 20, 90, 107, 114, 127, 184,
185, 188, 196
Ibadites (Ibadis), 21, 45, 89
Ibn al-Hajjaj, 18
Ibn Battuta, 112, 114, 146

267

Ibn Maja, 18
Ibn Sa’id, 180
Ibn Taymiya, 183
iconoclasm, 137
iconography, 148—9, 187—95; see also
art; design; symbols
idal-adha, 97, 107, 110
id al-fitr, 106
ideas, 133—4, 152, 162, 163, 165
idols, 53, 136, 147
Idrisids, 158
Ifriqiya, 155, 158
ihram, 110; see also dress; pilgrimage
imagery, 50, 51; see also design
Imambara, 107
Imams, 19, 20, 29, 31, 45, 143
India, 15, 20, 23, 48, 54, 73, 111, 120,
125, 137, 153, 163, 175, 184; and
status, 177; and trade, 115, 152,
155, 157; see also Taj Mahal
Indian Ocean 117, 148, 149, 152—7,
158, 182, 220
Indonesia, 94, 144, 145, 146, 147,
148, 152, 153, 192—3
inscriptions, 40, 50, 66, 76, 78, 109,
150, 187—95, 229; Arabic, 115, 117,
130, 139—44, 150, 156, 168, 178,
187—95; Chinese, 180—92;
Javanese, 192—3; Persian, 190
Iran, 15, 17, 20, 45, 48, 68, 125, 127,
137, 145, 184, 188, 197, 198, 208;
and trade, 115, 153; see also Siraf;
Susa
Iraq, 17, 20, 46, 67, 76, 95, 99, 111,
118, 136, 151, 157, 208
Isfahan, 198
Isma’ilis, 21
Israeli, R., 192
Istanbul, 36, 111, 194
Italy, 131
ivory, 158
iwan, 68; see also domestic
architecture/environment

jahiliyyah, see pre-Islamic period
jami masjid, see mosque, types
Jaulan/Golan, 172
Java, 146, 192—3
Jeddah, 112, 122

I
268

INDEX

Jenkins, J., 162
Jerusalem, 15, 29, 49, 58, 115, 142,
144, 150, 206
Jesus, 50
Jews, 13, 29, 50, 51, 64, 71, 95, 123,
143, 157, 197; cemeteries, 112, 175;
dietary laws, 95, 102; places of
worship, 49
jihad, 128—31, 184; see also war
jizyah, 38
Jordan, 36, 38, 47, 74, 96—9, 136, 156,
164, 217
judges, 19, 205, 211
Jurjura, 186
Juynboll, G., 136
Kababish, 73
Ka’bah, 28, 111, 143
Kairouan, 109
Kalbids, 143
Kalesi, H., 118
Kama river, 157
Karachi, 142, 155
Kara-Kum desert, 115
Karbala, 107, 114, 184—5
Kashmir, 37
Kazakhstan, 212
Keddie, N., 122
Kenya, 42, 87, 155, 181—2
Kerak, 96
Khadijah, 148
Khalifah, see caliphs
Khan, H-U., 33
khan, see hostels
khanaqah, 184; see also Sufis, lodges
Kharijites, 20, 21
Khazars, 157
Khirbet Fans, 96
Kilwa, 155
King, G., 89, 100, 131, 147
Kirkman, J., 120
Kisaichi, M., 205
Kish, 155
kohl, 118
Kordofan, 76
Kossaima, 172
Koumbi Saleh, 158
Kramers, J., 128, 148, 177
Kufah, 111, 138, 206, 222

kufic, see Arabic language, scripts
kulliye, 109
Kush, 106
labyrinths, 147
Laem Po, 155, 156
Lahiri, N., 224
Lamu, 87, 181—2
landscape archaeology, 5, 201,
218—24
landscapes, 183, 202, 224
Lane, E. W., 29, 108, 118, 121, 123,
168
Lapidus, I., 204, 219
Laqueur, H-P., 194
Lassner, J., 208
Lassy, I., 185
law, 2, 9, 15, 18—20, 24, 94—5, 109,
128, 168, 173, 183, 187, 204, 206,
228
Lawrence, T. E., 115
Leach, E., 170, 173
learned men, 19, 23, 185, 211
Lebanon, 20, 81
legal schools, 19—20, 95, 169
Leisten, T., 168
Lewis, I., 160
library, 184
Libya, 81, 131, 230
Lieber, A., 157
Lindholm, C., 230
literacy, 140—1, 188, 229
Lurs, 188
MacLagan, I., 105
Madagascar, 172
Madinat al-Zahra, 35, 40
madrasahs, see schools, religious
mafra;, see reception rooms/area
Maghrib, see Morocco; North Africa
magic, 2, 88—90, 93, 114, 124—8, 160
maglis, see reception rooms/area
Mahabharata, 146
Mahdi, 21, 127
Makran, 47
Malawi, 173
Malaysia, 152, 153
Maldive Islands, 155
Mali, 40, 146, 156, 158, 175, 180

INDEX

Maliki, 19, 95
Mamluks, 123, 159, 162
Manakha, 212
Manda, 155
Mande, 146
Mantai, 155
manufacturing, 2, 134, 159, 163—4
manuscripts, 137, 151, 159
maqsura, see mosque, furnishings
marabout, see holymen
Maraqe, 163
Marcais, G., 203
marine archaeology, 159
maristan, see hospitals
markets, 203, 205, 207, 213, 214
Martin, L., 96—9
martyrs, 20, 21, 175, 176, 184—5, 188,
222
Marx, E., 114
mashrabiyya, 64, 69—70
masjid, see mosque
Massawa, 44
Mate, M., 221
material culture, 2, 5, 9, 27, 49, 58,
80, 91—2, 110, 116, 120, 121, 125,
151, 181, 225—6, 231; categories of,
15, 227, 228; diversity, 2, 42;
evolution of, 2, 150, 232;
implications, 21, 102, 174, 229; and
mosques, 42, 49, 58; studies of, 2, 5
Mauritania, 158, 159
mausoleums, see tombs
Mawdudi, S., 24
Mazagan, 130
Mecca, 17, 49, 123, 139, 148, 222,
231; orientation towards, 28, 29,
30, 35, 77, 169; pilgrimage to, 18,
89, 107, 110—13
medieval archaeology, 4, 5, 6, 53, 229
Medina, 17, 29, 31, 49, 62, 110—11,
139, 222, 231
Mediterranean, 131, 148
merchants, 148—9; see also trade
Mesopotamia, 68, 157
metalwork, 138, 158, 164; see also
brass; copper; gold; silver
Metcalf, p., 176
Middle East, 94, 103, 122, 128, 206
migration, 17, 62, 114, 175, 188

269

mibrab, see prayer niche
milestones, 111, 115
military architecture, 115, 203; see
also forts; ribat
minaret, 12, 3 1—2, 33, 36, 43, 45, 52,
53, 55, 57, 58, 184
minbar, see mosque, furnishings;
pulpit
minorities, 14
Mirpur, 84
missionaries, 149
Moore, H., 78
Morocco, 54, 96, 114, 118, 127, 131,
158, 159, 210, 215, 221
mosque, 19, 23, 88, 109, 111, 134,
136, 142, 147, 168, 173, 184, 203,
222; archaeological recognition of,
26—7, 30, 32, 35—49, 57—8, 60;
building materials, 42—3;
Cambridge, 54—8; conversion,
55—7, 216; features, 12, 32—3;
furnishings, 32, 36, 41; Hui
mosque, 51—4; modern design, 33;
orientation, 33; origins, 29, 58;
position of, 38—40; sanctuary, 29,
31, 32; structuring principles,
28—9; temporary and nomadic, 46,
47, 58; threshold, 32, 33, 41, 53;
types, 33; see also minaret; prayer
niche; pulpit; qiblah
Mosul, 136, 175
Moynihan, E., 197
Mughals, 20, 73, 177, 198
Muhammad, 24, 50, 62, 79, 90, 100,
103, 114, 117,118,121,137,211;
family, 20, 127, 211; life, 17,49,110,
123, 144, 148; and origins of
mosque, 39, 58; sayings, 29, 104,114
Muharram, 21, 107
Mujeeb, M., 176
multi-disciplinary approaches, 2, 4,
41, 43, 107, 131, 160—2, 188—9, 197
Mumtaz Mahal, 178
Murphy, C., 104
musalla, see mosque, types
music, 162
Muslim community, 44, 54, 58, 59,
173, 218; archaeological
recognition of, 94, 107, 166—7, 174;

270

INDEX

INDEX

Muslim community, (contd.)
in Cambridge, 54—5, 57, 174; role
of tombs in, 183—7; see also
community (ummab)
Mutazalites, 142
Mzab, 89
Najaf, 114
Nasrids, 89
Near East, 167, 172, 174, 175, 197,
202, 206, 230
Negev desert, 47, 74, 101
Netton, I., 110
Niger, 180, 222
Niger river, 142, 158, 161
Night Journey, 49
Nishapur, 117, 118
nomads, 6, 15, 33, 40, 46, 47, 72—4,
90, 160, 161, 162, 198, 204, 209,
216—1 8, 219, 225
Noonan, T., 157
Normans, 143, 229
North Africa, 14, 17, 19, 21, 22, 36,
103, 130, 131, 145, 158, 176, 184,
186, 202, 203, 207
North America, 3, 9, 13, 20, 71
Nubia, 119, 175
Nukkarites, 21
Nuseibeh, S., 50
Olsen, P., 162
Oman, 21, 45, 117, 155, 220
orientalism, 3, 7, 202, 225, 232
oriental style, 59
Otrar, 212
Ottomans, 15, 20, 68, 69, 96, 103,
109, 111, 119, 121, 138, 186, 193—5,
196, 216, 222
Ouara, 180
Pacific region, 152
paganism, 17, 136, 147; see also
animism
pagodas, 52—3
painting, 137, 144; see also art
Pakistan, 17, 23, 42, 83, 84, 115, 142,
144, 147, 152, 153, 172
palaces, 40, 68, 111, 136, 143, 144,
207, 208, 211, 225

paleopathology, 169
Palestine, 17, 21, 47, 64, 68, 89, 101,
115, 136, 163, 170, 172, 196, 212,
215
paper, 138, 158, 159
paradise, 49, 100, 169, 188, 195,
197—9
Park, M., 142
Parker Pearson, M., 172
pastoralism, 64, 97—9, 101, 114, 161,
218, 225; see also nomads
Pathans (Pukhtuns), 42
Pella, 96
Pellat, Ch., 103
Persepolis, 37, 230
Persian Gulf, 20, 21, 115, 152, 155
Persians, 31, 150, 163, 209
personal possessions, 76, 80, 85, 93,
116—20, 132
Philby, H., 213, 224
Philon, H., 135, 137
pigs, 18, 96, 101—2
pilgrimage, 2, 18, 19, 21, 49, 93, 107,
109—14, 131—2, 148, 175, 176, 183,
219, 222
Piscatori, J., 10, 11, 114
poll tax, 38
pollution, 82, 88
Portuguese, 96, 118, 142, 215, 221
Possehl, G., 153
pottery, 2, 5, 6, 99, 107, 127, 138,
146, 157, 158, 164, 181, 197, 212;
Chinese, 89, 151, 155—6; lustre,
151; production of, 164
prayer, 18, 19, 21, 26, 28, 29, 31, 42,
49, 54, 56, 57, 58, 90, 117, 136, 168,
195; archaeological recognition of,
32, 36; congregational, 204, 205;
direction of, 29, 36; see also
Christians; qiblah
prayer beads, 117—1 8, 188
prayer niche, 12, 30—1, 32, 36, 40,
41, 43, 44, 45, 47, 52, 53, 55, 58,
227
prayer rugs, 28, 47—8; see also
carpets; textiles
prehistoric religion, 8
pre-Islamic period, 168, 204, 206,
208, 209, 217, 225, 230

privacy, 12, 62, 63, 64, 68, 69, 73, 78,
80, 82—4, 122, 158, 207; see also
spatial use
Prominska, E., 170
Prophet, the, see Muhammad
prophets, 50, 101
protected persons, 38
pulpit, 12, 31, 36, 41, 45, 55, 58
Punjab, 46
Punyal, 172
purdah, 62, 77, 81, 82—4, 87—8; see
also privacy
purity, 62, 82, 122, 221; see also
privacy

qadi, see judges
Qal’a, 68
Qarmatians, 21
Qashqa’i, 73, 79
Qasr al-Hayr East, 217—18
Qasr Burqu, 217
Qasr Ibrim, 68—9, 96, 100, 119, 127
qasr/qusur, 217
qat, 81, 106
Qatar, 74
qiblab, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 36, 40, 45,
48, 55, 57, 95, 168, 172, 173, 222
Qsar es-Seghir, 96, 118—19, 210, 215,
221
Quanzhou, 190—1
qubba, 177—8, 184; see also tombs
Qur’an, 20, 62, 82, 136, 138, 142,
168, 187, 231; and dietary laws, 94,
100, 102; as guide to life, 1, 9, 26,
204, 228, 232; primacy of, 18, 24,
124—5; and trade, 148—9; and
women, 82
Qur’anic school, 108—9
Quraysh, 211
Qusayr Amra, 136
Quseir al-Qadim, 48, 123, 155, 159

rabad/rabat, 203
Rajasthan, 46
Ramadan, 18, 97, 106—7
Rapoport, A., 77, 79, 201
Raqqa, 163, 164
Ras Abruk, 74
Ras al-Hadd, 117

271

Ravy, 118, 196
reception rooms/area, 69, 73—6,
80—1, 214, 217
Redman, C., 215
Red Sea, 67, 69, 112, 123, 155—6, 220
religion, archaeological recognition
of, 58, 91, 131—2, 165, 199
Renfrew, C., 167, 199
Retimo, 216
ribat, 130—1; see also military
architecture
Ricklefs, M., 192
Rielly, K., 96—9
rihlah, see travel
ritual, 8, 15, 93, 101, 160
Riyadh, 213, 224
roads, 111, 115
Romans, 31, 38, 96, 103, 104, 151,
163
round city, Baghdad, 208—11
Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam, 99
Russia, 157
Rykwert, J., 201
sacred geography, 173, 183, 197, 202,
222—4
sacred texts, 9; see also Qur’an
sacrifice, 23, 44, 89, 103, 107, 110,
114, 182, 186
Sadan, J., 99
Sahara desert, 47, 73, 158, 161, 189
Sai Island, 69
saints, 15, 22—3, 101, 114, 148, 176,
183—4, 185—7, 196
salat, see prayer
Samarkand, 115, 153, 178, 186
Samarra, 67, 91, 118, 210, 211
San’a, 69, 71, 80
Sasanians, 51, 135, 136, 149—50, 206
Saudi Arabia, 20, 23, 47, 78, 89, 122,
147, 153, 176, 180—1, 213, 218
sawm, see fasting
Scandinavia, 157—8
Scerrato, U., 147
Schimmel, A., 120, 138, 224
schools, religious, 9, 19, 23, 49, 95,
107—8, 181, 184, 207, 216
Schumacher, C., 115
science, 134, 163—5

272

INDEX

Sea of Galilee, 163
seal rings, 116—17, 118, 122, 123, 124,
227
sedentaries, 11, 15, 40, 146, 160, 161,
162, 198, 204, 209, 219
Seistan, 115
Seijuks, 211
semi-precious stones, 117, 153, 178,
179
Senegal, 138, 180
Serce Liman, 159
Sétif, 67, 78
settlements, 23, 40, 93, 201—6, 224,
225; archaeological recognition of,
39, 201—2, 206—7, 215—18,
225—6; patterns, 212—13, 218—19;
social dimension, 208—18;
structure, 40
Seville, 198
shadow plays, 146
Shafi, 19
shahadah, 18, 19
Shah-i-Zenda, 186
Shah Jehan, 178
Shanga, 42, 45, 117, 155
shari’ah, see law
Sharwas, 143
shaykh, 22, 73, 184
Sherratt, A., 12
Shi’ah, 10, 11, 15, 19, 20—1, 29, 42,
45, 74, 95, 107, 114, 127, 137, 174,
176, 183, 184, 188, 196, 229
Shiraz, 178
Shobak, 96
Sicily, 15, 131, 143—4, 229
Siddis, 153
Sidi Ameur, 186
silver, 117, 125, 149, 151, 157, 158
Simoons, F., 102
Simpson, St J., 174, 175, 197
Sinai, 112, 114
Sind, 47
Sinkiang, 48
Siraf, 41, 67, 118, 152, 155, 156
slaves, 157, 158, 159, 208
social archaeology, 93, 94, 147,
159—62, 166—7, 187, 201—2, 205
social organization, 11, 54, 77—84, 85,
120, 122, 211—13, 224

society, 77—82, 91, 137, 205, 207, 208,
211—13; Chinese, 102; Muslim,
103, 135, 144, 159, 175, 228
Sohar, 155, 220
soldier/warriors, 85, 131, 151, 175
Somalia, 181
Songhai, 175, 189
Sopher, D., 104, 222
Soucek, P., 137
South Asia, 83, 84, 88
South China Sea, 155
South-east Asia, 14, 15, 19, 202
Soviet Union, 114, 186
Spain, 13, 15, 17, 35, 36, 69, 103, 114,
157, 158, 189, 198, 207, 215, 222
spatial use, 62—3, 77—8, 80, 86—7; in
domestic architecture, 73—4, 76,
83; in settlements, 213—16
spices, 159
Sri Lanka, 152, 155
statuary: Buddhist, 38; Graeco
Roman, 31; Hindu, 38; West
African, 145—6; see also figural
representation; idols
status, 77, 78, 80, 82—4, 87, 88, 120—1,
122, 160, 167, 177—8, 180—2, 188,
189, 193, 195
stimulants, 106; see also coffee; qat
structuring principles, 27—33, 46, 49,
53, 58, 61, 80, 131—2, 165, 195, 200,
204, 207, 227, 228, 230
Suakin, 69
sub-Saharan Africa, 11, 14, 15, 44,
47, 77, 180—2, 202, 209; see also
Central Africa; East Africa, West
Africa
Sudan, 42, 112, 113, 125, 127, 155
Sufis, 10, 21—3, 90, 106, 118, 145,
147, 162, 183—4, 185—7, 193—5, 222,
229; lodges, 194; tombs, 180,
183—4, 185—7
Sufrites, 21
sugar, 100, 194
suicide, 174
sunnah, 19, 143
Sunni, 10, 11, 19, 20, 21, 23, 42, 45,
95, 107, 137, 142, 183, 229
suq, see markets
surab, 18, 143, 144, 197

INDEX

Susa, 164
Swahili, 87—8, 89, 181—2
Swat-Kohistan, 147
Sweden, 158
swords, 130, 133, 162
Syihet, 83
symbols, 142, 143—4, 147, 187—95,
196, 201; see also art
synagogues, 8, 9, 127
syncretism, 15, 49, 52, 114, 146,
147—8, 161, 167, 182, 196—7
Syr Darya, 138
Syria, 17, 21, 36, 68, 89, 115, 118,
151, 156, 163—4, 172, 198, 203,
217—8
Taj Mahal, 178—9, 197
Talbot-Rice, D., 136
Taliban, 22, 23, 24
Tamari, V., 212
Tamerlane, 212
Tampoe, M., 149
Tanzania, 181
tariqah, 22, 183, 194
Tarlow, S., 166
technology, 11, 152, 163—5; mines,
153, 163; observatories, 163
Tedu, 73
tekke, 184, 194; see also Sufis, lodges
temples, 58, 102
tents, 62, 64, 72—4, 217; see also
domestic architecture/
environment
Terrasse, H., 130
textiles, 138, 143, 151, 158—9, 164,
170—2
Thailand, 153, 155, 156
theory, 5, 6, 61
Thesiger, W., 95
Thomas, J., 229
thresholds/boundaries, 77, 88—90, 91;
see also mosque, threshold
Ti’innik, 68, 80
Timbuktu, 40, 156, 175
tombs, 23, 114, 124, 166, 168,
176—87, 195—6, 198, 199; saints’,
15, 22—3, 101, 114, 173, 174, 175,
176, 178, 180, 183—7, 196, 222
tombstones, 121, 133, 176, 195

273

trade, 109, 114—16, 131, 133, 134,
143, 148—9, 151—62, 164—5, 175,
219; caravan, 112—16, 153, 157—62,
189, 218; centres, 117, 153—8, 220;
sea, 152—7, 192; theory, 2, 148—9,
151—2
travel, 33, 93, 109—16, 131, 184;
archaeological recognition of,
88—90, 124—8
Trigger, B., 230
Trimingham, 5., 160
Tuareg, 47, 73, 175
Tunisia, 45, 109, 114, 144, 186
turbans, 121—3, 193—4, 227; see also
dress
Turkestan, 48, 162
Turkey, 15, 21, 48, 54, 82, 100, 111,
122, 125, 184, 186, 196, 197, 205;
see also Ottomans
Turks/Turkomen, 15, 69, 121, 123
Uganda, 59
Uighurs, 205
ulama, see learned men
Umayyads, 17, 20, 68, 96, 150, 157,
212, 217, 218, 232
ummab, see communit
umrah, 110—11; see also pilgrimage
United Arab Emirates, 106, 230
United States of America, 3, 9, 13,
20, 71
universities, 54, 109
urbanism, 11, 69; study of, 202—6,
219; see also settlements
Urgench, 157
Uzbeks, 14, 114
Vardjavand, P., 163
veils, 87, 12 1—3; see also dress;
privacy
Venetians, 216
Violich, F., 215
Vohemar, 172
Volga river, 157
Von Grunebaum, G., 203
Von Wartburg, M-L., 164

4

Wadi Hadhramaut, 112
Wahhabiyyah, 22, 23, 168, 176, 181

274

INDEX

Waines,D.,231
Wansbrough,J., 231
waqf, 19,109
war,2,17,93,124,128-31,132,134,
148,170
Washington DC,140
Wasserstein, D.,150
water,195-6
water supply technology,111,112,
115,184,198,207,216,217,218,
219-22
Watson,A.,120
weapons,130; see also armour;
swords
weights,150
West,the,7,9,71,78,79,128,131,
134,203,224,231; see a/so Europe;
North America
West Africa,19,23,42,45,94,113,
116,138,144,145-6,147,148,180;
and trade,158-62
Western Asia,103,175
Western Sabei,158,159-62,189
Wheatcroft, A.,121
Whitcomb,D.,206,218
Wilkinson,T.,220
Wilson,T.,181,182
women,56,65,67,72-3,79,81,
82-8,104-5,120-3,193-4,213

Woolley,C.,115
writing,see calligraphy; inscriptions
Xian,52
Yangzhou,156
Yao,173
Yemen,21,69,71,80,105, 106,120,
153,212-14
Yendi Dabari,116
Yoruba,162
Yugoslavia,213
Zagros Mountains,73
Zaidis,21
zakat, 18-19
Zakho,157
Zanzibar,45
zawiyah, 23,184,186; see also Sufis,
lodges
Zeyadeh,A.,38
Ziadeh,G.,80
Zikris,21
ziyara, 113-14; see a/so pilgrimage
Zoroastrians,37
zulla, 29

I

I
I

