The Community Environment

‘I swear by this city (and you are a resident of this city), by the begetter
and all whom he begot: We created man to try him with afflictions.
Qur’an. The City 90: 1—4

A consideration of the kinds of environment in which Muslim life
finds expression, and its possible archaeological implications, will
bring together many of the elements discussed in preceding chapters,
for a settlement is a conglomeration of domestic and other structures.
All of these have been considered in some detail, and are here placed
in context, settlements varying from villages to cities and the wider
landscape as well.
Rapoport makes the important point that ‘houses, settlements, and
landscapes are products of the same cultural system and world view,
and are therefore parts of the single system’ (1969: 73). Just as we
viewed the domestic environment as a social construct, so should we
see the settlement. This does not necessarily mean that a ‘culturally
deterministic’ approach is being proposed; on the contrary, the factors
which can underlie settlement form are many environmental, eco
nomic and so on but a social component must also be included.
Somewhat surprisingly, archaeological studies of settlements, land
scaoes and environments have until recently infrequently considered
such social, sacred or symbolic factors as of great importance (see
Bender 1993). This is in ou ous contrast with the archaeological
studies of the domestic environment which have already been dis
cussed (see, for example, Locock 1994; Parker Pearson and Richards
1994, and chapter 3); to quote Rapoport, ‘man lives in the whole
settlement of which the house is only a part’ (1969: 69). To neglect
this area emphasizes what Rykwert has termed ‘the poverty of much
—

—

202

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

urbanistic discourse’, whereby occupied space is studied only ‘in
physical terms of occupation and amenity’ and the ‘psychological
space, the cultural, the juridical, the religious’ are neglected (1976: 24).
Relevant archaeological studies might consider spatial patterning
with reference to economic geography (Fletcher 1977; Hodges 1987)
or to geography in general (Wagstaff 1987), but until recently it was
again anthropologists, historians, geographers and art historians who
frequently emphasized the possible social, symbolic and sacred
aspects of settlements; iconography of landscape (Cosgrove and
Daniels 1988); cosmological reasoning underpinning settlement form
(Lebeuf 1967); the place of the settlement within sacred geography
(Ortiz 1969); the possible significance of the centrality of either
settlements or components thereof (Wheatley 1971) (see also Rapo
port 1969: 50; Parker Pearson and Richards 1994: 12—19, for other
examples). Recently, however, archaeologists have come to consider
settlements and the whole environment as more than products of
economic decisions, but as social constructs (Hodder 1990).

203

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT
Cemetery

Muslim Cities and Settlements

Study of the Muslim city
As the Muslim urban settlement is one of the best-studied aspects of
Muslim material culture, it is given prominence in the following
discussion. However, at the same time it is recognized that to reflect
only on the city, at the expense of the town, village or camp, is wrong,
but it is hoped that this will in part be excused by the large-scale
absence of archaeological studies concerned with these other settle
ment types.
The Muslim city has in the past provided a convenient unit of
study and, based upon a limited number of examples, mainly drawn
from North Africa and the Near East, wide-ranging generalizations
were made as to the overall character of the Muslim city everywhere.
These studies were one of the first manifestations of the orientalist
approach, whereby the structure of the city was defined in terms of
religious requirements, and a similar form was said to exist from
Morocco to Indonesia. This process of the creation of a stereotypical
Muslim city has been examined by a number of scholars, most
notably by Bonine (1977) and Abu-Lughod (1987) and, more
recently, region by region across the Muslim world (excluding sub
Saharan Africa and south and South-east Asia) by Haneda and Miura
(1994). The stereotype created, based on North African or sometimes

Figure 7.1 Stereotypical city layout based on Tunis (after Hakim 1986: 59)

Syrian examples, comprised a standard kit of elements: the medina, or
central urban entity, within which was the casbab or walled citadel, a
city within the city containing the ruler’s residence, mosque, barracks,
stores and so on. The medina would be walled with several gates, and
perhaps surrounded by rabad or rabat, outer suburbs. The inhabi
tants lived in distinct quarters according to ethnic or economic back
ground in groups of courtyard houses connected by winding
alleyways and narrow streets, supposedly characteristic of the ‘orien
tal’ or Islamic city (see figure 7.1). The medina would also contain a
number of core elements: the Friday mosque, other local mosques,
suq or suqs (markets) arranged spatially according to the goods sold,
baths, hostels for travellers, schools, shops, cemeteries perhaps
(usually outside the city) and all the other prerequisites of urban life.
The process by which this was achieved has been aptly described by
Abu-Lughod (1987: 155) as an isnad, a chain of transmitters, in this
instance a succession of Western scholars. W. Marcais (1928), accord
ing to Abu-Lughod, initiated this approach, followed by G. Marcais
(1945) and, most influentially, G. Von Grunebaum (1955), who used
the North African examples in a generalized way and applied these to
the creation of an idealized ‘Islamic city’. This process has perpetuated

204

205

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

to this day in many respects, as in Hakim’s (1986) volume on Arabic
Islamic cities (admittedly North African in focus). Various reasons to
account for this ‘created’ Muslim city have been proposed: ‘to attempt
to explain everything in terms of a dichotomy between an advanced
Europe and a stagnant Islamic World’ (Haneda 1994: 4) or, alterna
tively, as Bonine reports (but does not agree with), as a model which
evolved with a central premiss that ‘Islam is an urban religion because
only in a town can faithful Muslims adhere to all requirements of the
Qur’an and shari’ah’ (1977: 148).
The view that Islam is only truly at home in an urban setting is
often held; for instance, Sopher remarks on ‘the strong predilection
for the city which runs through Islam’ (1967: 28). This is often based
upon notions of legalistic interpretation; for example, the requirement
of certain legal schools that valid Friday prayers must take place with
a congregation of over 40 people, which, as Lapidus notes, is non
sensical, as neither 40 nor two ‘make a place a city as opposed to a
village or other settlement’ (1973a: 60). Lapidus adopts a sensible
approach to urbanism, both in its place within the wider environ
ment, and also on the question of Islam being only an urban religion;
nomads or village dwellers are no less good Muslims for their settle
ment types. It is due more to ‘historical circumstance’ (Lapidus
1973a) that Islam and cities became the environment in which the
legal schools were established, and the surroundings in which the
early Muslim conquerors initially settled, either in newly founded
cities or pre-existing conquered ones.
But is it necessary to deny completely the existence of any common
features within Islamic cities or Muslim settlements, and to deny
religion as a structuring principle to a greater or lesser degree? As
with much ‘revisionist’ scholarship, there is the danger that the oppo
site to the equally inaccurate generalizing approach is achieved and
diversity is pushed to the fore to the exclusion of any common
patterns. Perhaps a ‘mix and match’ approach is best here, whereby
certain common features could be expected, but these will by no
means be the same in every situation (if anything, questions of scale
will rule this out: a village will obviously not have all the facilities of a
city). A complex of factors underlie the structuring of a Muslim
settlement, and these will be discussed in greater detail below.
To press wholly for specific local circumstances as the primary
agent behind the establishment and structure of the larger Muslim
city would appear to be flawed. Topography, climate, economy and
pre-Islamic traditions were all of obvious importance, and the city
was not structured solely according to religious requirements, but nor
need they play an insignificant part. If we accept that a domestic

environment can be structured according to religious or resultant
social requirements, why not the larger city as well? If the domestic
environment can be regarded as both the outcome and perpetuator of
social codes and requirements (see chapter 3), so the city or settle
ment can be so regarded, in many instances, on a larger scale. To use a
general point made in another context by Gilsenan, ‘space is crucial in
thinking about culture and ideology because it is where ideology and
culture take on physical existence and representations’ (1982: 187).
The Muslim settlement is an ordered and created space, and not
neutral from society or individuals, but it is not an isolated entity
either. Obviously, the settlement is defined or bounded, and how this
is achieved varies, but at the same time it is also an integral part of its
surroundings. Too often this has been ignored from an archaeological
perspective, and settlement examined as somehow divorced from its
surroundings. What we need is a ‘total approach’ whereby the settle
ment is considered as part of the whole, connected physically to the
landscape and the environment.
There is also the issue of ‘regionalism’ which is a factor in much
research into Muslim urbanism. Archaeological research has contrib
uted greatly to the debate on Muslim urbanism in Central Asia thanks
to several decades of research by Soviet scholars (Komatsu 1994),
whereas in Turkey, until very recently, the opposite was true. What
is fashionable in terms of research in one area need not be in another,
leading to a frequent lack of a comprehensive overview, or what has
been termed the absence of common paradigms in favour of particu
larist studies (Haneda and Miura 1994).

p

Definition and origins of the Muslim city
Definitions of what constitutes a city, a town or a village vary
immensely. Is it size, number of inhabitants, administrative nature,
facilities? General definitions do not always seem to apply (see, for
example, Weber 1958) in the Muslim world. Kisaichi (1994: 66), for
instance, argues that certain Muslim Uighur ‘towns’ in China lack
clear boundaries between themselves and the surrounding farm lands
so that ‘it might be more accurate to call it [sic] an enormous rural
village’. However, Hakim (1986: 56) uses more orthodox definitions
based upon administrative criteria and drawn from Arabic historical
sources such as al-Maqadisi (died 990) who differentiates the misr
(plural amsar), metropolis, qasabah, (plural qasabat), provincial capi
tal, medina (plural mudun), provincial or market town, and qaryah
(plural qura), village. Hakim also considers, that urban settlements
should include a Friday mosque, a suq, and a governor and/or qadi.

206

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

General common sense would appear to be a fairly straightforward
guide to the type of settlement being considered; size is obviously
important, but beyond this it would seem that any type of restrictive
definition as to settlement form could be challenged with examples
that do not conform. However, many larger Muslim towns and cities
prior to the modern age can be recognized on the basis of certain
criteria, and these have been divided into various types in the Near
and Middle East. These include the created cities (often garrisons) of
the early Muslim conquests; the amsar, Fustat and Kufah for example,
and the adapted pre-existing cities of antiquity, such as Jerusalem and
Damascus (Stern 1970: 30; Elisséeff 1980: 91). This created/adapted
model is simple but in many ways effective, as it can equally be
applied outside the heartlands, and thus provides a generalizing ele
ment within a mass of diversity.
Yet a Muslim city in West Africa has different local antecedents
from those of Arabia, as does one in Central Asia or Indonesia (for
the latter see Behrend 1984). In Arabia, Whitcomb has suggested that
the city ‘may be an urban type based on tribal organization and its
structure, like the tribal society which produced it, was an important
element in the spread of Islam’ (1996: 46). The form of the Muslim
city does not owe its origins solely to Islam even in Arabia; it has a
pre-Islamic heritage. The walled citadel, a recurring feature already
mentioned, is not a Muslim creation but found in earlier cities in the
Byzantine and Sasanian worlds. Similarly, the frequently encountered
central cluster of religious and administrative buildings is a focus of
power which predates Islam. Habitation in quarters according to
ethnic affiliation or social category was not an Islamic invention,
nor could a seemingly random town plan of myriad winding alleys
be accepted as the result of Qur’anic injunction or the implementa
tion of shar’iah. Islamic cities were not new phenomena as regards
their form, but the result of a variety of factors, new and old, and
were not solely dictated by religious requirements.

Archaeological recognition of Muslim cities and settlements
Could there then be said to be a Muslim city? And is this archae
ologically recognizable? There is, or can be, but this does not mean
that the sort of criteria outlined by Hakim (1986: 60—90) will be
found in every instance, though they can allow the archaeological
recognition of Muslim cities. Typological approaches are weak: not
every city will have a walled citadel, surrounded by a medina and
outer suburbs, defined by quarters of courtyard houses with an
emphasis upon inward orientation, alongside ward mosques, with a

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

207
central mosque/palace and administration complex either inside or
outside of the citadel. Suqs need not be centrally placed and graded
according to the trades or goods being sold and the degree to which
they might be considered polluting; madrasabs (religious schools),
cemeteries, water-storage facilities, caravanserais, hammams (baths)
and maristans (hospitals) need not all be present. Only in a few
selective contexts, as in North Africa and Islamic Spain where a
great degree of uniformity in city type appears to have existed, may
near-complete examples of the model be found.
Yet it is true to say that many of these elements can be present, and
that these constitute a Muslim city, as opposed to a non-Muslim one.
It cannot be disputed that core characteristic elements exist, even if
only reduced to the simplest form of a mosque and Muslim burials in
a settlement (the burials more usually surrounding it). It is these more
basic criteria, which are more likely to be applicable to smaller towns
and villages, which have been neglected thus far in the discussion, and
which could allow their archaeological recognition. Certain criteria
do exist which set apart a Muslim settlement from a non-Muslim one
from Senegal to Saudi Arabia, from Kazakhstan to Indonesia. They
are far from mirror images of each othei and are subject to many
structuring factors other than religious requirements, but at the same
time exhibit certain aspects in common which relate to a mutual
religion.
A much looser structure is needed in assessing the Muslim settle
ment, and its archaeological recognition; some core features will be
present, but a pre-ordained blue-print does not exist. Possible keys to
identification might include all or any of the above, but even these
changed over time. For example, it might be possible to say that
narrow streets and alleyways with courtyard houses having largely
blank façades and multiple dead ends were due to Muslim concerns
with privacy and the protection of the family, but in some instances
this might be due to the climate (providing shade) or, as Bulliett
(1975: 224) has suggested, to the existence of a society without
wheels, rendering wider streets unnecessary. The invocation of a
single factor to explain structuring features behind Muslim settle
ments is often impossible, but neither should economic or practical
necessity be given precedence over social or religious needs.
Social Dimension of the Muslim Settlement

The settlement can act both as a mirror and sustainer of social codes.
It is an active area of material culture and may provide information

208

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

209

on the societies it maintains and replicates, something which may be
approachable by the archaeologist. Once again utilizing archaeologi
cal and other sources of evidence, we will see that the settlement, our
final area of the archaeology of Islam, need in no way conform to a
mundane stereotype, but can be informative, vibrant and, unfortun
ately, elusive.
Authority at a central core

The relationship between sacred and secular authority in Islam, fre
quently referred to, and its importance stressed, especially in the
Early Islamic period, is manifest in the Muslim city and, much less
frequently, in other forms of settlement as well (perhaps understand
ably, as rulers tended towards inhabiting, or having grow up around
them, larger settlements). Yet more than just a simple juxtaposition of
mosque and palace as a focal point of sacred and secular authority is
sometimes apparent. A significant, but not typical, example of a
central core is provided by Caliph al-Mansur’s round city at Baghdad.
This circular city, which though only occupied between 762 and 766,
and reconstructed from historical data (excavation has yet to be
carried out), provides an ‘image of rule’, of how al-Mansur perceived
his authority and how this changed over time. The city was a circular
double walled ‘citadel’, surrounded by a moat, with at its centre the
caliph’s palace and the congregational mosque, expressing ‘the inti
mate relationship between religion and state’ (El-Ali 1970: 93) (see
figure 7.2). Surrounding this was an inner ring of buildings with the
offices of state, and the residences of the Caliph’s children, slaves and
bodyguards, and a further outer ring, the details of which are hazy,
but which would have been occupied by other functionaries and
soldiers (Lassner 1970a,b).
Although this complex was recognizably Muslim, expressed if any
thing by the congregational mosque, it was also the continuation of
pre-Islamic traditions. Lassner (1970b) records that the general fea
tures of the round city are found at pre-Islamic sites in both Iraq and
Iran, while Beckwith (1984) suggests that it was the culmination of
the fusion of a mix of traditions, most notably Iranian royal ones,
with the design being the work of a converted Central Asian priest
(see also Creswell 1952: 94—9). Leaving aside its ancestry, the central
notion of the mosque/palace core was not new in Baghdad. It is
found in certain Umayyad government palaces, as at Kufah (Lassner
1970b: 133), but the concept of centralizing authority is almost a
universal; in the ancient Chinese city, the seat of secular authority
was likewise placed centrally (Wheatley 1971: 462). The theme of

p

Large
arcades

S

Figure 7.2 Reconstruction of the round city, Baghdad (from Lassner 197Db:
207)

amalgamating power in a central core occurs through history, and to
give it an Islamic identity is wrong, though an Islamic version of it
was certainly developed.
What is also of importance is that the round city in Baghdad was
used as a means of unifying the disparate ethnic groups which formed
the population. Large suburbs spread in all directions, containing
Arabs (sedentaries and nomads), Africans and Persians, with the
round city as the core, separate, but ‘vocal’ at the same time. To
achieve this, the pre-Islamic heritage was skilfully utilized by al
Mansur. The circular plan and other aspects of ‘visual language’
which the local population understood were used to aid his search
for legitimacy and as a ‘tangible’ expression of authority (Lassner
1970b: 131). The focus of authority both spiritual and secular was
centred in the round city, and the caliph welded both secular and
temporal power in himself through the fusion of palace and mosque,
a further factor which helped in creating unity in the population.
Grabar explained the round city as ‘a conscious attempt to make an

210

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

/

7-..

/

II

-j

N

Figure 7.3 The Octagon of Husn al-Qadisiyya (after Northedge and Falk
ner 1987: 152)

entity that would symbolize the total rule of the Muslim prince’
(1973: 71). This was perhaps of some success as a round plan was
also used at the town of Qsar es-Seghir in Morocco, and the so-called
‘octagon of Husn al-Qadisiyya’ at Samarra, built by Harun al-Rashid
at the end of the eighth century, also drew upon al-Mansur’s round
a walled octagonal enclosure of over 1,500
city for inspiration
metres in diameter, with a gate set in each side (see figure 7.3). But
it was the interior where parallels with Baghdad were to be seen:
‘with its large area, avenues, central square, mosque and palace, the
Octagon can be seen to be a copy of the arrangements of Mansur’s
Round City of Baghdad’ (Northedge and Falkner 1987: 155; see also
Northedge et al. 1990).
The concept of power represented as an architectural component
has been studied as a mirror of historical changes in Muslim society
by Bacharach (1991), who has charted three phases in how the ‘loci’
—

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

211

of power changed over time. In the first administrative and mosque
complexes of the early Islamic period, physical proximity of the dar
al-imara and the mosque illustrated ‘the inter-related importance of
the roles of governor and religious leader’ (1991: 126). These centres
were located within and on the same ‘geographic plane’ as the areas of
population, a factor which altered in the second phase when the
religious, social and educational requirements of the population
began to be met by the main urban mosques. Authority began to
change, with the ulama becoming responsible for guiding the ‘Islamic
way of life’ especially in the cities; palace complexes were now placed
at some distance from the population (as at Samarra in the ninth
century) and, according to Bacharach (1991: 121), this ‘second era
coincides with the transformation of urban centres into Muslim
cities’.
The third phase in the late eleventh and twelfth centuries sees the
appearance of the citadel as ‘a major locus of Muslim rule’. This was
perhaps related to the fact that the users of the citadels were often
‘ethnically alien’ to those they ruled, the Seljuks in Anatolia for
example. The factor of height as well as distance also appears to
become important; rulers were now often above the ruled, as at the
Alhambra in Granada. Thus Bacharach’s analysis has shown that
changes in authority and even the nature of society can be manifest
in settlement form, with distance and topography utilized as a sig
nifier of power in a manner which could be archaeologically distinct,
and which also exposes the flaws in models which state the existence
of a citadel as a given everywhere from the first appearance of the
idealized ‘Islamic city’.

Class, society and ethnicity
To take this analysis one stage further, beyond examining the role and
manifestations of authority, it is necessary also to consider the settle
ment as a metaphor for society. As with many of the areas considered
in this volume, there is usually a departure point between ideals and
reality, and in this instance the ideal is represented by ummah, the
whole Muslim community devoid of class or racial distinctions.
The existence of this seems to conflict with practical realities. From
the outset, Muslim cities were composed of disparate ethnic groups,
as at Baghdad, but also manifest at Fustat, one of the amsar or
garrison cities founded in 640 and the predecessor of Cairo. A hier
archy existed in the first conquest situation: at the top were members
of the Prophet Muhammad’s tribe, the Quraysh, and the Ansar, the
Prophet’s supporters, then the other Arab Muslim tribes, and below

I

212

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

them non-Arab Muslims (Persians, blacks and so on), and finally
non-Muslims. These patterns were visible in the great semi-circular
camp city of tents and reed and clay huts grouped into 30—40 tribal
and multi-tribal units, which quickly grew more permanent (Abu
Lughod 1971; Kubiak 1982). To help create ummab, the Umayyad
rulers practised a ‘conscious policy to level tribal differences’ (Kubiak
1982: 216), as apparent in residential patterns, through, for example,
the promotion of a multi-tribal central quarter, Ahl ar-Raya, the place
of government and the congregational mosque.
However, it can be argued that this did not usually proceed much
beyond an ideal. People usually live with those they know best or feel
at ease with, ethnically, socially or as co-religionists, and it is likely
that residence according to ethnic or other affiliation is probably to
be expected in many cases, but whether this will always be manifest
in distinct quarters cannot be certain without evaluating each parti
cular case. Nevertheless, this type of residence pattern is to be found
frequently in the archaeological record and attested in historical
sources. At Otrar in Kazakhstan, for example, where Tamerlane
died in 1405, excavations in levels dated to between the sixteenth
and eighteenth centuries uncovered distinct quarters composed of
units of between six and 15 houses inhabited by people of different
social groups and, according to the excavator, perhaps grouped by
family (Baipakov 1992: 108). In certain instances, tribal marks on the
pottery even allowed a reconstruction of the ethnicity of the inhabi
tants.
Numerous other examples could be provided, and anthropology
offers more to show notions of class, ethnicity or family impinging
upon the ideal of uminah in settlement patterns. Gerhoim’s research
in the town of Manakha in the Yemen has already been mentioned in
the discussion of the domestic environment, and is equally pertinent
to the settlement, with the townscape described as ‘a mirror of the
social order’ (1977: 161). Topography and elevation were used to
express both authority and social distinctions (reminiscent of the
way the tower house in Yemen functioned in the vertical axis), with
the noble families in Upper Manakha, the rank and file or ‘middle
strata’ in Lower Manakha, and the low-ranking townspeople, not
considered as part of tribal society, even further below, a material
construct of society across the settlement. Similar patterning was
evident in the form of the traditional Palestinian village up until the
1930s. Amiry and Tamari (1989) relate how each village was made up
of a number of separate quarters named after patrilineal descent
groups, with again the more influential groups inhabiting the elevated
areas, and the others in the lower quarters.

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

213

What is apparent from these examples is that, once again, to isolate

one over-riding reason why people should live with their peers does
not work. In one instance, it could be due to religion (Christians
living apart from Muslims, for example); in another, by ethnicity or
class in an all-Muslim settlement. It could also be because of stigma
attached to occupation, as with blacksmiths or tanners frequently
living in their own distinct area on the edge of a settlement because
they are subject to fears and prejudices or because of the polluting
aspects of their work. Various factors underlie residential patterning
within the Muslim settlement, which often shows that a religiously
egalitarian Muslim community is more of an ideal than a practical
reality. This is something which archaeology is ideally suited to
investigating.
Spatial domains
The notion of spatial domains public, semi-private and private
spheres can be of great importance as we saw with the domestic
environment. In the idealized ‘Islamic city’ rigidly defined boundaries
between different spatial domains exist: the public mosque and mar
ket, the semi-private quarters with their lockable gates, and the
private domestic environment of the houses themselves, separated
into public and private areas. This idealized model has, as with
most generalizations, exceptions. Differences in settlement form, as
have been described for Yugoslavia and India, will preclude the uni
form existence of semi-private quarters in every instance, and even
the suq does not always qualify as a wholly public space, but is
sometimes gender restricted as at Riyadh (Saudi Arabia), where in
1917 Philby recorded a female suq alongside the ruler’s palace (1920:
162) (see figure 7.4). Which space can be considered as falling within
the category of private or public can, as was discussed in chapter 3,
depend upon gender.
It is perhaps not surprising that if a public/private spatial divide is
evident in the domestic environment, it should also be visible on a
larger scale in the community environment composed of agglomera
tions of these units. These larger units, while they signal an evident
spatial concern, could not then be expected to sit neutrally in their
relationship with the other components of a settlement. A great
degree of spatial coding does or did exist in many Muslim settle
ments, and is manifest archaeologically, as well as recorded by
anthropologists and historians.
Gerhoim (1977) gives an anthropological perspective on these
issues. He describes how in his study area in the Yemen the public
—

—

214

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

0

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

250yd

fr

Dhuhairi Gate

Thamairi

Figure 7.4 Plan of Riyadh, Saudi Arabia (after Philby 1920: 162)
sphere (male) is associated with the congregational mosque, the suq,
the administrative buildings, the mafraj (described in chapter 3), and
even the football field. Within this public sphere, status considera
tions are important, and gradations emerge between, for example, the
market, where social status is linked with how little you are seen to
do, and the mosque, which is less hierarchical (1977: 176); this infor
mation could not be deduced from the archaeological record alone. A
similar case exists for semi-private and private space. Gated town
quarters could be used to demarcate spatial domains, and Akbar
(1993) relates how gates could be used to maintain privacy and
identity. Even subquarters within the larger entity could themselves
be shut off to create a kind of communal living room for residents
(Akbar 1993: 145). The sequence of gates from the public one in the
city wall, to the quarter gate which is less public, to the subquarter
gate which is in turn semi-private, and, finally, to the house entrance

215

which is regarded as private, all demarcate different spatial zones,
patterning which should be kept in mind when considering a Muslim
settlement.
Archaeologically, the existence of spatial demarcation in Muslim
settlements has been well recorded, a particularly useful example
being the walled town of Qsar es-Seghir in Morocco. Here the
Muslim occupation levels of the twelfth to mid-fifteenth centuries
are overlain by a period of Portuguese occupation dated to between
the mid-fifteenth and mid-sixteenth centuries, therefore providing
two distinct settlement patterns for comparison. According to Redman, ‘the Qsar es-Seghir sequence provides a fascinating glimpse of a
stepwise series of modifications ultimately leading to the total trans
formation of an Islamic town into a European-Portuguese town’
(1986: 165). These included a greater concern by the Portuguese
with public space, represented by a 25 per cent increase in area
covered by streets and plazas. Focus was placed upon decorating
house entrance ways in comparison to the plain Muslim ones. The
centralized core of the Muslim town, consisting of the congregational
mosque, public bath and market, while the buildings obviously chan
ged, was also de-emphasized in the Portuguese town. This was inter
preted as reflecting a more individualized and segmented system,
‘probably resulting from a diminished sense of shared values and
less centralised tradesmen’ (Redman 1986: 246).
The example from Qsar es-Seghir illustrates that a Muslim settle
ment plan when juxtaposed with a Christian one can be archaeologi
cally recognizable. As with the mosque, so with settlement form,
archaeology can enable differentiation between different ‘religious
layers’. Interestingly, such a change in the nature of public and private
space was also recorded in Spain after the Christian re-conquest,
where Violich mentions that more direct access to the church, plaza
and market was often opened up (1962: 174). But it should also be
noted that a correlation between the presence of a Muslim commun
ity and an emphasis upon private.space at the expense of public space
does not always hold true. Changes in the use of space before the
Muslim conquest were evident at Baysan (Bet Shean) in Palestine,
with a decline in the use of public space evident with the abandon
ment of the amphitheatre. Pre-Muslim ‘Christianization’ had an
impact upon urban life and was also ‘reflected by the city plan and
architecture’ (Tsafrir and Foerster 1994: 101).
Having seen that a Muslim settlement overlain by a Christian one
was archaeologically recognizable, it is interesting to look at the
reverse process to ensure that we are not observing any peculiar
anomalies. The second case study is Bierman’s (1991) architectural

216

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

analysis of how Ottoman occupation transformed Venetian Crete.
The capital, Heraklion (Candia, Qandiye), was founded by the
Arabs in 827, captured by the Byzantines, and sold by the Franks
to the Venetians in 1204, who occupied it until the Ottomans took the
city in 1669, following on from their successful capture of the towns
of Khania and Retimo. The Venetians had literally ‘Venetianized’
Retimo and Candia by building ‘provincial versions’ of the Basilica,
Piazza San Marco and the Palazzo Ducale; thus, in Bierman’s words,
‘the central monumental core of these Cretan cities was developed to
replicate that of Venice itself, thereby reinforcing and perpetuating
Venetian political and religious values and attitudes by their presence
and their spatial relationships’ (1991: 57).
Prior to the Ottoman occupation a distinct spatial system was in
place. This was not in itself indigenous, and was certainly at odds
with Ottoman concepts of spatial construction. Hence the Venetian
spatial overlay was in turn ‘Ottomanized’ in what Bierman terms an
‘external’ and ‘internal’ manner. The former was effected most prom
inently through the siting of the Sultan’s cami, the main mosque
complex, visible from afar, which in both Candia and Retimo corre
lated with the position of former Christian buildings, a Franciscan
monastery church and a San Marco replica respectively. Conspicuous
spatial positioning was not an Ottoman prerogative, but the focus of
the cities was altered to centre on the Sultan’s marker. Cemeteries,
fountains, church to mosque conversions and madrasabs were all used
in the process of spatial transformation, especially through the altera
tion of the Venetian piazza system, thereby allowing access and sight
of the Grand Vezir’s mosque, the former Greek Orthodox cathedral
(Bierman 1991: 66). Thus it can be seen that spatial alteration to
reflect prevailing religious belief and social/cultural requirements
can obviously be a two-way process. Yet it should also be noted
that, although a Muslim spatial system was being created, this was
also very much a specifically Ottoman construct, with their distinct
ive cami and cemeteries proclaiming both Ottoman and the individual
identity of the founders.
Nomad settlements
So far the discussion has created an imbalance in favour of sedentary
city-dwellers. These, along with the inhabitants of towns and villages,
do not have a monopoly on settlement and Muslim society. Nomads,
as has been discussed already, are widespread in the Muslim world
and their settlements should be studied just as much as cities, towns
and villages, even if they are often more ephemerally fixed. The

I
L

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

217

archaeological recognition of nomadic settlements has already been
touched upon with reference to the domestic environment (see chap
ter 3), and besides tent outlines and the other evidence already men
tioned, wells, corrals, storage facilities, all could indicate their former
presence (see Cribb 1991). The frequently cyclical nature of nomadic
pastoralist activities of larger base camps and smaller way stations
might be recognizable; differences between camel, cattle and horse
keepers might equally be evident (see Cribb 1991). It is not my aim
here to exhaust the possibilities which a Muslim nomadic community
might suggest for archaeology. Rather, two examples of settlement
types with nomadic associations will be considered, as interesting case
studies with a social emphasis: a ‘Bedouin station’, and the enigmatic
qusur (singular qasr) or so-called ‘desert castles’, which are a feature
of the Early Islamic period in parts of Syria and Jordan. Both have
been suggested as having functioned in a variety of ways in nomadic
society, symbolically and practically, and the two archaeologically
investigated examples suggest possible frontier relationships between
states and nomads.
The first site is ar-Risha in Jordan, separated by a distance of 3 km
into ancient and modern, but surprisingly similar in character.
Ancient ar-Risha, founded perhaps as early as 650 and lasting until
the eleventh—twelfth centuries, is made up of a variety of structures: a
mosque, houses of varying sizes, one with a reception area, and
stables, about which tents must have been erected. It has been
described as a ‘steppic reflection’ of the ideal Islamic city, containing
all the necessary urban components and of approximately the same
date as the first amsar, and it is claimed to offer an insight through
architecture and settlement structure into Bedouin politics and pol
ities (Helms 1990: 5, 131). It functioned, like its modern counterpart,
where garages replace stables, as a service centre and stopping point
but, more importantly, as physical testimony to ‘direct diplomacy
between the state and the tribes’ (1990: 170). It drew upon pre-Islamic
models, such as that provided by neighbouring Qasr Burqu, but used
these in new ways through the transfer of diplomacy from the
boundaries of the previous Byzantine state to the tribal territory.
Thus, it can perhaps be suggested, it wholly rather than partially
included a group of nomadic Bedouin within the new Umayyad
state and its successors.
The second site is that of Qasr al-Hayr East in Syria, which,
though differing in several respects from ar-Risha, has also been
claimed to illustrate a concern with including the nomadic population
within the larger Muslim community and state. Excavated over a
number of years (Grabar et al. 1978), Qasr al-Hayr East was found

r
218

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

to contain a variety of distinct components. These included a walled
outer enclosure, 15km in perimeter, and containing evidence of an
attempt to ensure a permanent water supply through the use of
underground channels leading to a water supply 25 km away. Within
this was a ‘large enclosure’, interpreted as a medina containing several
residences and a mosque, and a ‘small enclosure’ interpreted as a
caravanserai. Created originally in the eighth century, and thus
another Umayyad foundation, it was partially abandoned in the
tenth century, reoccupied in areas in the twelfth century, abandoned
again in the fourteenth century, with thereafter intermittent smallscale use continuing.
If the interpretations of the excavators are believed, it was created
as ‘a means for controlling and settling turbulent tribes’ (1978: 157).
This, it was suggested, was achieved through providing, besides facil
ities for travellers, a medina, which was a role model of central
authority, a mosque, the symbol of a unified Muslim community,
and a source of income from the water supply and the outer enclosure
which could be used for pastoral activities. It could have become a
focal point for periodic gatherings of nomads. The second phase of
occupation was apparently divest of the symbolic function, if that is
the correct term, as it became a ‘motel town’, with the service
components coming to the fore. Therefore it is with the former
phase that the greater interest would appear to rest, if Qasr al-Hayr
did indeed function as an imprint of government within a tribal
territory. Indeed, it is this visual imagery which would then
appear to be of great significance, the ‘transference’ of stone archi
tectural components from the urban centre, whose function is encap
sulated, in a point made by Whitcomb, ‘as definitional elements for
an urban entity, rather like towered walls used as the symbol for cities
on early maps’ (1995: 491). It provided an image of the state, if
anything, and, although it is only a hypothesis, it provides an inter
esting scenario regarding possible relations between nomads and
the state.
A Total Approach: the Landscape
A settlement should not be divorced from its overall context, its
surrounding physical environment. Nomadic populations, for exam
ple, are not autonomous. Relations with either rural or urban seden
tary communities are common and mutual obligations and trading
networks between these groups exist. Protection was often provided
to caravans and town-dwellers by nomads, as in areas of Saudi Arabia

)

219

until recently (Cole 1975). Town or city-dwellers can be linked to
their rural sedentary counterparts through marketing networks, and
the larger settlements can act as market and service centres (see
chapter 5). Numerous permutations are possible, but the point is
that these links exist and, although not specifically Muslim, their
importance lies in the fact that the archaeology of Islam must be
viewed as the sum, the totality of all these elements. To separate
one element out, urban studies for instance, and to examine it on its
own is frequently restricting, as is privileging the urban environment
at the expense of looking at its place within the landscape.
Lapidus recognized that emphasizing dichotomies between city
and country are not a useful paradigm (1973b: 21), and it is in
evaluating these links that archaeologists can make a contribution
(see Sjöström 1993; King and Cameron 1994). Physical links between
settlement and surrounding area will exist in many instances, provid
ing a body of material for the archaeologist. These can range from
irrigation and water supply systems to field systems, nomad, trade
and pilgrimage routes, and fortifications. All mechanisms by which
the landscape can be tied together, settlement to settlement, nomads
to sedentaries, feature to feature deserve study. Connecting landscape
features are many, and we can look at water supply as an example. It
is important as a necessity of life, subject to much technical ingenuity
in its provision, as a ‘landscape element’ and also because it has a
significance beyond the purely practical in Islam as was shown in the
Muslim concept of paradise (see chapter 6).

Water supply
Many areas of the Muslim world are arid or semi-arid, and access to
an adequate water supply is of particular importance; a variety of
mechanisms have been developed to supply and store water.
Although much of this technology predates Islam and cannot be
said to be Muslim in character, it is intimately linked with a
large part of the Muslim world from North Africa to Central
Asia. Notable among the available traditional technologies are the
‘horizontal wells’, the qanat, foggara, karez and falaj, where water
from a ‘mother well’, a vertical shaft, is channelled, often over a
considerable distance, by a horizontal channel or conduit (slightly
sloping and usually covered) to source. Secondary shafts are usually
dug at measured intervals along the covered shafts for removal of
debris and for ventilation, as with the qanat, for example, common
in Iran (Cressey 1958; Goblot 1979; al-Hassan and Hill 1992).
These are often highly visible in aerial photographs and provide

220

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

a prime example of links between settlement and environment,
with tentacles of qanats and roads stretching out from the larger
settlements.
The very visibility of these systems lends them particularly to
archaeological investigation. A good example is the study of the
falaj and associated structures in various parts of Oman by Costa
(1983), and the work by Wilkinson (1975, 1976, 1977) in the vicinity
of the ninth—tenth century trade centre of Sohai a site already men
tioned in the context of Indian Ocean trade (see chapter 5). The stated
aims of the latter project, in particular ‘to describe the methods of
water supply used and in general to understand how the land was
used by the inhabitants of medieval Sohar’ (1975: 159—60), are pre
cisely what are often needed to tie Muslim settlements to their
surroundings in a ‘a total approach’. Also of interest would be relat
ing the type of information provided by Brookes (1987) to the
archaeological evidence derived from settlement studies. He describes
the ‘strict system of priorities’ (Brookes 1987: 193) enforced as to
water access from the falaj in Oman. Drinking had universal first
priority both inside and outside a settlement; after drinking, inside a
settlement, male bathing took priority, followed further downstream
by female bathing, in turn succeeded by the place for washing the
dead (mosques may have had their own access to water from the
falaj), and finally for agricultural use.
Add to the hydraulic systems already described, waterwheels and
equipment such as the Egyptian shaduf, a lever-type mechanism used
to draw water, along with the range of options available for storing
water tanks, cisterns, wells and poois and the material remains of
this one aspect of settlement ‘periphery’ are many. Indeed, in one case
the analysis of water technology has helped in totally rethinking the
role of a settlement; the study of the settlement devoid of this com
ponent would have been wholly misleading. The site in question is
Dahiak Kebir situated on the island of the same name off the Eritrean
coast of the Red Sea. Dahiak Kebir is located in an extremely arid
environment, yet functioned as a trade centre for several hundred
years, and thus would have had not inconsiderable demands for
water (Insoll 1 996c, d). These were met by over a hundred cisterns
cut out of the coral, of varying dimensions, and often linked to rockhewn channels functioning as catchment systems to collect the
sparse rains. Surprisingly, although the existence of this site has
been known for many years, only one aspect has been adequately
studied, the Arabic funerary inscriptions (Bassat 1893; Schneider
1983), thus providing a far from unique example of skewed analysis
in favour of a single privileged component, divorced from context,

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

221

and leaving the observer perhaps thinking that Dahlak Kebir
functioned only as a city of the dead. Obviously it was wholly
dependent on its surroundings for its very existence but this fact
seems to have been ignored.
The significance of water beyond the practical in Islam is some
thing a number of scholars allude to. At Qsar es-Seghir (Morocco),
for example, alongside the evident spatial differences between the
Muslim and Portuguese occupations, it was noticeable how the
Portuguese did not display in the surviving evidence the same con
cerns for latrines, drains, sewers and washing facilities evident in the
Islamic period (Redman 1986: 243). This does not necessarily mean
that the Portuguese were particularly dirty, but could be connected
with the emphasis upon cleanliness and purity which is a recurring
feature in Islam, exemplified by ritual cleansing prior to prayer, which
should take place five times a day (see chapter 2). A general preoccu
pation with hygiene is also something remarked upon by the excava
tors of Daulatabad, ancient Devgiri, in India (see plate 7.1). Wellconstructed drains, latrines and pipes were all recorded, both to
supply and dispose of water, leading Mate to remark that ‘if cleanli
ness was next to godliness, here was a society that strove after it’
(1983: 337).
The hammam, or bath-house, is a well-known feature of urban
Muslim society indicative of the concern with cleanliness and copied
or continued from Byzantine or Indian traditions. Examples have
been found archaeologically, and are well attested architecturally in
many areas of the Muslim world, though many are falling into disuse

—

—

Plate 7.1 The citadel and later town, Daulatabad, India (photo. T. Insoll)

222

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

today. Various types exist, though a similar plan might be followed
(for details on all aspects of the hammam, see Sourdel-Thomine
1971). Public baths were frequently built, as attested in areas which
were formerly part of the Muslim world, in Ottoman Bulgaria, for
example (Kiel 1974: 652) or in many areas of Spain (de Epaiza et al.
1989). Besides their obvious hygiene purposes, baths could serve ‘as a
meeting place for relaxation and communication’ (Grabar 1973: 155)
(see plate 7.2). Al-Janabi (1978: 190) also describes a further type of
bath, which he interprets as one used for the ablution of corpses, at
Kufah in Iraq and which dates from the Ilkhanid period (1258—1337).
Private baths could also exist. Recently, the so-called ‘Moorish baths’
in Gibraltar have been given just such an attribution, having possibly
formed part of the governor’s residence (Finlayson 1997). Excavations
revealed the presence of the plunge bath in the hot room, as well as
part of the hypocaust found to be filled with a thick deposit of black
sludge, residue from the furnace (Benady 1988: 8—10; see also Torres
Balbás 1942: 206—10). Numerous other examples illustrating the
importance of cleanliness and an adequate water supply could be
provided. The main point to emphasize is that the discussion of
water-related structures is only one example of possible settlement—
landscape links, but it illustrates how important it is to apply a ‘total
approach’ in considering all aspects of settlement and their possible
interconnections.

I

223

-.

Sacred geography
A final question to consider within the context of landscape studies or
settlement positioning is what actually constitutes sacred geography.
The networks of pilgrimage trails, local and international, have
already been discussed (see chapter 4), and these could be said to
form a part of ‘sacred geography’; similarly, the role of tombs within
this has also been described (see chapter 6). But what of other
elements? Do these exist? Even city orientation, as Bonine (1990)
has shown, is not necessarily reflective of qiblah direction but more
the result of topography, and, as Sopher (1967) remarks, Islam does
not impress cosmological representations upon the landscape: explicit
sacred connotations, aside from the obvious centrality of the holy
places of Mecca and Medina, are restricted to saints’ and martyrs’
tombs. Exceptions nevertheless exist, as at In-Teduq in Niger, a pre
sixteenth century site, which has been interpreted as indicative of
Sufism and monumentalization of the qiblah, through the clustering
of the stone-built tombs, houses and shops around the mosque
(Cressier 1992: 75—7).

Plate 7.2 Bathing scene from The Khamsa of Nizami (Browne no. 1424,
St John’s College, Cambridge)

F—
224

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

Yet this is an under-researched field, and the environment itself is
certainly not a sterile concept in Islam, but considered as something
entrusted to mankind by God, which should be maintained in a
sustainable way (Pedersen 1995: 263). Similarly, Schimmel (1991)
has illustrated how the landscape and environment can be represented
in spiritual terms in mystical poetry, and a study by Lahiri (1996) has
gone one stage further and managed to tie together various elements
of Muslim sacred geography in the landscape of late medieval Bal
labgarh, north of Delhi. Here, ‘shared social norms and tolerances’
(1996: 263) led to a homogeneity of Hindu and Muslim religious
geography. In summary, sacred geography, as with physical or
human geography, should surely be considered more fully in future,
even if only to be discounted as of little relevance within the archae
ology of Islam, once we are more certain of its importance. This is a
further component of the ‘total approach’ towards settlement studies.

but this is not the essential point. Rather, it raises the question of how
such issues could be examined by archaeologists interested in Islam in
the future. Are issues such as changes in ownership of property and
their possible fundamental societal consequences approachable by the
archaeologist through material culture? In this instance they are
related to material culture; Akbar (1988) goes on to define five
‘forms of submission of property’. Again the validity of the categories
is open to debate but the importance of such models is to illustrate
what might be considered through moving beyond a limited corpus
of standard archaeological paradigms. The Muslim settlement is not
(and never was) a fossilized entity, and if it is considered as a mirror
or result of society, as it is here, recent behaviours and their possible
material outcomes must also be considered.

225

Summary and Conclusions
The Contemporary and Future Situation

The relevance of much of the above for archaeologists of the future
dealing with the material residue of the present can be questioned. As
with many other areas of life and aspects of material culture, Muslim
settlements have recently undergone radical change. A situation exists
whereby, on the one hand, increasing diversity might be manifest in
certain matters and an increasing uniformity in others. Fundamental
agents of change are many and include prosperity, secularism and
Westernization, the impact of the motor car, the availability of new
materials and new technologies. No one cause is wholly responsible,
but it is undeniable that change has been felt across the Muslim
world. Riyadh, as described by Philby (1920) within living memory,
has gone forever.
Yet the pace of change is so quick and the impact so far reaching
that rapid changes in society will offer challenges to the archaeol
ogists of the future. A single example will be mentioned here. Akbar
(1988) has offered an interpretation to account for certain recent
changes in Muslim cities concerning issues of control and ownership
of property. Basically, he suggests that the traditional settlement is an
‘ordered’ one, with more people having a stake in society through
ownership or control of property, whereas a modern society is more
‘organized’ and, consequently, ‘people who neither own nor control
are irresponsible and dissipate the resources of the society’ (Akbar
1988: 200). Whether this is true is debatable (and is in many ways
reminiscent of a certain spectrum of current British political thought),

Settlements have been considered here as a facet of the material
culture which in totality constitutes the archaeology of Islam, and,
although certain commonalties appear, a generalizing model along the
lines of the once-popular ‘orientalizing’ approach is not acceptable;
too much emphasis has to be given to factors such as environment
and topography. The Muslim city has developed as an environment
for those following the requirements of their faith. Yet the direct
religious component within the Muslim city is negligible beyond a
notion of public/private spatial considerations which as a social con
cern are a by product of religious convention. (We can disregard the
central mosque/palace core as being wholly religious; as we have seen,
this appears to owe its origins in part to a pre-Islamic heritage of
power symbolism.) Nevertheless, there was something definable as a
Muslim city, and recognizable as such, regardless of the opinions of
the proponents of diversity to the extent that no uniformity is sup
posed to exist, even if it is only reduced to the core elements of
mosques and cemeteries. But frequently, as has been discussed,
much more than this will be found, which will entail the archaeologi
cal recognition of a Muslim city. Manifest patterns are apparent
which can differentiate it from other settlement types, best exempli
fied in juxtaposition as was illustrated using the Moroccan and Cretan
examples. Villages and pastoral encampments have fewer possible
recognition criteria, and were perhaps less affected, but again mos
ques and burials might allow their recognition as Muslim settlements.
If Islam is to be regarded as a complete system for life, it could be
expected that this would be apparent in the settlement. Muslim

r
226

THE COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT

identity could not be expected to be wholly exempt from this impor
tarn aspect of material culture. It is how this is achieved which is
subject, as with all the categories of material culture discussed, to
great diversity.

8

An Archaeology of Islam?

God creates you weak: after weakness He gives you strength, and after
strength infirmity and grey hairs.
Qur’an. The Greeks 30: 54
The conclusions which can be drawn from this study are varied, and
are certainly both positive and negative in terms of their implications.
On the positive side, and in answer to the fundamental question raised
at the very beginning of this volume, it can be seen that many
categories of material culture which can be recognized as specifically
Islamic are present cross-culturally. These can also be manifest archae
ologically, and can range from a city structured according to specific
spatial requirements down to items such as a seal ring. However, it
must also not be forgotten that much of what has been presented is an
ideal scenario, an ideal Islamic material culture, and it is very unlikely
that such a ‘suite’ of evidence would ever be found in totality. Excep
tions to every proposed structuring principle can and will occur, in all
probability outweighing the residue of orthodox behaviour. People
will be buried with grave goods, not all Muslims lived in courtyard
houses, mosques can be mis-aligned and built without a mihrab,
turbans might be rare, alcohol was drunk, the list continues. Equally,
traditional criteria are of little validity in many areas of the modern
Muslim world, but people are still Muslims, and it is possible to be a
Muslim with few outward manifestations. Archaeology can and does
attest to this, and comparative studies illustrate how flawed it is to
create an ideal Muslim, who just does not exist, except perhaps in the
Arabian Nights or in a Hollywood stereotype where the landscape is
studded with minarets and peopled with characters wearing turbans,
baggy trousers and shoes with pointed curling toes.

228

AN ARCHAEOLOGY OF ISLAM?

AN ARCHAEOLOGY OF ISLAM?

Many Muslims do not live life according to Qur’anic prescript or
the injunction of the shar’iah. The notions of ideals and realities are
both plainly apparent. The concept of ummah, or community, for
example, is in effect an ideal: glance around Muslim societies today
and it can be seen that they are beset with the same problems of
inequality and the like which are found in any other society or
community. Add to this the huge cultural diversity found, and the
problems involved in identifying an archaeology of Islam seem
immense. Further limitations are apparent. The geographical empha
sis in this volume has had to be selective, and in fact concentrates
on certain areas. Many of the examples of material culture given do
not apply, or have never applied, outside certain specific contexts.
Likewise, the masculine emphasis is noticeable: male rulers, male
artisans, soldiers and scholars predominate, and the female dimen
sion, where acknowledged, is often considered in what could be
termed clichéd contexts, relating to the domestic environment and
food preparation. This imbalance reflects much of the current litera
ture, and it is highly probable that archaeologists will be able to
define the female presence within the archaeology of Islam in a
more credible manner in the future, once greater attention is paid to
this area of study.
Thus, in the face of the problems outlined, the purpose of the
exercise could be questioned if, for example, one of the main conclu
sions is the recognition that the gulf between ideals or ‘structuring
principles’ and reality or ‘cultural diversity’ is largely insurmounta
ble. This makes us consider the positive points which have also been
isolated not least the practical advantages of illustrating that it is
possible to consider religion as exerting a potential influence over all
areas of life, and thus the archaeology of religion as constituting the
residue of this ‘total picture’. All aspects of life, from birth in the
domestic environment to death and burial, can be structured accord
ing to religious, and the resultant social, codes. The archaeology of
Islam must be regarded as a complete system, not an abstracted set of
‘princely’ artifacts or vague statements based upon a few grand
monuments, but the residue of millions of individuals spread over
time and space. In this respect it is perhaps easier to approach the
study of Islam as a distinct entity compared with many other world
religions; for example, Christianity, of which, according to one
involved party, a priest, it may be better ‘to talk more about family
resemblances rather than an essential essence’ (Shakespear 1995).
Islam is perhaps more easily defined, and this would certainly appear
to be correct as regards the categories of relevant material culture
which are related to it.

Yet it also needs to be remembered that religion is not merely a
monolithic entity superimposed according to divine will. The indivi
dual is again of great importance and individual religious experience
varies. According to Geertz, ‘for one man, his religious commitments
are the axis of his whole existence. for another man, not necessarily
less honestly believing, his faith is worn more lightly’ (1968: 111—12).
This has obvious implications for material culture and, in turn,
archaeology. Muslim and other religious interpretation is subject to
many different meanings at various scales. At a group level, for
instance, as was noted in chapter 1, these can include the different
legal schools, the two main Muslim traditions of Sunni and Shi’ah,
esoteric Sufi Islam, and many other interpretations and manifesta
tions. Within these each individual can bring his or her own perspec
tive to bear, creating further diversity but diversity, it is argued,
within a Muslim framework.
Similarly, what material culture ‘means’ can vary, Of all the case
studies cited in this volume, the one examining the Norman court in
Sicily perhaps provides the best example of the different meanings
which can be inherent in material culture with Islamic associations
(see chapter 5). But this was an extreme example, contrasting what
was in the end a Christian court composed of people who held a
specific vision of Muslim material culture as it had connotations of
how they perceived a court should appear. Yet similar diversity in the
meaning of material culture was apparent within a wholly Muslim
context, as was seen with the role of epigraphy. Inscriptions can mean
different things to different people: as a symbol if the viewer is
illiterate or cannot read it for other reasons, or as an instructive device
at a much more fundamental level if the message can be read. Add to
this context, remove our inscription from the hypothetical mosque,
say, place it in a museum and its meaning can change again depending
upon the observer. Notions such as plurality in meaning and inter
pretation, and contextual examination as an interpretative device are
well-trodden theoretical paths jn recent years and are not worth
travelling further down just for the sake of it. Archaeologists should
now be aware of such fundamental issues, and that Islamic archae
ology should in any way be exempt from such considerations is
insupportable. In fact this aspect of the ‘post-processual’ approach
has direct and fundamental practical implications for many aspects of
Islamic archaeology. An awareness that material culture can function
in different ways at different levels would appear obvious, but
neglected. Why else could Austin and Thomas raise the question:
‘how and why has it been possible for medieval historians to system
atically ignore the work of medieval archaeologists?’ (1990: 47).

—

. .

—

229

230

AN ARCHAEOLOGY OF ISLAM?

Replace ‘medieval’ with ‘Islamic’, and the sentiments are
the
and the simple answer is that they could because much of the same,
research
was irrelevant.
Besides an improved theoretical awareness, contributions
can also
be made to Islamic archaeology at a more practical level. It
was noted
in chapter 1 that the individual is often denied, as are
freque
whole strata of society; what was not mentioned is the relatio ntly
nship
between Muslims and archaeology. This might seem strange
,
like
considering a particular relationship between Hindus and
the past
for example, but in the context of Islam this is important
because of
the concept of jahiliyyah, the ‘age of ignorance’, which existed
before
Islam. At one end of the scale it might then be thought
that Muslim
interest in the past, at least before Islam, was and is
likely to be
negligible, but this is a false conception. As both Trigger
(1989: 183)
and Lindholm (1996: 33) note, the pre-Islamic past and archae
ology
can be of importance to Muslim peoples. The Shah’s celebra
tion at
Persepolis for the supposed anniversary of 2,500 years of
the
kings in 1971, or Arabs reciting the poetry of the warrio Persian
rs of the
jahiliyyah, are prime examples. Similarly, in Libya the
government
was responsible for starting a major archaeological project
, The
UNESCO Libyan Valleys Archaeological Survey, as it was
thought
that lessons from the past might be learnt to benefit
agricultural
practices today (Barker 1996: 1).
Yet how conceptions of the past and of archaeology exist
will
depending on cultural context and, of course, from individ vary
ual to
individual. An interesting, and rare, study of such issues is
provided
by Blau (1995), who examines attitudes towards the past
in the
United Arab Emirates. Elsewhere such studies are lacking
, even
though reviews of the relevant archaeology in different
region
might be undertaken or varying attitudes to the past consid s
ered
(see, for instance, the studies on the Near East, Soviet archaeology,
Israeli archaeology, and Indian archaeology in Trigger and
Glover
1981, 1982; also Layton 1989; Masry 1994; Insoll 1996c). Such
a study
or studies would be of great interest for comparative purpos
es in
assessing the relationship between archaeology, the general
study of
the past and of Islam.
This in turn leads to a consideration of the possible practic
significance of archaeology for the study of the very origins al
Islam. Archaeology can and has contributed to our understandinof
g
of the component parts, the structuring principles of material culture
the Muslim burial, the mosque, the domestic environment. In respec:
t
of these a largely orthodox position has been followed in the previo
us
pages, but the origins of the mosque, for example, are currently
the

AN ARCHAEOLOGY OF ISLAM?

231

subject of a re-evaluation (Johns 1995), a process of review based on
archaeological and historical evidence. Much more controversial is
the examination of direct events associated with the origins of Islam,
Qur’anic ‘history’ almost, through archaeology, although it is extre
mely unlikely that this will ever take place to any significant degree;
for example, archaeological research in Mecca and Medina, obvious
key sites, is impossible. Furthermore, from a Muslim perspective it is
not necessary; nothing will be found that will add to the religion, no
equivalent of the Dead Sea Scrolls or a hidden gospel will appear (al
Sharekh 1995). The truth is already revealed and material culture, and
therefore archaeology, cannot confirm or deny the faith of believers.
In this respect there are differences from other areas of religious
archaeology; biblical archaeology, for example, in which there some
times appears to be an emphasis upon proving or disproving actual
events (see, for example, Keller 1965; Bartlett 1997).
Such a viewpoint returns us to questions of faith touched upon in
chapter 1. How far should one probe when examining something as
personal as religious experience? This is perhaps for the individual to
decide but some sort of threshold of restraint surely needs to be
observed. Similar issues are considered by Waines (1995: 267—79)
with reference to the historical study• of Islamic origins, and he
provides a convenient summary of the pertinent research trends.
These fall into two main groups: first, that of the faithful, the ‘insider’
Muslim perspective, and, secondly, that of secular, Western, usually
European scholars. He notes that, until recently, a ‘dovish’ perspect
ive was adopted by scholars in treating the Arabic sources relating to
Islamic origins, but within the past two decades a much more ‘hawk
ish’ school has appeared, exemplified by, for example, Crone and
Cook (1977) and Wansbrough (1977, 1978). The Qur’an was sub
jected to ‘literary analysis’ in the latter study, for instance, where it
was seen as ‘salvation history’, presenting not a history of events but
‘simply theological rationalizations of those events’ (Waines 1995:
277).
Archaeology could have a significant role to play in assessing the
development of Islam and the validity of the Qur’an as a historical
source for those who think such an approach permissible. But essen
tially we are as yet in no position to achieve this, not only because of
the practical impossibility of attempting it, but also because the
theoretical and even moral implications have to be considered further.
Yet it is also necessary to accept, as the material culture makes plainly
apparent, that Islam and Islamic civilization did not emerge fully
fledged, but were subject, as with most things, to a developmental
process. This is especially obvious when Muslim material culture in

232

AN ARCHAEOLOGY OF ISLAM?

the first conquest situation is considered. In Spain, for example, most
of which was conquered in 711, Grabar (1973) notes that no Muslim
monument or text has been found until the formation of the
Umayyad caliphate in 756, with the Cordoba mosque, construction
of which started in 785—6, the first building ‘of any sort of signifi
cance in Muslim Spain’ (1973: 20—1). Whether this information is
now
out of date, as is likely in the light of 25 years further archaeologica
l
research, is largely irrelevant because the importance of this examp
le
lies in the fact that it illustrates that the pack of material culture
‘cards’ was not instantaneously laid out each time a new territor
y
was taken by the Muslim armies. Rather, as we have seen,
this
material culture was itself developing; moreover, buildings could
be
adapted and re-used and ephemeral materials employed leaving
little
or no visible traces. The ninth century would appear to be the turning
point when it could be said that many typically Islamic features
had
developed in a recognizable form. This prompts the question
of
whether it was coincidental or connected with fundamental religio
us
issues, such as the standardization, transcription and evaluation of the
hadith in the ninth century?
It is pertinent to finish this volume by re-stating that, although
great complexity and diversity, ethnic, cultural, geographical, is evi
dent, it is obvious that structuring principles are in operation which
create categories of material culture identifiable cross-culturally
as
Muslim. This unity can in part be attributed to the existence of the
Qur’an, which should structure the life of all Muslims. Yet to say this
does not mean that an ‘other’ is created, reminiscent of past orientalist
approaches; rather, this material culture is now part of the contem
porary ‘world picture’, from Mecca to Cambridge, and this has been
shown. The archaeology of Islam is of relevance for us all, not only in
offering a further dimension of material culture of which to be aware,
but also because of the conceptual implications in an era where we are
constantly reminded of the globalization processes at work around
us. The archaeology of Islam is not a Muslim archaeology but every
one’s archaeology.

