The Domestic Environment

Believers, do not enter the dwellings of other men until you have asked
their owner’s permission and wished them peace.
Qur’an. The Light 24: 27

While the mosque could perhaps be expected to accord with a fairly
standard form (and therefore be archaeologically recognizable), what
of the domestic environment which is not imbued with any overt
religious importance? Does this form a significant component of
Muslim life, or is it somehow neutral and merely confined to the
secular domain? Before examining specific ‘Muslim’ examples of the
use and creation of domestic space, it is as well to draw in certain
strands of current thinking on the social role of the domestic envir
onment.
Archaeologists appear to have come rather late in comparison with
other related disciplines to realize that a structure used for domestic
purposes does more than just provide shelter. It is an environment
which is thought out prior to construction and becomes the ‘physical
embodiment of an ideal environment’ (Rapoport 1969: 48, 1980). It
has been referred to as a ‘structuring structure’, both a medium for,
and the outcome of, social practices (Bourdieu 1977; Giddens 1979).
It is the home of the family unit, ‘the foremost and fundamental
institution of human society’ (Mawdudi 1986: 39), and the one
which forms the primary sphere in the Islamic social order. Thus,
the domestic environment can tell us much about society, beyond
merely illustrating the technological choices available to the builder,
and the architecture preferred by a society. It is also the environment
for family life within which children are raised, and in which social
codes and gender roles are defined, taught and transferred. In these

61

events, the house itself (here meant in its broadest definition) need not
be a passive player, but can be utilized, consciously or unconsciously,
in teaching processes and in perpetuating social codes and values.
Thus space can be used to reproduce the social or cosmological
order (Moore 1986), and the very structure and layout of the house
can be a metaphor for society (see Cunningham 1964; Humphrey
1974; Hugh-Jones 1985). To quote Carsten and Hugh-Jones (1995: 2),
‘house, body and mind are in continuous interaction, the physical
structure, furnishing, social conventions and mental images of the
house at once enabling, moulding, informing and constraining the
activities and ideas which unfold within its bounds.’ Archaeologists
have similarly become interested in viewing domestic architecture as
imbued with a greater social significance than previously acknow
ledged (see, for example, Kent 1990; Samson 1990; Parker Pearson
and Richards 1994). This is of great significance as domestic
structures are one of the categories of archaeological evidence
most frequently encountered by archaeologists, and within Islamic
archaeology this is no exception.
Having stressed that the domestic environment is far from neutral,
is it possible to define a type of domestic architecture as specifically
Islamic? Can it be said to be distinctive, even with an idealized
generalized form? Although culturally diverse, there is a definable
Islamic domestic architecture, and this has been studied in some detail
both by architects and archaeologists (see, for example, Petherbridge
1978; Fentress 1987, Campo 1991). However, one of the primary
concerns of this study has rarely, if at all, been considered, namely,
the archaeological analysis and recognition of Islamic domestic struc
tures. For example, if the archaeological recognition of nomads,
including their architecture, is considered (as by Cribb 1991), then
Islam is not considered as a structuring principle, even though the
majority of the groups used as examples are Muslim, and in many
cases their religion could have been of fundamental importance in
structuring their domestic space.
In contrast, where Islamic domestic structures have been consid
ered, there has often been a tendency to focus upon the grander
monuments, a further instance of ‘top-heavy’ Islamic archaeology
and architectural studies. As has been generally voiced elsewhere
(Petherbridge 1978: 193—5; Rudofsky 1981: 1), study of the vernacular
is usually neglected in favour of largely non-representative palatial
architecture which, when the full corpus of domestic architecture is
considered, forms a numerically insignificant part. Archaeological site
plans might portray a central cluster of buildings perceived as import
ant, a citadel perhaps, but the periphery, perhaps of less permanent,

62

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

and thus more archaeologically ephemeral, structures, is given short
shrift or left unstudied. This imbalance in the study of the archae
ology of the Muslim domestic environment is unfortunate, as again
the archaeologist interested in Islam is privileged in the sources of
information available in pursuing this field of study (textual, ethno
graphic, iconographic). Thus, this chapter will be concerned with
defining what constitutes Muslim domestic architecture, exploring
the criteria for its recognition archaeologically, and placing it within
its social context.

Women and children’s
quarters

1996).

Obviously, the concept of privacy was not invented by Muslims,
but domestic space is referred to in both the Qur’an and the hadith,
where the sanctity of the house is indicated, and strict rules to main
tain domestic privacy are outlined (see Petherbridge 1978; Campo
1991). The primary and over-riding concern is with privacy and the
protection and seclusion of women (in certain cultural contexts
referred to as purdah) and the sanctity of the family. Both wife and
domestic space are to be protected, and domestic life is linked to ideas
of purity. Indeed, Campo (1991: 21) suggests that Muslim ‘rules
governing access to domestic space are regarded as similar to rules
governing exposure of and access to the human body’. To achieve
this, physical space is often segregated into two spheres, whether two
halves of a tent, within a single or double courtyard or spread over

Inner private
courtyard

_T

i
Private

Private

I
Kitchen!
for
guests

An Ideal Islamic Domestic Environment

The model for the Muslim household can be regarded as that of the
Prophet, and the courtyard house built by the Prophet in the first
year of the hzjrah (622) in Medina as the first Muslim domestic
structure. Although often seen as the progenitor of Muslim domestic
space, it was in fact based on existing west Arabian architectural
traditions, and the pre-Islamic architectural heritage must be
acknowledged. The Prophet’s house itself, as far as it has been recon
structed historically, consisted of a rectangular walled courtyard, in
which livestock were kept, and on one or more sides of which were
rooms for sleeping, storing goods, and for each wife and her children.
The house functioned as both a dwelling and a meeting place for
believers (Cresswell 1932: 7; Marcais 1965: 113; Fentress 1987: 63).
The terminology applied to the Muslim house varies, but the most
frequently encountered Arabic names are dar, for the enclosed com
pound, and beit or bayt, for smaller dwellings, and a name which can
also be applied to a tent as in bayt sha’ar (Campo 1991; Petersen

63

Men’s
jquarters
Semi-private
courtyard

bi

Entrance
Street

Figure 3.1

Stereotypical layout of an idealized Muslim courtyard house

several palatial complexes. The private area is for family life, includ
ing the harem or women’s quarters, which is the arena for domestic
activities and from which all men except immediate male relatives
(husbands, sons, brothers) are usually excluded. The second area
forms a male—communal sphere, usually referred to within the litera
ture as ‘public’ or ‘semi-public’, and which can include a reception
room or rooms, or area where guests (usually male) are entertained,
and possibly separate men’s living quarters (see figure 3.1). Numerous
permutations are possible, and many devices can be used to ensure
privacy.
Within the traditional courtyard house, the dominant permanent
type which might be encountered archaeologically, privacy can be
further maintained through a deliberate inward orientation of space.
Exterior windows, which are usually few, are above street level to
avoid views inward, and the exterior walls are usually austere and
undecorated and entered by a single door; a second (women’s) door is
sometimes present. Angled entrance ways are employed to deny the

64

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

passer-by a view into the interior of the house, and guest rooms are
placed close to the entrance so that the family quarters are left
undisturbed (Al-Azzawi 1969). It should be noted, however, that
Muslim houses do not have a monopoly of features developed to
promote privacy. These predate Islam in many areas, as in Ancient
Greece, examples from which Nevett (1994) discusses and compares
with Islamic houses, and also in Assyria, and equally with many nonMuslim Byzantine period houses, including those described by Wool
ley and Lawrence in southern Palestine (1936: 92—3). Similarly,
domestic features promoting privacy can also be found today
among adherents of different religions, Jews, Christians and others.
Allied with the social requirements which Muslim domestic archi
tecture might aim to satisfy, cultural and environmental factors must
also be considered. It is perhaps best to define traditional Muslim
domestic architecture as a mélange of varying local cultural, religious,
social and environmental factors, and Rapoport (1969: 17) raises the
need to differentiate between the primary forces acting on house form
and those which he terms secondary or modifying. As regards the
Muslim domestic environment, the relative dominance of various
factors will vary, and it is the innumerable secondary or modifying
forces which serve to create the diversity found. But it is apparent
that to attribute the development of Muslim domestic architecture to
purely economic or environmental factors would be wrong. As will
be discussed in greater detail below, what might at first glance appear
as solely utilitarian, need not be so; the mashrabiyya or boxed
wooden lattice-work window screens, which were commonly used
in many regions of the Muslim world, provide a case in point (see
plate 3.1). They both reduce glare and allow the entry of cooling
breezes, but at the same time can provide privacy for women to
observe the world beyond the domestic unit without being seen
(Oliver 1987: 120—3).
Regional diversity has to be acknowledged, but a common concern
can be seen to run through the entire spectrum of Muslim domestic
architecture, from the palaces of the rich to the tents of the pastoral
ists. This (where observed, and this is, and even more so, was fre
quent) is a preoccupation with maintaining privacy through gender
segregation and the separation of the domains of public and private
life. Yet this explicit spatial division into public equals male, and
private equals female, can be criticized for being too rigid in its
definition (see figure 3.2). It has been argued that, through the
terminology used, the fact that women also visit each other is denied,
and in reality there is a constant but less visible round of public life in
the female sphere, which renders it not really private at all (Webster

Plate 3.1

65

Mashrabiyya, Massawa, Eritrea (photo. T. Insoll)

1984; Maclean 1996), with women exercising ‘veiled power’ (Webster
1984: 256). Male ‘public’ space is thus pushed to the fore at the
expense of a de-valued ‘domestic’ female space. This is a valid criti
cism of somewhat restrictive terminology and in many ways the
category of ‘male communal sphere’ is preferable to ‘public’, as is
‘female communal sphere’ to ‘private’.
To the archaeologist, who for interpretative simplicity likes the
existence of common codes or rules, the existence of these separate
domains, however termed, is reassuring. But as with all the other
categories of material culture discussed, exceptions do occur, and how
space is demarcated can vary and need not necessarily be fixed. As
Carsten and Hugh-Jones note, ‘we should then be wary about
describing the house as a structure of unchanging gendered opposi
tions’ (1995: 41). Yet, the existence of these public/private spatial
domains means that a definable Muslim domestic space exists. How
ever, we can recognize a Muslim domestic space not merely
4.

66

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

of investigation: how can Muslim domestic space be visualized
both horizontally and vertically in buildings, and how can the
essential structuring principles be recognized in more ephemeral
materials.

Semi-public (semi-private)
space

/

//
///

.

II

L

Coffee
house

/‘

4

ens
erublic

I

I Transition point

Figure 3.2

67

4\que
\quiet, public)
house
(men’s social)
Street
(public realm)

Spatial domains in Isfahan (after Rapoport 1969: fig. 3.14)

because of a spatial divide; furnishings, inscriptions, individuals all
create the image. But it is when we come to try to recognize a
domestic space archaeologically, basing this identification solely
upon the existence of these separate domains, that difficulties
arise. A terraced house in Leicester, England, for example, reduced
to a ground plan or standing as an empty structure, though
perhaps inhabited by a Muslim family for many years, and perhaps
formerly curtained or partitioned into separate areas, would defy
identification. It is not possible to define a Muslim domestic
space utilizing plan alone; in this manner it could not be set apart
from a Christian, Hindu or secular domestic structure which shows
privacy concerns. Not all Muslim domestic structures do or have
maintained a public/private divide, and Muslims do not and have
never maintained a monopoly on privacy. The only way in which
the Muslim domestic structure can be archaeologically identified is
if it is found in company with other categories of archaeological
evidence.
Archaeological Recognition

Assuming that we are investigating the Muslim domestic environment
as part of a complete package, the practical issues which might be
of interest to the archaeologist can best be summarized as the axes

Permanent structures in stone and brick
The horizontal axis The most frequent level of archaeological inves
tigation of domestic architecture will be upon the horizontal axis, for
two main reasons. First, single-storey dwellings are much more com
mon than multi-storey ones: probably over 70 per cent of the world’s
total today according to Oliver (1987: 136), and the figure was almost
certainly even higher in the past. Secondly, very rarely will standing
structures be preserved in the archaeological record. No hard and fast
rules exist, but within the rural environment it is probable that single
storey Muslim dwellings will be more frequently encountered. While
pressures of space in the urban environment, certain defensive situa
tions and specific environmental conditions (for example, taller
houses can capture breezes, as on the Red Sea coast) will facilitate
the use of multi-storey houses (Petherbridge 1978). In many cases
only the strength or depth of foundations will suggest upper storeys.
Although numerous regional traditions exist which dictate differ
ences in how this space is structured (see, for example, Marcais 1965
for a summary of regional variations in domestic architecture, their
development and spread), archaeological excavation of the horizontal
axis in many areas of the Muslim world has provided data which
supports the existence of public and private spaces, as argued for
above, but this could only be defined as ‘Muslim specific’ because it
was found in association with other categories of evidence, or identi
fication was achieved by using other sources of evidence such as
historical documents. Examples include Siraf (Iran) where courtyard
houses dated to c.1000 were found. These were originally multi
storey buildings, but the walls only survived to a maximum height
of 3.5 m (Whitehouse 1970, 1971). Similar courtyard houses were
recorded at Sétif (Algeria), where Fentress (1987: 65—6) charted
changes between the tenth and eleventh centuries, with a greater
emphasis on the seclusion of women becoming apparent. In the
later phase, the courtyard was divided into two sections, in one case
by a suite of rooms, in another by a wall ensuring that male visitors
did not have to pass through the women’s quarters to reach the
reception rooms. Likewise, in what has been termed the ‘Abbasid
popular quarter’ at Samarra (Iraq), houses were often linked by
secondary doorways, perhaps, as al-Janabi has suggested (1983:

68

69

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

308), ‘reflecting the extension of families by marriage, or possibly
even an earlier Mesopotamian combination of separate public and
domestic quarters’. A further variant of the courtyard house is the
iwan, which differs from the previously discussed Maghrebi and
Persian examples in its layout, and is defined as ‘a room enclosed
by three walls, opening out in the whole width of the fourth side’,
and open to the courtyard space (Marcais 1965: 113), examples were
recorded at Fustat, the initial Muslim settlement in the vicinity of
Cairo (see Scanlon 1970a; Kubiak 1982; see chapter 7). This type of
house is extensively found throughout Central Asia, Iran and the
Middle East.
Similar spatial concerns can be seen within palatial complexes, and
Hillenbrand (1994: 377, 381) makes the point that, although palaces
are something of a problematical category, they meet all the private
and official requirements of Islamic decorum. They replicate and
amplify the smaller everyday domestic environment on a much larger
scale, with their public audience quarters, private rooms, strongly
fortified entrance and storerooms, magnifications of features found
in smaller houses. Some palaces were even in part composed of mul
tiples of courtyard houses, as in the eleventh-century Palais de la
Salut at Qal’a (Algeria) (Fentress 1987: 60), and certain of the
Umayyad ‘desert palaces’ of Syria and Palestine were comprised of
a number of bayts, each housing a tribal or family unit (Petersen 1996:
296), with some of the latter inhabited by Muslims but built by
Byzantine architects. Yet, obviously, we should not take the analogy
between palaces and more humble domestic environments too far, as
most houses do not contain features such as mosques and baths.
Examples on the horizontal dimension can also be found at the
very base of the domestic architectural spectrum. In the village of
Ti’innik (Palestine) during the sixteenth to mid-eighteenth centuries,
up to seven or eight single-room houses (bayt) were clustered
together within walled courtyards (hawsh). Though built like this
for defence, Muslim requirements regarding social relations were
not relaxed, and thus dictated that the occupiers of each hawsh
were members of the same extended family (Ziadeh 1995: 1004—5).
The existence of structured Muslim domestic space is also found
within military installations. In the garrison fortress of Qasr Ibrim,
220 km south of Aswan (Egypt), characteristic double courtyard
houses were built in stone during the Ottoman occupation (late
sixteenth to early nineteenth centuries), with a clear subdivision into
distinct male and female areas (Adams 1990: 4—7), forming recogniz
able public and private domains. These certainly indicated a changed
social pattern from that of the previous Christian and pre-Christian

settlements, and the arrival of a Turkish military garrison (Alexander
1988: 86, 1994). Far to the west in Al-Andalus similar spatial concerns
were also evident in Granada. Within the Alcazaba, the fort attached
to, but preceding, the Alhambra, the capital of the Nasrid kingdom in
Granada dating from the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, 17
houses for guard families were found, ‘laid out in the characteristic
Islamic urban pattern’ (Lopez 1992: 154), with angled entrance ways,
and attention focused inwards on the courtyards.

p

p

I.

The vertical axis Spatial structuring according to Muslim social
requirements need not only be projected in the horizontal dimension,
but vertically as well. It is perhaps too easily forgotten that a multi
storey building could equally be structured spatially into male and
female, family and guest areas, a factor of great importance where
space might be restricted for many reasons, especially in the urban
environment. At the Ottoman fortress on Sai Island in the Sudan, a
roughly contemporary southern companion to Qasr Ibrim, men
tioned previously, mud-brick houses of up to three storeys were
recorded still standing (Alexander 1997b; see also Vercoutter 1958;
Alexander 1997a). These structures could have been similar to the socalled ‘castle’ houses found along the same stretch of the Nile (Adams
1987: 334—8; Insoll 1996c: 453), but at Sai were perhaps less overtly
defensive in character, surrounded as they were by a substantial wall.
This fact is indicated by the surviving slots for the now-missing
mashrabiyyas which were recorded, a feature which parallels the
houses of the Red Sea coast, such as those in the abandoned town
of Suakin where numerous multi-storey houses survive (Greenlaw
1995).
Possibly the best-known examples of muiti-storey housing in the
Muslim world are the ‘tower houses’ of Yemen, clustered in the
mountainous central plateau and San’a, the capital (Kirkman 1976;
Serjeant and Lewcock 1983). These extraordinary structures provide
us with an example of how the public and private domains, most
frequently encountered horizontally, can also be articulated through
vertical space (see figure 3.3). Beginning at the ground floor, interior
space is highly structured, fulfilling both practical and social require
ments, through between five and nine storeys. Of importance within
this context is the relationship between the mafraj, the principal
reception room for men, and the private quarters of the women
(including the kitchen). The former is usually located on the topmost
floor, while the latter are situated just below. Practicality and social
requirements are combined. For example, chance encounters on the
staircase can be avoided through the presence of strategically placed

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

a

animal stalls

d

diwan

e
g
h

entrance hail
grinding mills
excrement room
grain and fruit store
k kitchen
I lobby
lb lavatoryIbathr00

m mafraj
o
r
u

loading and mounting animals
room: general use and sleeping
Store
terrace
shaft

z

manzar

S

Figure 3.3 Vertical utilization of space in a
San’a tower house (not to scale)
(from Lewcock and Serjeant 1983: 458)

71

wooden grilles which allow women to observe who is on the stairs.
Similarly, the open-work wooden box windows, already referred to,
have an aperture in their base to ‘allow women to see down to the
street and control access to the house’ (Kirkman 1976: 54).
What might be of cultural importance here is what Gerholm (1977:
163) terms Yemeni ‘sensitivities to height difference’. This is certainly
not a Yemeni Muslim prerogative, but perhaps status was also
involved in reaching such heights in construction (perhaps as well as
something as mundane as wanting a pleasant view!), while at the
same time not infringing upon social codes. Another factor which
should be considered is that being a Muslim gave, as is universally
found in the Muslim world, superior status. Jewish houses in San’a
and elsewhere could not overlook Muslim ones, in case Muslim
women were observed and Muslims should similarly not be able to
overlook their neighbours. Jewish houses were thus restricted to two
storeys, and differed architecturally from Muslim houses in many
other ways (Lewcock and Serjeant 1983: 497; see also Rathjens
1957). These are factors which could be archaeologically discernible,
and might facilitate the identification of different religious commun
ities.
Another example of the vertical utilization of domestic space is
provided by contemporary African-American Muslim communities
who live in blocks of flats. Here, choice is restricted as these
communities do not live in a Muslim society; however, at the same
time, they attempt to differentiate themselves and demarcate their
domestic space from the outside world (McCloud 1995: 105—6). To
achieve this a variety of mechanisms are utilized. Where feasible,
complete blocks of flats are bought; failing this, emphasis is placed
upon signalling the existence of a Muslim domestic space at the
entrance to the home, through calligraphy, stickers and similar
mechanisms. Inside, space is ‘gender neutral’ unless visitors are
present, then the public—private divide becomes apparent, as does
gender segregation, the living, room for men, the kitchen for
women. To quote McCloud, ‘in their domestic spaces, African Amer
ican Muslims have thus taken small portions of various Muslim
cultures and woven an interesting tapestry that transcends (without
denying) both their American nationality and their ethnicity. They
have, in short, created a space for Islam inside the boundaries of
Western architecture and culture’ (1995: 110). Just how this would
be recognizable to the archaeologist of the future presents great
problems: the fabric of the home does not set it apart from those
occupied by non-Muslim neighbours, other than that the windows
are covered.

72

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

Impermanent and ephemeral structures

Both nomadic pastoralists and sedentary agriculturists living in
struc
tures built of less durable materials have obviously been attracted to
Islam since the beginnings of the religion (see plate 3.2). The fact that
such people frequently live in shelters constructed of
ephemeral
materials, cloth, skin or reeds for example, does not mean that they
were excluded from structuring their domestic space according to
Islamic custom.
Tents This incorporates a huge range of structures
utilized by
numerous ethnic groups over a vast region and time period. Four
examples drawn from the substantial literature which exists will be
discussed to illustrate to what degree the tented domestic environ
ment can be structured to fulfil Muslim requirements where they
are
followed.
Among the Bedouin of the Arabian peninsula, the customary shel
ter, the textile ‘black tent’, is divided into men’s and women’s
spaces
(see Feilberg 1944; Faegre 1979). This separation is
maintained
through a dividing curtain, the qata. The men’s side, usually
the
smaller, is covered with carpets and cushions for guests. Here
also

Plate 3.2 Kazakh family in front of tent, early twentieth century (Haddon
Collection, Cambridge)

I

I

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

V

73

will be a hearth for preparing coffee and all the accompanying accou
trements. The larger women’s side is the main living and working
area, which will not usually be seen by any other man except the tent
owner. Therefore, in this example it can be seen that spatial use is the
same as that found in more permanent domestic structures. Other
tent users can maintain a similar spatial divide. The Hassaniya Moors
of north-west Africa utilize a curtain-divider which can seclude
women when visitors are present (Andrews 1971, 1995), and among
the Kababish of the Sudan internal space (within the Sheikh’s tent at
least) is firmly demarcated into public and private areas, with each
wife having her own tent positioned so no wife would have preced
ence over another (Verity 1971: 31). Also of interest, though
obviously without wide archaeological significance, is Andrews
(1987: 151) mention of a historical source which records that private
tented rooms were created for queens in the great Mughal tented
courts of early seventeenth-century India, so they could see but not
be seen.
In other areas and with other ethnic groups explicit domestic
spatial separation is not so clear. The Qashqa’i of the Zagros Moun
tains in Iran do not divide the tent structurally into male and female
sections, though in practice such a division, of tasks and entertaining,
does occur (Beck 1978: 356—8). Similarly, the Tuareg and Tedu of the
central Saharan regions, who utilize a type of free-standing frame,
non-tensile, mat and skin tent, do not generally maintain a spatial
division (Nicolaisen 1963; Faegre 1979). However, although internal
physical boundaries might not be created, manifestations of a concern
with privacy may be present. One such feature can be the orientation
of the tent or indeed of the whole camp. With the Qashqa’i, for
example, although they might not subdivide the tent, the tents them
selves are positioned so that no tent entrance faces another (Beck
1978: 357).
Although we cannot directly transfer from the past into the pres
ent, it is also reasonable to suggest that information gained from
ethnography has some bearing upon the tented domestic environment
of the past. It can be seen that variety is found, and the degree to
which space is structured into public and private domains, male and
female spaces, varies greatly, and in many instances no such demarca
tion exists at all. Once again we are largely concerned with an ideal,
but where such a spatial separation exists could it be archaeologically
recognizable? Matters are complicated by the very nature of the tent
which allows great flexibility of space. Cribb (1991: 101) notes that
the tent is rarely a self-contained spatial unit; activity areas can be
extended, as can the tent itself to cope with feasts and similar

74

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONME
NT

occasions. Furthermore, within the basic
unit, space can change func
tion: a domestic space can becom
e a guest area, for example. This
complicates things, as does the ephemera
l nature of the structure, and
the transient lifestyle of its occupant
s. The archaeological recognition
of a tented domestic space which has
been structured by possible
Muslim requirements is difficult, yet
this is not an impossible under
taking. Whereas nomads are frequently
attested archaeologically, as
with Garlake’s (1978) survey and
excavation of a temporary tented
camp at Ras Abaruk (Qatar) re-used
from the seventeenth to the
nineteenth centuries, evidence which
might allow the recognition of
a division of domestic space is more
southern Jordan isolated a number of elusive. Recent research in
featu
this (Banning and Köhler-Rollefson 1992 res which could attest to
:
nomadic encampments near Beidha there 195). In recently occupied
were two hearths within the
tents, the larger one placed in the centr
e of (or just outside) the tent
(itself represented by an area cleared of
ston
and goat dung) which was used by the es and blanketed by sheep
women for cooking, and a
smaller one used by men for coffee-making
. Faegre (1979: 25) claims
that ‘the size and depth of the coffee
hearth tells the observer whether
the host was a generous man and even
what tribe camped there.’
Numerous other features testified
to the former tents: stone bed
platforms, stone storage platforms, ditch
es for water run-off, stone
bases for poles, and stone cord weights
or trailing weights.
The existence of such features could
division had existed within a tent, possibly illustrate that an internal
ing of domestic items and faunal remains reinforced by the pattern
wit
To make such an identification more secu hin the demarcated area.
re, physical evidence for the
partition would be needed, such as lines
of
place. Avni (1992: 245) found that just suchstones to hold a curtain in
to strengthen tents externally in pre-Islam an arrangement was used
ic contexts in the Negev
desert. Thus, it can be argued that in certa
in cases it could be possible
to recognize archaeologically the form
er presence of a tented domes
tic space which had been structured acco
rding to different spatial
domains, but to take this identificatio
n one stage further, to say it
was structured by Muslim social codes,
requires more than an outline
of stones on the ground. Other categories
of archaeological evidence
are required as well (see figure 3.4).
Reed, grass and palm architecture

drawn from the repertoire of dom

A second example which can be

estic structures made from more

ephemeral materials, and which can show
a spatial division, are
houses built of reeds which as with
the tent and the courtyard
house, significantly predate Islam. The spli
t-reed houses of the Shi ah

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

75

1”
2m

1

0

Low perimeter wafl

Pup tent

0
Roof

o

1

2

1.5w
Mushrooming wal’

3m

)
House

Complex of huts

)

Figure 3.4 Although are not told whet
according to possible
ound in Afghanistan provides an example of how
pup tent todmull
over time through various stages of construction
incre
ased
privacy gra U Y
(from Hallet ana camizay I °8O 56—7)
-

76

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

‘marsh Arabs’ (Madan) of southern Iraq are built on reed platfor
ms
or natural islands and are usually occupied by a family unit (Thesiger
1954, 1980; Salim 1962: 55; Young and Wheeler 1977).
Although little
attempt is made to keep women apart from visitors, a raised reed
platform divides the family quarters from the area used to entertain
male visitors in the absence of a separate guest house, the mudhi
f,
often an elaborate barrel-vaulted structure. In contrast, a stricter
division of space into the usual public and private spheres is found
in the palm-branch houses built in the Muscat region of Oman. Here
a soubla or maglis, a guest room made of branches for the reception
of males, is incorporated into the courtyard house. This is entered
from outside the house and is adjacent to the main entrance (Abdu
lak
1977: 20). Similarly, a spatial demarcation is maintained by the Hamar
Arabs (Kordofan province, Sudan). A grass or cane compound is
built
surrounding three inner compounds, one for men, one for women
(and children) and the other for animals, and a guest hut of grass
on a
wooden framework is incorporated within the men’s compound
(Asher 1986: 54).
Although all these examples of domestic structure tents, and reed,
grass and palm houses are made from less durable materials,
it
has been shown how they too can be spatially structured into
different domains, and how in certain instances it might be possible
to identify these as structured according to Muslim social require
ments, if other categories of evidence are found. It is this latter
point which is of critical importance as all of the recognition criteria
outlined for the recognition of Muslim domestic space could
be
exhibited by non-Muslim groups, including the ground plan with
the existence of internal partitions, division of internal space and
angled entrance ways. Secondly, there is the question of orientation,
with a focus on the interior not the exterior (decoration, windows
and so on), and the orientation of structures so as not to face
each other; and, thirdly, the artifacts present, the positioning of
features such as hearths, and the patterning of artifacts which
might allow the recognition of a gender division. A satisfactory
identification of Muslim domestic space based on these criteria
alone cannot be achieved: it is necessary to strengthen this identifica
tion by examining the other evidence which might be present within
(coins, personal possessions, inscriptions, furnishings, dietary
remains) and around (burials, other structures) the domestic struc
ture. Fortunately, we do not, or should not, study the domestic
environment in a vacuum, as devoid of all contextual information,
and thus the above criteria are valid when a more holistic examination
is being undertaken.
—

—

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

77

Archaeology, Domestic Space and Social Use
Once domestic space has been identified as being formerly occupied
by Muslims, can more be made of its study? Of course it is possible,
and indeed necessary, to move beyond building materials and the
actual physical dimensions of domestic structures to a broader,
more socially aware, Islamic archaeology. A variety of further in
formation may be retrieved: the composition of the society and the
family, gender and status concerns (and possible links with purdah),
spatial use and the way physical and spiritual thresholds or bound
aries are created.
Society and the family
To see what might be learnt about Muslim society at a larger scale,
and the Muslim family at a smaller scale, from a study of domestic
architecture, three examples will be considered here: orientation;
house form in sub-Saharan Africa; and the -built expansive mechan
isms of the Muslim domestic structure.
Orientation House orientation is in fact an area of research with very
little general applicability; there is no one fixed orientation for Muslim
houses. Instances occur where the domestic structure is oriented to
Mecca, but this is by no means uniform, though latrines may deliber
ately face away from Mecca. Often orientation is primarily for climatic
reasons, to encourage cooling breezes and prevent the entrance of dust
(Petherbridge 1978: 201—2). Unfortunately, this absence of a dominant
domestic orientation removes from the archaeologist an avenue of
interpretation, which is usually exploited to the full.
House form However, one interesting and broadly inter-related
example of a link between orientation and possible social change
can be provided. In many areas of sub-Saharan Africa there appears
to be a correlation between round houses and local religions, and
square or rectangular houses and Islam. While some Islamized groups
live in round houses and vice versa (Insoll 1996b; see also Engestrom
1959: 65; Sanogo 1991: 152), the correlation occurs frequently enough
in the archaeological record to suggest that it is of some significance,
and that there can be a switch in how space becomes ordered follow
ing conversion to Islam in certain areas.
Rapoport (1969: 41) has suggested that in general round houses
cannot be easily oriented, a statement that would not appear to make

78

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

sense. Rather, it is perhaps possible that it was easier to fulfil
privacy
requirements, perhaps newly introduced with Islam, or, as is
more
likely, increased in significance following conversion through the
use
of rectangular or square house plans. Moore (1986: 191) has
suggested
that there is a link between a prestige system with positive ‘mode
rn’
values (Western ones in her example) and the replacement
of round
houses by those of rectangular plan. Similar thinking appears
to have
in part underlain the recent use of rectangular architecture
in favour
of round houses in the northern Cameroons, and where the govern
ment pushed ‘modernization’ policies (Lyons 1996). Perhaps
a similar
interpretation can be projected further back in time. Thus,
along with
the new religion come elements of different material culture
,
necessarily better or improved, but part of the package proclai not
ming
Muslim identity. In turn, it also brings us back, though withou
t any
direct connection whatsoever, to the sentiments underlying
the
inscriptions in the Dome of the Rock and its very construction
(see chapter 2) making a statement of the new faith, in this instanc
e
by utilizing the domestic environment as one of the signall
ing
mechanisms.

79

Fentress (1987: 67), reminiscent of the development of the Prophet’s
house itself. Yet to reconstruct how a particular Muslim domestic
complex of one or more natural families was conceptualized in the
past is difficult for it could vary regionally and according to gender.
This is the case with the Qashqa’i, for example: their camp was
viewed by men as a number of different households, while women
saw it as a single community (Beck 1978: 357). Such differences in
conception serve to reinforce the point that, when dealing with the
archaeological record, with the legacy of different groups and indivi
duals with different conceptions, to stress too firmly that a single
interpretation of events is the only possible answer is flawed. If a
multiplicity of options can exist regarding something as prosaic as
how a settlement is conceived, what does this infer for more complex
entities?
The division of house types into two categories correlating with
‘collectivistic’ and ‘individualistic’ societies (Parker Pearson and
Richards 1994: 60—1) is of importance with regard to Muslim house
holds. Collectivistic societies are defined as possessing a shared value
system and having an emphasis on restricting and ‘containing’
women. Features relevant to their domestic structures include gender
separation inside and outside houses, separate men’s accommodation
and dwellings largely functional and similar in appearance. In con
trast, in individualistic societies, mobility is high, kinship is weakened
and competing value systems and fashions develop. Here identity
(personal status) is affirmed through the house, which in itself is
more public, although domestic life may be private. These categories
can be seen to equate with what Rapoport (1969: 5—6) terms the
‘additive quality’, characteristic of vernacular architecture as com
pared to the ‘closed, final form of high-style design’.
It is obvious that, while elements of the ‘collectivistic’ social defini
tion apply to Muslim society, elements of the ‘individualistic’ defini
tion also apply, and it would certainly be wrong to say that the
Muslim domestic environment is somehow egalitarian and thus
devoid of any competitive tendencies as elaborately decorated house
interiors testify. But, on the whole, collectivist values dominate,
although increasingly coming into conflict with ‘individualistic’
ones. Collectivistic attributes are having to be shoehorned, and not
through force, into domestic structures associated with individualistic
design as outlined above. Al-Azzawi (1969: 98—9) has studied this and
describes how ‘Western’, ‘European’ or ‘closed’ houses have been
introduced into Iraq and in many cases replaced the traditional ‘col
lectivistic’ courtyard house. These new structures did not fulfil any of
the social, environmental or religious requirements discussed. Simple

—

Communality and individuality Although studies of house orien
ta
tion might be largely unprofitable, it could be possible to reconstruct
something of Muslim family structure from an archaeological study,
taking as our starting point the fact that we know from both histo
r
ical sources and modern observation that Muslim society has
been
based around the extended family comprising the father, his wife
or
wives (up to four), their children, and sometimes including marrie
d
sons and their households. Physically, this is best exemplified by what
has been termed the ‘accretive nature’ of the Muslim house (Pether
bridge 1978: 198); as the extended family grows so does the house,
which is often left unfinished to allow further quarters to be built on.
An example of this process in action is provided by Talib (1984: 55),
who describes how the roof timbers of courtyard houses in Saudi
Arabia were often left uncut to allow new beams to be connected to
the old. Such a process could even be archaeologically recognizable
through a careful evaluation of structural phasing.
Indeed, Fentress (1987: 66) has gone as far as to draw parallels
between the structure of the house plans excavated at Sétif and the
Muslim families who occupied them, with the individuals of the
family standing as subordinate to the patriarch ‘as the single rooms
do to the courtyard’. Here also additional wings could be added to
the house as a son got married. This process was facilitated by co
operation between the inhabitants of the quarter and, according to

f

80

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

yet obvious shortcomings were apparent: ventilation
was poor, airconditioning needed, and courtyards which were
built
over and
turned into the main living room, failed to fulfil
privacy requirements
being frequently over-looked by neighbouring
houses.
However, this apparent incompatibility with the
‘modern’ does not
mean that Muslim societies have lived in a
form of stasis for 1,400
years; merely that the process of change has
accelerated much more
rapidly recently. Ziadeh’s (1995: 1005—7) study of
the village of Ti’in
nik provides a case in point. Altered social
and political conditions
since the l950s could be plotted through changes
in
residence patterns. The collective houses (ahwash) architecture and
were largely aban
doned in favour of separate multi-room concrete
reflected the shift from an economic system based buildings which
on self-sufficiency
and collective free labour by members of the
extended family to one
based on waged labour and the nuclear family. At
the same time, an
economy which had been dependent on animals
disappeared,
indi
cated by the absence of the internal stalling of
animals within the
courtyard.
These examples show how house form can reflect
familial and
social structure within Islam, the domestic
environment being an
active rather than passive aspect of material culture.
But, regardless
of change, it is still possible that the existence
of the structuring
principle, even if only reduced to an emphasis upon
privacy, will be
seen to continue, as it has done for so long. This
element,
a concern
with privacy and its resulting manifestation in many
different
forms,
is thus presented as a generality, where utilized,
and is the structuring
principle of the Muslim domestic environment and the
possible key
to its archaeological recognition (bearing in mind
the points already
made to make such an identification more certain).

Public and private faces
But what of other factors which might be investigated
once the initial
identification is certain? The pursuit of status and how
this
is manifest
is one factor. To display one’s finest possessions
within the area where
one receives guests is a universal characteristic; such
a room or rooms,
courtyard, open area or tent can become an arena for
signalling status
and wealth. The primary means of achieving this is
simply by dis
playing the choicest possessions within the space
used to entertain
guests. Kirkman (1976) mentions that in the guest room
the San’a (Yemen) tower house, for example, ornate (mafraj) of
copper trays,
candlesticks and other expensive items were displayed
a concentration of equipment ancillary to entertainingalongside
guests:

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

81
water-pipes, tobacco boxes, braziers, spittoons for the ubiquitous qat
chewing sessions, and cushions and rugs, often richly patterned and
finished, for the guests to sit and recline on. Similar processes are
apparent in traditional houses in the Ghadames oasis (Libya) where
the room used to receive guests was also the focus of decoration;
painted motifs, mirrors, brass utensils and wall hangings were all used
to create an impression of wealth (Evans 1975—6: 35; Shawesh 1995:
43). Likewise, such notions of display are present in the sitting rooms
where guests are received in modern apartments of the Egyptian
middle and upper classes in Cairo, which Campo describes as a
‘blend of Euramerican and Islamic material culture’ (1991: 127).
More complex was the pursuit of status by the ruling class within
the Lebanese village discussed by Michael Gilsenan (1982). Here
space itself was transformed for Status purposes. Foremost in this
process was the house itself, described as a Franco-Italian château,
which was built in direct contrast to the traditional inward-looking
castle of the ruling class. The château was all ‘facade, appearance,
show’ (Gilsenan 1982: 169), used to enhance status and distinguish
the owners from the other members of the village, and the maglis or
reception room was also transformed into a ‘salon’. Whereas the
traditional maglis, the ‘social heart of the house’ (1982: 182), had
been furnished in a conventional and austere manner with mats and
cushions, coffee-making equipment and water-pipes, the salon was
the absolute opposite, furnished with polished marble tables, plastic
chandeliers, high gilt chairs and gilt mirrors, all for show, and to
express wealth and status. Emulation, again for status purposes, was
pursued lower down the social scale; even the peasants occasionally
replicated in cheap materials the ‘salon’ or aspects of it in order that
they might ‘pretend to a minute but crucial economic advance over
the others’ (Gilsenan 1982: 186). In fact, the only group who resisted
this process of emptying social space of any traditional value in the
blatant pursuit of status were religious men, concerned as they were,
as Gilsenan notes, with inner rather than outer meanings. Such pro
cesses of display and of emulation might well be archaeologically
visible. Furthermore, a preoccupation with gaining status advantage,
no matter how small, is not confined to the upper echelons of society,
but is something that can be found through all levels of society and
across the Muslim world, and in other societies. But a concern for
status need not solely be concerned with inanimate material posses
sions. Status is also a factor which must be considered with regard to
the seclusion of women, with once again the domestic environment
functioning as one of the primary mechanisms by which this can be
achieved, which in turn has certain archaeological implications.

82

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

Status, society, culture and purdah
Yet to propose status as the sole reason for the existence of an
emphasis upon secluding women in parts of the Muslim world
would be incorrect. Three dominant factors influence the extent to
which the seclusion of women is practised: social concerns, status
considerations and cultural context. Equally, the existence of seclu
sion practices (sometimes referred to as ‘purdah’, meaning literally
screen or curtain) should not be taken to mean that women in Muslim
societies are weak and devoid of any power; this too is wholly
incorrect. Gender relations and social ‘power’ can be negotiated in
many ways.
But if we consider social concerns, a link between these and purdah
appears to be directly connected with religious considerations
through the existence of a conscious effort to restrict female social
interaction as outlined in the Qur’an, where this subject is considered
in some detail. For example, it is stated that one should ‘Enjoin
believing women to turn their eyes away from temptation and to
preserve their chastity; to cover their adornments (except such as are
normally displayed); to draw their veils over their bosoms and not to
reveal their finery except to their husbands, their fathers, their hus
bands’ fathers, their sons, their step-sons, their brothers, their broth
ers’ sons, their sisters’ sons, their women-servants, and their slavegirls; male attendants lacking in natural vigour, and children who have
no carnal knowledge of women’ (The Light 24: 31). What can perhaps
be seen as being intimately linked with this are concerns over purity
and pollution, not in the manner that Douglas (1966) discusses them,
that is, the physical concern with polluting substances, but more with
social matters; namely, the physical power of women, and the protec
tion of the purity of the family through the seclusion and protection
of women, who are potent as the agents of reproduction, and who
have, according to Khan (1976: 100), ‘the power to defile the pure
blood of the group’. Khan defines purdah as a ‘control mechanism’,
ensuring acceptable and orderly relationships between the sexes
(1976: 106).
The second major factor linked with secluding women can be
manifest as a concern with status. The degree to which women can
be segregated depends much on social and economic position, and
‘social prestige is associated with strict observance’ of segregation
(Khan 1976: 101). Cosar (1978) discusses how, in Turkey, peasant
women could not wear the veil due to its impracticability for working
in the fields, whereas women working in towns were veiled and

II (

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

83

segregated. Similarly, Gilsenan (1982: 172—3) relates that peasant
women in Lebanese villages are ‘seen to work’, which is crucial
within an environment where ‘seeing someone is a socially deter
mined act and not a question merely of images on the retina and
physiological process’. The reverse of this, not seeing someone, is
thus also of importance, and status is gained through the absence of a
family’s female members, thereby implying that their work is being
done by someone else.
The third dominant factor is cultural, and the importance of this
should not be underestimated. Although the seclusion of women is
found in Muslim societies from Morocco to Indonesia, the status of
women can and does differ markedly (Papanek 1973: 305; see also
Stowasser 1984; Webster 1984): in certain areas, a concern with seclud
ing women is particularly manifest; in others, it is of no importance.
An example of commonplace close purdah is provided by the Muslim
communities of South Asia. Here seclusion has been explained as a
cultural response to the patriarchal society which already existed,
rather than being ‘a reflection of Islam’ (Raza 1993: 60). It might in
part have been influenced by the existence of a caste system,
although, strictly speaking, caste should not be accepted by Muslims
as it goes against the notions of the universality of the Muslim
community; in practice it has deeply influenced Muslim groups in
the region. This can in turn affect the domestic environment. Ahuja
(1979: 33) records that among certain Indian Muslim groups, the
kitchen, considered the purest part of the house, is carefully pos
itioned according to place in the caste hierarchy. This ranges from
being exposed at the front of the houses of lower-caste families to
being situated on the top floor, and away from the entrance as far as is
possible, in high-caste, two-storey dwellings. Otherwise, Indian Mus
lim houses often manifest the usual spatial pattern of public and
private domains, frequently based around a courtyard (Mujeeb 1967).
Of particular interest in this context are studies of the Muslim
communities of South Asian origin in the United Kingdom (Khan
1976; Barton 1986; Raza 1993; Lewis 1994). Along with the physical

movement of these people from South Asia have come their cultural
concerns, including those relating to purdah. However, the transla
tion of purdab concepts into practice in Britain is not the same as in
Bangladesh or Pakistan; as we saw with the Cambridge mosque
adaptation in chapter 2, compromises have had to be reached. An
example of this is provided by the Bengali community from the
Syihet region of Bangladesh who, since the 1960s, have settled in
large numbers in the city of Bradford in the north of England. This
group has been studied by Barton (1986), who found that in the

84

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

village environment in Syihet purdah was maintained in many
ways,
through, for example, erecting screens around houses. In
Bradford
this is more difficult, but purdah is both considered customary
and
attached to status connotations, making its abandonment improbable;
likewise, among Muslims of Pakistani origin who have also settled
in
Bradford. In many cases, they came direct from villages where
purdah
concerns were strong, especially among those from Mirpur
district
(who number some 15,000, out of a total community of
25,000
Pakistanis in the city) (Khan 1976: 102). In certain
instances,
women are now isolated more than they ever were in Pakistan
or
Bangladesh.
In both of these communities the domestic environment is
consid
ered the female domain and a public/private spatial division is
main
tained, yet many of the houses occupied are small terraced
houses
built during the Victorian era which do not always suit the
social
requirements of Muslim families, often of the extended type (even
though a public/private spatial division was frequently
maintained
during the Victorian period, as evidenced by the parlour; Petersen
1997). As Nielsen notes, constraints of climate and traditional
domes
tic architecture in northern Europe have ‘forced domestic
family
activities indoors into accommodation designed for small nuclear
families’ (1995: 102). Existing space has to be adapted to suit
cultural,
religious and social requirements through, for example, utilizing back
rooms as female quarters, with the front for men, and by erecting
curtains and other partitions to maintain divisions (Barton 1986). Yet
although purdah is practised, perhaps even to a greater degree than
was ever the case in South Asia, the archaeological visibility of
this
would be nil if these houses were reduced to their foundations and
studied on the basis of ground plan alone. However, it assumes
relevance to the archaeologist interested in Islam because it again
shows that rigorously defined boundaries do not exist; what
consti
tutes the Muslim world and the non-Muslim world has in fact a
great
degree of fluidity, as in all probability it always had. Although
Bradford is patently not within the dar al-Islam, a large Muslim
community lives there which will offer future challenges to
the
archaeologist.
Space, gender and its archaeological recognition
Within archaeology in general there has been a move towards rectify
ing the imbalance in gender studies (see, for example, Conkey
and
Spector 1984; Ehrenberg 1989; Conkey and Gero 1991). In Islamic
archaeology a similar imbalance exists, which may in part be due to

I

r

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

85

neglect, but also because of the difficulty in recognizing and defining
both gender-specific items and space archaeologically. Yet having said
this, there often appears to be an emphasis, albeit in all probability
subconscious, on male space and activities. This is expanded upon by
Chatty (1978: 399), who argues that the women’s sphere, private,
domestic and informal, is often regarded as secondary to the extradomestic, public and formal ‘universe of men’. In fact, one could be
forgiven for thinking that the Muslim world through much of its
history, as presented in many sources, was populated solely by caliphs
and soldiers, with women (if considered) subordinated to concubines
and servant girls.
Recognizing gender relations is a necessity in understanding the
‘social’ content of Islamic archaeology. Conkey and Gero (1991: 9)
discuss gender as ‘a structuring principle setting certain guiding
rules for the enactment of daily life’; and, with reference to social
structure in many parts of the Muslim world, to propose such guiding
criteria would certainly be valid. The domestic environment is more
than just a shelter offering physical protection from the elements, but
the arena in which gender roles are ‘taught’, making its study much
more significant than merely charting a succession of architectural
styles, decorative finishes or ground plans. Yet at the same time it
should be acknowledged that ‘engendering archaeology’ is no easy
process.
In the archaeological study of a domestic environment structured
according to Muslim social requirements, various possibilities to
study gender exist. By, for example, examining the patterning and
typology of personal artifacts, and the contextual examination of
features such as hearths, it might be possible to begin to recognize
the division and interplay between male and female space. Allied with
this, the privileged position of the archaeologist interested in Islam is
again a factor of some significance, for he or she has recourse to
observing a living faith and numerous cultures influenced by it,
and can supplement his or her archaeological data from an extensive
body of ethnographic, anthropological and historical evidence. To
emphasize this point, recourse will be made to two studies, one of
which is drawn from ethnography, and which it is argued could not
be reconstructed archaeologically (Bourdieu 1973), and the other
which is archaeological, but which the author, Linda Donley-Reid
(1990: 115), admits would have been difficult to reconstruct from
archaeological evidence alone. Both have direct reference to the
domestic environment, but at the same time illustrate the range of
interpretative possibilities which can exist, but which equally could
elude us.
—

86

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

The Berber house Bourdieu’s (1973) analysis of a contemporary
Berber (Kabyle) house in Algeria shows strict male/female opposition
through the existence of demarcated public and private domains. The
rectangular house interior is divided into two parts: a ‘dark and
nocturnal’ lower part of the house, of moist, green or raw objects,
natural beings (animals), natural activities (sleep, sex, death, birth),
and tasks such as fetching water, wood and manure. The second is a
light-filled, noble, upper part, which is defined as a place of human
beings, fire and objects created by fire, including the rifle, the symbol
of male honour, and the protector of female honour (see figure 3.5).
Various spatial oppositions were recorded, with the low, dark part
opposed to the higher, as female is to male. Gender oppositions were
also extended from the internal to the external world, and evident in
how the very physical structure of the house is visualized, with, for
example, the main beam being identified with the master of the house,
and the supporting pillar with the wife, interlocked in a representa
tional act of physical union (1973: 99—102).
The existence of genderized space is of great significance and the
fundamental structuring mechanism of the Berber domestic environ
ment. However, this example is in its details particular to the specific
context in a part of Algeria, it is not Islamic, but is within the Muslim

Figure 3.5 Interior of a Berber house, Algeria (from Bourdieu 1973: 107)

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

87

world; moreover, it could even be suggested that how one person,
male or female, might visualize the domestic environment in terms of
gender need not necessarily be the same as another. Thus we can draw
no general conclusions from such an example. Rather, it serves to
illustrate that the seemingly innocuous material we encounter in the
archaeological record, such as a house plan, can be the residue of
complex or perhaps even unexpected meaning or process. The ap
plication of such concepts within Islamic archaeology is rare,
although it must be recognized that drawing this kind of anthropo
logical explanation from archaeological data is at present difficult, and
frequently, impossible.
The Swahili house This second example attempts to combine just
these sources of evidence, archaeological and ethnographic, in the
examination of several Swahili coral and clay houses in the Lamu
Archipelago and on the adjacent mainland of Kenya, all dating from
after the early eighteenth century (Donley-Reid 1990; see also Donley
1982, 1987). The Swahili conceptualized people as falling into five
basic groups: Waungwana (freeborn men and women), Madada
(female domestic slaves), Wazalia (locally born slaves), Watumwa
(plantation slaves) and, finally, Washenzi (all other Africans). Within
the inter-relationships between these groups the domestic structure
took on a great importance. To quote Donley-Reid (1990: 119), ‘the
hierarchical relationships among groups of individuals and the inter
actions between each of these groups centre on the types of houses
and where houses were built.’ Space and location were paramount.
Who built what, where and when was decided by the Waungwana,
and social progression into and through Swahili society was repre
sented by the progression from the grass round hut into the lower
levels of the multi-storey coral house, and finally into the upper
levels, and the inner sanctum, the ndani. Non-Waungwafla men
were excluded from the process of upward mobility altogether, but
it was possible for the female descendants of a slave girl taken as a
concubnie to have a coral house built after a couple of generations.
Thus here it can be seen that both social mobility and specific gender
exclusions are manifest with the domestic structure as the key to
both.
Donley-Reid records that, with the Swahili, status was linked with
purdah, and women were secluded both through the use of the veil
(discussed in chapter 4) and through the house. Women were
excluded from the mosque, and in turn the ndani, the room at the
very centre of the top of the house, though reserved both for the
woman who owned the house and her husband, became the ritual

88

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONME
NT

centre for women, and associated with their
polluting and shameful
aspects, such as childbirth. Women were
also regarded as a highly
Valued commodity, similar to the correlatio
purdah evident in the South Asian examples n between status and
discussed above. In this
context, a point made by Donley-Reid is of
great relevance: ‘the most
valued objects, including the highest status
women, were located in
the innermost room, the ndani, of the hous
e’
added to stress the explicit link between women,(1990: 124; emphasis
the domestic envir
onment and status).
In this instance genderized space was again
culture actively utilized within gender relat created, and material
ionships. Furthermore,
within this example it can be seen that
the links with Islam are
more explicit than was apparent in the Berb
er house. This is evident
in the interplay between the pure mosque,
the male space, and the
ndani, the female and impure space, as one
level of meaning which
can be discerned in the complex interplay
of factors, indigenous and
foreign, Muslim and non-Muslim, which char
acterize Swahili society
itself. The challenge herein lies in attempting
to reconstruct such rich
tapestries of detail (remembering that this exam
ple
vertical axis of reconstruction, making the arch also relates to the
aeologist’s job even
harder) in other contexts, where perhaps the
acco
mpanying ethno
graphic and historical evidence is not so abun
dant.

Thresholds, boundaries and entrances
A final area of study is how boundaries and
thresholds between the
different domains can be created. Frequent
ly, for them to be effective
they must be demarcated, and three primary
categories can be iso
lated of how a threshold or boundary
can be created. The first
comprises physical boundaries, such as angl
ed entrance ways, blind
walls and similar features. According to Park
er Pearson and Richards
these ‘can serve to mark differences in domains
control access between them’ (1994: 24). The and thus restrict and
thresholds with lesser degrees of physical visib second category are
ility, perhaps evident
within the domestic environment as charms
and amulets buried under
entrance ways, for example. They might not
be visible, and thus are
not known to the individual crossing the thres
hold, but to the house
owner they exist and can protect both from
the djinn, ‘a race of
supernatural beings created before man’ (Westerm
arck 1933: 5), and
more manifest threats such as people harbourin
g bad intentions. They
constitute a further way of creating a boundary
or threshold beyond
the use of bricks, mud or concrete. A third
mean
s of creating a
threshold or boundary is through visible deco
ration and calligraphy,

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

89

plastic or painted, which can serve to signal a ‘transition zone’ (Parker
Pearson and Richards 1994: 27), as with the stickers in the AfroAmerican Muslim apartments discussed earlier.
All three of these categories could be archaeologically visible, and
the frequent emphasis upon creating, defining and protecting spatial
domain-S within Islam means that they might also be widely found.
Angled entrance ways could survive in ground plans, and although
often regarded as unorthodox, charms and amulets can likewise sur
vive. Examples could include items placed in the house foundations,
as in Egypt where Campo records that a variety of objects were
buried: grain, salt, dates or small items in gold or silver (1991: 101).
Qur’anic or magical texts could be buried in a pot or a similar
container, or a sacrifice interred. In al-Rabadha (Saudi Arabia), one
of the centres on the hajj route, the Darb Zubayda (discussed in
chapter 4), a skeleton of a baby camel was found in a building of
apparently Abbasid origin. This, King argues, ‘was certainly a sacri
fice, pointing to a continuation of a pre-Islamic threshold-laying
ritual associated with a building’s foundation’ (1994b: 198). While
far removed in both time and space, Donley-Reid mentions that
the remains of a goat were found buried in the floor of an
ndani excavated in an eighteenthcentury Swahili coral house
(1990: 121), which might have served the same purpose. Other pro
tective charms found included cowry shells and an owl bone, and
imported Chinese porcelain which, especially if blue, was considered
effective protection against the ‘evil eye’ (Donley 1987: 187—8).
Again, context would have to be examined to state categorically
that the charms were Muslim, as their use has a long pre-Islamic
background, but their importance lies in the fact that such concerns
can be materially manifest, and frequently still are today in various
protective threshold rituals in Palestine, Syria and Turkey for example
(Petersen 1997).
Numerous other examples of the use and/or archaeological survival
of protective devices could be cited. In nineteenth-century Egypt,
aloe was hung over the door of a house to give both the house and
its occupants a long life (Lane 1895: 259), while in the Mzab area of
Algeria, an Ibadi stronghold, amulets and other prophylactic objects
could be hung above the door lintel for protection (Mercier 1922:
162—3; Roche 1970). Visible decoration might also survive, such as
protective religious inscriptions. The presence of a pilgrim returned
from hajj or pilgrimage to Mecca (discussed in chapter 4) can also be
proudly signalled around or on the door or on house exteriors in
various areas of the Muslim world (see, for example, Wenzel 1972:
60—1; Michot 1978; Campo 1991: 149—58).

90

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

But besides the threshold having significance as a device which
serves to demarcate and protect at a practical level, it can also be
invested with a more overt religious significance. Members of the
Bektashi Sufi order, for example, showed reverence to the threshold,
and would not step on one, because of its powerful religious symbol
ism, which is described by Birge (1937: 174): ‘[as] Ali is the Gateway
or Door of the city of knowledge any doorway is symbolic of Au’s
spiritual significance in life. One side of the door is said to represent
Hasan, the other Huseyin (Hussein); the top stands for Muhammed
and the bottom threshold for Fatma.’ Thus in this instance the thresh
old, whether in the domestic environment, a mosque or Sufi lodge, is
explicitly linked with religious considerations. However, this would
appear to be the exception rather than the nile; the threshold in
general functions as (within the context of the domestic environment)
the defining marker between the domestic, private, public, natural
and even supernatural worlds, and for this fact it is the key link
between many of the themes discussed in the chapter.
Summary and Conclusions
The preceding discussion has shown that the Muslim domestic envir
onment is remarkably diverse in form, and in underlying meaning,
which could lead us to determine that few general conclusions could
be drawn. Yet although great variety is apparent in layout, architec
ture and materials, the existence of demarcated public and private
domains, and a concern with gender segregation, can be seen to be
manifest through almost the entire spectrum of Muslim domestic
architecture, from nomads carrying their religious and social codes
and transiently fixing them with skin or cloth tents, to others who
more permanently anchor them in mud, brick and stone, ranging
from one-room structures to vast palatial complexes, and projected
through space both horizontally and vertically. Aspects of this might
be archaeologically visible; others will not. Religion can be of funda
mental importance in structuring the Muslim domestic environment
but, importantly, need not be. Explicit links between Islam and the
domestic environment do not exist in the same way as we saw with
the form of the mosque, structured as it was by the fundamental
obligation of prayer. The traditional domestic environment is the
result of the fusion of cultural and environmental factors, and social
and religious requirements, and owes a major debt to a substantial
pre-Islamic heritage. A religious element is present, but it is indirect,
though links can be seen to stretch back to the Prophet’s house, and

a

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

91

thus the domestic environment can be imbued with what Campo
(1991) terms a degree of ‘sacrality’.
A domestic environment structured according to traditional Mus
lim requirements might be archaeologically recognizable through a
variety of defining features, but to base our identification of the
former presence of a Muslim community upon house plans alone is
insufficient. It forms one element of a possible package which could
indicate the existence of a Muslim community archaeologically. To be
certain, various categories of material would need to be found in
association with each other. At the same time, it should be noted
that not all Muslims live in courtyard houses structured according to
a ‘traditional’ model. Muslims have never all lived in such houses and,
as we have seen, certainly do not today. But the existence of a
domestic environment which can be structured according to a Muslim
ethos is undeniable, and we should be aware that this can be manifest
in many different ways. Beyond questions of identification, various
other types of information might be retrieved: these included changes
in the structure of the family and of society over time, perhaps with a
shift from a communal to a more individualistic ethos; status and
display considerations as manifest in material culture patterning;
gender differentiation as a structuring agent for domestic space; and
how thresholds, boundaries and entrances might be created, protected
and maintained.
Consequently, having considered the implications of the domestic
environment for the archaeology of Islam, are there any further
implications for a more general ‘archaeology of religion’? Essentially,
it can be seen that another facet of material culture, not necessarily
considered by archaeologists within the rubric of religion, can in fact
be placed under this heading in certain instances. Although the con
nection need not be direct, and can range along a proverbial sliding
scale from overt to nothing at all, it is obvious that to reduce the
domestic structure per se to a mere shelter is banal and inaccurate. It
can and, in most instances, does structure, act upon and intimately
involve social life. Social life and religion are difficult to separate,
with the latter influencing the former to a greater or lesser degree.
Therefore, religion has to be considered as more than just a set of
conveniently pigeonholed beliefs, but rather it should be seen as an
agency which can act upon the whole of life and which can influence
many, if not all, aspects of material culture. Finally, it is also apparent,
as we saw with the mosque, and as we will see in future chapters, that
we are also dealing with dynamic ongoing processes. Unsuitable
house types might be introduced, and subsequently rejected, but
many new forms of domestic structure, ideally suited to traditional

92

THE DOMESTIC ENVIRONMENT

Muslim social requirements, are also being designed and built in the
Muslim world, and wherever Muslim communities are found. Thus,
as with the mosque, evolution of material culture will again provide
further challenges for the archaeologist of the future.

4

Muslim Life

Children of Adam, dress well when you attend your mosques. Eat and
drink, but avoid excess. He does not love the intemperate.
Qur’an. The Heights 7: 31

It may be difficult to recognize archaeologically the religious element
in many everyday activities, but the archaeologist must be aware of
the possibility of its existence if we are ever to begin to achieve the
‘social archaeology’ sought in the past two decades. Many other
aspects of life can also be influenced by Islam, as the above epigraph
indicates, and being a Muslim supposes more than mosques and
domestic structures. These are not always considered by archaeol
ogists as being within the domain of the archaeology of religion,
whose interest often lies with the evidence of the ‘big issues’ of ritual,
death, the household and the rural or urban environment. However,
within a study such as this, which attempts to assess the possible
archaeological study of Islam in its totality, attention must be paid to
all areas of life in which complete or partial obedience to Islamic
precepts might be recognized, especially feasts and festivals, food and
drink, education and health, pilgrimage and travel, personal posses
sions and dress, magic and, finally, war. Each of these can be used in
many different ways to create the overall religious, and in turn social,
identities. As diverse as each of these categories may appear to be at
first glance, there are in fact many ways in which they are inter
linked. Besides the more obvious connections, the most important
link is that none of these categories can be classed as purely secular
activities for each is, or can be, influenced by Islam to a large extent.
Their importance (to the archaeologist) cannot be overemphasized, as
their existence again disturbs the notion that religion or ‘ritual’ can be

94

95

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

conveniently pigeonholed, with a neat dividing line from those clas
sified as secular.
Furthermore, once we begin to consider each of these aspects in
life, and as many of them show they can be used ‘actively’ to create
and maintain group identity, negotiate social position, establish gen
der relations, and legitimize political authority. All these areas will be
examined through a series of examples, both to illustrate how the
apparently secular can be imbued with an element of the sacred, and
to assess their archaeological implications. Thus although it must be
acknowledged that the lives of many Muslims are not and were never
structured by such considerations, the following examples serve to
illustrate the possibilities which can exist.

be acknowledged, and differences between the Islamic schools of law
recognized, but in general terms a number of binding rules exist. There
are three categories of food: halal, that which is lawful; haram, that
which is prohibited; and makruh, that which is reprehensible, but
which is not subject to the degree of prohibition as haram. Alcohol,
spilt blood, pork, dogs, excrement, carrion, and milk of animals whose
flesh is not eaten are forbidden, and a complex body of laws regulates
in great detail which food is considered lawful and when exceptions
concerning consumption can be made. Similarly, slaughter is subject to
religious law, and an animal must be killed facing the qiblah, the name
of God invoked and its throat cut (see Gibb and Kramers 1961: 43 1—2,
556; Pellat 1971 a: 304—9). Rules concerning hunting wild animals vary,
but often saying a prayer or muttering a basmala before dispatching
the arrow or bullet will suffice.
To the archaeologist studying a faunal assemblage it might theor
etically be possible to identify the remains generated by a diet struc
tured according to these Muslim dietary laws. Pertinent questions
which might be asked include:

Food and Drink

Diet and cuisine
Food and drink, as ‘the fuel of life’, make a convenient starting point,
yet almost simultaneously a distinction needs to be made between
diet and cuisine. It will be argued that there is no such thing as a
‘Muslim cuisine’, whereas there is a Muslim diet, structured by diet
ary laws, as set out in the Qur’an and hadith.
Cuisine Within the vast geographical area which is the Muslim
world great culinary variety exists, which renders the idea of a uni
form Muslim cuisine absurd. Certain similarities might be found, in
the use of spices or the preparation of similar breads in many regions,
or the common use of certain items of equipment, but there is no
‘Islamic kitchen’ or ‘Islamic dish’. Perhaps a common inheritance
might be evident in different regions. As Waines (1991: 807) notes,
the Muslim world inherited the chemistry and technology of cooking
from the ancient centres of the Middle East, an area where there
might be an element of ‘coherency’ in culinary cultures for whatever
reasons (see Tapper and Zubaida 1994). Yet how applicable is this
concept to Indonesia or West Africa where the culinary heritage
differs? It is not, and where conversion to Islam occurred, regional
cuisine was merely modified to the taboos of the new faith.

Diet More profitable for the archaeologist is the identification of
the Muslim diet, which is structured by religious law and provides a
further category of evidence which might allow the archaeological
recognition of a Muslim community. Issues of non-observance must

1 Are certain species absent in faunal assemblages, pigs and dogs for
example, and is this a result of dietary avoidance?
2 Is a halal diet noticeable, for example through special butchery
patterns, cut marks on bones, body parts and offal left over?
3 Are slaughter patterns different among herds owned by Muslims,
as opposed to those of other religious groups?
4 Is the composition of a ‘Muslim herd’ different, and can this be
recognized archaeologically?
Often subtle differences exist in what may or may not be eaten
between the different legal schools, and an ‘ideal’ faunal assemblage
could theoretically allow not only differentiation between the various
religious groups, Jews, Muslims and Christians, for instance, but
perhaps also within the Muslim community itself on the basis of
these differences. Three examples have been chosen which suggest
exciting, but as yet solely theoretical, interpretative possibilities.
Among adherents of the Hanafi school all marine creatures which
are not shaped like fish are unlawful, whereas the other legal schools
are not so strict; the Maliki school pronounce the hyena makruh, yet
they can eat birds of prey, which adherents of the other legal schools
do not, as all carnivores, whether birds or mammals, are forbidden
(Pellat 1971a: 306—7). Dietary differences are also evident between the
Sunni and Sbi’ah creeds. For example, Thesiger relates how in Iraq
Sunni Muslims would eat hares while Shi’ahs would not (1980: 81).

96

97

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

These are patterns which might theoretically be evident in a faunal
assemblage; they also illustrate that diversity is again evident, and that
entities such as dietary laws can be differently interpreted depending
on context and circumstances.

The other animal whose presence or absence might be informative
in differentiating a Muslim faunal assemblage is the dog. But this is
again by no means uniform. As regards the Jordanian sites, dog
remains are fairly common in Muslim period levels, where they
were not used as a food resource, but rather for herding, guarding
and hunting. Two factors indicate this: the absence of butchery marks,
which are ‘a fairly clear indicator of a food use, in particular if the cut
marks are found on the meat rich part of the carcass’ (Rielly 1996),
and the fact that most of the dogs found were represented by
partial or complete skeletons, clearly showing no post-mortem use.
Thus, it is not necessarily assured that certain species, notably pigs
and dogs, will be absent in faunal assemblages from Islamic sites.
Factors other than adherence to dietary law must be considered, but,
as the examples illustrate, in certain instances relevant patterning can
be found.

Archaeological reality: a case study from Jordan
Having outlined some of the theoretical possibilities which could be
considered when analysing faunal assemblages from Islamic sites, it is
worthwhile testing them against archaeological data from Jordan. The
sites which will be considered are Gadara, where occupation of a
major Roman and Byzantine city has been approximately continuous
up to the present; Pella, with specific emphasis upon the Umayyad
and Abbasid levels above and adjacent to the Byzantine city; Aqaba, a
Umayyad and Abbasid city; the Ayyubid and later occupation of the
village of Khirbet Fans; and, finally, the late Muslim occupation of
the three Crusader castles of Kerak, Shobak and el-Wueira. The
information in the following section is primarily drawn from the
detailed answers to my questions kindly provided by Louise Martin
on general issues (1996) and Kevin Rielly on the specific Jordanian
material (1996).
Absence of species The absence of certain species in faunal assem
blages can be meaningful, as long as consideration is given to other
factors (Martin 1996). These include excavation bias, differential dis
posal, and the possible local environmental constraints involved in
keeping species such as pigs. A possible approach is offered through
examining patterns across a series of sites, or changes through various
sequences. In Muslim period deposits few pig bones were found, ‘but
most of these could be interpreted as residual, i.e. mixed in from
earlier levels’ (Rielly 1996). An exception to this pattern was provided
by the small number of pig bones recovered from Pella, where con
text, according to Rielly, ‘strongly suggests the continued use of pig
(albeit as a minor food resource) well into the Muslim period’,
perhaps the result of toleration towards a small Christian or recently
converted Muslim population. Certainly, in other instances, the
presence or absence of specific species can be very informative. At
Q sar es-Seghir in Morocco the appearance of pig remains in
Christian Portuguese levels helped serve to differentiate this assem
blage from the preceding Islamic one, where cattle, sheep and goats
predominate (Redman 1986: 229—30). Similarly at Qasr Ibrim
(Egypt), pig bones were completely absent from the Ottoman levels
(Alexander 1997).

Halal diet Halal slaughter ‘involves a clean cut to the throat’, and it
is ‘highly unlikely that a skilled practitioner will cut down to the
bone (most likely the hyoid), thus leaving no trace’ (Rielly 1996) (see
plate 4.1). Even if this were done, the hyoid of a sheep or goat, for
example, is usually small in size and prone to fragmentation, which
further complicates the recognition process. Where hyoids were
found on Islamic period sites in Jordan, no cut marks were evident,
but in any case these could also have been made after death, for
example, while removing the head. In general, little differentiation
was evident between pre-Muslim and Muslim butchery methods,
while the practice of not eating certain offal would not be apparent
in the archaeological record ‘short of extremely good preservation’
(Reilly 1996). Although it can be seen that this example relates only
to Jordan, it is applicable elsewhere, and therefore it is unlikely that
halal diet would be recognizable archaeologically.
Muslim animal husbandry The third and fourth of our questions
above can be considered together as both are related to animal herds,
their slaughter and composition. As regards the former, Martin (1996)
suggests that a conceivable approach would be linking ‘slaughter
patterns to particular feasting times, for example, Ramadan’. How
ever, since Ramadan is movable rather than seasonal, ‘one would need
very good ageing data from animals’, and zoo-archaeology cannot get
anywhere near the resolution of ageing needed to address this issue at
present, though cementum banding may eventually help. However, id
al-adha perhaps offers better possibilities for recognition on account
of a ‘special’ lamb being preferred for the sacrifice: male, neither too

98

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

99

There would appear to be more camel bones (many with clear butch
ery marks) on Muslim sites relative to those of an earlier date. In fact
the finding of a camel bone can almost be used as a marker for a
Muslim period context.’
Therefore, we appear to have one animal, the camel, which can act
as the sort of ‘marker’ which we require, an archaeological indicator
of Jordanian Muslim diet. (Its wider applicability as an indicator
of Muslim diet will be considered below.) In general, however, it
appears that in many ways an ‘ideal’ faunal assemblage would be
required to answer the questions outlined. However, several possible
useful lines of enquiry have been suggested which at a practical
level might begin to allow Muslim diet to be recognized and investi
gated archaeologically in a regional study. Moreover, such questions
need to be asked because, as will be discussed later, diet, and therefore
the archaeological remains, are not solely the residue of logical
economic decisions; they too can be strongly affected by religious
reasoning.
Alcohol and vegetable crops

Plate 4.1
Library)

Halal butchers, Kom Ombo, Egypt (© Hutchison Picture

Can other elements of Muslim diet, drink and vegetable foodstuffs,
for example, be archaeologically associated or indeed identified with
Muslims? The ban on alcohol within Islam is well known, and this
might in certain instances be archaeologically visible. Sadan (1991:
721), for example, notes that the use of certain receptacles is forbid
den to Muslims ‘for ease with which they might be used to ferment
liquids’. However, observance of this proscription is by no means
uniform, as is frequently attested in The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam:
‘and David’s lips are lock’t; but in divine high-piping Péhlevi,
with “Wine! Wine! Wine! Red Wine!” the Nightingale cries to the
Rose, That yellow cheek of hers t’ incarnadine. Come fill the cup,
and in the fire of Spring the Winter garment of repentance fling’
(Fitzgerald 1970). Physical evidence for the infringement of the
prohibition on alcohol was found at Samarra in Iraq, where
several tall pottery vessels painted with Christian imagery and
dating from the mid-ninth century were found which were inter
preted as wine flasks, and which led to the inference ‘that there
was a wine hall near the Caliph’s harem at Samarra’ (Talbot Rice
1971: 37).
More complex even is the recognition of the vegetable component
of the Muslim diet. This is not subject to dietary law as is flesh
and associated products, and thus cannot begin to be an archaeolog
ical indicator of a Muslim community in the same way; staple
—

young nor too old, healthy and without broken horns (El-Rashedy
1997).

The composition of a Muslim herd as an aid to its recognition is
likewise complicated. The imprecise nature of the archaeological
record obscures things, and the archaeological assemblage can be
best described as a death assemblage, and rarely an accurate reflection
of the herd structure pertaining to the period under study (Rielly
1996). Certainly, with regard to the Jordanian sites, Rielly notes that
‘it would appear that the major food animals, i.e. sheep, goat and
cattle, suffered very little change in either their relative importance as
food items or their major uses, as this area shifted from a Christian to
a Muslim state.’ However, he continues, ‘one species is worth com
menting on with respect to a possible change in diet, i.e. the camel.

100

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

food crops often remained unchanged in regions to which Islam
spread. Botanical remains might, howevei indicate the spread of
crops associated with the Muslim world. Crops such as rice, sugar
cane and wheat were widely diffused, but obviously they do not take
on a Muslim identity! Rather, at a precise point in time they can be
said to be culturally associated with Islam, as Al-Hassan and Hill
(1992: 212—13) discuss. For example, wheat was a staple food in
Islamic agriculture in the medieval period, as compared to rye bread
common in northern Europe, and sugar is a basic commodity
which ‘owes much of its development and spread to the Islamic
civilisation’ (1992: 220). The significance of wheat was also rein
forced by taboos, as in Turkey where Leach and Leach make the
point that, ‘though lacking prominence in the Qur’an. wheat is
considered a blessing from God and offences against it are open
to divine retribution’ (1977: 64). Various prohibitions exist about
what one can or cannot do in a wheat field, with wheat, and when
eating bread in Turkey. Similarly, certain fruits are especially
esteemed through their being favourites of the Prophet Muham
mad; these include water melon, banana and pomegranate, each of
which is said to contain ‘a fecundating seed from Paradise’ (Lane
1883: 161).
But greater use of archaeobotany needs to be made in Islamic
archaeology before we can even begin to approach these issues. As
King notes, ‘very little has been done in the way of paleobotanical
research for the Islamic period as a whole, and it is hoped that more
attention will be given in the future to this subject by archaeologists’
(l994a: 6). One instance of its application is at Qasr Ibrim (Egypt), a
site already mentioned in the context of the domestic environment
and which will be referred to again on account of the exceptional
preservation conditions found there. This meant that abundant
botanical remains survived, and when sampled indicated that the
crops grown varied over time. Significantly, one of these changes
occurred at the interface of the late Christian and early Islamic
periods (c. 1500), when the bicolor variety of sorghum ceased to be
cultivated, though the cultivation of the durra variety continued. This
has been interpreted as due to the fact that bicolor was more suited to
the making of beer and ‘so the Islamic prohibition of the consump
tion of alcohol may be one possible reason for this (Rowley-Conwy
1989: 135).
Although only a cursory treatment of Muslim dietary law has been
provided here, the importance of this fundamental area of Muslim life
to the archaeologist interested in Islam has been emphasized, and is
one in which numerous possibilities for research exist.
.

‘

.

101

Food and society
Equally important as the practical recognition of Muslim diet from
archaeological remains is the manner in which the whole spectrum of
food and drink can function socially, both in the creation of Muslim
identity and within Muslim life. Grant (1991: 109) makes the import
ant point that too often the preoccupation of the archaeologist deal
ing with animal bones is with economic matters, herd management,
animal improvement and the like, with ritual and symbolic elements
separated out; however, she adds ‘the religious, the symbolic and the
economic are all inextricably combined’ (1991: 110). Faunal assem
blages need not be the residue of solely economic decisions, and this
is particularly true of pastoral communities of all kinds, including
Muslim ones. Abu-Rabia (1994: 90), for example, records that among
the Bedouin of the Negev desert (Palestine), the significance of the
flocks of animals kept is much more than merely economic. ‘The
flock is the connecting link not only between men but also between
men and God, prophets, saints and pious people.’ The faunal assem
blage, the residue of this ‘significant flock’ and of the subsequent
‘significant meals’, would not indicate that the animals had been taken
to saints’ tombs, or that they were perceived of as any more than
wealth on the hoof, but as archaeologists we should consider such
possibilities, otherwise we might again run the risk of losing some
thing of the rich tapestry of meaning which could underlie the
archaeological evidence. The following examples show that food,
drink and their raw materials can be of significance beyond being
palatable or even apparently logically chosen.
Pigs in China The Muslim Hui communities of China have already
been mentioned (see chapter 2), and it was noted that the creation and
maintenance of Hui identity was not straightforward. As with the
utilization and adaptation of mosque architecture in the relationship
between the Hui and the majority non-Muslim Chinese, so pork
avoidance is significant. This forms part of the concept of qingzhen,
‘pure and true’, which is described by Gladney as more than an
expression for the absence of lard or pork but a sacred symbol
‘marking Hui identity’ (1991: 9). China is one of the most important
pig-breeding nations in the world, and pork is a major source of
protein. Thus, to avoid it serves as a distinguishing sign from the
mass of the population. However, the degree to which pork is
avoided varies greatly. In areas where the Hui are less visibly Muslim,
the pork taboo ‘becomes the most distinguishing marker of identity’,

102

MUSLIM LIFE

separating them from their Han neighbours. In the north-west of
China the word for pig is even avoided, and euphemisms such as
‘black bug’ and ‘black bastard’ are used instead (Gladney 1991: 25,
185). Porcine euphemism, however, would appear to be highly flex
ible, as Simoons (1981: 27) notes that pork is often eaten if it is called
mutton, a more pragmatic response. In contrast, other Hui groups,
such as the Chendai Hui, who are virtually culturally indistinct from
their neighbours, are not at all scrupulous in maintaining pork avoid
ance, openly or otherwise. But this is more easily understood if the
overall cultural context of this Hui lineage is considered, among
whose practices Gladney describes the lighting of ‘incense to ances
tors in their lineage temple’, some going as far as not believing in
Islam (1991: 264).
Even within one ethnic group the range of behavioural variability,
religious observance and non-observance is immense. In this example,
it can be seen that, although pork avoidance is one of the fundam
ental
Muslim dietary laws, the degree to which it is upheld depends upon
the perceived degree of social need and how practical it is to maintain;
thus a pragmatic attitude exists. Although the prohibition on eating
pork is scrupulously observed by many Muslims and the circum
stances affecting this case study are somewhat exceptional, this beha
viour is far from confined merely to the Hui. Such general issues as
the perception and practice of religion by its adherents, and how the
accompanying social laws or requirements are followed, are subject to
both individual or group choice and external pressures, a fact which
has direct material culture implications as a primary structuring agent
for cultural diversity. Furthermore, supposed economic rationality as
a structuring factor can often be exposed as false. There is no con
nection in this instance between pig prohibition and, as Simoons
points out, ‘rational explanations’ of health (1981: 111). Here, food
avoidance is used as a sign of separate cultural and ethnic identity,
which concurs with a point made by Farb and Armelagos (1980: 118)
about Mosaic and Qur’anic dietary laws in general. Namely, the
emphasis put upon them was ‘in part because foods can serve as
badges that distinguish one people from another’. With regard to
the Hui this is true, but is obviously divorced from economic and
rational concerns, almost to the point of disadvantage, it can be
suggested, in China, the land of the pig.
The camel The camel is perhaps synonymous in many people’s
minds with Arabia and the heartlands of Islam. Although such associ
ations are clichéd, they do, however, contain a kernel of truth, and it
is useful to consider the camel as a ‘cultural symbol’ within Muslim

103

MUSLIM LIFE

society. The camel is mentioned several times in the Qur’an; for
example, The Heights 7: 40. The Prophet is also seen as ‘the Camel
Rider’, and the camel as the beast ridden by the Messianic Redeemer
(Bashear 1991: 74). Bulliet (1975) has also charted the near total
disappearance of wheeled vehicles in much of western Asia and
North Africa following the Arab conquests, with dominance passing
to a camel-riding elite. The camel also played an important role in
pre-Islamic sacrifice, and Pellat (1971b: 666) makes the point that it
was ‘one of the animals endued with baraka, and to eat its flesh
amounted to an act of faith’. Simoons (1981: 87) argues that the
slaughter and consumption of camels ‘has come to be regarded in
the Middle East as almost an Islamic rite, and a sort of profession of
faith’. Thus to many Muslims the camel has important associations,
possibly owing to its spiritual connotations (but this is far from clear),
but certainly to its ‘multi-functional’ nature in many geographical
regions as a source of meat and a beast of burden (see Bulliet 1975;
Wilson 1984). Owing to these strong Muslim—camel cultural associa
tions, non-Muslims in many areas avoid consuming camel meat;
Ethiopian Christians, for example, because ‘they regard this as a
Muslim habit’ (Simoons 1981: 42).
Archaeological research in Spain and Hungary, both areas once
occupied by Muslims, has provided unequivocal evidence for the
perception of the camel as a cultural symbol identified with Muslims
by non-Muslims. Only seven dromedary (one-humped camel) bones
have been found in Spain in Muslim contexts, two from caliphate
period levels of the tenth—eleventh centuries in Granada, and five
from Almohad period levels in Guadix dating from the twelfth cen
tury. Some of these bones exhibited saw and cut marks, as well as
traces of having been exposed to fire, which contrasted with camel
Roman levels suggesting that ‘the consump
remains recovered from
tion of dromedary meat in Iberia could have had ritual connotations
in affirming the Muslim condition of Andalusians. in this way,
eating dromedary became a sign of cultural identity’ (Muniz et al.
1995: 373). The dromedary is not found in Iberia today; this would
not appear to be due to ecological reasons (the absence of suitable
habitat, and the existence of viable alternatives such as oxen and
horses), but because they had been introduced as ‘signs of cultural
identity’ and were rejected once their importers left the peninsula
(1995: 374). Following the re-conquest, the Christians could neither
eat nor even ride camels, as animals too closely associated with the
previous Muslim residents. In Hungary, camels were introduced dur
ing the Ottoman occupation (fifteenth to seventeenth centuries), and
their absence today, according to the excavator of various Ottoman
.

.

104

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

105

period sites, is partly due to the same variety of reasons, including the
factor of ‘cultural resentment’ (Bartosiewicz 1996: 453) against a beast
associated with conquering peoples (both Roman and Muslim). These
examples show how it is possible for an animal, its by-products such
as meat, even its tractional advantages, to be rejected because of its
perceived cultural associations. Economic logic, though playing a
part, is not the dominant factor.
Patterns of communal and private consumption This offers a further
factor for the archaeologist to consider when interpreting archaeol
ogical material relating to Muslim food use. What is present need not
only reflect availability; more often than not a process of conscious
choice is behind what is consumed and, as with many of the areas of
material culture discussed in this volume, food can also be actively
used for a variety of purposes (Douglas 1984). Food can be used as an
active agent of communal inclusion or exclusion; perhaps, it can be
suggested, of special importance within Islam, the religion of com
munity (ummah), where the communal consumption of food is a
recommended activity according to a hadith, which records that the
Prophet remarked ‘eat together and do not eat separately, for the
blessed is with the company’ (Ali 1951: 356, quoted in Goody 1982:
206).
Communal purposes to which food can be put are many. In Old
Delhi (India), Murphy (1986: 111) describes how Muslims manipu
lated feasting foods for social purposes, to emphasize Muslim identity
by excluding others and to improve relations with different religious
groups, especially the Hindu community by ‘making special pro
visions for their food’. Obviously related to this is the issue of the
cow in Muslim—Hindu relations in India. The Muslim ruler Akbar,
for instance, banned the slaughter of the cow, not through reverence
for the animal but as a political gesture, as a means of building better
relations with the Hindus. Conversely, Hindus could be actively
encouraged to eat beef ‘so that they would thereby become outcast
from Hindu society and turn to the religion of Allah’, of greatest
effect in the lower strata of Hindu society where the cow was less
revered (Lodrick 1981: 65).
Food can also be used at an individual level for social purposes; for
example, in the relationship between the sexes, as Hastorf stresses:
‘food can express political, social, and economic relations as well as
nutrition, it also expresses the development and maintenance of gen
der relations in the past’ (1991: 132). Unfortunately, this is an area of
study which has been much neglected by archaeologists, as has the
whole area of food preparation and related technical systems in

Plate 4.2 Songhai women cooking in Gao, Mali (photo. R. Maclean)
general (Maclean 1997), possibly, as Hastorf notes, because it is
popularly perceived as a woman’s activity (see plate 4.2). Suitable
illustrative case studies based upon archaeological material are thus
few and far between, and it is anthropology and popular fiction that
provide the most interesting examples.
Maclagan’s (1994) research in the western highlands of Yemen
illustrates just how gender relations and food can be intertwined.
She describes how male and female obligations and relations were
negotiated in this area in terms of food, and how ‘women’s relation to
food is defined by their relation to men’ (1994: 159). Food could be
utilized as a means of female protest, by being withheld or badly
prepared. It could also be used in the forming of friendships between
women, and foods associated with men, such as meat, were usually
not eaten by women, unless there were men in the household. Food
was thus the very medium of discourse in this area of Yemen, and a
similar scenario is described in the Buddha of Suburbia, a novel
depicting the life of a half-English, half-Indian young man in 1970s
London. When, for example, the relationship between the main
character’s Muslim uncle and aunt breaks down, his auntie Jeeta uses
food subtly, as one means of expressing her anger with her husband.
She ‘cooked for him as before, but provided only plain food, the same
every day, and long after the expected time, bringing it to him when he

106

MUSLIM LIFE

107

MUSLIM LIFE

was asleep or about to pray’ (Kureishi 1990: 208).
She served food
designed to cause constipation, and when he complained,
the opposite, on a monumental scale. In both these she served
unconnected
examples, far removed in every context, food can be seen
as truly
socially significant and as actively used. It is not merely
a fuel for the
body, but functions within the social arena, within an
Islamic context,
yet at the same time without being specifically Muslim.
Stimulants A further dimension of food use in a social
context in the
Muslim world is provided by the consumption of
stimulants. There
has been much learned debate among Muslim scholars
use, but many are used in different communities. Qat, about their
an evergreen
shrub whose leaves and shoots are chewed to produce
a mild stimu
lating effect, and coffee have been the subject of recent
studies (Weir
1985; Hattox 1991). Initially both substances, which
originated in
Ethiopia and spread to Yemen in the fourteenth to fifteenth
centuries
though a recent find of three coffee bean fragments at
Kush in the
United Arab Emirates in contexts dated to the twelfth to
thirteenth
centuries will probably mean that the date of their
introduction to
Arabia will need revising; British Museum 1998), were
associated
with some religious men and Sufi orders as the effects
were thought
to bring ‘them closer to God and enhanced meditation
(Weir 1985: 76). However, over the course of time both capacity’
coffee and
qat underwent a definite change in status, they lost any
overtones, although they were never religious substances religious
in them
selves. The public coffee house and the private qat party
became,
as
they are today, social outlets, places to meet, gossip, and
even com
pete socially. Tea, coffee, tobacco, qat, hashish, opium, pan
substances which effect the mind might be forbidden, and although
the
stances themselves might vary, the Muslim world can hardly sub
be said
to be free of the consumption of stimulants, each of
which can
generate its own peculiar and recognizable material
culture, and
provide a further dimension of life which could be visible
archaeol
ogically.
—

Feasts and festivals Directly related to the subject of the
social use
of food and drink are feasts, fasts and festivals which form
an import
ant element in Muslim religious and social life, and are
thus of
relevance within a consideration of the possible archaeology
of
islam. Huge local variety exists, but four pre-eminent examples
can
be isolated: the Fourth Pillar of Islam, sawm or daytime
fasting and
nightly feasting, which takes place in Ramadan, the ninth
month of
the Muslim calendar; id al-fitr, the feast and festival to
celebrate the

end of the fast of Ramadan; id al-adha, the feast to celebrate the day
when hajj pilgrims sacrifice in the Valley of Mina near Mecca, which
is an obligation on every free Muslim who can afford to buy a
sacrificial animal, usually a sheep, camel or cow; and, finally, the
tenth of Muharram, of special importance to the Shi’ah, and also
significant to the Sunni as Ashura. This is an emotionally intense
culmination of a ten-day mourning process to commemorate the
death of Hussein at Karbala in 680 (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 47,
156, 409, 469; Von Grunebaum 1976).
These four examples differ immensely both in character and emo
tional tone, and it is difficult to assess what general implications feasts
and fasts hold for the archaeologist. Although certain categories of
specific material culture are utilized, such as special foods and dishes,
or certain specific relics might be generated (faunal remains resulting
from sacrifices or various types of artifact), it is extremely unlikely
that a particular festival, feast or fast could be recognized archaeol
ogically. The one exception to this might be Muharram, with its own
specific material culture such as the tazia, the replica of Hussein’s
coffin carried in procession, and the Karbala, the building in which
these replicas are sometimes buried, as well as the Imambara, a large
religious structure also used during Muharram (see Asher 1984: 89—90
for Bengali examples). Yet within the sum total of elements which
constitutes the archaeology of Islam this is of little importance. It is
the awareness of such events which is significant, as a further possible
(and probable) component of Muslim life, past and present.
Food and drink within the context of Muslim society can therefore
be seen to be more than just fuel for the body, and thus should be of
greater interest to the archaeologist than merely a source of economic
data. Food in itself was not explicitly religious, but through dietary
laws has been influenced by a religious component. At a practical
level, the existence of these dietary laws could allow the archaeol
ogical recognition of a Muslim diet, a further category of evidence
in the possible identification of a Muslim community. Furthermore,
we have seen that food, here meant in its broadest definition, can be
used in myriad ways manipulated, avoided, associated with and
can also serve a variety of purposes: as a cultural symbol, or a means
of communication or protest, for example. These are all things
for us to consider when examining faunal remains, pottery forms,
botanical samples, all the residue of food use. And once again the
privileged position of the archaeologist interested in Islam is appar
ent. We are able to see, from diverse historical, ethnographic and
anthropological evidence, the many dimensions of food use in
Muslim life.
—

—

108

MUSLIM LIFE

Education and Health

Education and health present further dimensions of life which can be
visible archaeologicaily. Education, for example, could be represented
materially by a wide range of evidence. The importance of education,
particularly religious education, in the Muslim world, both today and
in the past should be stressed (secular education is discussed in
chapter 5): ‘from its inception, indeed from the very first word of
the first revelation to Muhammad, Islam had the character of a
literary and, therefore, learned civilisation; in such a context the
acquisition of knowledge and its transmission were paramount’
(Dickie 1978: 38). The material manifestations of education could
range from a Qur’anic school set up in an open area, where boys
learnt to memorize the Qur’an from wooden boards, as described by
Lane (1895) in nineteenth-century Cairo (see plate 4.3), to purposebuilt madrasabs (religious colleges), which grew in importance from

MUSLIM LIFE

109

the tenth to eleventh centuries, to the great mosque universities such
as al-Azhar in Cairo or Zeitouna (Kairouan) in Tunisia, where
Qur’anic sciences (commentaries), hadith, law and theology were all
taught (Gardet 1970: 588). Lane also describes the form of the al
Azhar, a large building surrounding a central court with a place of
prayer on the side facing Mecca, and ‘on each of the three sides are
smaller porticoes, divided into a number of apartments called riwaks,
each of which is destined for the use of natives of a particular country,
or of a particular province of Egypt’ (1895: 213).
Madrasahs could frequently have a similar plan, though on a much
smaller scale, and which in their developed form combined the func
tions of the mosque (masjid) and hostel (khan) (Hillenbrand 1986:
1123). They are by no means universally found but were built in
many areas of the Muslim world. For a summary of their origins,
development and spread, see Pedersen (1986) and Hillenbrand (1986).
The külliye or building complexes constructed by the Ottomans
provide an example of what could be built incorporating a madrasah.
These structural complexes began to be built in a fairly simple form in
the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, combining a mosque and
madrasah, and perhaps a soup kitchen. One hundred years later
these could be much more elaborate, exemplified by the Yilderim
kulliye, which combined a mosque, madrasah, bath, soup kitchen and
hospital, all fortified and with two entrance gates (Kuran 1987: 134).
Although this example is obviously exceptional, it gives an idea of the
types of integrated structures which could be built. Furthermore,
health was represented in this instance by the hospital (maristan),
which could equally be found as a single structure, as could more
simple hospices (Dunlop 1958). The study of such buildings might
also allow the archaeological recognition of waqf or charitable
endowments. A hospital, hostel for travellers, religious college, com
plex such as the külliye, possibly even a bridge, could be supported
from waqf foundations, and indicated through inscriptions (see
Rogers 1976, for example), perhaps in certain instances along with
the architect’s name (see Mayer 1956: 21—2).
Pilgrimage and Travel

/

Plate 4.3

Qur’an school, Rakai District, Uganda (photo. T. Insoll)

Yet another element of Muslim life which has definite and recogniz
able archaeological implications is provided by travel in all its many
forms. Hajj, pilgrimage to Mecca, is possibly the best-known exam
ple, but many other manifestations exist. Travel for other types of
pilgrimage, migration, journeying for curiosity or trade, all have been

F
110

111

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

an important element of Muslim life since the very beginnings of
Islam, both for men, and with the first two at least, for women.
Muslim travel is, according to Netton (1993: x), ‘old as the religion
itself’, a process which began with the Prophet’s migration, the hijrah,
from Mecca to Medina, year one of the Muslim calendar. In its
broadest sense, ‘travel’ can be said to be imbued with a spiritual
significance, expressed thus by Gellens (1990: 53): ‘embedded deep
in Muslim consciousness is an identification of travel with pious
activity, an appreciation that achievement in such endeavour is a
sign of divine approval and munificence.’ The direct implication of
such sentiments means that it is often difficult, or impossible, to
separate one activity from another. As will be discussed in greater
detail below, trade could, and did, accompany pilgrimage; once again
leading to a blurring between the secular and sacred as is apparent in
so many other aspects of Muslim life.
All these types of travel can leave, to a greater or lesser degree,
material culture traces (the archaeology of pilgrimage at least has
recently been considered; see Graham-Campbell 1994). These can
be plotted diagrammatically in a simplified form, providing what
can be termed ‘circles of visibility’ and allowing the recognition of
different aspects of this journeying. This ranges from greater observa
tional clarity of hajy-related activities the closer one is to the Holy
Places, with correspondingly a blurring of definition with distance,
when local pilgrimage trails and centres become more easily recog
nizable. Each of these should be considered individually, beginning
with hajj.

which are wound around the body leaving one shoulder exposed.
This garment must be worn during ha;j or umrah in the sacred
territory as a symbolic gesture of the erasure of class and race dis
tinctions.
Alongside the creation of a feeling of community, the intermingling
of people during pilgrimage can lead to the spread of new ideas, and
have much political significance. Control of the Ka’bah, the sacred
sanctuary in Mecca, could aid secular power (Hawting 1993: 31—2),
and prestige accrue from the ownership of relics associated with it, as
the collection in the Topkapi Palace in Istanbul (the former Ottoman
court), attests. Here keys to the Holy Ka’bah, a fragment of its door,
the gilt waterspout of mercy from the Ka’bah, and the golden cover
of the black stone itself (probably a meteorite, and recorded as given
by the Angel Gabriel to Abraham, who is believed to have built the
Ka’bah) are all displayed. The possession of these items, along with
relics of the Prophet and his family, invested the Ottoman Sultan with
a certain legitimacy to rule, and were the ‘emblems of Islam’ (Wheatcroft 1995: 52), reinforcing the claim to be caliph (where used), the
highest political and religious authority in Islam, and the Prophet’s
successor as leader of the Muslims.
It is not necessary to repeat here the origins of, and ceremonies
involved in, hajj, which have been well covered elsewhere (Burton
1898; Peters 1994), but the centrality of Mecca and Medina as the hub
of a web of routes leading from all corners of the Muslim world
should be emphasized. The three major routes before the modern era
and the dominance of air transport were the Syrian route via Damas
cus, which also carried Anatolian, Balkan and some Central Asian
pilgrims; an Egyptian route from Cairo which also catered for pil
grims from the Maghrib and West Africa; and an Iraqi route which
carried pilgrims from Iraq, Iran and the East (see figure 4.1). Further,
less important, sea routes were followed by pilgrims from the East
African Coast, India and beyond (Petersen 1994: 48—9).
The archaeology of the hajj routes has been the subject of recent
interest (Petersen 1994). Archaeological studies of the Darb Zubayda,
which flourished under the patronage of the Abbasids, linking Kufa in
Iraq to Mecca, with a further trail to Medina, have shown that a
variety of installations exist. Thirteen hundred wells, 54 guard stations
and halting places, a hundred reservoirs, numerous cisterns, mosques
and milestones and in places a delimited trackway cleared of stones,
were recorded (al-Rashid 1980, 1986). Archaeology has also provided
information on the hijrah route between Mecca and Medina. A paved
roadway, up to 4 m wide, made of flat stones and cobbles filled with
gravel, was found, protected in the Ottoman period by fortified

Hajj and umrah
Pre-eminent among Muslim travels is ha;j, or pilgrimage to Mecca,
one of the Five Pillars of the Faith, and an obligation (with certain
exceptions) on every adult Muslim with the requisite means. Ideally,
bajj, with all its attendant ceremonies, should coincide with the
Festival of Sacrifice, id al-adha. Otherwise, lesser pilgrimage to
Mecca, umrah, can be undertaken at any time, with the same cere
monies, but minus the sacrifice, and with less religious benefit accru
ing (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 121,159; Petrushevsky 1985: 64—6).
Besides bringing individual religious merit, hajj is also significant in
strengthening the ummah, by acting as a unifying force bringing
together all Muslim ethnic groups, classes and cultures. Equality
between these often disparate groups is obtained by various means,
through, for example, the mandatory wearing by men of a simple
white robe, the ibram, made up of two seamless pieces of white cloth

112
MUSLIM LIFE

Figure 4.1

113

Pilgrimage routes in Arabia (after Peters 1994: xxv)

posts (Whalen et al. 1981: 53). Parts of another hajj route
from Tarim
in the Wadi Hadhramaut through the mountains to Aden
have been
recorded, as at Andar near Hureidhah (Whitcomb 1988:
182).
Away from the Arabian Peninsula, further archaeological
evidence
of the ha;j pilgrim traffic has been found, as at the former Red
Sea port
of Aidhab (Sudan) opposite Jeddah, the port for Mecca. This
port was
connected to the Egyptian route, and grew in importance
after the
land route through Sinai was closed by the Crusaders in the
twelfth
century (Peters 1994: 90—1). Visited by Ibn Battuta in the midfour
teenth century, it appears to have been a pretty miserable
place, but
extensive precautions were taken to ensure adequate supplies
of water
by digging cisterns and wells (see figure 4.2) (Elisséeff and
el Hakim
1981: 14). Extensive cemeteries were ‘ample reminder of the appalli
ng
death rate among the pilgrims’ (Paul 1955: 67), and included
a nonMuslim zone of burial, recognizable through grave orientation
(see
chapter 6), and interpreted as the burial place of Jews or
Coptic

Figure 4.2 Plan of Aidhab, Sudan (not to scale) (after Paul 1955: 65)
Christians (Elisséeff and el Hakim 1981: 41). A living legacy of hajj
traffic has also been left in the Sudan, with the significant numbers of
people of West African origin who have stayed there.
Ziyara, rihlah and hijrah
Pilgrimage to Mecca is not the only form of religious journeying
undertaken in the Muslim world (Eickelman and Piscatori 1990;
Netton 1993). Myriad shrines and holy places are visited continu
ally, in the process of ziyara. These range from major centres, such as

114

115

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

the Shi’ah foci of pilgrimage, the tombs of Hussein at Karbala and

character. Although ‘trade’ itself is examined in greater detail in
chapter 5, the mechanics of land-based caravan travel will be dis
cussed here because of its intimate relationship with pilgrimage. The
relevant categories of archaeological evidence will be broadly the
same as those already outlined for pilgrimage, with caravan trails
differing little from pilgrimage routes. An example of the mapping
of a major trade route is provided by the results of archaeological
survey in the Seistan region of Iran, through which a route ran linking
the Persian Gulf ports in Iran to Herat in Afghanistan, and on to
Pakistan and India. Exceptional preservation has allowed the study of
a variety of features indicating the former roads and tracks, dwelling
or watch towers between towns and forts, orange brick dust stains,
the residue of former way-markers, wells and bridges (Tate 1910;
Fischer 1973). Milestones may also be found. Welch describes a mile
stone dating from 685—705 from Palestine which bore the inscription:
‘the highway... Abdullah ‘Abd al-Malik, amir of the Faithful, Allah’s
mercy be upon him, this mile is eight miles (from Jerusalem)’ (1979:
44). A similar inscription from close to Aqaba (Jordan) is described
by Woolley and Lawrence (1936). Erected between 1500 and 1516, it
reads: ‘the cutting of this blessed road was ordered by our master the
Sultan al-Malik al-Ashraf Kansuh al-Ghuri, may his help be strong,
who also erected in this blessed khan towers for the deposits of the
pilgrims’ (1936: 161).
A further category of structure, specifically associated with Muslim
travellers of all types, which would be of great importance to the
archaeologist attempting to identify trade and pilgrimage routes, is
provided by the ‘caravanserai’ or khan, which has been likened in its
modern equivalent to a petrol station, ‘occurring at regular intervals,
ubiquitous, unremarkable and unremarked’ (Sims 1978: 98). The
usual architectural form was of a central walled courtyard, sur
rounded by lodgings for men and beasts, facilities for storing goods,
and perhaps a prayer area, baths, water-storage facilities, and a few
small shops or kiosks. Caravanserais could also be provided with
defences, and varied both in size and according to region (Sauvaget
1940: 1—4; Petersen 1994: 51). Numerous examples have been
recorded and investigated archaeologically all over the Muslim
world: from Central Asia, as at Talaihan-Ata in the Kara-Kum desert,
where a caravanserai dating from the eleventh to fourteenth centuries
was excavated on the trade route leading to Bukhara and Samarkand
(Fedorov-Davydov 1983: 401), to the Jaulan (Golan) in Syria, where
Schumacher (1888) recorded caravanserais ranging from the humble
to the well appointed. But among the most unexpected, though
clearly archaeologically visible, examples yet found (Insoll 1996c:

Au at Najaf, where almost parallel rituals of visitation to those of ha1j

have developed (Momen 1985: 182), to individual saints’ tombs,
important in local contexts. Criss-crossing the Muslim world are
vast networks of pilgrimage trails, as Ibn Battuta recorded during
his extended wanderings in the mid-fourteenth century (Gibb 1993).
As with hail, local pilgrimage is archaeologically recognizable on a
lesser scale. Instructive examples can be drawn from Central Asia,
where local pilgrimage to tombs is still of great importance. This was
especially the case, as Bennigsen and Enders Wimbush (1986: 23)
discuss, during the Soviet era, when they served as substitutes for
closed mosques and hayj was impossible. In this region the deep-seated
tradition of ‘parallel Islam’ (1986: 23) is better described as syncretism
with traditional beliefs. Among the semi-nomadic Uzbeks, for
instance, local pilgrimage was incorporated within the seasonal
cycle, and during the summer drive of the animals to new pastures
various shrines and holy places were visited by Uzbek herders. At
these, sacrifices and offerings would be made, and ‘thus, Islam and the
ancient belief in magic, were united’ (Emeijanenko 1994: 49). This
again illustrates how apparently secular activities, such as seasonal
transhumance, can also be placed within the overall religious frame
work. This is reinforced by an example from Sinai, where Marx (1977)
discusses how pilgrimage to saints’ shrines is an important feature of
social life through helping to create local community, as hajj serves to
create the world Muslim community. It also offers material advantages
to transact business for ‘they [the Bedouin] do not conceive of purely
spiritual or purely material occasions, as found in specialised industrial
societies’ (1977: 41). Thus, the inter-connectedness of many elements
spiritual, material, cultural is again apparent.
Many journeys were also made purely in the search of knowledge, or
rihlah, and promoted by the Prophet who, according to a hadith,
counselled his followers ‘that they should seek knowledge as far as
China’ (Netton 1993: x). There is also hijrah (migration), defined by
Eickelman and Piscatori as ‘the obligation to migrate from lands where
the practice of Islam is constrained to those where in principle no such
constraint exists’ (1990: 5). This is certainly something which could be
archaeologically visible as with the Andalusian Muslim refugees who
settled in Morocco, Tunisia and Algeria after the Christian re-conquest.
—

—

Commerce and travel
The final category of travel which will be considered here as having
archaeological implications is that which has an overtly commercial

116

117

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

486) was a structure recorded at Yendi Dabari in Ghana, deep in the
tropical forest zone of West Africa, where the remains of a two-storey
structure interpreted as the remains of ‘a strangers’ complex of ware
houses and paddocks for pack animals’ (Ozanne 1971: 55—6) were
investigated.
Thus, as with the other aspects of life discussed so far, it can be seen
that pilgrimage and travel are further important dimensions of Muslim
life; specific material culture is associated with these activities which
can be recognized by the archaeologist. Once again, direct connections
between the sacred and the secular exist, through actions such as
combining trade with pilgrimage, either in the local context or on
hajj. This inter-connectedness, apparent with many areas of Muslim
life, is a theme running throughout this chapter and throughout this
book. Further possible markers of Muslim identity, and potentially
important components of Muslim life, are provided by personal pos
sessions and dress.

the Prophet, it served a variety of purposes on a variety of levels.
Although rare today, seal rings were common and, through their
function as a form of signature, were used to seal goods and docu
ments. Inscriptions frequently consist of the name of the wearer and a
pious inscription engraved on a semi-precious stone, which was set in
a silver band, following the example of the Prophet. The quality
obviously varied, but the choice of materials was often deliberate, as
the Prophet did not approve of gold, although it was sometimes
employed, while ‘brass savoured of idolatry’ and iron was ‘emblem
atic of souls condemned to the eternal fire’ (Allan 1978: 1103—4; and
see also Juynboll 1986: 110—11). Carnelian was frequently used for
the seal (for examples, see Content 1987: 35—6), and Jenkins and
Keane suggest that among the qualities which recommended its use
were ‘availability, toughness, and resistance to abrasion’ (1982: 20). Its
popular use might also be connected with the tradition that the
Prophet advised everyone to wear an agate, a material which, accord
ing to Donaldson, was primary in the magical hierarchy (1939: 152).
Such an interpretation could in turn help in explaining the trade in
carnelian which took place across vast distances in the Muslim world
during the medieval period.
Examples have been found archaeologically. A seal ring, inlaid with
a disc of black jasper on which was cut an Arabic inscription in
reverse, was found at the site of Shanga on the Kenyan coast (Horton
1996: 357). This find, along with a variety of other evidence, allOwed
the suggestion that a Muslim community was present at this site from
its foundation in the late eighth century. Engraved seal stones of
carnelian, turquoise, lapis lazuli and hematite were recovered from
Nishapur in Iran (if the provenance is correct) and dated from the
tenth to eleventh centuries (Jenkins and Keane 1982: 19—21), while at
Ras al’Hadd in Oman a reverse-cut carnelian seal was found at this
Indian Ocean trade centre (Petersen 1997).

Personal Possessions and Dress
Both personal possessions and dress are intimate items which are
often invested with a meaning beyond their surface appearance, and
can convey a variety of socially important information, state Muslim
identity, and could be encountered archaeologically. Though perhaps
conceived of as ‘lesser items’ of life, they should not be ignored by
the archaeologist for this reason. However; it should be noted that the
examples chosen do not imply the existence of universals: that all
women were veiled, or that all Muslims wore seal rings and used
prayer beads, for instance. These are obviously interchangeable with
many other items, and though present in one area could well be
absent in another. Similarly, many of the items discussed are of little
relevance today. Rather, the chosen examples function as an illustra
tion that the archaeology of Islam is equally composed of large and
small alike, and favouring one at the expense of the other is to bias the
picture we present.
Personal possessions
The seal ring The seal ring can be seen to be an object combining
both secular and sacred significance, and certainly of utilitarian and
aesthetic value. Functioning both as a sign of individual identity, but
also of Muslim identity, and an item connected through tradition with

The rosary or prayer beads More overtly religious in character is the
rosary (subha), which has been described as a ‘visible example of the
passion for the words of God’ (Bravmann 1983: 21), and which is also
a comparatively rare example of Muslim religious paraphernalia, as in
many ways Islam lacks the trappings associated with other world
religions. The simplicity of worship in Islam precludes a large body
of ritual material culture. The rosary is a set of prayer beads usually
made up of 99 beads indicating the 99 beautiful names of Allah,
which are used in prayer or meditation. They can be made of many
materials: wood, semi-precious stones, ivory and, more recently,
plastic. Although they are not universally used, they can be both

118

MUSLIM LIFE

generally associated with Muslims, and more specifically with certain
movements, such as the Sufi orders where their use is very wide
spread. Indeed, Gellner (1981: 143) makes the point that they are,
‘so
characteristic of the religious fraternities that one can refer to
fraternity, or its distinguishing spiritual technique, as a wird (rosary a
)’.
Prayer beads thus provide another example of an object that is
both
intimate and yet specifically Muslim in character, individual
in
association, durable in nature and with definite archaeologica
l im
plications. At Gao (Mali), for example, the recovery of a large turned
wood central bead from a rosary dated to between the early eleven
th
and late fourteenth centuries helped prove that Muslims lived in
a
particular area of the city.

Miscellany Other items could help to denote the former presence of
a Muslim in the archaeological record, yet to define them as cate
gorically Muslim would be misleading, even though they might
be
intimately linked with Islam, Muslim culture or the Muslim world.
The direct religious association, as with prayer beads, or indirec
t, as
with the Arabic inscribed seal ring, is missing. Within this catego
ry
could be placed the miswak or siwak, a toothbrush or toothpick
made
from fragrant wood, valued by the Prophet Muhammad for hygien
e
purposes, and recommended for cleaning the mouth prior to prayer
(Gibb and Kramers 1961: 388—9). Owing to associations with
the
Prophet, it could take on a significance for which it was never
intended; Kalesi relates, for example, that pilgrims returning from
Mecca used to bring miswak back to the Balkans with them owing
to this association (1978: 374).
Similar are various female items such as kuhi or kohl pots and
applicators. The applicators, decorated or plain, were small probes
of wood, ivory or silver, and their containers were of glass or metal.
Kohl is still commonly applied as an eye cosmetic in many areas of
the Islamic world, especially the Arab lands; its use is described
in
detail by Lane (1895: 44—5, see also Wiedemann 1986). Such appli
cators were found in Islamic period levels at Qsar es-Seghir in Mor
occo, along with a variety of other personal items which clearly
differentiated the Muslim community from the subsequent Portu
guese Christian one (see chapter 7; Redman 1986: 129). Likewise
at
Nishapur in Iran, kohl applicators were found and, although they
have a pre-Islamic background, Allan records how decorated and
undecorated kohl sticks ‘were common throughout the Islamic
world in the early Islamic period’ (1982: 38). Other find spots he
lists include Fustat (Egypt), Hama (Syria), Rayy and Siraf (Iran) and
Samarra (Iraq). Unfortunately, an item such as a kohl container or a

MUSLIM LIFE

119

siwak cannot obviously be said per se to be an object which belonged
to a Muslim, yet a clear association with Muslim culture exists. Such
objects might, however, be of value depending on the context in
which they are found, as at Qsar es-Seghir.
A further illustrative example of the possible usefulness of personal
possessions in recognizing Muslim communities is provided by
material recovered from the Ottoman fortress at Qasr Ibrim in
Egyptian Nubia. Exceptional conditions meant that many of the
personal possessions associated with the garrison were preserved.
Distinctive male possessions included reed pens, wooden combs,
keys and spoons, iron razors, leather shoes, amulets, horse trappings,
musket parts and smoking pipes (see plate 4.4). None of these items
could be said to be specifically Muslim, but all are of types which can
be identified as coming from the Muslim world, though similar items
were found in late Christian levels (see Adams 1996). The same is true
of the female possessions found: multi-coloured glass bangles, kohl
accessories, sandals, jewellery and perfume containers. However, in
both instances the association with Islam is still indirect. The import
ance lies in the fact that such a diverse range of materials was found in
association with each other, and that these were found in conjunction
with other categories of evidence which directly indicated that the

Plate 4.4 Various personal items from Ottoman period levels at Qasr Ibrim,
Egypt (photo. T. Insoll, courtesy of the Egypt Exploration Society)

120

121

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

former owners of these items were Muslim. Therefore, a wealth of
information on often neglected aspects of life was obtained through
archaeological evidence, details which begin to allow Muslim life in
total to be reconstructed.

closely connected with Muslims as they ‘could barely perform their
prayers in draped or tied clothing, as the women needed a decent
covering from ankles to neck’ (1980: 109).
Certainly one of the most elaborate examples of the use of dress to
convey information concerning status in the Muslim world was pro
vided by the Ottoman court where, according to Wheatcroft, ‘colour
and form had their own eloquence, and costume possessed a subtle
grammar’ (1995: 39). For men, beard length, turbans, colour of robes
and shoes and the cut of the sleeves all defined social status according
to intricate codes (see, for example, Rogers and Ward 1988: 164—85).
Although women lacked public roles, Turkish dress styles were still
widely worn throughout the Ottoman provinces, and were ‘emulated
in the towns by any of the subject population who had aspirations
towards status and wealth’ (Scarce 1987: 14). Over the centuries, until
reforms in the early nineteenth century swept them away, this lan
guage of dress, though maintained, came to be somewhat less well
understood and was, as Wheatcroft puts it, ‘imperfectly spoken but
still eloquent’ (1995: 39). Dress codes were kept because they were
traditional (though they were also subject to fashion), even though
their symbolic meaning had ceased to be completely understood. This
raises the question of how much more material culture functions in
this way, and how much interpretative meaning in turn is lost,
removed as we are from the events themselves.

Dress
A second category of personal objects which might be of use to the
archaeologist in pursuing such issues are items of dress. Dress is a
medium which can be used to convey a variety of information, and
thus constitutes a further ‘actively used’ area of material culture (see,
for example, Cordwell and Schwarz 1979). Dress, like the domestic
environment, is an area of material culture which can be used to
uphold Muslim social codes, but can, like food, be used for a variety
of different social purposes: to signal status, gender, religious and
political affiliation, and class or caste. Within Islam, clothing has a
special significance; Watson (1983: 41) mentions how, ‘in practice if
not in doctrine. the faithful should be clothed, preferably from the
neck to the anicies, with only the face, neck, hands and feet showing’.
Obviously, great variety in types of dress is found, but at the same
time an underlying and recurrent concern with modesty is often
apparent across the Muslim world, especially as regards women’s
clothing. As well as a concern with modesty, the speed and extent
of the Arab conquests frequently led to the widespread adoption of
their fashions, and these could replace local costume or be amalgam
ated with it. Thus, quite apart from religious demands, elements of a
recognizable Muslim couture existed and could be identified archae
ologically from textile fragments.
.

.

Status and affiliation Although ideally it should not occur, as all
believers are meant to be equal, clothing can obviously be used to
emphasize status distinctions, and it would be foolhardy to deny the
often great divergence which exists between theory and practice in
many areas of Muslim life. In the Yemen, for example, Kirkman
(1976: 67) describes how clothing could serve ‘as a chosen marker
of social identity’. Religious scholars could set themselves apart
through their dress, affirming their position in society. Similarly,
female dress in the Yemen could also exhibit social distinctions, but
in a different form from that of men, reflecting not public role but
isolation from public life (though this in itself is an often-debated
point, and is discussed further below). Besides indicating status,
clothing could also set a Muslim apart from his or her neighbours.
In parts of India, Schimmel relates how tailored (sewn) clothing was

The turban and the veil Besides the more culturally specific
instances of the social role of clothing within Muslim society, other
factors must also be considered. A particularly instructive example is
provided by the turban, as the Prophet Muhammad is said to have
encouraged Muslims to wear a turban ‘as a badge of their faith’ (Miles
1952: 170). A hadith states that turbans are a mark of Islam and divide
believers from unbelievers, and wearing one, though not a religious
duty, is recommended for men (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 596). The
use of a turban representation on some Ottoman tombstones as a
means of stating religious affiliation will be discussed later (see chap
ter 6); the turban could serve a similar role in life. Turbans, through
their material, style and colour, could also be used to differentiate
between different religious groups within society. In nineteenth-cen
tury Cairo, for example, Lane (1895) describes how a Muslim was
distinguished from the Coptic and Jewish populations by the colour
of his turban, as well as through other aspects of dress. Green turbans
were reserved for the descendants of the Prophet, while Copts and
Jews were restricted to black, light-brown, blue and grey turbans and
‘generally dull-coloured dresses’ (1895: 43). Although the turban, as

122

MUSLIM LIFE

the seal ring, was by no means universal, it serves to illustrate
that
items of clothing exist which can serve as markers of religious
identity
For women, the headgear denoting Muslim identity is the veil and
headscarf. Many items can be subsumed within this category, from
the all-concealing chador to the more modest Western style headscarf.
The veil is of significance for two main reasons: it is intimately
connected with women, the ‘hidden’ 50 per cent of the population
(archaeologically at least); and it can be used to enforce Muslim social
codes concerning the privacy of females and of modesty in general.
But, again, universals should not be promoted; the extent to which
the veil was or can be used, if at all, varies greatly, and, as with
the
turban, need not be restricted to Muslims. Scarce (1987), for example,
describes how Orthodox Christian women in the Balkans could be
heavily influenced by Turkish traditions of dress, even as far
as
wearing a veil, and makes the important point that ‘it would be
a
naive simplification to assume that sartorial difference could be neatly
divided between Christian and Muslim women’ (1987: 99). The veil
could also take on an exaggerated significance. Remedius Prutky,
a
Franciscan missionary, recorded that, at Jeddah (Saudi Arabia) in the
mid-eighteenth century:
although the women guard their faces solicitously, that they may not
be seen, yet they pay little attention to the other parts of the body,
especially the poor: for it often happens, when they leave the house to
wash their shifts and ribbons, that, having no others save those they are
wearing, they stay at the river washing as naked as God made them,
with only their faces covered, and sit their while their washing dries in
the sun. (Arrowsmjth_Brown 1991: 33)
The degree to which veiling has been practised, and thus the
seclusion of females maintained, has often depended on social class.
In the Middle East, for instance, Keddie (1992: 48) makes the
point
that ‘except among the recent, modernised elite, veiling has been
widely regarded as a sign of status, showing that the husband and
wife can afford for her not to work.’ It can be seen that in many ways
the use of the veil is linked with the structuring notions which can
underlie the form of the traditional Muslim domestic environment,
namely, to protect the purity of the female members of the household
(see chapter 3). By the veil being worn outside, these concerns are
extended into the public domain. It is a further example of how
material culture can be used to convey the traditional norms and
requirements of a Muslim society. But, equally, the role of the veil

123

MUSLIM LIFE

is subject to many different interpretations as to the degree to which
it actually excludes women from society at large, or alternatively
includes them, though in a less obvious manner (see, for example,
Webster 1984). The veil can, in conditions where textiles survive, be
encountered archaeologically. At Quseir al-Qadim, for example, the
earliest known surviving woman’s face veil was recovered from
Mamluk period levels dated to between the mid-thirteenth and midfourteenth centuries in this Red Sea port (Vogelsang-Eastwood
1993: 87).

Colour Another dimension of clothing and its possible significance
within Muslim life is colour. Colour as a medium of information
display has already been touched upon in the context of the turban;
green is the colour connected with the Prophet’s descendants and has
been widely used in flags and banners. Athamina (1989) also describes
how colour in dress and banners was used by the Abbasid regime as a
means of manipulating and legitimizing power, a process which
began in the mid-eighth century when Caliph al-Mansur introduced
black garments for his courtiers and entourage. A deliberate back
ground with religious associations was created for this uniform with
reputed links back to the Prophet, who was said to have had a black
banner the day Mecca was conquered, and who foresaw salvation for
his family after his death coming from the east with people bearing
black flags. The black uniform became the official uniform of the
Abbasid regime, and symbolic of social class and power. Hence,
according to Athamina, ‘persons striving to improve their social
standing sought permission to appear in the black uniform’ (1989:
320). Likewise, as it became a symbol of loyalty to the regime,
traitors could be stripped of it, and on occasion made to wear
white, a colour adopted by the opposition ‘deliberately in contrast
to those of the Abbasids’ (1989: 322). But the meaning of colour is
not static; as with the seal ring, the veil or any other element of
material culture, it can be subject to the developmental process, to
fads and fashion, and meanings can change. The significance of the
colour black turned full circle in nineteenth-century Cairo, for
Edward Lane mentions how black dress and turbans were ‘character
istic, almost solely, of Christian and Jewish tributaries to the ‘Osmán
lee, or Turkish, Sultan’ (1895: 43).
In summary, the few examples which have been discussed have
been chosen from a vast range of possibilities, and are not meant to
be exhaustive; rather, they serve to show that even what could be
termed the ‘small items’ or ephemera of life the seal ring, the turban,
the veil can also help in serving to create or denote overall Muslim
—

—

124

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

identity. They are objects associated with the individual, and
illustrate
that the archaeology of Islam is more than mosques, palaces
and
elaborate funerary monuments. It is the sum total of all these ele
ments, both large and small. Yet, at the same time, it should also
be
realized that diversity must be acknowledged. Though seal rings
might have been popular in one area, they might be unheard
of
elsewhere, and black uniforms, for example, were certainly not uni
versal. To enumerate individually all the objects which could signify
Muslim, geographically and temporally, would run to several volumesa
and exhaustive cataloguing was not the point of this exercise.
The
chosen objects are readily interchangeable with many others; they
are
not in some way defining items of ‘Muslim culture’, but equally
these
‘lesser items’ of Muslim life, in all their many forms, should not
be
neglected. They provide a possible source of much useful
social
information for archaeologists, perhaps bunkered through the
pursuit
of the so-called ‘big issues’.
Magic and Talismanic Protection

A further area of Muslim life which could be of significance to
the
archaeologist is that of magic in general, and personal talismanic
protection in particular. A deep concern with magic is apparent in
many areas of the Muslim world, especially magic for protection,
fulfilling desires, health, potency in love or war. This can sometimes
be approached by the archaeologist through the artifacts involved.
‘Orthodox Islam denies the efficacy of amulets and other magico
religious devices, but these traditions have always been a vital
aspect of popular Islam, just as they have played a significant role
in the belief systems of many people throughout history’ (Silverman
1991: 19). Usually, a distinction is drawn between good magic,
which could aid Islam, and bad magic or sorcery. Numerous
media can be employed to protect, curse or destroy paper, metals,
water, textiles, leather but a common element is the efficacy of
the Qur’an, as a supremely powerful agent. This is due to the fact
that ‘the Qur’an differs from the other major scriptures of the
World in that it contains not reports about God by a Prophet or
his disciples, but his direct speech, the syllables, words and
sentences of Allah’ (Geertz 1976: 1489—90, cited in Bravmann
1983: 16). Besides verses from the Qur’an, notably the basmala
and the Fatihah, cabbalistic signs, magical formulas, the beautiful
names of God, numerical representations and various substances
can all be used for magical and protective purposes. The actual
—

—

125

material forms of protective or destructive magical items can be many,
and a universal type certainly does not exist, but generic categories
which might be encountered archaeologically may be briefly
considered.

Magic bowls
One such group of items, the so-called ‘magic bowls’, appear to
encompass not merely bowls, but plates and cups as well. These are
always made of metal, silver and copper most commonly, though iron
is infrequently used, and they date from the later medieval period into
the present. Formerly, according to Canaan (1936: 79), they were
found all over the Muslim world. However, Bates is more specific
in geographical attribution when she says that they are most common
in Turkey, but are also occasionally found in western Iran and India
(1991: 58). Magic bowls were used to cure poisoning, and reduce fear
or fright, as well as for divination. For the purposes of healing, water
is drunk from the bowl, the interior of which is usually inscribed with
Qur’anic verses, or various of the other devices already described
above, such as numerical combinations, magical squares, figural
motifs (Canaan 1936: 89, 94; Bates 1991: 56). The importance of
magic bowls is not that they are in anyway universally used, but
because they provide a specific example of the translation of Muslim
magic into durable material culture, and thus illustrate that a concern
with magic could be archaeologically visible.

Higab
The most common example of an item with magico-religious associa
tions, which might be archaeologically detectable, are amulets, or
higab, which are worn on the person. These were, and to a lesser
extent are, popular in certain areas, but absent altogether in others,
and can take many different forms, usually consisting of a written text
in two parts, the da’wa or spell and the jadwal, a magic square or
other geometric device (Silverman 1991: 22). These are often within a
leather, metal or cloth covering, and worn around the neck, waist or
arm, or sewn on clothing. They are usually written by a holyman for
a specific purpose: safety in travel or protection from disease or
attack. Among the Berti of the Sudan, for example, el-Tom (1987)
records that the higab are believed to contain immense power which
can be gained in various ways. These include physically keeping this
power on the person through wearing amulets, or less visibly through
internalizing the Qur’anic verses or other powerful formulas in the

126

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

127

head by memory or inside the body through drinking the text by
washing off the ink and swallowing the water (1987: 243). Amulets
have been found archaeologically, for example at Qasr Ibrim, where
many higab were excavated in various contexts dating from the
sixteenth to nineteenth centuries. They have leather outer covers,
and inside contained a further package made of cotton, which in
turn contained the sacred text (even a blank piece of paper) (see
plate 4.5). Other manifestations of amuletic protection occur, for
example in Shi’ah chain mail dating from the early nineteenth century
which adds spiritual protection through the incorporation of Arabic
invocations ‘requesting aid and assistance’ (Welch 1979: 106) in brass
links set within the steel jacket similar to, though more efficient
than, the inscribed cloth jackets of the Mahdi’s followers in the Sudan
in the nineteenth century. This is a dimension of Muslim magic which
is significant to the individual, rather than the group or household, as
was apparent in the protection of the domestic environment (see
chapter 3).
—

Bricks, crows’ beaks and carpets

Plate 4.5 Higab (amulet) contents from Qasr Ibrim, Egypt (Egypt Explora
tion Society)

The extensive body of ethnographic, anthropological and historical
sources dwelling, in whole or in part, upon the subject is of great use
to the archaeologist of Islam in recognizing magical items. An in
formative example is provided by a fragment of text in the Cairo
Genizab, a medieval synagogue archive, describing contexts for the
magical use of Arabic letters. Recorded instances include the use of
the letter Kaf, engraved on old red potsherds, then steamed until
blackened, the result being that vegetable matter will turn ‘from one
state to another’. Other contexts include fragments of brick inscribed
with the letter Mim to arouse fear in a person, or engraving the letter
Nun on a piece of white marble to foil robbers (Ebeid and Young
1974: 405). What at first could appear to be contradictions of normal
Muslim practice can also be of relevance within the domain of magic
and protection. One might expect, for example, that intimate contact
with the crow might be avoided, as it is one of the so-called five
nuisances, but it also possesses talismanic properties, and to carry a
crow’s beak on one’s person averts the evil eye (Pellat 1965: 1097).
Similarly, the number five, and representations of it, such as the hand,
were used to protect inanimate objects such as carpets, guns, bags and
pottery from the evil eye in Morocco (Westermarck 1933: 29—31),
while the same imagery, the hand, can have a totally different sig
nificance in Iran, where it signifies the five most sacred persons of the
Shi’ah faith: Muhammad, Ali, Fatima, Hassan and Hussein (Hastings

128

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

129

1911: 459). This again illustrates that meaning is by no means uni
form; there are no, or very limited, pan-Islamic interpretative mean
ings. A belief in magic might be widely found, clothing will certainly
be worn, but within each of these broad descriptive categories great
diversity exists, a situation broadly comparable to the notions of
structuring principles and cultural diversity discussed before. To
begin to approach the second level, reconstructing the rich tapestry
of Muslim life in all its dimensions, and basing this upon archaeolo
gical evidence, requires a variety of factors: an open mind, a rigorous
examination of context and analogy, and the consideration of other
possible sources of evidence.
War
The final aspect of Muslim life to be touched on here is war. This is a
contentious subject but cannot be excluded as it was often intimately
connected with the spread of Islam, and must therefore be included
within a consideration of the possible archaeology of Islam. Holy war,
jihad or ‘the spread of Islam by arms’, often the subject of fear and
stereotypes in the West, is, according to Gibb and Kramers, ‘a religious
duty upon Muslims in general’ (1961: 89), and the only type of war
authorized and regulated by Islamic law (Peters 1977: 3). Thus, it
should be considered as a further area of life which can be imbued
with religious significance. According to orthodox Muslim doctrine,
two major domains exist in the world: the cZar al-harb, the land or
abode of war, and the dar al-Islam, the land of Islam. Within the latter,
Muslim rule is established, Islamic law is in place, and non-Muslim
peoples have submitted to Muslim control. Creation of this was the
object of jihad, yet the existence of such a division does not mean that
advancing ‘the boundaries of the Faith until the whole World acknow
ledged Allah’ (Wheatcroft 1995: 47) is a practical proposition today.
Obviously it is not, and a compromise position has been reached. Yet,
similarly, the existence of a religious dimension to the pursuit of war
within parts of the Muslim world cannot be wholly discounted, even
today. Recent conflicts in Afghanistan, Bosnia and Chechnya attest to
this, where volunteers, perhaps physically divorced from the immedi
ate conflict, offered their services in aid of fellow Muslims (see plate
4.6). According to Bosworth (1976: 202), ‘religious enthusiasm should
not be underestimated as a motive all through Islamic warfare.’ Cer
tainly, such motivation could be suggested as a possible guiding light
behind many of the tragic events which have dominated the media in
recent years, including suicide bombings in the Middle East.

Plate 4.6 War scene from The Khamsa of Nizami (Browne no. 1424, St
John’s College, Cambridge)

r

130

131

MUSLIM LIFE

MUSLIM LIFE

But what implications does war hold for the archaeology of Islam?
First, it is necessary to distinguish somehow between jihad and ‘gen
eral’ warfare, which can be started for many reasons all too familiar to
us: political power struggles, greed, territorial ambitions. The latter
version of warfare was, and sadly is, endemic, but can hardly be
classified as religious, though such a label might be sought as a
propaganda or motivating device. However, such conflict is essen
tially secular in nature. Secondly, it is necessary to consider if there is
such a thing as a Muslim apparatus of war, thus setting it apart
from other conflicts materially. This is the only element possibly
approachable by the archaeologist and, indeed, the literature on Isla
mic weaponry, tactics, fortifications and the like is vast (see, for
example, Rahman Zaksv 1965; Parry 1970; Parry and Yapp 1975;
Nicolle 1976). Distinctive elements might be selected; types of
fortifications perhaps (Creswell 1952; Grabar 1978: 66—7) or wea
ponry or armour of different patterns (al-Hassan and Hill 1992:
96—8) and, of course, inscriptions. But it is impossible to generalize
about these within the space available, other than simply to state that
the diversity in types and forms was immense. In certain contexts and
historical situations, specific machinery of both warfare and defence
associated with the Muslim world of course existed, yet at the same
time it is necessary to avoid creating stereotypes, such as the Saracen
of Hollywood fame with his pointed helmet and curved scimitar.
Incidentally, the latter component, at least, is wholly erroneous;
according to Bosworth (1976: 208), this type of sword was not
common until the fifteenth century (see also Rahman Zakry 1965:
291).
However, one example of specific material culture which might in
certain instances prove useful in recognizing the pursuance of jihad,
or at least in reconstructing military frontier zones over time, should
be discussed: the ribat. This has been described as ‘a base from which
to prosecute Holy war’ (Hillenbrand 1994: 331), a type of ‘fortified
monastery’, and is found on many of the frontiers of the Muslim
world, as in Central Asia and North Africa, dating from the medieval
period. Grabar describes the ribat form as ‘square with halls around a
porticoed courtyard’ (1973: 180), with essentially the same plan being
used as can be found in many caravanserais, and a further example of
the interchangeability of Muslim building form often found in medi
eval Islam. These have been recorded in many areas. For example, an
exceptionally large ribat dating from the mid-twelfth century, and
one of a number of coastal ribats built, in the words of Basset and
Terrasse, to ‘defendre Ia terre d’Islam contre les debarquements pos
sible des infideles’ (1927: 119), was recorded close to Mazagan in

Morocco. This was one of the frontier districts, and besides the
enclosing wall, defensive towers, gateways and two minarets were
all partially preserved. Similar ribats on the North African coast are
also referred to by King, as at Ajdabiyah in Libya, where they were
‘initially associated with the wars of the Aghlabids against Sicily, Italy
and the Mediterranean islands’ (1989: 197).
Although we have only briefly considered one possible aspect of
material culture which might be linked with jihad, the ribat, the
essential point to consider is that the ghazi, the warrior of the
Faith, did, and perhaps does, exist, pursuing yihad for the expansion
of Islam. Thus, although we must remember that war is fought more
frequently in the name of many causes indistinguishable from those
fuelling conflicts perpetuated by non-Muslims, it is possible that
another element of Muslim life cannot be wholly separated out and
classified as secular. Many, if not all, aspects of life can be imbued
with a religious significance, something which we as archaeologists
should remember when looking at our evidence, whether fort or
faunal assemblage.

t

F

Summary and Conclusions
Thus, various areas of life, which are not perhaps always considered
by archaeologists, have been shown to be, in many instances, both
inseparable from the religious domain and approachable through
archaeology. This further enables us to begin to view the archaeology
of Islam as a complete entity, ranging from grand mosques and
palaces, through individual burials, down to the residue of a meal.
All can be, but need not be, affected by a religious element. Life need
not be seen as a series of purely economically driven or rationally
based decisions, factors which are perhaps increasingly coming to the
fore in an age when faith and religious practice are separated out, or
absent altogether, from everyday life for many people in the Western
world. The multi-disciplinary examples considered in this chapter
were drawn from a vast geographical, cultural and temporal range,
but serve to illustrate that religious ideals can be translated into
practical structuring codes for life. Therefore, the archaeological
study of religion should not be conceptualized as confined to a few
aspects of life. As was seen with much of the material discussed,
multiple interconnections are often evident, with the one running
into or influencing the other, as we saw with food and festivals,
pilgrimage, trade and travel. All can come together, until their bound
aries become blurred.

e

132

MUSLIM LIFE

To return to the concept of the ‘umbrella’, or superstructure, with
many component parts below it, Islam acts as the umbrella, with
beneath this our discrete categories of food, war, pilgrimage and so
on, with further diversity evident within each of these categories,
though still subject to the structuring codes of the religion. Thus
variety is produced within the overall entity, or what have been
termed structuring principles and cultural diversity. But limitations
in how far we can offer interpretations have also been exposed in the
face of the bewildering richness apparent. Clothing, food, personal
possessions, all can be invested with a social significance and meaning
which we can best perceive through ethnography or historical
sources; even taking into account the privileged position of the
archaeologist interested in Islam, these may be difficult, if not
impossible, to reconstruct archaeologically. However, we must be
aware of the available possibilities, if only to make us realize that
we will never know all the answers, and that archaeology suffers from
restricting factors. Finally, much of our discussion has been con
cerned with the ‘ideal’, as with the ideal faunal assemblage, but such
notions have to be pursued, if only to suggest possible interesting
directions of research for the future. The lesser areas of life can be of
equal significance to the popularly perceived ‘big issues’, within the
archaeology of Islam, the archaeology of religion and archaeology in
general.

5

