Art, Trade and Ideas

Believers, do not consume your wealth among yourselves in vanity, but
rather trade with it by mutual consent

Q ur’an. Women 4: 29

We now turn our attention to what are, in many respects, much
broader categories: art, trade and ideas. Art is a loose term, defined
by the Oxford English Dictionary as ‘skill, esp. human skill as
opposed to nature; skilful execution as an object in itself; skill applied
to imitation and design, as in painting etc.’ (Fowler and Fowler 1952:
63). Even if we confine ourselves to the latter part of the definition,
techniques,
it can be seen that ‘art’ could cover a wide range of
could be applied in myriad contexts, and rendered in equally
diverse materials. In short, it is something which can be applied in
one form or another to many of the items already discussed, from
tombstones to swords. All can be influenced by art or even be art
objects in themselves, though not necessarily perhaps in the same
way as originally envisaged by the people who made or commis
sioned them. Therefore, we also come upon the problem of
differentiating between art objects per se, and those which are
regarded as such by contemporary observers. It can even be suggested
that academics often ‘create’ art objects through their researches,
where perhaps such original intentions were lacking, or such a
definition would not have been applied in the original context.
However, it is not the place here to define what constitutes an
art object. Instead, the following discussion will be concerned
with all items bearing decoration of one form or another, thus keep
ing to the pattern of broad categorizations followed throughout the
volume.

134

135

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

How then do trade and manufacturing enter into the same discus
sion as art? The link between the three is somewhat created, but at the
same time fairly obvious. The connection is the agency through
which ideas, including artistic ideas or conventions, and scientific
ideas and manufacturing techniques, are transmitted from one place
to another, often via trade. Conquest can and obviously did serve as
the agent for the spread of Islam and Islamization, but the peaceful
movement of ideas, including religious ones, through trade, is often of
even greater importance when the spectrum of Muslim history over
the centuries is considered. These issues will be discussed in greater
detail below; suffice it to say here that trade provides a convenient
framework to link a range of material not covered elsewhere, which
could, and indeed does, form part of the ‘package’ which might allow
the recognition of a Muslim or Muslim community in the archae
ological record.
In many respects this chapter deals with material which has suffered
the greatest contemporary disruption. The following discussion is
mainly concerned with material dating from before the late sixteenth
century and the rise of European power, and the ensuing fragmenta
tion and collapse of the Muslim ‘world system’. The form of a mosque
and Muslim burial, for example, though affected by modern influ
ences, are, as we have seen, still recognizable for what they are,
regardless of contemporary factors. In contrast, distinctive Muslim
coinages and sciences have largely ceased to be identifiable in the
manner in which they were recognizable in the medieval period. A
Muslim science, for instance, is now largely the same as a Western one,
though the relevant research might be carried out in a Muslim country.
Certainly, the trade patterns that were manifest in the medieval period
have long since disappeared. Thus the study of much of this material is
ideally approached through archaeology as one of the primary means
of furthering our understanding of both artifacts and processes. Art,
however, is perhaps the least affected, and contains recurring elements
which should allow its recognition as Muslim art today.

environment that many developments took place which later percola
ted down through society. A detailed examination of the processes by
which this occurred is beyond the remit of this volume, but has been
well covered elsewhere, both in general and region by region (see
Talbot Rice 1993; Brend 1994).
Nevertheless, briefly summarized, Oleg Grabar (1973) makes the
point that there is no absolute date for the creation of Muslim art. It
can be linked, not surprisingly, to the conquering of each region. As
each area was taken by the Muslims, pre-existing elements of Class
ical, Byzantine, Sasanian and even Central Asian art were then appro
priated and adapted in a long drawn-out process (Talbot Rice 1971:
5). An ensuing characteristic was the widespread diffusion of pre
viously restricted decorative motifs from one end of the newly
formed Muslim world to the other (Grabar 1973: 7, 208). General
defining characteristics of Muslim art, according to Philon (1980: 12),
are an ‘inherent ambiguity of purpose, function and meaning’ with a
universality of decorative forms, and the easy adaptability of build
ings for various purposes with only minor changes, leading to ‘an
intimate relationship between the monumental and the minor arts’.
What is apparent from this is that Muslim art is a mixture of local and
general components, and that there is no• one overall entity; it did not
appear in the saddlebags of the conquering Muslim armies, but was
subject to an evolutionary process.
But what, if any, are the defining characteristics of Muslim art? It is
easy to suggest the frequently cited, though erroneous, statement that
Muslim art is solely a reflection of religious requirements, and that
the primary recognition criterion, for this reason, is an absence of
figural representation. This is wrong, for Muslim art can and has
served both secular and religious purposes, and is by no means devoid
of figural images. At the same time, there are various components to
Muslim art, though they are no more than broad categories and can
be made to ‘function’ in many different ways. These are: a general
absence of figural representation, especially in overtly religious con
texts; a prevalence of calligraphy in the Arabic script; and geometric
and other motifs (arabesques), the latter usually derived from vegetal
prototypes, and both used in repeat forms (Grabar 1973; Ettinghau
sen 1976; Philon 1980). The existence of these categories could allow
the recognition of Muslim art in archaeological or other contexts, but
the manner in which the three major elements are manifest are
numerous (as is the case with all our categories in the archaeology
of Islam) in both styles and media, and it is worthwhile considering
each of these component parts in a little more detail, beginning with
the issue of figural representation.

Islamic Art or Art of Muslims: Background and Components
A consideration of what is Islamic or, perhaps preferably, Muslim art
is a frequently asked question which has been approached by various
scholars (see, for example, Ettinghausen 1944; Grabar 1973). How
ever, these studies are usually concerned with the luxury end of
production which, when considering a subject such as the formation
of Muslim art, is not overly surprising as it was in the courtly

136

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

Figural representation
To examine the issues surrounding figural representation is instructive
both to see how doctrine can be created and to dispute the popular
misconception that it does not exist in Muslim art. Within the first
two centuries of Islam figural images are found, for example, on
coinage, and therefore accessible to much of the population, until
the reforms of Abd al-Malik in the late seventh century (discussed
below). More frequently, as Arnold notes (1965: 19), it was used
within the private domain in the upper echelons of society. Notable
examples are provided by the frescos at the eighth-century palace of
Qusayr Amra (Jordan) where, among other things, the rulers con
quered by Islam are represented, including the Negus of Abyssinia
(Ethiopia), the Sasanian ruler and the king of the Visigoths (Talbot
Rice 1993: 2 6—7), and at the palace of Khirbat al-Mafjah (Palestine)
where hunting, love, horsemanship and athletics are all represented
(Hamilton 1959: 233). That figurative representation was not imme
diately repressed, or that people were not bothered by it in the early
years of Islam, is further reflected in an incident related by Juynboll:
when the Muslims assembled for prayers in the great hall of the royal
palace at newly conquered al-Mada’in (Ctesiphon), various statues
were still standing in it ‘which nobody thought of moving’, indicating
that ‘the prohibition against making images of living things had not
yet been formulated’ (1986: 108).
But it should be noted that an absence of figural art in mosques and
other religious buildings has almost universally been in effect, though
even in these contexts rare exceptions do exist, as in the carved stone
mihrab from Mosul (Iraq) described by Talbot Rice, decorated with
human figures and dating from the eleventh or twelfth centuries
(1993: 98—9). However, a reaction against figural representation did
appear, and has been explained as a Muslim reaction to their lack of
an effective symbolic vocabulary to counter Christian propaganda, or
as a parallel development to Christian iconoclasm. Hence Abd-al
Malik’s reforms formalized the attitude that ‘the prevailing specific
use of representations tended to idolatry and no understandable
visual system other than writing and of inanimate objects could
avoid being confused with the alien world of Christians and by
later extension of Buddhists or of pagans’ (Grabar 1973: 98). Support
for this proposition was sought in the Qur’an and hadith (see Isa
1955; Gibb and Kramers 1961: 554; Salman 1969, Ettinghausen 1976:
62) and, although the former ‘does not expressly forbid the making of
images, the hadith are more specific on this issue, and judgements

r

137

were pronounced against ‘all types of artistic creativity in which
representational forms are possible’ (Bravmann 1974: 15, 16). This
was translated into laws, and a condemnation of the representation of
living things, among both Sunni and Shi’ah, can be seen to be fully
effective by the ninth century. Iconoclasm is also something which
could be archaeologically recognizable by, for example, the beheading
of statues or the defacing of other figures, as is noticeable in Chinese
Central Asia and in parts of India.
Nevertheless, a separation between ideals and practice exists, and
figural representation is found in many spheres of Muslim art, though
almost totally confined to the secular domain and usually to the
upper strata of society. Painting and manuscript illustrations, espe
cially those produced in India and in Iran, are some of the bestknown examples of the genre (see, for example, Pinder-Wilson
1969). Subjects include portraits and illustrated epics such as Nizami’s
Khamsa (Five poems) or Firdausi’s Shahnama (Binyon 1930: 60—73).
Much more rare are depictions of Muslim religious history, including
pictures of Muhammad which, according to Arnold ‘are so rare that
some writers have even doubted the existence of any’ (1965: 91), but
they do exist, and Iranian examples dating from the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries are discussed by Soucek (1988). Otherwise, fig
ural representations could probably be found which have been pro
duced in almost all media at one time or another somewhere in the
Muslim world, and various further examples will indeed be referred
to later. However, although there are figural representations in Mus
lim art, they are, on the whole, infrequent, and one of the key
components of that loosely defined entity which is Muslim art is
their general absence, and this should form one of the criteria allow
ing its recognition.

Geometry, arabesques and abstract patterns
Further common features of Muslim art are the presence of geometric
patterns and designs incorporating miscellaneous abstract and veget
ally derived motifs, including the so-called arabesque, defined by
Philon as ‘based on the infinite leaf scroll’ (1980: 14). A certain
unity is lent to them as a group through their use in repeat designs,
often literally covering a surface in infinite patterns which ‘are visual
demonstrations of the Oneness of God and His Omnipresence’ (Phi
lon 1980: 14). Yet it should be noted that besides the more widely
found motifs, such as the star or arabesque, distinct regional styles
developed. Space again precludes a detailed discussion, but one repre
sentative example will be mentioned, the development of stylistic

138

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

r
ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

139

categories within the Ottoman design repertoire. Its five basic styles
described by Petsopoulos (1982: 8—9) are the plain tradition, literally
devoid of decoration; the formal and vegetally derived, Abraham of
Kutahya; another variant of this called Golden Horn; Saz, a further
naturalistic vegetal design; and finally, the mis-named Quatre Fleurs.
They are found on metalwork, ceramics, textiles and paper. In fact,
this emphasis on surface over shape (Grabar 1973: 194), and the
associated techniques developed for surface decoration within Mus
lim art, is widespread throughout the Muslim world and forms
another recognition criterion.
Calligraphy and epigraphy
The third component which should allow the recognition of Muslim
art is the use of calligraphy, and its close relation, epigraphy. They
will be examined in some detail with reference to case studies, as this
is the component of Muslim art which can be encountered on all
categories of material. Whereas, for example, the arabesque might be
(and largely is) absent in West Africa, calligraphy in the Arabic script
is used extensively on metals, paper, stone, ceramics and cloth. It is
the medium of Muslim art par excellence, encountered from the River
Senegal to the Syr Darya and, in fact, wherever Muslim communities
are found.
By far the most comprehensive survey of the basic history and
background to Muslim calligraphy is provided by Schimmel (1970,
1990). She notes that the importance of writing is stressed in the
Qur’an, where it is ‘considered to be of divine origin’, and, although
the Arabic script existed at the time of Muhammad, he was illiterate
(this latter point is disputed by other scholars; see, for example,
Guillaume 1954: 57). His pronouncements were written down on
any available material, and the first Qur’an was assembled during
the reign of Uthman, the third caliph, in the mid-seventh century.
The sacred character of writing encouraged its spread, and since the
language in which God’s message was transmitted was Arabic, the
Arabic script had precedence over all others, becoming ‘the distinc
tive feature of all Muslim peoples, from West Africa to Indonesia’
(Schimmel 1970: 1, 3). The two dominant styles of Arabic script are
kufic and cursive. (Note the difference between script and language;
other languages can and are rendered in the Arabic script, including
Malay, Swahili, Hausa, Persian, and Turkish.)
Kufic, which originated in Kufah (Roman 1990: ix), is angular in
appearance and was used for copying Qur’ans and extensively in
inscriptions on buildings and tombstones (see plate 5.1). Kufic

Plate 5.1 Tombstone, Dahiak Kebir, Eritrea (photo. C. Spence)

fr

inscriptions are almost without exception in Arabic, and various
regional styles developed (see figure 5.1). The style declined in
usage after the eleventh century, whenit either begins to be found
in co-existence with cursive scripts, as on the Qutb Minar in Delhi, or
is replaced altogether by cursive (Schimmel 1990: 25). Cursive scripts,
which are more rounded and easier to use, were developed in Mecca
and Medina, and were of use for everyday purposes. They co-existed
with kufic from the very beginning of Islam, but it was not until the
thirteenth to fourteenth centuries that the multitude of cursive
scripts which had developed were systematized into six styles: thu
luth, riqa, naskh, tauqi, muhaqqaq and rihani (Schimmel 1990: 22)
(see figure 5.2). Calligraphy in the Arabic script, therefore, provides a
further category, which is almost universally used, and which can
allow the recognition of Muslim art. But besides providing pleasing
decoration, art can function in many other, often subtle, ways. The
provision of information at various levels is one obvious example,
and much interesting research has been undertaken which directly
considers this issue with reference to the use of calligraphy and
inscriptions.
Sacred and powerful scripts
Beyond the extensive use of inscriptions in explicitly religious con
texts, they often transfer a sacred dimension into the secular sphere.
Through a deliberate religious invocation or the use of Arabic, the

140

Figure 5.1

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

141

Forms of basmala in kufic script (after Schimmel 1970: 17)

language of the Qur’an, an inscription might take on a sacred sig
nificance even where the meaning might not be understood. For
example, Ettinghausen describes a monumental kufic inscription on
the exterior of a mosque in Washington DC which was ‘incompre
hensible as verbal communication’ to most people, but was not really
a fact of any significance as the inscription still served an important
function in an area with many new converts, where ‘the lettering is
the message, rather than its content’ (1974: 306, 307).
The power of writing is a factor which appears to recur through
Muslim history, even where literacy was restricted, and knowledge of
Arabic confined to memorized prayers and a few verses from the

Figure 5.2 Three types of figural representation achieved through calligra
phy. Top, Muslim talisman from southern Thailand (after Forbes 1988: 1);
middle, face from Yugoslavia (after De Jong 1989: 25); bottom, glass painting
from Java (after Fischer 1994: 52)

142

143

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

Qur’an. What could occur was what Edwards (1991: 67) terms the
functioning of inscriptions as ‘orally revealed scripture’. This might
appear a contradiction as applied to epigraphy, but is not necessarily
so. Arabic calligraphy functions as a symbol of the faith, an accepted
visual image of Islam across the Muslim world, even though it might
not be understood or its use was infrequent. Why else would the
power of perceived holymen be so important in many areas? The
Scottish explorer Mungo Park, for example, though not a Muslim,
earned a living for himself writing charms or ‘saphies’ during his
extended travels along the River Niger at the end of the eighteenth
and beginning of the nineteenth centuries (see Park 1807). The very
fact that he could write was of importance, and the fragments of
script served as protective talismans ‘by virtue of presence rather
than content’ (Edwards 1991: 67).
But the meaning of epigraphy cannot, obviously, be discounted as
merely visual imagery. The messages carried by inscriptions could
serve many purposes, both sacred and secular. At the Dome of the
Rock in Jerusalem (see chapter 2), the power and triumph of
Islam over other faiths was spectacularly proclaimed, and epigraphy
could also be used to settle religious disputes. The series of 14
inscriptions recovered from the site of the harbour town of Daybul
(Banbhore) 60km east of Karachi in Pakistan (Anon 1964: 50—i;
Ghafur 1966: 65—9) are of special interest. Two were dated, and all
were interpreted as having been fixed to the façade of a central wall
in the main mosque ‘in a way that met the gaze of the person
who entered the mosque’ (Ghafur 1966: 89—90). But why was
this so? During the second and third centuries AH, one of the
intellectual and spiritual debates in the Muslim world was connected
with the so-called Mutazalite doctrine which stressed that God could
not be seen with the ‘physical eye’ either in this world or in paradise;
the latter belief conflicted with the beliefs of the majority of the
faithful and, as Guillaume (1954: 128) records, was ‘in spite of the
affirmation in the Qur’an’. Mutazilism was the accepted official
dogma under Abbasid rule, but during the reign of Mutawakkil this
policy was reversed and the Mutazalites were persecuted. The inscrip
tions, placed as they were in the main place of worship in a major
port, and thus open to view by ‘Muslims from all corners of the
Islamic world’ (Ghafur 1966: 90), were used by the orthodox Sunni
school to campaign against the Mutazalite doctrines. Hence, one
carefully chosen Qur’anic verse espoused the anti-Mutazalite view
on ‘the vision of God’, while a further inscription promoted
orthodoxy over the Mutazalite viewpoints concerning the ‘creation’
of the Qur’an.

This was also the case in the mosque of Abu Ma’ruf at Sharwas
(Libya), where the inscriptions were used for specific religious pur
poses, one of which may be Ibadi in character and records: ‘The
Qur’an is our Imam,/and the sunnah is our Path’ (King 1989: 205).
Another contains a surab (II, 130) which appears to have been
selected to appeal, by referring to the prophets of Judaism, Christian
ity and Islam, to the various religious communities which lived in the
area between the mid-tenth and twelfth centuries (Lowick 1974, cited
in King 1989). Thus these examples show that inscriptions are not
necessarily arbitrary additions of decorative interest placed with little
thought as to position.

I.

External symbols
Inscriptions of all types can function in many useful capacities for the
archaeologist, as chronological indicators, aids to identifying people
or places, but it is worthwhile adding a caution as the presence of
Arabic calligraphy and epigraphy need not necessarily signal the
presence of Muslims. An apt example of this is shown by the kisfic
or pseudo-kufic inscriptions found in churches in southern and cen
tral France (Watson 1972, 1989). These are obviously not Muslim
contexts, but the textile trade meant that Muslim motifs were copied.
Rigid borders do not always exist, and religious or political expansion
and contraction must be acknowledged, as noted with regard to the
use and adaptation of pre-existing places of worship in chapter 2. The
absence of defined boundaries means that various stylistic or cultural
elements could circulate and information and stylistic codes be
exchanged.
An example of the acceptance of Muslim art in a non-Muslim area
is provided by Sicily in the early twelfth century. Here, somewhat
surprisingly considering the Christian context, Arabic calligraphy
played a central role. Sicily, which had been under Muslim rule
until the Kalbids lost control in.the 1040s, was invaded by the Normans in the 1060s, but it was not until the early twelfth century that a
Norman monarchy was established (Ahmad 1975). In 1130 the new
king, Roger II, was crowned, but had ‘no trapping of monarchy in
which to robe himself’ (Johns 1993: 134), and chose those of the
Fatimid caliphate, from which he took the external symbols and
‘ignored or remained ignorant of their intrinsic significance’ (1993:
158). Two Arabic inscriptions which once adorned Roger’s palace
encouraged the visitor to adore the palace in a manner analogous to
the rites employed in circumambulating the Ka’bah, although it is
unlikely that these Muslim rites were ever actually followed at

144

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

Roger’s Christian court. Other facets of Muslim culture adopted
included the use of Muslim titles and the Arabic language in bureauc
racy; building palaces to architectural plans which mirror structures
in Muslim Ifriqiya (approximately equivalent to modern Tunisia); the
use of decorative elements such as muqarnas or stalactite vaulting;
and paintings replicating iconographic themes present in the Fatimid
western palace in Cairo. It also appears that Muslim dress was worn
not only in the court circle, but perhaps also by the general populace
of Palermo (Johns 1993).
Johns’ study (1993) shows how easily external symbols can be used
to mean different things to different people. Here, Muslim material
culture and symbols were being used in a manner which bore no
relation to their original context, even though Sicily was a direct heir
to over two centuries of Muslim heritage. Society was only trans
formed to a certain point by the Fatimid imports. However, it would
be impossible to mistake this for a true Muslim community even if we
only had the archaeological evidence to consider. Key components
are absent, which in totality act to construct and perpetuate society,
revealing that this was patently not a Muslim society, apparent once a
look below the surface is taken.

fr

Visual Imagery
Three general components have thus been isolated which could allow
the recognition of Muslim art: an absence of figurative representation,
the prevalence of abstract motifs, and calligraphy in the Arabic script.
Howevet the visual imagery of Muslim art is, in a number of regions,
drawn from the existing non-Muslim repertoire, which exceeds an
abstract or calligraphic vocabulary. Yet which elements might appeal
varies considerably, possibly, it can be suggested, according to the
specific pre-Islamic heritage. Case studies can be provided to illus
trate this from three geographically disparate areas, West Africa,
Indonesia and Pakistan.
Al-Buraq is the winged creature who reputedly carried the Prophet
on his night journey from Mecca to Jerusalem which is mentioned in
the first verse of surah 17 of the Qur’an, but the details of the al
Buraq legend were not consolidated until the formulation of the
hadith literature (Bravmann 1983: 75). The established representation
of al-Buraq usually comprises a crowned head, often of a young
woman, attached to a winged horse (see figure 5.3). The inspiration
for this, according to Arnold (1965: 119), was drawn from many
pre-Islamic representative traditions in western Asia, including the

145

Figure 5.3 A1-Buraq image (after Bravmann 1983: 73)

I

centaur of Babylon, the ‘man-headed bulls’ of Assyria and the
Sphinx. It was a powerful image among Sufis in Iran, but also of
particular popularity in both West Africa and Indonesia. In West
Africa, al-Buraq is represented on printed posters imported from
Egypt and North Africa, and in stylized amulet form, on masks,
and in one instance supporting an initiation drum of the non-Muslim
Baga people of coastal Guinea (Bravmann 1983: 82). Al-Buraq images
are also found in Indonesia, where the figure has been adapted to the
cultural context, ‘Indonesianized’ almost (Fischer 1994: 50).
Why is this image, which would appear not to be particularly
central to Muslim iconography, popular in regions of the Muslim
world separated by thousands of kilometres? This is perhaps due to
the existence in both regions of long-standing figurative traditions
prior to the arrival of Islam, and this had a direct bearing upon the
uptake of images and the conception of the strictures concerning
certain aspects of Muslim art. In West Africa, masking and sculptural
traditions connected with local cult and initiation activities are com
mon, and their inter-relationship with Islam is discussed in detail by

146

147

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

Bravmann (1974). In parts of Indonesia, Java in particular; the pre
Muslim Hindu legacy meant that figurative images had been exten
sively used and people, as in West Africa, were accustomed to their
existence, and continued to produce them once converted to Islam. In
Java, figurative art functions in the context of connecting what Geertz
(1968: 27) has termed ‘Indic Java’ with ‘Muslim Java’. These images
are representative of the syncretism between Islam and traditional
practices which occurred in both areas, and it is possible that there
was a need for this to occur if Islam were to succeed in appealing to
the population. When Islam first reached Java the Muslim mission
aries found it useful to use the Wayang, or shadow play, complete
with the Hindu deities ‘to spread the new religion’ (Boediardjo 1978:
112). These were gradually replaced by Muslim heroes (Tjandrasa
mita 1978: 153), thus indigenizing Islam.
Indeed, the vast range of figurative images in Javanese Muslim art is
amazing: brass statues, architectural decoration, wooden puppets,
ceramics and glass paintings, either wholly non-Muslim in inspira
tion, such as the depictions of the Panakawan, the attendants of
Arjuna and Kresna in the Javanese version of the Mahabharata, or
fusing these with Muslim elements such as calligraphy. They reflect
what Fischer terms ‘the openness, diversity, and ingenuity of a folk
art that uses history, indigenous tradition, and a foreign faith, and
extols them all’ (1994: 50). These are factors paralleled in Muslim
West Africa, and are evident historically and ethnographically, as seen
in accounts of the masked dance witnessed by Ibn Battuta at the
capital of the empire of Mali in the mid-fourteenth century, and in a
similar form over 600 years later among the Sanu clan of the Mande
Dafing in Bobo-Dioulasso (Burkina Faso) (Bravmann 1974: 49—52).
Moreover; this process is traceable archaeologically as syncretic tra
ditions developed to accustom the mass of the population, the sedent
ary agriculturists (Insoll 1996b: 91—2).
Yet the variations of Muslim art from the orthodox to the syncretic
can also be seen to function within relatively circumscribed geo
graphical areas. For example, in West Africa, one Muslim group
might have strong figurative traditions, while another might be
wholly devoid of them and utilize a more orthodox repertoire of
calligraphic, geometric and abstract elements. Likewise, in Indonesia
a locally constricted ‘spectrum of art’ can be seen to function; in
contrast to the Javanese figurative tradition, the art and design of
Biman, described as ‘a staunchly Islamic regency’ (Hitchcock 1987:
52), is much more orthodox. Although traces of older belief systems
with figurative traditions are found, the use of figurative elements is
extremely rare, and there is an emphasis upon geometric and vegetal

designs. Even the ancient Indonesian ‘ship of the dead’ and bird
designs are not used, though they are by neighbouring Muslim
peoples (Hitchcock 1987: 54). That Islam is an adaptable religion
is reflected in material culture, especially art, broadly defined as it
is here, and archaeologists are well placed to investigate this, for it in
turn sheds light on social issues, such as the varying impact
of orthodox as opposed to more diverse Muslim traditions.
The retention of pre-Muslim design elements, and the development
of a ‘spectrum of art’, which can indicate the flexibility of Islam to
adapt to particular local or regional circumstances, can be further
shown to operate in Swat-Kohistan (Pakistan). Here, the presence
of a maze or labyrinth symbol carved in mosques was recorded
(Scerrato 1981, 1983), in certain instances placed so as to be at eye
level when squatting (as when praying perhaps). This symbol is,
according to Scerrato, ‘fundamentally alien to Islamic culture’ (1983:
26) and, although this point can perhaps be disputed, the presence of
the labyrinth motif is of great interest. Islamization of the region
occurred in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and a syncretic
tradition evolved in this formerly Buddhist area. The hypothesis
proposed to account for the presence of these labyrinths by Scerrato
is that they are symbols of initiation into knowledge (1983: 28), and
possibly linked with Sufi tariqabs (brotherhoods) and kept hidden to
avoid the censure of the orthodox Mullahs. This scenario is conceiv
ably lent support by the existence of a Muslim mystic visited by
Scerrato, who ‘lives, apparently not by chance, in a semi-subterranean
and labyrinthine dwelling’ (1983: 28). By contrast, at the opposite end
of the ‘spectrum of art’, King relates how at the site of al-Faw (Saudi
Arabia) a deliberately smashed stone idol of a well-dressed man was
found, and though the date of the act of breaking it is unknown, he
remarks that ‘it is tempting to associate it with the onset of Islam’
(1994b: 212). Though uninvestigated, such acts might conceivably
have occurred on a large scale as Arabia was transformed ‘in a space
of some ten years from polytheistic paganism to a strictly monotheis
tic society’ (1994b: 212).
The importance of these examples is to show that Islam can be
adapted to suit local contexts, and that it can overlie and intermix
with a wide variety of pre-existing traditions; animism in West Africa,
Hinduism in parts of Indonesia, ancient traces of Buddhism in north
ern Pakistan. Although most, if not all, of the components of the
archaeology of Islam might be present, ‘cultural diversity’ can again
be seen to operate. Yet equally, no element of syncretism need exist,
and orthodox Islam can be wholly apparent. What is again evident is a
‘flexible Islam in thought and practice’ (Eickelman and Piscatori

p

148

149

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

1990: xiv). The marriage between the superstructure, Islam, its beliefs
and practices and local variety is here evident, and illustrated through
art, something which could be archaeologically visible elsewhere.

importance of trade: ‘the Qur’an not only shows an interest in it
throughout but uses a series of terms of the language of commerce to
reproduce religious ideas’ (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 56). Besides the
religious guidance for trade contained in the Qur’an and hadith, laws
promulgated dealt with coinage, fiscal administration, crafts, markets,
taxation and even economic principles (Lewis 1987: 124). Trade and
mercantile activity were thus hardly alien to the nascent Muslim
the initial
community, and traders followed in the wake of
Muslim armies serving to connect up the Muslim world as it took
shape in a more peaceable fashion. Traders could even be mission
aries, accompanied by missionaries, or preceded or followed by them.
Various interconnections could and did exist, both directly and indir
ectly, via numerous stages over phenomenal distances, periodically
during the medieval period. However, it is important to note that the
trade routes and commercial centres were not fixed, ‘their economic
fortunes were not constant unchanging entities in history’ (Chaud
hun 1985: 99). Dynasties came and went, merchants died, fashions
changed, ports silted up, numerous factors were forever changing;
excellent reviews have been provided by Chaudhuri (1985), Tampoe
(1989) and Hourani (1995) with regard to the Indian Ocean which
illustrate this in some detail. It is only necessary here to show that
such systems were in operation, the functions that they could serve,
and elaborate upon a few instances of the types of archaeological
evidence which might indicate their former presence.

The Transmission of Muslim Iconography and Other Ideas
The mechanisms behind the spread of Muslim iconography are many
and complex, and relate more to the spread of Islam itself than merely
the diffusion of artistic repertoire. One of the primary factors was
trade. The importance of trade has already been noted as an agent for
the spread of ideas including religious ones, and was not confined to
Islam; Buddhism, for example, was spread into Central Asia and
China partly through the actions of traders. Unfortunately, the
agency of trade as a medium for the spread of religion is often
neglected by archaeologists, who accentuate the economic aspect
and associated issues above all others, thus leading to a one-dimen
sional emphasis. Yet the investigation of trade mechanisms and pro
cesses in all their manifestations is an area to which archaeology can
make a significant contribution. Moreover, besides the possible link
age between trade and the initial spread and transmission of religion,
religious considerations can also go hand in hand with mercantile and
other economic activities on an everyday basis. Eaton provides an
example of this when he describes how many early Bengali Muslim
saints, represented materially by their shrines, ‘are associated with the
teaching of wet-rice agriculture, along with, of course, the preaching
of Islam’ (1984: 26). This is a topic which has already been touched
upon in the consideration of local pilgrimage and ha;j in chapter 4.
Islam and trade were linked from the very beginning. Conversion
to Islam could be facilitated through trade. For example, local mer
chants could benefit from better trade conditions and lower taxes
through converting (see Tampoe 1989: 128—9), and greater trust
between co-religionists might have been of significance for trade
purposes. Certainly, in both Indonesia and West Africa, trade was
one of the contributing factors to the initial introduction of Islam,
and its continuing spread and acceptance (see Tjandrasamita 1978;
Insoll 1996b). Muhammad himself was connected with trade, being
born into a trading milieu and trading family. Mecca, according to
Ahmed, ‘was a busy and wealthy commercial town almost monopol
ising the entrepôt trade between the Indian Ocean and the Mediter
ranean trading centres’ (1988: 17), and when Muhammad was young
he was in charge of a ‘trading enterprise of a widow, Khadijah, whom
he subsequently married’ (Waines 1995: 11). The Qur’an reflects the

r

Coinage
Coinage is not only a primary indicator and mechanism of trade, but
also provides a direct link back to topics already examined such as
figural representation and calligraphy. However, the significance of
coinage within the archaeology of Islam is even greater than this
because it came to be seen almost as a token of religious identity, as
well as a source of evidence which can indicate the very development
of Islam. But it should also be noted that, as is evident in many of the
other areas of material culture considered in this book, coinage was
not part of a fully formed package denoting Muslim identity, which
was opened in each newly conquered area. This did not exist, and a
transitional period is evident, when all aspects of Muslim material
culture were under development.
Coinage had long been in use in all the regions first conquered, and
the existing currency of the conquered areas was used. In former
Sasanian provinces, the primarily silver coinage underwent a change

150

151

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

in the dating system used, and the name of an Arab governor or a
pious inscription in kufic might be added. Otherwise, the Sasanian
issues still bearing the image of the former ruler alongside a fire-altar
with attendants were used. Likewise, in former Byzantine areas the
existing coinage were utilized; the gold and copper issues might
be slightly altered, the name of the emperor suppressed and a mint
name in Arabic and Greek added (Grierson 1960: 242). But on the
whole these coins were left largely unaltered, and it was not until
the reforms of Abd al-Malik that coinage was fully Islamized, with
the removal of the figurative images and a change from Greek/Persian
to Arabic epigraphy. These reforms took place at the end of the
seventh century and have been described by Darley—Doran (1986) as
coinciding with theological conflict which was going on between the
Umayyads and Byzantines. ‘The Islamic coinage reflected this by
stressing the unity of God to counter the Trinitarian precepts of
Christianity’ (Darley-Doran 1986: 10), reminiscent of how the con
temporary inscriptions in the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem were
used (see chapter 2). It again illustrates that the development of Islam,
and thus of Muslim material culture, was not an instantaneous event.
This issue has been examined by Hoyland, who states that prior to
72 AH (691) ‘the archaeological record is strangely silent about Islam,
and this despite the fact that we have a fair amount of material from
this time’ (in press: 4). But, after this date, the sources of evidence
multiply, with numerous public proclamations of faith rendered not
only on coins, but in inscriptions of many forms (Hoyland 1995).
That Abd al-Malik’s reform programme served to ‘Arabize’ govern
ment (Welch 1979: 44), and Islamize material culture is evident from
the coinage, and also the glass weights (dinar, dirham, uqiya and so
on) used to test coins (Miles 1948: 2—3, 1951). Coins provided an ideal
medium for expressing the new ideology, probably having a wider
impact than inscriptions inside mosques which might only be seen by
Muslims. Through coins used in trade a much wider audience was
reached, and the coin, in addition to serving its primary function as a
token of value, could also serve as a symbol for expressing religious
identity, alongside an obvious political role. Various messages were
carried and functions could thus be fulfilled, though not necessarily
all at the same time. Obviously, the uses and messages implied or
stated by coinage vary and need not be fixed, but, as Wasserstein
argues, the ‘family resemblance’ of Islamic coinage was there to
‘define Islamic coins as Islamic’ and ‘non-Islamic coins as nonIslamic’ (1993: 303).
Muslim coinage is also of interest as a further example to illustrate
the diversity which can exist within the spectrum of Muslim art and

design. Coins were probably ‘art objects’ which reached a much
larger audience than ever ate from a lustred ceramic bowl or perused
the pages of an illustrated manuscript. In this context it then seems
surprising that figurative images reappeared at all on coinage, albeit
rarely, after the imposition of Abd al-Malik’s reforms. One such
series of bronze coins bearing portraits and other similar images
were produced in Turkish-dominated areas in northern Syria, north
ern Iraq and eastern Anatolia in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
Of importance is the fact that the metal from which the coins were
struck seems to have influenced whether it bore an image or not.
Thus copper coins bore images as ‘copper coins in Islam have always
been less affected by the conventional taboo against images than have
gold and silver’ and as ‘first and foremost secular objects’, used in the
market by people of diverse background. In contrast, ‘the dinars and
scarce silver dirhams are the political manifestos of rulers who took
pride in their status as ghazis (warriors) on behalf of orthodox Islam’
(Lowick 1985: 160, cited in Wasserstein 1983: 316). Images which
appear to have been used concurrently included imitations of Byzan
tine coins bearing explicitly Christian motifs; representations of Mus
lim rulers, ‘first in the likeness of Greek, Roman and Sasanian
monarchs, later also in typically Islamic guise wearing up-to-date
styles of dress; and thirdly, astrological shapes (Lowick 1985: 172).
Thus it is obvious that even here, with an area of material culture
readily accessible to much of the population, and outside the private
courtly or aristocratic context usually associated with infringements
of this prohibition, supposed universals such as the ban on figurative
imagery can be shown to be invalid in certain instances.
Trade Routes and Trade Goods
Having briefly considered coins, not only as an agent of commerce,
but also as a vehicle for political and religious imagery, it is useful to
examine the trade routes and trade goods themselves as possible
sources of information. These illustrate how widely the Muslim
world was connected with regions beyond its frontiers, which in
themselves are often difficult to define. Here, as case studies, trade
by sea and land, and three examples of trade items Chinese cer
amics, silver coins and textiles will be considered.
Although the role of trade as an agent for the spread of ideas,
including religious ones, has already been mentioned, it is important
to re-emphasize that trade need not only function within the secular
economic domain. Many examples can be cited where trade has been
—

—

152

153

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

accompanied by the spread of ideas associated with ‘civilization’ or
religion, as with the mercantile ventures of the Portuguese in the late
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. However, this is not to say that all
trade was underlain by religious intent; it was not. Rather, such
impulses can co-exist, and trade need not necessarily be divest of
any sacred component, even if this is not explicit to the traders
themselves; by the very movement from region to region, colonies
and trading settlements might be established, leading to a ‘bridgehead’
being formed. Places of worship would be established, and over time
the religious belief would spread, perhaps even through no overt
agency, into the surrounding area. Even fleeting contact with traders
or trade goods can have lasting impact, as with the cargo cults of parts
of the Pacific region. Religious, technological and philosophical ideas
can be transmitted.

China; further segments in the western Indian Ocean connected the
East African coast, or later under Fatimid impetus the Red Sea to
Egypt (Whitcomb 1990—1: 56), and the lands bordering the Mediter
ranean (see figure 5.4). The concepts of unity and diversity over this
vast area are discussed by Chaudhuri (1985: 21—3); social and cultural
diversity was rooted in four different civilizations: Hindu, Chinese,
Irano-Arabic and Indonesian, with a ‘strong sense of unity’ lent by
the sea trade and the caravan trade in Central Asia. Although Muslim
sailors might, and did, sail as far as China, where they founded
colonies (the descendants being the Hui, who have been mentioned
before, see chapters 2 and 6), this did not mean that they controlled
the whole area of the trade route. Various trade centres and their
surrounding areas did form parts of the Muslim world but these were
not contiguous: ‘the political and religious frontiers of Islam ran
across trade routes, kingdoms of non-believing princes, and
natural boundaries made by deserts, mountains and seas’ (Chaudhuri
1985: 21).

Sea trade: the Indian Ocean and beyond
Obviously, trade by sea was not a Muslim invention, but trade via sea
routes was of fundamental importance to the Muslim world. Besides
the evident trade requirements which were fulfilled, this trade acted
as a means of connecting up the various regions of the Muslim world
and beyond. One of the most important of these trade systems was
centred in the Indian Ocean, the Bay of Bengal and the South China
Sea. Many Indian Ocean trade centres, as well as the trade systems
themselves, have been examined by historians and archaeologists, and
the most convenient study, primarily because it has been recently and
extensively updated to include relevant archaeological data, is a study
of Arab seafaring (Hourani 1995). Indian Ocean trade was cyclical,
and it should not be thought that the same routes operated continu
ously in the centuries between the beginning of Islam and the dis
ruption caused by the arrival of European merchants in the late
fifteenth century. However, when trade connections flourished and
trading conditions were good the continuity in the system over
centuries, and the sheer geographical distances involved in the trade
systems, were phenomenal.
Mechanisms One such period was between the late seventh and
early tenth centuries, with direct sailing via a series of stages from
the Persian Gulf to Canton. This sea route was, according to Hou
rani, ‘the longest in regular use by mankind before the European
expansion in the sixteenth century’ (1995: 61). This route stretched
from Siraf and other ports on the Persian Gulf, via Pakistan and India
to Sri Lanka, across to Malaysia and Indonesia, and then round to

/

The living legacy Before examining the archaeological evidence, it is
as well to note that ample living testimony to Indian Ocean trade is
provided by the descendants of traders, adventurers, slaves and pil
grims, dispersed around the various regions and often far from their
original homelands. The Hui have been mentioned, and Possehl
(1981) refers to the ‘living legacy’ of the agate miners of the Narmada
mines in Gujarat, western India, who are of African descent. These
Siddis ‘are actually more common than one might suspect in western
India and Pakistan, especially the coastal areas This is a result of
the lively commerce between India and Africa for at least the past
two thousand years’ (Possehl 1981: 41). The Arab Muslim commu
nities of southern Thailand show a similar legacy, where Farouk notes
that small communities of Arabs of predominantly Hadrami
(Yemeni) and Saudi descent are settled and maintain family connec
tions ‘with other Arabs across the border in Malaysia’ (1988: 7). Arab
communities are also found settled in the vicinity of Samarkand in
Central Asia (Bennigsen and Enders Wimbush 1986: 125). Though
the original ‘wave’ of Arab immigrants came as conquerors in the
eighth century, we can speculate that subsequent influxes were per
haps trade related.
.

.

.

The archaeological legacy Archaeological evidence attesting to the
operation of Indian Ocean trade and the connection which existed
between the ‘different worlds’, which is sometimes represented by,
for example, ‘made to order goods’, is abundant. It illustrates both the

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

g

s

ç

155

earlier ‘direct’ Indian Ocean trade system and the later ‘segmented’
one which developed as its successor. The trade centres themselves are
archaeological indicators of the trade communities, the trade itself,
the goods and the interaction, co-existence and impact of social,
religious and political systems which came into contact through the
mechanism of trade. Various of these centres which have been archae
ologically investigated have already been used as case studies. These
have included Siraf on the Persian Gulf (Whitehouse 1968, 1970,
1974), Daybul/Banbhore close to Karachi (Anon 1964; Ghafur
1966), and Shanga on the Kenyan coast (Horton 1996). To these can
be added, for example, Mantai on the north-western tip of Sri Lanka
(Carswell and Prickett 1984), and other trade centres in Sri Lanka, on
the coast of India (Carswell 1979a) and on the Maldive Islands
(Carswell 1977). Sohar on the Omani side of the Persian Gulf (Wil
liamson 1974), Kish 200 km south of Siraf (Whitehouse 1976), Kilwa
and Manda on the East African Coast (Chittick 1974, 1984), and
much further east, Laem Po in Thailand (Dasheng 1995).
Other examples of trade centres which have been archaeologically
investigated with varying degrees of competence could be cited. Thus
a body of data exists which could, and should, allow an examination
not only of economic-related trade process, but also of the accom
panying interaction, or lack of it, between the different religious and
social traditions as already outlined. Unfortunately, from an archae
ological perspective at least, this has hardly yet begun. Preoccupation
is still predominantly with the ‘harder’ economic issues. However
one example can be provided in glazed Chinese pottery of an mdicator not only of trade, but also of the interaction and fusion of
different cultural elements.
Sherds of Chinese pottery obtained via Indian Ocean trade (ships
are admirably suited to the transport of such bulky and fragile corn
modities) are found scattered on the shores surrounding the South
China Sea, Indian Ocean, the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea. They are
found at many if not all of the trade centres already mentioned (see
also Wijayapala and Prickett 1986; Tampoe 1989, for discussion of
Chinese pottery at Mantai and Siraf). Chinese pottery of various
types white wares, celadons, stonewares has been recorded at
numerous other sites dating from the tenth to the sixteenth centuries.
Examples connected with the Red Sea coasts, for instance, include
Bach on al-Rih Island off the Red Sea coast of the Sudan (Kawatoko
1993), Dahiak Kebir further south on the Dahiak Islands in Eritrea
(Insoll 1996d) and, to the north, Quseir al-Qadim in Egypt (Whit
comb 1979; Carswell 1982), and beyond at Fustat in Egypt (Scanlon
197Db; Mikami 1980—1). Chinese pottery has also been recovered
—

—

156

157

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

from various locations on the opposite, Arabian shore (Mathew 1956;
Whitcomb 1988) as at Ayla, the early Islamic town at Aqaba in Jordan
(Whitcomb 1990—i). Sherds have been recorded at some distance
from the Red Sea (though probably indirectly sourced via this region)
at Timbuktu in Mali (Insoll 1996a) and at Douma and other locations
in Syria (Carswell 1977, 1979b).
Yet, besides the more obvious economic information which can be
derived from this particular source of evidence, Chinese pottery
recovered from archaeological contexts has been informative with
regard to specific ‘Islamization’ of products for distinct markets. At
Siraf, for example, among the several hundred sherds of imported
Chinese stoneware dating from the ninth to eleventh centuries, a
fragmentary ‘Dusun’ stoneware jar was recovered which bore the
names Yusuf and either Mansur or Maymun ‘incised before the vessel
was glazed’ (Whitehouse 1973: 244). The presence of these Muslim
names indicates that ‘the jar was made to order for a Muslim trader
with contacts, or possibly a factory, in a Chinese port’ (1973: 244).
This is not a unique instance; Dasheng (1995) mentions Chinese
ceramics being made specifically for Muslim markets, and at Laem
Po in southern Thailand, a bowl made at the Changsha kilns in
Hunan and dating from the ninth century bore an ‘Arabic-inspired
design’ (1995: 55). A water bottle found in Yangzhou in China, of the
same date and of Chinese production, also had an underglaze Arabic
inscription, interpreted as a ‘writing of double Allah in symmetry’,
but ‘clearly painted by ceramic workers who did not know the Arabic
script’ (1995: 59). Other Chinese wares produced for export markets
were also influenced by Muslim forms and decorative motifs. The
reverse was also true; Chinese vessel forms and ceramic types like the
large white-ware spittoons found at Fustat (Mikami 1980—1: 77) were
variously imitated in the Muslim world.
These examples are of importance as they illustrate that there was
an element of cultural understanding between the different civiliza
tions and societies involved in Indian Ocean trade. But what does this
imply for less visible aspects? Although this remains hypothetical and
difficult to test, it can be suggested that producing ‘foreign’ items for
trade might mean that in the process one could get used to these
materials oneself, even if only to a slight degree. The ‘rub-off’ of
cultural elements could thus occur, which returns us to the point that
we cannot always think in terms of distinctly polarized entities or
blocks, the Muslim world as opposed to China, for example. Com
merce meant interaction; no matter how strictly one might attempt to
control this, trade meant the flow of ideas, and once again complexity
is evident and must be allowed for. Thus we can begin to infer and

suggest less tangible contacts and influences which a sherd of pottery
might indicate.
Land trade: the Scandinavian connection and beyond
The tentacles of Islamic medieval commerce stretched elsewhere by
land; for example, north to Europe, in particular to Scandinavia. Such
a trade existed, especially in silver coinage from the Muslim world
being exchanged for slaves and furs, primarily in the ninth and tenth
centuries (Noonan 1981). However, unlike parts of China, India or
elsewhere at various Indian Ocean trade centres, there is as yet no
evidence that communities of Muslim merchants themselves were
established. Thus this trade was not accompanied by conversion to
Islam, by all or even part of the population, or it appears by Islamiza
tion to any degree.
This Scandinavian trade and the ‘Viking contacts’ followed routes
which either stretched north from Baghdad and the Mesopotamian
region or as northern branches of the Central Asian caravan trail, the
Silk Road to China. Both of these routes are considered by Herrmann
(1991), who describes how the latter branched along the Amu Darya
to Urgench, east of the Caspian Sea, and to Bulgar at the confluence
of the rivers Kama and Volga, while the former branched north along
the western shore of the Caspian via Itil, ‘the Khazar Emporium’
(Lieber 1981: 25), to Bulgar (see figure 5.4). The furthest the Muslim
merchants penetrated was to the Khazar region; beyond this, trade
was in the hands of the Vikings, although Arab visitors reached the
Upper Volga in the tenth century. The Arabs, according to Noonan
(1981: 52—3), developed a pragmatic attitude to the Khazars, and trade
flourished when military conflict over control of the Caucausus had
subsided. This in itself was important as Noonan notes that ‘the
Arabs managed to participate in an active trade with a Khazar leader
ship whose representatives had abjured Islam and then turned to
Judaism’ (1981: 52).
The most common archaeological evidence of the Viking trade with
Muslim lands are the thousands of Islamic silver coins which have
been recovered, predominantly in the form of hoards, at various
locations in Scandinavia, Russia and on the Baltic coast. Lieber
records that nearly 105,000, mostly silver, Islamic coins of various
types, all dating from before 970, have been found in Scandinavia
(1981: 21—2). The Iraqi origins of this trade are signalled by a hoard
unearthed near Zakho in northern Iraq, buried in the early ninth
century, and containing 3,306 coins. This hoard contained numerous
different issues, including 37 coins from Umayyad Spain and 129
-

158

159

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

Idrisid Moroccan coins. Rather than representing a hoard buried for
future use in Iraq itself, it can be suggested that it was gathered
together for onward trade to Scandinavia, where a voracious appetite
for silver existed. Glass beads from Muslim areas and dating from the
late eighth century are also found in northern and eastern Europe.
These, according to Cailmer (1995: 51), ‘entered the Baltic region
from the east, to appear in Finland, the Aland Islands and central
Sweden’. Thus here long-distance trade, albeit of little significance
compared to the commerce of the Indian Ocean, was in operation,
but without any accompanying ideological change.

general importance within the Muslim world for numerous purposes
in all social strata (Ettinghausen 1976: 71—2). To quote Golombek, it
became ‘a world submerged in textiles, where textiles played a role in
every facet of life, for everyone rich and poor’ (1988: 33). In certain
advantageous conditions, as at Fustat where 3,000 textile fragments
were excavated from rubbish heaps dating to the eleventh century
(Mackie 1985: 23), or Quseir al-Qadim, also in Egypt, where nearly
4,000 pieces of Mamluk textiles were found (Vogelsang-Eastwood
1993: 87), extensive collections of textiles have been recovered, and
the information derived from their analysis has proved of great use in
reconstructing trade routes, the significance of the textiles, their uses
and the manufacturing techniques employed. But in many areas this
profitable avenue of research, like those of paper, perfumes, spices
and even slaves, is closed by the lack of evidence.
Secondly, as with certain commodities, so with the means of their
transport, which are known mainly from secondary evidence, manu
script illustrations, historical sources, and facilities such as ports and
caravanserais; much more rarely are the ships or caravans encoun
tered archaeologically. However, instances do exist, as with the
eleventh-century shipwreck excavated at Serçe Liman on the
southern Turkish coast. This ship, of apparently Muslim origin, con
tained a mixed cargo of Byzantine amphora and Islamic glass, as well
as glass cullet (refuse glass for re-use) also of probable Byzantine
origin. This is of importance as it again attests to the links between
Muslims and non-Muslims, ‘trade, even in times of war, seldom
stopped between Muslim countries, or even between Byzantine and
Muslim ports’ (Bass and Van Doorninck 1978: 131). Further evidence
for the operation of maritime trade between the Muslim world and
Christian Europe was recently found off the coast of Devon (Eng
land) where a cargo of gold Moroccan coins and jewellery dating
from the 1630—40s was discovered by marine archaeologists (Alberge
1997: 3). Similarly, direct evidence for land-based caravan trade has
also been found (see plate 5.2). At the ‘lost caravan’ site in the Ijafen
dunes in Mauritania, several thousand cowry shells, once in sacks,
along with 2,085 bars of brass were found (Monod 1969). These
items, dating from the twelfth century, had been buried for safe
keeping by a caravan crossing the desert to the Western Sahel and
never recovered.

Land trade: the West African connection
In contrast, several thousand kilometres to the south, the situation
was very different. Land-based trade which operated across the
Sahara from North Africa to the trade centres of the Western Sahel
region of West Africa was accompanied by conversion to Islam and
Islamization in general, starting in the late eighth century. Indigenous
states, such as the empire of Ghana whose capital was in Mauritania
(where only the merchant’s quarter, Koumbi Saleh, has so far been
found), and indigenously founded towns such as Gao on the eastern
Niger bend in Mali, attracted Muslim merchants in pursuit of gold,
ivory and slaves to ship north to the wider Islamic world (Thomassey
and Mauny 1951, 1956; Insoll 1996b). In return, these merchants
brought manufactured luxury goods, glazed pottery, glass and semi
precious stone beads, glass vessels, items of metalwork, textiles, paper
and commodities such as cowry shells, one of the currency items in
use during the medieval period, and brass (Insoll 1995).
Archaeological limitations An assessment of this type of trade also
allows two general archaeological implications to be noted. Differ
ential survival means that this trade, perhaps inevitably, is skewed in
favour of the more durable items. This can lead us to undervalue the
importance of certain commodities, especially textiles. In the Western
Sahel region no imported textiles have been recovered from the trade
centres, yet the corpus of medieval Arabic sources and later European
travellers’ accounts both tell us how important the textile trade was
(see Barth 1965; Levtzion and Hopkins 1981); silk, gauze and linen
are all recorded as being imported from North Africa, as well as
unspecified cloth from Al-Andalus, and turbans from Ifriqiya during
the medieval period (Levtzion and Hopkins 1981: 97). As we saw in
chapter 4, clothing, and its obvious links with modesty concerns, are
of particular importance within Islam, and textiles were of great

I
r

Trade and social processes Archaeology, in combination with an
analysis of existing historical, sociological and anthropological stud
ies, is also beginning to allow amodel to be developed to chart the
actual processes and rates of conversion to Islam over time in the

F

160

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

161

p

Plate 5.2 Salt caravan, Gao, Mali (photo. A. Bennett)
Western Sahel (Insoll 1996b: 90—1, 1997b). This owes a debt to
Fisher’s three-stage model of Islamic conversion (1973, 1985), but
equally draws its impetus from trade, and thus we are able to begin
to move beyond merely economic concerns, and to consider factors
of social relevance, as was argued for earlier.
Islam was brought to the Western Sahel region by Muslim Arab
and Berber traders. The primary converts, along with the foreign
merchants’ local partners in trade, were the local rulers who accepted
Islam for a variety of reasons. These included genuine belief (of
obvious importance but difficult to assess archaeologically); the
advantages conversion might bring in the spheres of magic, ritual
and prestige; wealth in trade; and better administration through the
adoption of the Arabic script and Muslim officials (Levtzion 1979:
214; Hunwick 1985). Town-dwellers appear to have been early con
verts, a fact attested archaeologically. Islam may have been attractive,
as has been suggested by Trimingham (1959) because, by being uni
versalistic in outlook, it had the power to bring together the different
ethnic groups which often made up the population of towns in
this region. Often concurrent with townspeople, nomads were early
converts, again for a variety of reasons, dominant among which
Trimingham (1959) has suggested was the appeal of a lack of a
hierarchical priestly system, and the ease of worship Islam enjoys.
Lewis (1980: 24) also suggests that the usual pattern of early

Figure 5.5 Cemeteries in the Niger bend region, Mali (from De Gironcourt
1920: 161)

conversion to Islam by nomadic populations was because they ‘found
in long-distance trade an attractive and profitable supplement to
pastoralism’. This interpretation might help in explaining the cemet
ery patterning seen in the Niger bend and Adrar des Iforas regions
bordering the Sahara (see De Gironcourt 1920), with Muslim cem
eteries clustered along trade routes and in areas formerly (and cur
rently) inhabited by nomads (see figure 5.5).
The final group to convert to Islam were usually the sedentary
agriculturists, the bulk of the population. Various ideas have been
proposed to account for the fact that this group was often last to
convert to Islam. It has been suggested that conversion involved more
of a fundamental wrench from older systems and ties, with animism
and traditional religious cults furnishing the means by which the
pressing problems of existence, such as the ensuring of rain, could
be comprehended and resolved, turning around the cycle of tending
crops, livestock and children (Trimingham 1959: 25; Bravmann 1974:
31). Eventually, through the development of a syncretic Muslim
tradition incorporating elements of traditional religious practice and,

162

163

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

it should not be forgotten, by the sword as well, conversion among
the sedentary agriculturalist population increased (similarly, educa
tion and the growth of Sufism were also factors which aided the
spread of Islam in West Africa). This, however, was not an instan
taneous process, but drawn out over many centuries, and in certain
instances is not yet complete, as Islam continues to gain converts
among the sedentary populations of West Africa, both in the forest
regions, as among the Yoruba, and also in the Sahel, as with the
Dogon.
Although the model just presented is local in context and, inevi
tably, much generalized and simplistic, it is at least providing a start at
trying to draw in the archaeological evidence within the frameworks
provided by studies utilizing different sources of evidence, as with
those already mentioned. It is certainly specific to the West African
region, but it would be of interest to see if similar processes are
evident elsewhere in the Muslim world, where it is possible that in
many instances an implicit link with trade, as in the Western Sahel,
existed as the agent of initial Muslim contact.

fourteenth to fifteenth century date which was found near Tel Beth
saida, north of the Sea of Galilee, in Palestine.
Philosophical, technological and all types of scientific ideas can be
transmitted through traders. With sciences, for example, the exchange
of ideas both across the Muslim world and with other non-Muslim
areas, such as China and Europe, was complex and has been much
studied (see, for example, Needham 1954— ; Sabra 1976; al-Hassan
and Hill 1992). Muslim contributions in many areas of science and
technology were great, not only as inheritors and developers of the
Graeco-Roman heritage, but also as active innovators (al-Hassan and
Hill 1992: 9), and through the unity lent by the existence of Islam
across a wide area. Islamic knowledge filtered through to the West via
centres of translation such as Cordoba; Greek, Indian, Persian, Arab
and Chinese ideas were all transmitted to Europe from the Muslim
world (Gabrieli 1970). Add to this the fact that Muslim provinces
such as Transoxania bordered scientific ‘hot-houses’ such as China
(and indeed, as we have seen, trade centres were established within it),
and a picture of the vitality of Muslim science and technology
becomes clear. Elements of this are archaeologically recognizable.
Vardjavand (1979), for example, excavated an observatory dating
from the thirteenth century at Maraqe in the Azerbaijan region,
including what was perhaps the library, a central tower with a dia
meter of 45 m, and a foundry interpreted as the workshop where
astrological instruments were made.
The contribution that archaeological research can make to our
understanding of Muslim manufacturing and processing technology
is equally significant, but has so far been little pursued, either in
investigating relevant sites or bringing modern scientific analytical
techniques to bear upon archaeological materials. However, an exam
ple of the archaeological investigation of a processing site is provided
by recent research near Eilat in southern Palestine. Here, in the Wadi
Tawahin (millstone wadi) extensive evidence for the processing of
gold-bearing quartz ores was found. This included various structures,
a storage pit, outlines of tents and work stations containing tools and
millstones dating from between the eighth and tenth centuries. The
quartz ore was crushed using anvils and two sizes of hammer before
being ground to a powder using the millstones. Subsequently, the
gold-bearing dust would have been washed to separate the gold in a
complicated process, though no direct evidence was found for this
stage of processing (Gilat et al. 1993).
Exciting results were also obtained at Raqqa in northern Syria
where a major manufacturing centre has recently been investigated.
Conquered by the Muslims in 639—640, it became the Abbasid capital

The Transmission of Islamic ‘Civilization’
Trade can also function as the agent of transmission for many other
ideas besides religious ones. Visual art has already been discussed and
music is another art form which can be transmitted via trade and
other cross-cultural connections. Although there is evidently no such
thing as a single style of Islamic music, and indeed the legality of
listening to music has been much debated by Islamic scholars (Farmer
1929: 22), similarities exist across the Muslim world in both musical
styles and certain types of instruments. According to Jenkins and
Olsen, ‘the musical culture area of the Islamic world stretches for
thousands of miles and Moroccans travelling to Turkestan would feel
at home with the music despite all local differences (particularly in
instruments)’ (1976: 85). Yet obviously the types of music are many,
‘from learned and sophisticated types of music elaborated in the
context of supra-national Islamic civilization, to simple forms of
sacred music and nomad or sedentary folk musical traditions’ (Shi
loah 1995: xv), as are the styles and categories of instrument, and
music’s varying cultural importance. But this is also a category of
evidence which has an archaeological dimension; the discovery of
musical instruments in archaeological contexts is well attested in
many areas and over various periods. Arav (1993), for example,
describes a decorated brass Mamluk conical drum, of probable

164

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

and home of Caliph Harun al-Rashid in the late eighth century.
There, between 796 and 808, he built a new palatial and industrial
complex (Henderson 1996: 59). Excavations within the industrial
complex have provided information on glass technology, with a com
plete glass workshop dated to c.804. It was here that a major change
in Islamic glass technology took place with the development of
common Islamic soda lime glass, a glass composition ‘which was to
last relatively unchanged for about 600 years and which was used
throughout the Islamic world’ (Henderson 1996: 69). Other industrial
evidence found included the site of a pottery industry, and evidence
for sugar production, including discarded moulds, and a series of
basins and channels which might have been the remains of a sugar
factory.
The connection between the development of sugar as a traded
commodity and the spread of Muslim civilization has already been
referred to (see chapter 4), and it makes an interesting case study.
Archaeological evidence for sugar production is not restricted to
Raqqa. Whitcomb (1992) mentions the remains of a sugar industry
in the southern Ghors region of Jordan, where several sites had the
remains of pots and moulds used in the manufacturing process, and at
Feifa, the mud-brick walls of a sugar mill itself were recorded (1992:
114—15). At Susa in Iran, further conical sugar moulds, pierced at the
base, were found along with the remains of a sucrerie (Boucharlat and
Labrousse 1979); and Von Wartburg (1983: 313) draws attention to a
variety of relevant research which has been conducted elsewhere.
Thus the evidence recovered from Raqqa and other sites has made a
direct contribution to our understanding of Muslim manufacturing
and processing technology in many ways, another dimension which
can be approached through archaeology. Technology was not
restricted to one site, but was transmitted around the Muslim
world, owing in part to the unity provided by a common religion,
and through the agency of trade. Much more could be learnt from
excavating and recording sites linked with all aspects of Muslim
science and technology, and from examining the objects which fill
our museums and stores from past seasons. Similar summaries could
be offered of archaeological research on ceramics, metals and textiles,
and further information could undoubtedly be derived from the
analysis or re-analysis of many categories of item, as with the exam
ples discussed by Henderson (1996): information on enamels (Hen
derson and Allan 1990), glass composition (Brill 1970; Gratuze and
Barrandon 1990; Henderson 1995), source analysis of beads (Saito
witz et al. 1996), study of metals and metallurgy (Weisgerber 1980)
and pottery (Frierman and Giauque 1973; Mason and Keall 1990).

I

ART, TRADE AND IDEAS

165

These are just a selection of relevant studies which have been under
taken, and numerous further possibilities exist for the application of
modern scientific techniques to whole categories of material which
have been largely neglected in this respect. There is no reason why
style should be privileged over fabric.
Summary and Conclusions
The material discussed in this chapter art, trade, science and manu
factures appears initially to be only loosely connected, if at all, but
as the discussion progressed it became apparent that interconnections
between these seemingly disparate subject areas are in fact evident
across the Muslim world. Essentially, this is due to the movement of
similar modes of thought across great distances through the processes
of Islamization: conquest, missionary activity and trade, singly or
combined. As a result a certain unity was created. This does not
mean that a ‘standard Muslim’ was created, drawing from a limited
pooi of binding requirements and ideas; on the contrary, great diver
sity exists. However, something functioned to allow similarities to be
manifest, in music, symbolically in art motifs or with the presence of
calligraphy in the Arabic script from Timbuktu to Djakarta; this is
Islam, and thus again we return to the point that a Muslim does exist
in a recognizable form across the Muslim world, and that this can be
evident materially, and therefore approachable by the archaeologist.
Why else would common features be found? Why else would sales of
‘Islamic art’ take place? Yet within this vast entity, this overall frame
work of structuring principles, myriad diversity is evident, adapting
and transforming components of Muslim law and thought, but this is
still undeniably Muslim diversity.
Certain implications for the general archaeology of religion also
exist. Art is frequently acknowledged as being either wholly religious
in intent or having a sacred dimension, whereas trade is not, but this
need not be the case. As was shown, trade need not be categorized as
entirely secular; it can be associated with the spread of ideas, includ
ing religious ones. In the next chapter we will turn to a more ortho
dox preoccupation of archaeologists in general, death and burial, as a
possible further indicator of the former presence of a Muslim
community.
—

—

DEATH AND BURIAL

6

Death and Burial

Every soul shall taste death. We will prove you all with evil and good.
To Us you shall return.
Qur’an. The Prophets 21: 35

No one escapes death, and theoretically all Muslims should be buried
in accordance with specific rites. Thus the burial is another category
of evidence, and one of primary importance, which might allow the
recognition of a Muslim in the archaeological record. Moreover,
the investigation of funerary evidence allows us to examine further
the social dimension which, as has already been stated, is often much
neglected within Islamic archaeology. Tarlow and Boyd (1992: 4)
make the relevant general point that historical archaeology, of
which Islamic archaeology clearly forms a part, has been notoriously
poor in its development of sophisticated social analyses. While it is
not suggested that the following discussion provides the ‘sophisti
cated social analysis’ required, it is hoped that it will show that
Muslim burial, and the often accompanying commemorative struc
ture, constitute more than just a typology of monuments. Both the
burial itself and the funerary monument can have a meaning and
significance which, if unlocked, can provide a wealth of information
on the development and diversity of Islam and the Muslim world and,
of course, on the individuals buried.
Furthermore, it should be remembered that the Muslim commun
ity, both past and present, was and is made up of people, individuals
and communities, not merely of ‘unquestioning machines’ blindly
following the tenets of their religion. This point appears to be often
forgotten. Islamic funerary archaeology is the residue of these indi
viduals and communities and, as with other societies, a desire for

167

commemoration, to assuage grief, replicate social position and hier
archies in death as in life, to attain piety, establish identity, as well as
struggles over authority, can all be manifest in Islamic funerary
archaeology and architecture. By studying the patterns of death we
can learn much about life.
In the light of contemporary funerary archaeological and anthro
pological theory (see, for example, Hodder 1982a: 139—46; Metcalf
and Huntingdon 1991; Tarlow and Boyd 1992; Parker Pearson 1993),
a more complex view of Islamic funerary archaeology and architec
ture needs to be taken, acknowledging the diversity which exists and
utilizing it to the full for the purposes of interpretation. The rich
texture of detailed ethnographic and archaeological evidence available
to the archaeologist interested in Islam enables not only information
on property, social status and prestige (the usual preserves of the
archaeologist dealing with funerary evidence) to be obtained, but
also information on possible non-orthodox ritual and beliefs, and
perhaps even on the individual, the person who has been buried (an
interesting examination of this is provided by Simpson 1995, with
regard to the late Islamic Near East).
Within the framework of Islam, where the sacred and secular
spheres of life are interwoven until they are inseparable, the archae
ologist cannot succumb to the charge levelled at them by Renfrew
(1994: 52) whereby ‘the disposal of the dead is generally considered,
by archaeologists, under a different rubric from that of religion’.
Within Islam, as with most if not all religions, religious belief has
an influence over death, its conceptualization, understanding and
practicalities (the funerary practices and monuments). Likewise
death influences religion, with ideas of resurrection and rebirth after
death being a recurring theme. As part of introducing the ‘social’ into
Islamic archaeology, we cannot divorce religion and the disposal of
the dead, and thus we have to look at Islamic funerary practices,
archaeology and architecture anew, as more than bricks and mortar,
but as being of greater social significance. This chapter will thus
explore the social dimension of Islamic funerary archaeology, and
burial as a category of evidence indicative of the Muslim community
in the archaeological record.
Muslim Burial: Ideals and Origins

The origins of Islamic concepts of death, funerary practices and of the
earliest commemorative structures have often been discussed (see, for
example, Grabar 1966; Ragib 1970), and are the subject of debate. The

168

169

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

Qur’an, though discussing death, contains nothing about funerals or
funerary monuments, the details of which are dealt with in the hadith
and legal texts (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 91; Smith and Haddad 1983;
Bowker 1991). Attitudes towards funerary architecture in the shari’ah
have been examined by Leisten, who makes the point that funerary
monuments were not widely used before the ninth century, with
common burial practices prior to this date consisting of interment
under a pile of stones, or the grave was simply left uncommemorated

face towards Mecca (sometimes supported in this position by bricks
or by a narrower grave-shaft). A confession of faith is said to the
deceased which is believed to enable it to answer the questions posed
by the interrogating angels Munkar and Nakir, and thus gain entry to
paradise. The grave itself should be reasonably shallow to allow the
deceased to hear the muezzin’s call, but also deep enough to allow
the corpse to sit up for its interrogation by Munkar and Nakir.
Only the place where the head of the deceased is laid may be com
memorated with a marker stone or piece of wood, the shahid (in this
context meaning witness). However, in reality great variety with
regard to grave markers is found according to the Islamic legal school
or sect followed and geographical area (Hastings 1911: 501—2; Gibb
and Kramers 1961: 89—90, 515—17; Dickie 1978: 44—6; Simpson 1995:

(1990: 12—13).

Early prohibitions on funerary architecture and commemoration of
the dead possibly reflected opposition to the pre-Islamic cult of the
dead in the Arabian peninsula, and the fact that ornate tombs were
considered ‘symbols of worldly pomp’ (Leisten 1990: 18). No special
attention should be paid to the place of the dead, and they should not
become the focus of worship, for all should be equal in death. Such
ideals were retained by some sects until today but for others were
relatively short—lived, even if disapproval for an ornamented or
inscribed gravestone might persist in Muslim law (Simpson 1995:
247). A variety of factors contributed to a growth in the use of
funerary architecture; these included the expansion of Islam beyond
the Arabian peninsula and the ensuing cultural admixture, pre-Islamic
survivals and the desire to express power and authority, both secular
and sacred (Hillenbrand 1994: 253—4). The widening gulf between
ideals and reality which developed in urban Egypt is commented
upon by Edward Lane (1895: 508), who observed a number of fu
nerals in Cairo in the early nineteenth century and remarked that ‘it is
astonishing to see how some of the precepts of the Prophet are every
day violated by all classes of modern Muslims, the Wahabys alone
excepted’.
Throughout the Muslim world an essentially uniform funerary rite
should be employed and should be straightforward, unostentatious
and simple: ‘the body is treated with a ceremonial which varies little
in different parts of the Muslim world, and is nearly the same for men
and women’ (Hastings 1911: 501). The funerary rites should entail
washing the corpse immediately following death, sealing the body
orifices and perfuming the body, which is then enveloped in the
shroud or grave clothes. Burial is rapid and the ritual prayer or salat
for the deceased is said either in the open in the cemetery or the
mosque (frequently in the cemetery) or sometimes in the house of
mourning. The stretcher or bier is carried to the place of burial by
men, followed by the funeral procession. The corpse is lifted out of
the bier and placed in the grave (a coffin is not usually used), the head
in the direction of the qiblah, so that it lies on its right side with the

241—2, 244—5).

While certain exceptions have to be acknowledged (discussed
below), the treatment of the corpse prior to burial, the procedures
for its actual interment, and its position within the grave, are fairly
uniform and vary little throughout the Muslim world. These should,
theoretically, allow the archaeological recognition of a Muslim burial.
It is above ground that ideals and realities diverge, and it is the means
of commemorating the dead the funerary monument and the way
in which these structures are manipulated by the living, which offer
us an insight not only into death but also into life, and are thus of
great importance.
—

—

The Place of the Dead
Within Islam, understandable prohibitions on disturbing Muslim
graves exist and these must be respected. Hence, the discussion of
sub-surface Muslim graves remains largely hypothetical. (The general
ethical dilemmas of disturbing the dead have been well covered else
where; see, for example, Webb 1987; Day 1990.) It could also be
argued that there is little to be gained from the study of individual
Muslim graves, due to the pan-Islamic methods of burial employed;
theoretically at least, princes and paupers should be buried according
to the same rites, and within the grave nothing should be found to
differentiate them.
Nevertheless, having emphasized the sensitivities associated with
this issue, it must also be stated that the importance of individual
interment to the Islamic archaeologist is great, and hence should be
included in this discussion. The reasons for this are various; first,
obvious useful paleo-pathological and anthropoiogical data can be

170

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

171

recovered as, for example, Prominska’s study of a thirteenth—four
teenth century Muslim cemetery at Kom el-Dikka in central Alexan
dria (1971). Secondly, the investigation of burials may allow the
recognition of a Muslim in the archaeological record. Thirdly, in
most cases the placing of the dead is the result of a conscious decision
(excepting accidents and casualties in war) and the logic behind these
decisions can tell us much about Muslim life. In order to explore this
concept, three levels of analysis will be discussed: the position and
treatment of the individual corpse, internal cemetery patterning and
intra-cemetery patterrnng.

The position and treatment of the individual corpse
The concept of the corpse as contaminating, impure and dangerous
appears to be almost universal, and Islam makes no exception. The
passage or transition of the corpse from this stage to the next has been
charted by Leach (1976, summarized in Parker Pearson 1993: 204).
He proposes a three-stage framework for the treatment of the dead,
with the first phase in the transitory process being the corpse in this
pre-burial and dangerous state. This useful framework can equally be
applied to the Muslim burial.
The probable absence of direct archaeological evidence for this first
and important phase means that without the ethnographic and
historical sources our understanding of such concepts within Islam
would be limited, thus restricting interpretative possibilities from the
beginning. Rites such as washing and perfuming the body would not,
obviously, be archaeologically detectable, but clues to the existence of
rites of purification might be found. One such indication would be
the shroud or grave clothes. Opinion varies as to the number of cloths
which should be used one, two, three or five but in general they
should be simple and usually white (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 89—90).
However, in practice, great variety is found. Hillenbrand (1994: 253),
for instance, mentions that the use of richly worked silk shrouds was
one of the first infringements of the original simple Muslim funerary
rites. In itself this possibly reflects the need to move beyond the
strictures of an essentially uniform rite, a recurring factor in the
elaboration of Islamic funerary practices.
The use of grave clothes could conceivably have opened up another
avenue for the display of social status. In Palestine, complete sets of
grave clothes, different for men and women, were used (see figure
6.1), which were sometimes prepared by the living ready for their
death (Granqvist 1965: 58—9). These are far removed from the simple
shroud or shrouds, but still do not reflect the opulence of the ornate
—

—

Figure 6.1 Grave clothes formerly used in Palestine. Top, men; bottom,
women (after Granqvist 1965: 60—1)

172

173

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

grave clothes of the rich of Egypt, where muslin, cotton and silk were
all used (Lane 1895: 506). However, in general, this first stage of the
transition of the dead will always be difficult to reconstruct in its
entirety based upon archaeological evidence.
The second stage might be of greater importance to the archaeol—
ogist; namely, the progress of the corpse into the ‘liminal zone’ which,
according to Parker Pearson (1993: 204), is physically manifest as a
cemetery, shrine or temple, where the funeral takes place and where
the corpse is separated from the living through burial or other forms
of disposal. It is the ritual activities associated with this stage that
could allow the recognition of a Muslim burial. The characteristics of
Muslim burial have already been outlined, and recognition criteria for
the archaeologist could be:

Broomhall mentions further infringements in Muslim burials in
China where the corpse was sometimes placed in a sitting position
(1910: 230). Islamic prohibition on interfering with the corpse were
also broken in Malawi, where the Muslim Yao prepared the body for
burial by cutting a hole in the neck and squeezing the intestine empty
(Bone 1982: 132). Although flouting Muslim law, such exceptions can
be due to the survival of pre-Islamic practices or a lack of religious
knowledge, and, though far from exhaustive, these examples indicate
that exceptions do exist. But, equally, certain generalities in how the
Muslim dead were and are treated can allow the archaeological
recognition of a Muslim burial.
The third and final stage in Leach’s framework, the passage of the
dead into the other world once the ritual activities are over, is of
course archaeologically unrecognizable. Nevertheless, material in
dications as to how the concept of the afterlife might be envisaged
could be found, and within the context of Islam these are discussed in
the final section of this chapter.

1 The position of the corpse within the grave (right-hand side, face to
qiblab), and the orientation of the grave pit.
2 The lack of grave goods.

3 The use of single interments, with gender segregation in separate
vaults.
This has greater than merely theoretical importance and such cri
teria have been found to operate in many places. For example, one of
the earliest explorations of the archaeology of the Jaulan in south
western Syria found that it was grave orientation that set Muslim
Bedouin tombs clearly apart from earlier, and very similar, stone-built
‘dolmens’. Both were built of stone slabs and surrounded by stone
circles, but the Muslim tombs were oriented differently, ‘incumbent
upon them from religious motives, whilst the general character of the
dolmen has been retained’ (Schumacher 1888: 130).
Exceptions to the recognition criteria can be found in all parts of
the world. Examples include: the placing of grave goods with Muslim
burials dated to between the mid-fourteenth and early eighteenth
centuries at Vohemar on the north-east coast of Madagascar (Verin
1986: 221—2; Dewar and Wright 1993: 444), and more occasionally
with burials in Palestine (Granqvist 1965: 56, 84, 249; see also Simp
son 1995: 245—7, for other examples of grave goods placed in Muslim
burials in the Near East). Communal graves were in use in Palestine
and the Punyal region of northern Pakistan (Jettmar 1967: 69—72).
Burckhardt (1830: 281) records that it was a custom of some of the
Bedouin of the eastern provinces of Egypt to ‘bury with the dead man
his sword, turban and girdle’. At Kossaima (Egypt) the dead man’s
shirt, head cloth, pipe, camel stick and cap were all left as offerings
on, rather than in, the grave (Woolley and Lawrence 1936: 44).

r

c

Internal cemetery patterning
Beyond the treatment of the individual corpse, the patterning of
the burials within the cemetery can also provide us with information
on Muslim communities. While the general archaeological theory
and methodology concerning spatial patterning within cemeteries
is, of course, applicable to Islamic funerary archaeology (see, for
example, Chapman et al. 1981; O’Shea 1984), it should be remem
bered that there is not always a simple equation between patterns of
life and those of death; they are not ‘mirror images of life’ (Hodder
1982a: 140). What, then, could be specifically gained within the
‘archaeology of Islam’ from a study of internal cemetery patterning,
aside from possible information on population size and descent
groups?
Dickie (1978: 46) makes the important point that Muslim cem
eteries ‘expand as a process of organic growth around a focus of
grace, baraka’, which in many cases is a saint’s tomb. This is because
it is thought that ‘proximity to a holy person will help protect the
grave from disturbance and increase the amount of blessing in the
afterlife’ (Simpson 1995: 244). Similar locational stimuli for burial
round a mosque can be provided by the qiblah, proximity to which
can also be desired. This notion of ‘sacred geography’ is of impor
tance, and could in certain instances over-ride the presumed logic of
inter-cemetery patterning, whereby familial groups congregate
together in a manner which perhaps suits the archaeologist more

174

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

than reality. Religious desires can provide the impetus to cemetery
use to such an extent that burial within the vicinity of a more
important saint’s tomb can lead to severe over-crowding and frequent
changing of the occupants of graves in closest proximity to the source
of baraka (see Gibb and Kramers 1961: 357 for a discussion of this
among the Sbi’ah). The archaeological recognition of suicides’ graves
could also be possible. The Prophet disapproved of suicide, and it is
forbidden in Islam (Rosenthal 1971: 1246). Therefore, it could be
asked whether the graves of suicides are accorded special treatment,
perhaps placed in a discrete section of the cemetery, or in another area
altogether? This is certainly of relevance as regards children; Simpson
records that separate areas or distinct cemeteries for children are
frequently found in the Near East (1995: 244).
A further question of increasing relevance within the contemporary
world is the archaeological recognition of Muslim space within nonMuslim environments. An instructive example can be provided in the
Cambridge city cemetery. The growth in the Muslim community
(discussed in chapter 2) dictated the need for a burial ground. This
has had obvious material culture implications, clearly visible in
figure 6.2, where the Muslim section of this cemetery is both
spatially separated and oriented in a different direction from the
blocks of non-Muslim and, in the majority, Christian graves. This
would be recognizable archaeologically, even if all surface indications
had gone, and the presence of a Muslim community would be
recognizable.

Muslim burial area

Figure 6.2 Alignment of Muslim burial section in comparison to the pre
dominantly Christian burials in the Newmarket Road Cemetery, Cambridge
(after the cemetery burial plots plan)

175

Intra-cemetery patterning
A third level of analysis is the patterning of cemeteries themselves. An
interesting example of this can be provided from an ethnographic
study in Timbuktu (Mali), where it was found that ‘the ecological
pattern of the dead strongly reflects that of the living’ (Miner 1953:
221). The city was enclosed on three sides by burial grounds (all
Muslim), with each cemetery having definite ethnic and quarter iden
tities. The Bela, formerly the vassals of the Tuareg, lived and buried
completely separately from the rest of the population. The Arabs also
tended to bury their dead in separate cemeteries, with different Arab
groups being further buried apart near their paternal kin. However,
some burial in the same cemeteries of Arab and Songhai (another major
ethnic group in the region) also occurred (Miner 1953). This illustrates
that correlations between territorial patterns of life can exist in death,
and that in certain contexts ethnic identity and residential patterns
might be reconstructed from funerary data. But within Muslim socie
ties, as in all societies, such patterns cannot be taken for granted.
Variation in cemetery patterning can also be found according to
region within the Muslim world. For example, in the Arabian penin
sula and the Near East, cemeteries were frequently located at the foot
or on the slopes of mountains at sites ‘imbued with an atmosphere of
sanctity’ (Ory 1991: 123), and Jewish and Christian cemeteries should
not be placed too near ‘those of the faithful’ (1991: 121). Burton-Page
also relates how, in certain areas of India, Muslim cemeteries are
situated south of the settlements, ‘possibly an extension of the south
as the quarter of Yama, the God of death’ (1991: 126). Simpson, in
considering cemetery location in western Asia, states that where
cemeteries are placed outside city walls, as at Mosul, they can become
‘the focus of certain other activities considered hazardous or “anti
social”, such as pottery production or car-repair garages’ (1995: 243).
Indirectly, cemetery patterning might also tell us something about
migration, pilgrimage and trade routes, and the borders of the Muslim
world as they changed over time. Cemeteries can grow up at nodal
points along these routes, perhaps where a saint’s tomb, meeting place
or caravanserai might have been located (Petersen 1994: 53—4). At the
frontiers of the Muslim world, Hillenbrand (1994: 264) mentions that
there appears to be a correlation between martyrs’ tombs. At Aswan
in Egypt, which bordered Christian Nubia, 50 or so Fatimid (969—
1171) mausoleums were found clustered in a vast cemetery, and were
apparently erected for ghazis, warriors who had died fighting for
Islam. Similar patterns were also apparent in Central Asia. A more

176

177

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

detailed analysis of such cemetery patterning might be of use in
charting the fluidity of the frontiers of Islam over the centuries.
The three levels of analysis discussed show that examining the place
of the dead in Islam provides a possible starting point for new
research. They also begin to hint at the variability which exists, and
the variety of information on Muslim society which might be recov
ered by the archaeologist through examining funerary data. Perhaps
most significantly, it was shown that, theoretically at least, a universal
and archaeologically recognizable Muslim burial exists, another cat
egory of evidence which might allow the archaeological recognition
of a Muslim and a Muslim community.

architecture, and the interpretative possibilities which exist as regards
its social function.

Tombs for the Living and the Dead
As well as ‘below ground’ aspects of Muslim burial, it is also neces
sary to consider the Islamic commemorative structure as a medium
for conveying a variety information about the deceased, but also
about those left behind. Fleming (1973) has described European
megalithic tombs as ‘tombs for the living’, and this notion is transfer
able to many Islamic funerary monuments which, as well as com
memorating the dead, were often designed to impress or convey
information to the living. They could become, according to Mujeeb
(1967: 183), ‘a symbol unifying life, death and eternity’. Moreover,
through the use of marble, fired-brick or other materials, a statement
could be made concerning power, grief, sanctity or love, and hence,
by constructing a funerary monument, the dead could be ‘brought to
life’ and, as Metcalf and Huntingdon (1991) discuss, used to reinforce
or legitimize the claims of the living.
There exists no uniform ‘meaning’ or ‘role’ for Muslim funerary
architecture; it varies regionally, according to doctrinal or sectarian
affiliation and to factors such as personal choice and wealth (many
people are not at all affected by building mausoleums and a simple
tombstone could suffice as a marker, if one is used at all). Among the
Shi’ah, for example, there is an emphasis on martyrdom, and pil
grimages to tombs and veneration of martyrs are of importance. In
North Africa, the ‘cult of the saints’ is of significance, and funerary
architecture, or rather the saint within, can form a focus for commu
nal identity and belief. Among the Wahhabis of Saudi Arabia, the
reverse is true, and the doctrines of early Islam are restored, with
simplicity being the essence of funerary practices, and with no
veneration of saints. Thus the following examples serve to illus
trate some of the diversity which exists within Islamic funerary

Display
Often primary among the factors underlying the construction of a
funerary monument are notions of display. Building a tomb is of
greater visibility to the living than merely ornate graveclothes,
which after burial would soon be forgotten, and offers another way
of moving beyond the strictures of the formal Muslim burial rites.
Above ground imagination could be freed, and architectural expres
sion and the architect’s creativity exploited. Furthermore, the tomb
provides a means of creating a lasting legacy, through monumentalis
ing the deceased, and even, it can be argued, placing them within
history. Various dimensions are possible and three will be discussed
here.
Status The first factor which might be of importance is the demon
stration of status, religious or otherwise, and in India such concepts
were taken to their extreme. Here, the ultimate secular monuments
were created (Taphoo 1974, 1975), a process which culminated in the
Mughal period (1626—1858). During this time, single-chambered
tombs were replaced by tombs consisting of one large central cham
ber set within a garden divided into four by axial waterways, the
chahar-bagh, with a subsidiary pavilion at each corner of the garden
(1975: 24). These Mughal garden tombs served as ostentatious sym
bols of wealth and prestige, indicated by the fact that they were often
built by their ultimate occupants well before death, and were used as
places for feasting and celebrations prior to fulfilling their primary
function (Jellicoe 1976: 112), as a capsule for the dead.
After death, the garden tomb could continue to serve as a symbol
of the deceased’s wealth and status, but a change in symbolic function
sometimes occurred. If the care of the tomb complex was entrusted
into the guardianship of a Muslim holyman (as often happened), the
occupant of the tomb might thus also take on a more pious identity,
more so than in life, and a form of ‘legitimization’, as discussed by
Metcalf and Huntingdon (1991), took place. A social statement might
also be made, literally saying ‘I am pious’, and achieved through
utilizing an existing tradition of architectural form and an endow
ment process, both of which were connected with such ideas of piety.
Gibb and Kramers (1961: 334) note that it became a custom for the
powerful to prepare a tomb and an adjoining funerary mosque for
themselves while alive because ‘just as the qubba under which the

178

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

179

saint lay and the mosque adjoining it was sanctified by him so viceversa a qubba and a mosque could cause a deceased person to become
considered a saint’. The benefits of investing in a monumental tomb
might therefore be gained twice: first, in life, as a worldly symbol of
wealth, and a place to party; and, secondly, after death, by continuing
as a symbol of wealth, but perhaps also of piety. Therefore different
identities could be created through the use of funerary architecture
and accompanying endowments.
Love A second possible dimension associated with building a funer
ary monument is to display love, and again India offers a fine exam
ple, the Taj Mahal on the outskirts of Agra, built by Shah Jahan
between 1632 and 1654 for his wife, Arjumand Banu Begam, better
known as Mumtaz Mahal. Vast resources were poured into the build
ing of this monumental tomb complex, not for pious reasons, or
solely for the purposes of displaying wealth, but, more importantly,
as an act of remembrance of, and as a testimony to his love for, his
wife. No expense was spared in building the Taj Mahal. Brick, not
wood—scaffolding was used, and a ramp over 3 km long was built to
lift material to the dome. Both craftsmen and materials were imported
not only from different regions of India, but also from other areas of
the Muslim world, including Baghdad, Shiraz and Samarkand. White
marble set with inlays of precious and semi-precious stones, forming
inscriptions and decorative motifs, was used on the exterior, while the
interior was equally sumptuously finished with marble filigree
screens surrounding the replica tombs (the actual burials were
below ground), and furnishings including gold lamps and Persian
carpets (Davies 1989: 193—5; see also Nath 1970; Volwahsen 1970;
Qaisar 1988). The finished monument is truly magnificent (see plate
6.1). Indeed, it has been described as having ‘sexual appeal. a seduc
tive building’ (Tillotson 1990: 101), owing to its flesh-like surface of
marble. This perhaps could be further interpreted as testimony to
Shah Jahan’s physical, as well as spiritual, love for the woman who
bore him 14 children.
However, it is when dealing with emotion in all its many forms that
the process of interpretation becomes most difficult, and thus a con
sideration of all the intense emotions which inevitably accompany
something as traumatic as death is often neglected by archaeologists.
Perhaps within the context of such a substantive monument as the Taj
Mahal it is easy to begin to say something about the emotions
accompanying death, grief for a lost lover perhaps (see Begley 1979
for an alternative and less-convincing interpretation of the Taj
Mahal), but equally, with lesser monuments, such emotions could
.

.

Plate 6.1

The Taj Mahal, Agra (photo. T. Insoll)

also be relevant. The person buried was once in all certainty some
one’s relative, perhaps their lover, but it is often easier (and safer) to
concentrate on the socio-political domain, thus de-personalizing what
is after all a very personal event. The fact that emotion of all sorts
must be inextricably linked with Islamic death and burial, as with any
other, need not be reiterated. Emotion can be displayed on many
levels, from the mass emotion which was visibly apparent on our
television screens when Ayatollah Khomeini was buried in 1989 to
that of numberless family burials which have occurred over the
centuries. When considering such a sensitive and personal subject,
the archaeologist should bear in mind that funerary evidence is
undoubtedly imbued with an ‘emotional legacy’, unapproachable as
that might be.
Muslim identity A third type of information which might be
displayed through building a funerary monument is Muslim identity.
As we saw with the Taj Mahal, the very materials used in funerary
architecture can also serve as a means of conveying information.
These materials can range from the more obviously costly, such
as the semi-precious stone inlays and white marble of the Taj
Mahal, to the less obvious, such as the use of fired-brick in the

180

181

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

central and western Sudanic regions of Africa, where its symbolic
status depended upon the context in which it was employed.
Although it was not imported, it still served as a highly obvious
indicator of social status through the amount of resources, primarily
water and fuel, which had to be invested in its manufacture in
this often resource-poor environment. Thus, fired-brick appears to
have served as a ‘material of power’ in both funerary and other
contexts. This is indicated by a comment by Ibn Sa’id (died
c. 1286—7) who reported that in Barisa (Senegal) ‘none builds with
plaster and baked bricks except a ruler or a person of wealth and
distinction to whom he has given permission to do so’ (Levtzion and
Hopkins 1981: 185).
This has been recorded archaeologically in the cemetery at
Gao-Saney (Mali) where various fired-brick tombs were found
(twelfth—thirteenth centuries) (Mauny 1951; Insoll 1996b). The use
of fired-brick in this region in the ‘palace buildings’ at Ouara (Chad)
and at Garoumele (Niger) (Binet 1956; Bivar and Shinnie 1962: 4;
Lebeuf and Kirsch 1989: 25—6) suggest that fired-brick was a visible
material symbol of social status, but possibly also of Islamization.
There certainly appears to be a correlation between the use of firedbrick, often only for a short-lived period in selective contexts (tombs,
mosques and palaces), and the initial acceptance of Islam by the
indigenous rulers. Thus it can be seen that Islamic funerary architec
ture, both materials and structures, can serve not only to commem
orate the deceased but can also display and convey a variety of
information to the living.

monument as that of someone of great material worth, perhaps an
important secular figure, which would obviously be completely
inaccurate.
In direct contrast to this are the Wahhabi sect (described in chapter
1), whose essential doctrine Niezen describes as ‘true Islam [is] that of
the first generation of Muslims, the Prophet and his immediate suc
cessors’ (1987: 2). They are opposed to ‘the cult of saints’, and
Wahhabi burial is in keeping with the original Muslim custom of
commemorating the grave, if at all, by a pile of rocks, a practice
originally intended to protect the corpse from wild animals (Laqueur
1992: 284). Kings and paupers should thus be buried in the same way,
theoretically at least, which gives rise to the interesting mental picture
of the Saudi prince, living in a luxurious house, with a garage full of
expensive cars, being indistinguishable in death from the person who
burns or collects his rubbish. Thus, it can be seen that the absence of a
substantial funerary monument need not always imply that the per
son buried necessarily lacked social status or material wealth. Diver
sity and complexity are again the keywords.

Inversions of reality
What is displayed, however, can equally be misleading. For example,
the presence or absence of a monumental tomb need not be a true
reflection of the worldly status of the deceased. Treatment in death is
not necessarily consistent with position in life, and doubts are
thus cast on any claims for the existence of certainties as regards
funerary architecture as a metaphor for social status. This is illus
trated by considering a hypothetical case study contrasting the
treatment of Sufi saints and Saudi princes after death. The former
may have led hermit-like or ascetic existences, perhaps shunning
worldly goods, and devoting themselves to a life of contemplation,
of reading the Qur’an and religious devotion. Through their saintly
reputation, followers might erect a funerary monument totally dis
proportionate to their worldly status. The archaeologist, lacking any
additional information, such as inscriptions, could interpret such a

Multiple meanings
But just as the meaning of funerary architecture can be misleading, it
can equally be very complex. We return again to the fact that many
aspects of Islamic material culture can have various meanings depend
ing upon the observer or interpreter. An interesting case study,
demonstrating the existence of ‘multiple meanings’ in funerary archi
tecture, is provided by the local tradition of building ‘pillar tombs’ on
the East African coast. These are so called because the deceased is
commemorated by a large pillar (up to 6 m), usually made of coral,
which is often inset with imported porcelain dishes. They are asso
ciated with the Swahili (see chapter 3) and are found from southern
Somalia down the coast into Tanzania, and date from between the
fourteenth and seventeenth centuries (Kirkman 1966; Prins 1967;
Sanseverino 1983). A group of these monuments on the northern
coast of Kenya was analysed by Wilson who found that they seem
to have served a variety of functions beyond merely providing ‘a
suitable resting place for the earthly remains of worthy or wealthy
persons’ (1979: 33).

They functioned, first, as symbols of ancestry and lineage, or
Waungwana status, representing people with deep roots in the com
munity who were usually wealthy and in positions of authority, but
not necessarily of religious authority. For example, the founder of the
madrasab in Lamu (Kenya), though revered as a saint, was denied a

182

DEATH AND BURIAL

funerary monument built of permanent materials earlier in this cen
tury because he never attained the required Waungwana status (Wil
son 1979: 34). The possession of this status appears to have over
ridden religious considerations. Thus, both funerary architecture and
‘the ancestors’ appear to be used to legitimize social and political
claims in this specific context. However, it would also appear that it is
the claims of the living that are being pursued, rather than those of
the deceased by reinforcing the possession of the all-important
Waungwana status.
As well as their secular importance to the living, the tombs were
also imbued with religious significance, and could be used within
rituals of ancestor and spirit worship, which co-existed with orthodox
Muslim practice (and in certain instances continue to do so). Archae
ological evidence attesting to these non-Muslim rituals has been
found, including incense burners, and a pillar tomb, which had
what appeared to be a chimney at its centre, was possibly used in
sacrificial rites. This evident lack of Islamic orthodoxy has been
further indicated by the orientations of certain tombs, which are
often many degrees off the almost due north required on the
East African coast. This led Wilson (1979: 41) to suggest that the
tombs were built by people ‘who were outside the firm grip of Islam
or who were innocently ignorant of the finer points of orthodoxy or
geography’.
Thus, in this example, a variety of functions and meanings appear
to underlie the Swahili pillar tombs. These in turn appear to be logical
within the context of Swahili society which is a blend of Indian
Ocean and African elements, of Islam and traditional beliefs. Physi
cally, the pillar tombs stretch the idea of the Muslim marker stone or
shahid to its absolute limits, and this is incorporated within, and
adapted to, the needs of Swahili society. Undoubtedly, the meaning
of these monuments within Swahili society was even more compli
cated than has been suggested, but part of their former meaning might
now be lost forever. How would the interpretative possibilities have
been restricted without an understanding of the concept of Waung
wana status? This was largely gained from historical and ethno
graphic sources, and would have been difficult, if not impossible, to
reconstruct from archaeological data alone. The Swahili tombs were
imbued with multiple meanings which could vary according to status
and the participant or observer involved. They served to commemor
ate the dead and, perhaps more importantly, function for the living.
Furthermore, the Swahili tombs also provide a salutary lesson as to
the interpretative possibilities of funerary architecture, but which
equally may elude us.

DEATH AND BURIAL

183

Tombs as a focus
Muslim funerary architecture may also have social significance in
acting as a focus for religious devotion or for the community. Primary
among these are the range of structures associated with the mystical
and saintly aspects of Islam. Though often strictly opposed by the
orthodox and condemned by fatwa (formal legal pronouncements
such as that made by Ibn Taymiya in the fourteenth century), saints’
tombs and the ‘cult of saints’, Sufi orders and mystical Islam are of
great importance in many areas of the Muslim world to both Sunni
and Shi’ah, and Islam had to yield to a need for practices such as the
veneration of saints. Saints’ tombs and ‘re-incorporated pre-Islamic
sanctuaries’ (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 324, 629) became of prime
importance in many areas of the Muslim world. To the archaeologist
interested in Islam this category of structure is of significance, not
least in their abundance. They act within ‘sacred geography’, becom
ing almost ‘sacred markers’ within the landscape. Innumerable exam
ples of funerary architecture forming the focus of pilgrimage or the
physical or spiritual centres of communities could be cited, and a
wide variety of local types of commemorative structure is found, too
many to be discussed in detail here. Hence only a couple of examples
will be cited to illustrate their importance and the role they can play
in the lives of many Muslims by acting not only as tombs for the
dead, but also as focal points of great importance to the living.
Saints and Sufis Without parallel as examples of this phenomenon
are the tombs of saints and Sufis, but (as noted in chapter 1) to define
the saint and Sufi as completely separate entities in every instance is
perhaps to categorize them too rigidly. A Sufi is a Muslim mystic who
is usually a member of a religious order or tariqah (but need not be).
A saint is a holy person who need not be a Sufi and can be anyone of
sufficient spiritual status. Similarly, a Sufi leader or founder of an
order could often acquire saintly status, thus a certain interchange
ability of role is possible, though how the funerary monuments are
materially manifest might differ. Generally (though, of course, excep
tions exist), a Sufi tomb will form part of a larger complex of build
ings, a monastery, convent or lodge, while a saint’s tomb can be (but
need not be) isolated within the landscape.
The appeal of a saint’s tomb, Sufi or otherwise, is due to the notion
that the soui of the saint lingers around the tomb, baraka is present
and will aid people who seek the intervention of the saint through
petitions, prayers and offerings of various kinds. Typically, around a

184

DEATH AND BURIAL

Sufi/saint’s tomb a complex of buildings will grow up or, if already
extant, the tomb of the founder will be centrally placed. These com
plexes have many forms and names, zawiyah (North Africa), khana
qah (Central Asia), dargah (India), tekke (Turkey), depending on
where in the Muslim world they are found (the concern here is
only with the types of structure which incorporate a tomb). The
complex can be composed of a variety of buildings: the tomb of the
founder and perhaps of his descendants, a mosque, madrasab, public
baths, library, accommodation for the resident members of the order,
their families and servants, and for pilgrims and travellers, the whole
often enclosed by a surrounding wall (Trimingham 1971: 176; Brett
1990: 35; Baha Tanman 1992: 147). Numerous examples of Sufi com
plexes which incorporate at their centre a saint’s tomb could be
provided. Golombek (1974), for example, records one at Natanz
which was in existence in Iran in the fourteenth century. The shrine
was centred around the tomb of a Sufi shaykh, with a mosque, cistern,
lodgings, minaret, and the corridors and vestibules ‘connecting the
various parts of the complex’ (1974: 420). Of importance is the fact,
noted by Golombek, that the focus upon the shaykh occurred after
his death. ‘It is as if the shaykh were deemed a more “valuable” asset
in his tomb than alive and teaching’ (1974: 422).
In contrast to the complete complex is the single tomb or com
memorative structure. The qubba, or domed tomb, found throughout
the Muslim world, is a good example of this type of monument (see
plate 6.2), and can range in both design and materials from the
humble to the magnificent. The dome is a sign of veneration, but
does not itself have a specific funerary attribute (Grabar 1966: 44).
Qubbas can mark either the actual burial place of the saint or holy
person or something associated with them or simply act as a memor
ial shrine (Trimingham 1949: 142). No binding rules exist, but it
should be noted that the domed tomb, and indeed all other types of
saints’ tombs, can function as a focus of community attention and
become the object of pilgrimage.

Martyrs Another class of Islamic funerary monument which can
become objects of pilgrimage are martyrs’ tombs and shrines. These
range from humble piles of stones to vast soaring edifices. As was
discussed in the context of jihad (see chapter 4), the significance of
martyrdom within Islam should not be understated and is of parti
cular importance for the Shi’ah, with Hussein, the grandson of the
Prophet, who was slaughtered at Karbala in 680, ‘the shahid par
excellence’ (Gibb and Kramers 1961: 516). Burial at martyrs’ shrines
is considered an honour, and corpses are brought from afar for

F

DEATH AND BURIAL

185

Plate 6.2 Qubbas from the air, Old Dongola, Sudan (Institute of Archae
ology, London)
interment at the shrines of the most important martyrs. Lassy (1916:
146—9), for example, relates how in Azerbaijan successive burial
was sometimes practised: first, in a shallow, temporary grave to
allow the flesh to decay; then, once this was complete, the clean
bones would be transported to Karbala for reburial in the company
of the ‘beloved Hussein’. Besides the obvious significance of a vast
build-up of funerary remains at certain popular locations, this exam
ple also presents the interesting scenario of certain areas devoid of
whole strata of people in the funerary archaeological record; namely,
those wealthy enough to arrange transport of their remains to sites
such as Karbala.

The political role of tombs A further factor of possible importance is
the political role that these structures, or rather their contents, can
sometimes play in Muslim communities; the saint can function as a
focus of religious devotion or communal identity hostile to and
beyond the control of the ‘accepted’ religious or secular authorities,
represented by the government and the ulama, the Muslim learned
class of the cities. Similarly, Sufis could also be regarded with
suspicion. Being ‘mystics’, and often thought to espouse ‘semi-social-

186

187

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

ist’ doctrines or to possess loyalties transcending national or ethnic
boundaries, they were often seen as ‘rebel figures’ (Ahmed 1988: 91).
Indeed, one of the first acts of the new secular Turkish republic on
assuming power in the early years of this century was to close the
dervish lodges and to forbid public manifestations of dervish life
(Lifchez 1992: 6). Similarly, within the former Soviet Union, Sufi
tariqab were condemned as ‘fanatical anti-Soviet, anti-social, reac
tionary force[s]’, and shrines and tombs were turned into antireligious museums, as, for instance, the Shah-i-Zenda in Samarkand
(Bennigsen and Enders Wimbush 1986: 22, 62).
The role of funerary architecture in politico-religious strife would
be difficult to reconstruct archaeologically, but the anthropological
and historical literature abounds with examples illustrating this often
contentious aspect of the cult of saints and Sufism. In North Africa,
the ‘cult of the saints’, centred on tombs or shrines, is often an
important part of religious life, especially significant in rural areas
(Montet 1909; Dermengheim 1954; Gellner 1969). In Tunisia, an
example is provided by the centrality of the cult of saints in the
village of Sidi Ameur, where tombs form not only the physical
focus of the community, with the clustering of the habitations of
the descendants of the saints around the zawiyah or tomb, but also
the spiritual focus of pilgrimage and sacrifice (Abu Zaria 1982).
Saints’ tombs played a major role in life to the extent that the national
political party attempted to replace the zawiyah and the cult of
saints with local party branches, and through education tried to
develop a national ideology standing against ‘archaic customs’
(1982: 194, 201).
Another example in late eighteenth-century Algeria was a conflict
between the urban based authorities and a rural Sufi order over the
‘baraka-producing remains’ of a Sufi-saint. The saint’s corpse was
actually stolen from the Kabyles of the Jurjura and taken to Algiers as
the burial ceremonies for the saint in the Kabyle zawiyah would,
according to Clancy-Smith, ‘attract large crowds of pilgrims to the
tomb seeking divine favours through the saint’s intercession, some
thing that could lead to unrest among a fractious population located
on the boundaries of Turkish authority’ (1993: 167) (Algeria then
being under Ottoman control). Eventually a miracle was proclaimed,
and the saint, his body duplicated, became the ‘man with two tombs’,
each exuding the all-important baraka one in Algiers and the other
in the Jurjura.
But how is this of importance to the archaeologist? For several
reasons: first, because we are witnessing the active utilization and
manipulation of funerary architecture and funerary remains in the

struggle for religious and political loyalties and power. Thus, this
provides another example of the potency of funerary architecture as
actively, and not passively, constituted, not solely a dead tomb for a
dead individual but a tomb acting both for the living and the dead.
Furthermore, such conflicts remind us of the ‘different Islams’ which
can exist, urban and rural, orthodox and mystical. But how it might
be recognized archaeologically is not at all certain. What, then, are the
general implications which can be drawn from this consideration of
Islamic funerary architecture for archaeologists? Our examination of
the way tombs can function for both the living and the dead
has shown that these structures function within Islam at a much
deeper level than that of merely providing an attractive resting
place for the deceased. In many contexts it might be feasible for the
archaeologist to interpret something of the social role and significance
of a Muslim tomb, since a rich body of ethnographic, sociological
and historical data exists which can help in formulating ways of
considering the archaeological data and in suggesting options which
might otherwise be neglected. Yet, besides the burial itself and the
possible accompanying commemorative structure, a third source of
evidence exists: funerary epigraphy and iconography, the ‘language of
death’.

—

Funerary Epigraphy: the Language of Death

Although decorated or inscribed gravestones are disapproved of in
Muslim law, the fact remains that the use of funerary epigraphy and
iconography as a means of signalling a variety of information is a
widespread phenomenon, and within Islam much can be learnt from
this source of evidence. De Moraes Farias (1990: 69), for example,
describes how a common genre of Muslim funerary epigraphy exists:
opening with the basmala formula, followed by the name of the
deceased, the date of death, and ‘one or more quotations from, or
paraphrases of, or allusions to, the Qur’an’. In many regions, how
ever, the use of Qur’anic inscriptions is rare, the reason being that
they might be trodden on or disturbed (Simpson 1995: 247). What is
present will vary, and the existence of funerary epigraphic traditions
throughout the Muslim world provides a rich source of evidence
which is much more varied than merely stating that so-and-so was
buried in such-and-such. Funerary inscriptions are used for many
purposes: to signal gender, social status, occupation, religious piety,
and for claiming origins and ethnicity, ownership or use of something
or somewhere through descent, to express religious beliefs, and even

188

189

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

to ‘indigenize’ Islam, bridging the gap between Muslim and nonMuslim practice.
The very existence of an inscribed tombstone can tell us something
about the deceased, besides the information gained from reading it.
Not everyone could afford an engraved or inscribed tombstone, so
often what we are seeing are the wealthier or revered members of
society. The ‘top-heavy’ archaeology of Islam is again apparent,
working in favour of the upper echelons, both secular and sacred.
Even the crude scratched inscription on an unworked marker stone
implies a degree of literacy, which might have been beyond the
abilities of a percentage of the population, possibly a sizeable percent
age, in an age when literacy could have been restricted.

ogists, as well as the need to utilize general archaeological tools such
as relational analogy and the other contextual interpretative meth
odologies developed over the past 15 years or so (see, for example,
Hodder 1982a,b, 1986).

Symbols
Symbols are one means of overcoming this problem. Among the Lurs
of western Iran, for example, complex iconography was employed on
funerary stelae dating from the late eighteenth to mid-twentieth
centuries. These included figural representations symbolizing both
the religious beliefs of this Shi’ah ethnic group, and also providing
more practical information on gender and, indirectly, on migration
routes. Mortensen (1991: 81—6, 1993: 136—44) isolated a variety of
motifs, including a geometric garden design, invoking a mental image
of paradise, strings of prayer beads, combs and prayer stones, used by,
and so representing, men. Most interesting was an image of a riderless
horse, which appears to be a representation of the martyrdom of the
Imam Hussein, who is of central importance to the Shi’ah faith. This
image served two purposes: to focus attention on the day of judge
ment and the afterlife and, on a more worldly level, to indicate the
pious intentions of the deceased (Mortensen 1991: 86). The combina
tion of pictorial and written information perhaps also served to
inform both the literate and the illiterate.
A variety of information is conveyed by these tombstones with
their ‘value-laden symbols’ (Hodder 1982a: 213). However, in this
case the code to these highly informative material symbols is being
lost through disruptive policies such as the forced sedentarization of
the Lurs, which is upsetting the equilibrium of their way of life, and
which has led to discontinuation in the erection of pictorial tomb
stones (Mortensen 1991: 86). This begs the question of how much we
are now unable to translate in the repertoire of Islamic iconography
and symbolism? There is certainly still much to decode, with a partial
solution offered through closer working contacts between ‘Islamic’
archaeologists, art historians, architects, historians and anthropol

Piety, doctrines and human nature
Less overtly symbolic, but equally informative, are the funerary stelae
of the Gao region of Mali. In certain instances, both the gravestones
and the scripts were imported into this region. Five of the tombstones
found at the site of Gao-Saney were imported, ready carved with
name and date, across the Sahara from Muslim Spain (probably from
Almeria) in the early twelfth century (Sauvaget 1950; Vire 1958; de
Moraes Farias 1990; Insoll 1996b). The very presence of these stelae
in the Gao Region meant that the Almoravid dynasty then control
ling Al-Andalus had overcome its scruples about using commemorat
ive funerary stelae in providing these items for export. De Moraes
Farias (1990: 76) has suggested that the religious austerity of the
southern Alnioravids evident in their home territories of the western
Sahara, was transferred north, hence the dearth of funerary inscrip
tions dating from their period of control of Spain (1056—1147). But a
desire for such commemorative devices obviously existed at Gao, and
this was fulfilled as the Almoravid appetite for the commodities
which could be sourced from this region (discussed in chapter 5)
was stronger than their religious scruples. Thus, human nature, in
the form of greed, might be expressed in the presence of these stelae.
It would also appear that the funerary stelae at Gao were used for
purposes other than merely commemorating the dead. One of the
factors behind the initial conversion to Islam by local rulers in the
Western Sahel and Sudan, including those at Gao, was prestige, and
even after death the new-found faith could be proclaimed. Three of
the kings commemorated on stelae, including two of the imported
Spanish examples dating from the early twelfth century, in the cem
etery at Gao-Saney were recent converts to Islam. Their new identity,
and indeed their piety, were clearly shown by successively adopting
the name of the Prophet, and of the first two caliphs, Abu Bakr and
Umar (Flight n.d.: 1). A century later, other funerary inscriptions in
the Gao region show that Islam had been ‘indigenized’, with the use
of local names present. For example, one tombstone dated to 1210
and recovered from the cemetery at Gorongobo, bears local Songhai
female names, the dominant sedentary ethnic group in the region.
Thus, we can learn much more from ‘the language of death’ than
merely who was buried where and when.

190

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

191

Ethnic identity: ‘us’ and ‘you’
The Hui, on the coast of southern China, continue to use Islamic
funerary inscriptions in subtle ways. The Chendai Hui, who form
part of the Hui ethnic minority, use gravestones bearing inscriptions
in Arabic as proof of their ‘otherness’, their identity, ‘etched in stone’
(Gladney 1991: 265), in their struggle to create a cultural and ethnic
identity and to differentiate themselves from their Han Chinese
neighbours with whom they are virtually culturally indistinct (see
Dasheng and Kalus 1991, for a list of the inscriptions). This raises the
interesting question why, if they are so far removed from Islam and
Muslim practices, would Muslim tombs, funerary inscriptions and
other Islamic monuments be so important to the Chendai Hui?
Gladney (1991) eloquently approaches this issue with reference to
the Ding lineage of the Chendai Hui. She suggests that a variety of
reasons contributed to the importance placed on the Arabic funerary
inscriptions (and other material culture). For example, under the
communist government historical cultural traits were essential for
proving ethnic identity, and achieving this brought benefits such as
economic assistance for an ‘underprivileged minority’ (1991: 274).
Thus, it would make sense to utilize funerary and other monuments
pro-actively in such a situation. But it would also appear that the
importance of the monuments has altered over time. In periods of
stress or need, they could be employed, literally, as historical texts,
attesting to the rights, obligations and foreign ancestral traditions of
the Hui; equally, they could be quietly forgotten.
The complexities involved in the relationship between the Chendai
Hui and their legacy of funerary inscriptions is evident when funer
ary epigraphy can be seen to function ‘the other way’, so to speak.
While gravestones could be used to affirm different ethnic identity, in
this case, Islamic, they could also reflect the problem of being a
‘foreign’ minority within the midst of a sometimes hostile majority.
Hence Arabic and Chinese texts were often combined, possibly as a
means of justifying that the Hui also belong, they are not so different
as to warrant persecution. In Quanzhou (Canton), an interesting
example of an early stage in this process has been recorded, where
an inscription dating from the tenth—eleventh centuries has, at the top
of the stele, a standard Arabic inscription and, below, a Chinese
inscription reading ‘grave of the barbarian guest’ (Gladney 1991:
191): a juxtaposition of foreign Muslim tradition with what must be
a Chinese reflection on the deceased (see figure 6.3). Also in Quan
zhou, a trilingual inscription in Arabic, Persian and Chinese dating

Figure 6.3 Bilingual tombstone in Chinese and Arabic from Quanzhou,
China, probably dating from the tenth or eleventh century (after Gladney
1991: 191)

from 1750 was recorded set into a tomb. The terminology applied to
the deceased differs between the languages; in Arabic he is referred to
as ‘this feeble man, the deceased’, while in Chinese he is the ‘pioneer
sage’ (Broomhall 1910: 113—14).
Yet perhaps the most informative example of the pragmatic and
complex interplay between foreign, Islamic and Chinese tradition and
terminology is provided by another inscription from Quanzhou.
Here, members of the Pu Hui lineage changed their name from the
foreign sounding ‘Pu’ to the Chinese ‘Wu’ to escape persecution and

192

193

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

this was reflected on their tombstones: on the front of their tombs
would be inscribed ‘Wu’s tomb’ and on the back, secretly, ‘Pu’s tomb’
(Gladney 1991: 273). This secretive, almost subversive, juggling of
Muslim and Chinese tradition, of ‘otherness’ and ‘belonging’, is far
from fossilized and has been shown to alter over time. The relation
ship between the two traditions of Islamization and Sinicization, and
the resultant implications for Chinese Hui Muslim culture, are encap
sulated by Israeli when he remarks: ‘the Proposition that Muslims in
China have simply become Chinese Muslims is thus, and indeed turns
out in historical perspective to be, a superficial observation at worst, a
reckless generalisation at best’ (1979: 169). More than the outward
Sinicization of Islam is apparent, but its intricacies can be approached
through material culture, and preserved for the archaeologist, in this
instance through funerary inscriptions.

grams to commemorate dates. For example, 1622 is represented on a
tomb in Drajat by a carved panel depicting a sea with waves, above
which an arrow is extended, symbolism which Ambary interprets as
‘segara umob panab tunggal’ or 1544 saka (1986: 34). Hence, in
eastern Java, where circumstances are wholly different from those
experienced by the Hui, Islamic identity could be much more openly
proclaimed and, importantly, indigenized without accompanying
fears and pressures.

Indigenizing Islam
A group of funerary inscriptions from eastern Java provides an
apparently more straightforward instance of the indigenization of
Islam in Asia, but without the accompanying subterfuge. Indonesia
is today home to the largest Muslim population in the world, with the
majority living on the island of Java (Ricklefs 1979: 100). Muslim
contacts began when foreign, as opposed to local, Muslim trading
communities were established in northern and eastern Java by the
eleventh century (Woodward 1989: 58; see also Tjandrasamita 1978).
The spread of Islam from these trading communities and its accept
ance by the local community has been charted by Ambary (1986)
through an analysis of funerary epigraphy. The earliest stele dating
from the eleventh century at Leran was imported for a foreign
Muslim, but by the fourteenth century local groups were inscribing
tombstones in Arabic in a simple form, sometimes incorrectly, as at
Tralaya. Dates given in Javanese script indicate the local connection,
for instance at Trawulan, where a stone of 1368 was dated saka
1290 (Damais 1968), which is of significance, according to Ricklefs,
as ‘the use of the saka era strongly suggests that this is the oldest
surviving gravestone of a Javanese, rather than a foreign, Muslim’

Status and religious affiliation
A final example of the Islamic ‘language of death’ are the anthro
pomorphic gravestones of Ottoman Turkey. In the Ottoman empire,
with its complex bureaucracy (Inalcik 1973; Wheatcroft 1995), rank
and social position were signalled in death as in life. Elaborate icon
ography and calligraphy carved on to the stones were used to denote
secular status and religious affiliation from the sixteenth century
onwards. Secular tombstones were carved and painted, with those
on men’s graves topped with a turban denoting their rank (see plate
6.3), probably derived from pre-Islamic Turkic tradition, while
women’s were decorated with flowers and children’s were made in
miniature versions (Goodwin 1988: 62; Laqueur 1992: 284).

(1979: 103).

Towards the end of the fourteenth century, the local Javanese script
had become more conspicuous, and the use of Arabic declined, a
process which continued: ‘once Islam had firmly taken root in Java
nese society about the beginning of the sixteenth century, local ele—
ments once more are prominent in the calligraphy’ (Ambary 1986:
25). This is also reflected in the reappearance of pictograms or chrono

Plate 6.3 Ottoman tombstones, Hadarpasha cemetery, Istanbul (photo.
T. Insoll)

195

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

One of the best studied aspects of Ottoman funerary iconography
is that connected with the Sufi or dervish orders. The stelae used on
dervish graves were used to denote membership of a specific dervish
order and even lodge (tekke) (De Jong 1989; Lifchez 1992). Laqueur
(1992: 286—91) has shown how this art form developed from the
sixteenth century, and expanded in the eighteenth century in Istanbul.
Representations of the dervish’s headgear were carved in the round or
incised, in certain cases, the gui or rosette design crowning the head
gear allowed the specific tariqat (Sufi order) to be recognized, with
even the internal hierarchy of the tekke being sometimes indicated.
De Jong notes that tombstones of the Bektashi order (referred to in
chapter 5) were easily recognizable owing to the representation of
their distinctive twelve-sided felt headgear (hüseyni tac) (1989: 11).
Though primarily confined to male graves, examples of female der
vish graves are also found.
With the Ottoman dervish tombstones, although an orthodox
monument was employed, orthodoxy was stretched to its limits (or
beyond) through the use of complex epigraphy and figural iconogra
phy. These symbolic devices can be used to replicate after death two

major, and often conflicting, themes of Ottoman life: the secular
order of status concerns and bureaucracy, and religious affiliation.
Once again, funerary epigraphy and iconography can be seen to act at
a deeper level than purely commemorating a deceased Muslim. But, at
the same time, the over-riding link is still there; these tombstones,
from those of the Lur in Iran to West Africa, China, Indonesia and
Turkey, are all indisputably and recognizably Muslim (see plate 6.4).
Great diversity is apparent, but they are of one family; both structur
ing principles and cultural diversity are evident.

194

Plate 6.4 Muslim cemetery, Borneo (Haddon Collection, Cambridge)

The Apple and the Olive
So far we have seen that the significance and symbolism of the burial,
the tomb, the gravestone and the ‘language of death’ in Islam can go
far beyond the merely functional. A similar symbolic significance,
again very revealing, can be seen in much of what can be associated
with death and funerary rituals in various areas of the Muslim world.
In much of the Muslim world that is dry and inhospitable there is a
preoccupation with water, symbolically and practically, as a source of
life (Lings 1968). As will be discussed below, water is intricately
linked with Qur’anic imagery of paradise, and the Islamic garden,
an earthly paradise, was created as a reflection of this. At a more
mundane level (obviously not everyone was buried in a tomb set in a
formal garden or even had access to such a garden), the ideas of water,
fertility and verdure are frequently linked with both life and death. In
opposition to the concept of life-giving water, there is another, of heat
and dryness oppressing the dead. The person who neglected their
prayers in life would have to atone for this after death, by making
their ablutions with fire: ‘all that is done here with water, must be
done there (eternity) with fire’ (Granqvist 1965: 69). Although such
concepts are not, however, confined to Islam (Humphreys 1981: 10),
the association between water, particularly moving water, and life,
and dryness and death, serve as a lesson in contextual associations
which could be of use to the archaeologist concerned with a fuller
understanding of all facets of Muslim societies.
Within Islam, the heat—death association had a direct influence
upon the materials used in tOmb construction. Leisten (1990: 15—16)
describes how, in the early Islamic period, it was believed that a tomb
should not be made of brick and sealed with lime mortar as these
materials had been in contact with fire and would dry out the grave, a
continuation of certain pre-Islamic beliefs that the soul of the dead
would suffer thirst. An archaeological example of the need to cool the

196

DEATH AND BURIAL

corpse is provided by the grave shafts which were linked to aboveground brick tomb towers found in Rayy in Iran and dated to
between the tenth and twelfth centuries (Adle 1979, cited in Leisten
1990: 21). These perhaps served to provide ventilation for the dead, as
wind towers do for the living. Similarly, in Turkey, Goodwin (1988:
66) relates how by the end of the seventeenth century there was a
fashion for having open ironwork domes on the Ottoman türbe
(tomb or mausoleum). This, according to one legend, served to
‘admit the fire-quenching rain’, a ‘vehicle of purification [and] a
source of nourishment’ (Dickie 1978: 45).
The reverse of the heat—death association, that of water/verdure—
life, is of equal significance, and both are tied together. An example of
this is provided by considering the apple and the olive, two trees of
importance to the Shi’ah Turkic peoples of Azerbaijan. These trees
provide fruit and hence sustain life, and on another level they, along
with the willow, symbolize life. Lassy (1916: 143, 147) describes how
the olive, with its green leaves throughout the year, actually repre
sents life, and how the willow through its blossoming in spring,
exhibits a new vitality, as people also do at that time of year. Green,
the colour of the leaves and of Islam, as well as signifying life, can also
signal purity: ‘my father’s house is green’, meaning the family was
blameless, was a phrase used in Palestine (Granqvist 1965: 63). But
green can also be the colour of death, of grave clothes for example, as
well as reminding people of paradise, and thereby acting as the ‘last
and highest colour in the gamut of mystical experience’ (Schimmel
1976: 29). The apple also assumed significance in a funerary context
among the Azerbaijan Turks. This was due to its ‘extraordinary
fruitfulness’, a vital power which the dead needed, and its association
with Hussein, whose ‘wonderful apple’ never decreased in size no
matter how much he ate it (Lassy 1916: 150).
At a practical level this information is of use to the archaeologist
interested in Islam. The significance of a colour such as green can be
seen, and the physical survival of green-coloured clothing, shrouds
and the like in funerary contexts is obviously possible. Secondly, the
fact that corpses can be interred, as in Azerbaijan, with material
symbols or parts of life-giving or vitalizing substances is of import
ance. Stones representative of apples, ‘apple-smelling’ sand from the
tomb of Hussein, and willow sticks could all be placed with the
corpse. Furthermore, such ideas and practices are not confined to
the Shi’ites of the Caucausus. In North Africa, the exceptional ver
dure of trees planted on saints’ tombs is attributed to their baraka,
and sacred trees often indicate the burial place of a saint, with offer
ings left at these trees and pieces of cloth tied into their branches as a

197

DEATH AND BURIAL

form of supplication (Lassy 1916: 143—9), something frowned upon
by the orthodox as incompatible with monotheism, but as Guillaume
notes, neither Judaism nor Christianity has been able to get rid of
such practices ‘so it need not surprise us if Islam has not been more
successful’ (1954: 9). Simpson also records that aloes, myrtle and palm
fronds were frequently placed above graves in various areas of the
Near East, and that flowers were grown over graves in Turkey and
Iran (1995: 247).
Besides the practical importance of such information, perhaps of
greatest significance to the archaeologist is that it can be seen how all
aspects of death and funerary rites in Islam can be imbued with a deep
significance, beyond the act of merely disposing of the dead. They can
be tied with, and inextricable from, life. But how could the signifi
cance of the apple or the colour green in a funerary context be
guessed at without the ethnographic and historical accounts? When
does a pebble become an apple, for example? The truth is that it
would be extremely difficult, if not impossible, to reconstruct this
solely from archaeological evidence.
The Archaeology of Paradise
The final aspect of material culture associated with death and burial
which will be touched upon here is the Islamic garden. Although the
archaeology of paradise might seem a strange concept, within Islam
man-made versions exist in the Islamic garden. This is more than a
random collection of plants, buildings and watercourses; it is struc
tured by ‘sacred geography’ and concepts of the afterlife, and can, as
we have seen with the Taj Mahal, form the setting for a tomb. The
significance of the garden as a metaphor for paradise is shown in the
Qur’an, where gardens are frequently alluded to, or explicitly
described, as in surah 55 (The Merciful), where the four gardens of
paradise are described thus: ‘But for those that fear the majesty of
their Lord there are two gardens planted with shady trees.. Each
is watered by a flowing spring. And besides these there shall be two
other gardens of darkest green. A gushing fountain shall flow in
each.’ The origins of the paradise garden predate Islam and, as Moy
nihan notes, ‘the English word “paradise” is simply a transliteration
of the old Persian word “pairidaeza” referring to a walled garden’
(1980: 1). The ancient Persian belief in the world divided into four by
two axes with a pooi at the intersection, the ‘spring of life’, gave rise
to the chahar-bagh or ‘fourfold’ garden (Dickie 1976). This is a motif
found represented on ceramics dating from as early as 4,000 BCE
.

.

.

.

..

.

.

.

.

.

198

199

DEATH AND BURIAL

DEATH AND BURIAL

(Wilber 1979: 3), with the earliest Persian garden or park yet known
dating from around the sixth century B CE at the palace of Pasargadae
near Isfahan (Brookes 1987: 31).
The incorporation of Persia into the Muslim world ‘allowed the
concept of the Persian garden to be carried to Syria, Egypt and the
Maghrib’ (Pinder Wilson 1976: 73). Thus similar gardens developed in
many regions of the Muslim world (see studies in MacDougall and
Ettinghausen 1976), with a physical form usually consisting of a
square or rectangular unit divided into four by two crossing axes,
often watercourses. At the centre, if a funerary garden, would be the
tomb, so that the deceased could continue to enjoy the pleasures of
the garden and also ‘foretaste heavenly bliss’ (Dickie 1976: 90—i,
1978: 47; Schimmel 1976: 18). Otherwise a pavilion might be placed
in the same position. Perhaps the greatest examples of Islamic gardens
dating from the medieval period are those of Persia, India and Spain;
some survive to this day, others have been excavated and recon
structed. An example of the latter is provided by the excavations in
the Alcazar in Seville where, Dickie notes, pollen analysis showed
that orange trees had been planted in each corner of the four flowerbeds (1976: 98), which were themselves sunk to a level of 2 m below
the height of the walkways (Ruggles 1993: 167). This use of elevated
walkways between the quadrants of the garden created the impression
of walking on a floral carpet ‘with flowers instead of threads’ (Dickie

understanding of paradise, which can be entertained by all classes of
society throughout the Muslim world.

1976: 100).

The creation, maintenance and even access to gardens was
obviously beyond much of the population. Rulers such as Babur,
the founder of the Mughal dynasty, might create gardens almost
wherever they went (Moynihan 1980), but this was not an option
open to everyone. Therefore gardens were created on carpets which
could contain representations of all the features of real gardens:
plants, poois, watercourses, birds and fish (Ellis 1982: 15—17).
According to Goody, ‘gardens became a standard theme of the Orien
tal carpet used by nomads, peasants and city-dwellers alike. Few
could have gardens; most could have carpets, which do not need
watering and flower all year round’ (1993: 112). The Islamic garden
as a metaphor for paradise functioned so successfully for all strata of
society partly as a reaction to the arid environment found across
much of the geographical range of the Muslim world. As Dickie
notes (1976), the Arabs amplified the Persian idea through their fear
of death, dryness and desert. Moreover, the garden can be seen to
signify much more than just a physical setting for displaying plants
and elegant architecture. In this instance it is something to enjoy, but
can also be a physical reflection of the commonly held Muslim

Summary and Conclusions
The preceding examples, drawn from the archaeological, ethno
graphic and historical literature, have shown the diversity which
exists, both in meaning and form, in Muslim funerary practices
which certainly involve more than just disposal of the dead. The
living, the deceased and their myriad varieties of funerary monuments
can be inextricably interlinked in ways more complex than an archae
ologist, for reasons of interpretative simplicity, would perhaps like to
acknowledge. The deceased can be used by the living, and the living
can be used by the deceased, not for any single reason, but for many
economic, religious, political and social. Numerous agendas, needs,
hopes and emotions are expressed and, one trusts, fulfilled through
the medium of funerary ceremonies and monuments.
What, then, does this contribute to our understanding of funerary
archaeology in general? In short, it is apparently impossible to assign
any one ‘universal’ interpretation to a burial, even within a suppos
edly ‘clear-cut category’, such as Islam. The burial cannot be neatly
categorized or separated as something clinical, as merely a way of
disposing of the dead or as only an arena for the display of social
status, removed from the individual, either the dead or living. As we
have seen, death forms a part of life: the corpse can form a communal
focus; imagery of the afterlife can serve as an instructive device;
tombs are built to serve a variety of purposes; and funerary epigraphy
is utilized in many different ways. The diversity found in one exam
ple of funerary archaeology, within the spectrum of Muslim death
and burial, is quite phenomenal, and this perhaps should be more
frequently remembered by archaeologists concerned with the appli
cation of cross-cultural ‘catch-all’ models.
Within the context of the archaeology of religion, what has been
learnt? The point made by Renfrew (1994) that the study of the
disposal of the dead is too often divorced from religion by archae
ologists, was referred to in the first section. Death and funerary
practices are in most cases ‘serviced’ by some form of religious rite,
or are incorporated within the religious whole, for, as part of the
human condition, we usually require something more than just dis
posing of what fast becomes a putrefying and distasteful hazard to
health. This object was once personalized, as relative or friend, and
religion can provide a means of coming to terms with grief and loss.
—

200

DEATH AND BURIAL

To adopt a polarized approach, whereby the disposal of the dead and
religion are separated out, is wrong. It severely restricts interpretative
possibilities and does not reflect reality.
Finally, what conclusions are there to be drawn from a study of
funerary practices within the archaeology of Islam? It can be seen
that ‘diversity’ and ‘complexity’ are again the keywords, and the
recognition of this diversity supports the notion that within our
conceptual frameworks we need to incorporate the ‘multiple centres
of Islam’, rather than a defined ‘core and periphery’ (see chapter 1).
But within the range of Muslim death and burial practices there are
common identifying characteristics and a unifying structure; Muslim
tradition and dogma tend to act over the whole, and orthodoxy is
apparent. To the archaeologist, the overall recognition criteria would
be the essentially uniform treatment of the corpse within the grave. A
Muslim burial should be recognizable in the archaeological record. It
is above ground that we begin to see the egalitarian nature of Muslim
burial become corrupted in certain instances; yet below ground one is
still a good Muslim.
What of this diversity today? What are the lessons for the Islamic
archaeologist looking at funerary practices in the future? The
increased ‘franchise’ of Islam means that its material culture correlates
can now be found in a wider geographical area than ever before:
Muslim burials will be encountered in Berlin, London and Washing
ton. Yet, it is possible that the regional identity which has character
ized much of this discussion will not be encountered by the
archaeologist of the future. In certain respects it might be easier to
identify a Muslim buried in the 1990s, eight hundred years hence,
than one buried eight hundred years ago. Increasing standardization
of material culture has occurred, reflecting a general world-wide
trend facilitated by easier communications and a homogeneous global
media, allied with a desire to present a unified face to a more hostile
non-Muslim world and increased Islamic revivalism and fundament
alism (Ali 1996). Thus, though dogma might be fixed, the all-import
ant material culture remains resulting from Muslim death and burial
cannot be regarded as static and unchanging.

7

