                                                                      eet




                                                                Bae
                                                                er
                                                                 PP



xy




               ii         %
                        SAUTER ‘atUNS    Atk SY
                                        EOS
     PRR are        “       i
       DARA
        TUR                                         NAS

                                                          cat
                                                  at i)
|
    Pr
    *
     ‘
IN PURSUIT          OF THE PAST


   Decoding the Archaeological Record   __
    IN PURSUIT OF THE PAST
       Decoding the Archaeological Record —


q                 Lewis R. Binford
Se
oe
CS,




             with the editorial collaboration of
            John F. Cherry and Robin Torrence




                   with 147 illustrations —        Pe
 This book is dedicated to the memory of Frangots Bordes. It remembers the many
hours of our joking, arguing, and enjoying each others’ minds. Our field has lost a
major contributor and I have lost a very good friend. I deeply regret that I will not
                          hear Bordes’ reply to this book.




                 Any copy ofthis book issued by the publisher as a
              paperback is sold subject to the condition that it shall
             not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, resold, hired
                out or otherwise circulated without the publisher’s
            prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than
                that in which it is published, and without a similar
               condition including these words being imposed on a
                               subsequent purchaser.

                             © 1983 Lewis R. Binford

                         Foreword © 1983 Colin Renfrew

               First published in the USA in 1983 by Thames and
              Hudson Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, New York
                                        IOIIO

              Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 82-50816

            All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be
            reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
                  electronic or mechanical, including photocopy,
                  recording or any other information storage and
             retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
                                      publisher.

                              Printed and bound in
                        the German Democratic Republic
                                 Contents


Foreword              Colin Renfrew

Editorial    Note   = fohn F. Cherry and Robin Torrence

Author’s Acknowledgments                                              II



Preface                                                               a


1   Translating the Archaeological Record                             te)
    THE SCIENCE OF ARCHAEOLOGY IQ LETTING THE PRESENT
    SERVE THE PAST 23. THE BIG QUESTIONS OF ARCHAEOLOGY 26

PART I                What Was it Like?                               Bal
2   Man the Mighty Hunter?                                            33
    MAN THE BLOODTHIRSTY KILLER: THE VIEWS OF DART 33
    DOUBTS ABOUT DART 36 LEAKEY’S ALTERNATIVE 38
    BRAIN SAPPROACH 43. HELP FROM CONTEMPORARY STUDIES 51
    BACK TO THE PLEISTOCENE 56

3   Life and Death at the Waterhole                                   60
    WHERE DID EARLY MAN EAT AND SLEEP? 60 LEARNING FROM
    MODERN WATERHOLES 62. THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF AN ANCIENT
    WATERHOLE 70 DEVELOPING A PLAUSIBLE ARGUMENT 74
    CURRENT RESEARCH 75


PART II               What Does it Mean?                              ded
4   The Challenge of the Mousterian                                   79
    THE ‘RELIC AND MONUMENT’       PERIOD 80   THE ‘ARTIFACT AND
    ASSEMBLAGE’ PERIOD 84.       THE TREE OF LIFE 87   THE PRESENT:
    A CONFLICT   OF VIEWS   92
    An Archaeological Odyssey                                    95
    DISCOVERING THE PAST 95 THE FACTS DO NOT SPEAK FOR
    THEMSELVES 98 THE CONTEMPORARY WORLD OFFERS A
    SOLUTION? 100 NONSENSE AND THE NEW ARCHAEOLOGY 106
    ULTIMATE   CONCERNS   108

    Hunters in a Landscape                                      109
    A STATIONARY. VIEW OF A DYNAMIC LANDSCAPE 109 THE SCALE
    OF LAND USE 110 LIFETIME CYCLES OF LAND USE 114, ANAVIK
    SPRINGS SITE.COMPLEX II7 TULUGAK LAKE SITE COMPLEXES 127
    PUTTING THE SYSTEM TOGETHER 131 SPECIAL-PURPOSE SITES 133
    THE LAYOUT OF RESIDENTIAL SITES 138 THE CHALLENGE TO
    OUR METHODOLOGY 142

    People in their Lifespace                                   144
    SITE STRUCTURE: A CHALLENGE TO ARCHAEOLOGICAL
    INTERPRETATION 144. WORKING AROUND A HEARTH 149
    HEARTHS, INSIDE AND OUTSIDE 156 SLEEPING AREAS 160
    BREAKFAST IN BED 163 EXTENSIVE ACTIVITY AREAS 165 SITE
    STRUCTURE: COMBINING THE MODELS 172    INSIDE PALANGANA’S
    HOUSE 176 OUTSIDE AN ESKIMO HOUSE 184 CONSTRAINTS ON
    THE USE OF SPACE: HEAT AND LIGHT 185 TURNOVER RATES 187
    EFFECTS OF BULK PROCESSING 187 CLEAN-UP STRATEGIES 189
    BUILDING A THEORY OF SITE STRUCTURE 190

PART III             Why Did it Happen?                         193
8   On the Origins of Agriculture                               195
    APPROACHES TO THE PROBLEM OF AGRICULTURAL ORIGINS 195
    MOBILITY AS A SECURITY OPTION AMONG HUNTERS AND
    GATHERERS 204. POPULATION GROWTH AND HUNTER-GATHERER
    SUBSISTENCE OPTIONS 208
    Paths to Complexity                                         214
    MONOPOLISTS, ALTRUISTS AND BIG-MEN 215 INTENSIFICATION
    AND SPECIALIZATION 221 _GEW-GAWS AND TRADE GOODS 227
    PATHS TO COMPLEXITY 231

Notes on the Text                         :                     295
Bibliography                                                    243

Index                                                           252
                               Foreword


The work of Lewis Binford establishes him as the outstanding archaeological
thinker of our time. His influence, as the senior and most original figure in the
intellectual developments of the 1960s which came to be called the ‘New
Archaeology’, has arguably been greater than that of any other writer this
century concerned with the understanding of man’s early past.
   In writing this Foreword I have the privilege of saying why the thinking which
this book expresses and represents is so important for the development of modern,
processual archaeology, offering, as it does, the opportunity of defining more
clearly man’s place in the world. For many people the most obvious attraction of
archaeology is the excitement of discovery — unearthing the lost treasures of the
past. The adventure of making new finds in distant lands is indeed one of its
pleasures. But that is only the beginning, and as Binford so clearly shows here,
that is not the most important or the most interesting part of the enterprise. For
the task of archaeology is not simply a matter of ‘piecing together the past’ — as if
the bits and pieces, the material data, could be fitted together in some painless
way to make a coherent picture, as soon as they are dug up. The real task is, on
the contrary, a challenge and a struggle —a sustained struggle to devise meanings
and interpretations which can be related to the finds, the data, in a coherent and
justifiable way. The real intellectual excitement — and the exasperation — of the
practice of archaeology comes from the tension between the abundance of the
evidence on the one hand, and the very real difficulties in formulating warranted
conclusions from it. This is an intellectual adventure which is ultimately more
rewarding than the pursuit of new finds by continuing excavation.
   I regard this book as outstandingly important because it brings out so clearly
— indeed more clearly than any work before it — that this struggle for meaning
has always been and remains the fundamental challenge of archaeology. Only by
undertaking that struggle can we attain any worthwhile understanding of man’s
early past and of the developments which shaped its transformation into the
present. The book has moreover another — and quite separate — merit: it is
enjoyable to read.
   Lewis Binford is a man who lives his archaeology with considerable intensity —
and archaeology is one of those subjects which is very much an activity as well as
an area of thought. When this activity involves not simply excavation and re-
search of the familiar archaeological kind, but ethnoarchaeology — living and

                                         7
Foreword

working amongst contemporary hunter-gatherer groups and others with non-
western, subsistence economies — there is scope for a rich variety of experience.
  I well remember the author’s first academic visit to Britain, to the Sheffield
archaeological conference in December 1971. His session at the meeting was
devoted to the interpretation of the evidence of the Mousterian period in France
(discussed here in Chapter 4), and very lively it was, if decidedly technical at
times. But at home in the evenings prior to the conference, four of us sat and
talked around the dinner table. The candles, which had been lit at the beginning
of dinner, burnt lower and lower as Lew described his experiences among the
Nunamiut Eskimo, None of us showed the slightest inclination to move until, one
after another, the candles guttered out, around three in the morning, and we
decided to call it a day. I recall those interesting and lively evenings with great
pleasure now because they had a quality of archaeology experienced, archaeology
that is lived through — the actual process of ideas and understandings of the past
taking shape, and being changed by experience in the field. Such a sense of the
immediacy of personal experience is best expressed by the spoken word, yet I
believe that it is conveyed here also, by many of the chapters in this book, most of
which in fact did take shape as the spoken word, as the editors indicate in their
introductory note. All of us in the Department of Archaeology at Southampton
were greatly stimulated by, and learnt a great deal from, his teaching with us in
the autumn term of 1980, when these chapters took shape. I think that this book
does indeed retain much of the urgency and the attack and the force of argument
which came over so well in person. It can be read, therefore, as an account by
one of the world’s leading archaeologists of some of the principal pieces of work
which he has undertaken. No one will read it without gaining some fresh insights
into the life of early man, and the evidence upon which our knowledge of it rests.
   The importance of the work does not, however, lie primarily in the interesting
account which the author gives of his individual research projects. It rests rather
in its restatement and exemplification of some of the fundamental tenets of the
New Archaeology which Binford has consistently propounded since 1962, and
which have so significantly influenced much later work.
   The most important thing to realize about the New Archaeology — or pro-
cessual archaeology as it is better called now that the newness is wearing off — is
that it started as, and to a large extent remains, a series of questions about the
human past. It was not initially a coherent body of theory — and this is a point
which has often been misunderstood, indeed misrepresented — and only slowly,
gradually and painfully is such a body of theory now being generated. It entails,
on the contrary, a very frank realization that there is no easy and ready-made way
by which we can have a valid knowledge about the past. As Binford sets out very
clearly, everything that we know about man’s early past, or rather everything
that we think we know, is based on inference. Now many earlier workers, from
                                                                     Editorial Note   g

the fathers of archaeology such as General Pitt-Rivers and Oscar Montelius,
down to our own century and Gordon Childe or Walter Taylor, have made
contributions to archaeological theory, But many of them have given the im-
pression that they had succeeded in establishing a correct way of proceeding, a
set of rules, as it were, by which we could now go ahead and ‘do’ archaeology,
and reconstruct man’s past. What Binford has consistently stressed is that we still
in the main lack such rules: rules which would allow us to move from our observa-
tions of the archaeological record — which of course exists and is observed now,
in the present — by reliable processes of inference, to make warranted statements
about the past.
   Stated so baldly, this crucial point may not come across as a very startling
revelation. But in reality it is the fundamental idea of the New Archaeology. It is
brilliantly documented in Chapter 2 which, summarizing Binford’s recent book,
Bones : Ancient Men and Modern Myths, sets our earliest human ancestors into a
perspective very different from that to which we are accustomed. These points
are made here with outstanding clarity and coherence, so that this volume gives
an unparalleled insight into the intellectual struggle and debate which constitute
the real drama of contemporary archaeology.
                                                                     Colin Renfrew




                         Editorial Note

It may be helpful to the reader to know something about how this book came to
be written and about our collaborative role in its production, During his visit to
Europe from October 1980 to January 1981, Professor Binford spoke about his
past and present research to audiences ranging from large-scale public gatherings
to intimate groups of professionals. He also taught undergraduate classes and
discussed his ideas with graduate students and university teachers, as well as
lecturing to large archaeological audiences. On all these occasions the response
was extremely enthusiastic. To those of us who are fortunate enough to have been
taught by Binford the warm reception he received came as no surprise: he has a
great power for making the past come ‘alive’, for getting to the root of important
controversies, and for suggesting very original approaches to methodological and
theoretical problems in archaeology.
   It was due to the foresight of Colin Renfrew, then Professor of Archaeology at
Southampton University (Binford’s chief host institution during his visit), that
many of the lectures were taped, in the hope that a book based on a sample of the
Editorial Note

talks might be possible. These tapes were nevertheless far too numerous to be
published without extensive editing, a task which pressure of work prevented
Binford from undertaking in its entirety. Since we knew him well, were enthusi-
astic about his work and general approach to archaeology, and also attended most
of his lectures in England, we were asked to collaborate in the formidable task of
converting tape recordings made on over two dozen separate occasions into a
book ofinterest to the layman or undergraduate student, as well as to professional
archaeologists. Our initial duties included taping the sessions, obtaining (or in
most cases making) transcripts of these tapes, establishing a coherent format for
the book, and piecing together a text from the transcripts. This first, very pre-
liminary draft was sent to the author; he took it with him to South Africa in the
summer of 1981, mulled it over, altered several chapters (mainly by expansion),
added introductions to the sections, two new chapters, and footnotes, and selected
the illustrations. From this greatly improved raw material we then edited the
 final version. Our main job was to ensure consistency throughout and, where
 necessary, to simplify as far as possible those passages made somewhat in-
 accessible by the famous Binford prose style (a problem rarely encountered in his
spoken deliveries). This has been a far more time-consuming task than we
 imagined at the outset, but the pleasure of examining, literally word by word, the
 latest thoughts of one of the acknowledged leaders in our own field has been its
own reward.
    For the record, it may be ofinterest to relate individual chapters to the specific
occasions on which the material was presented. Chapter 1 is based on three talks
broadcast by the BBC in April 1981 and published in The Listener (g, 16, 23 April
 1981). Chapter 2 was originally presented as two lectures on Palaeolithic
archaeology for undergraduate classes at Southampton University. Chapters 3
 and 4 were written specially for this book; the former incorporates observations
and ideas arising from Binford’s trip to South Africa during the summer of 1981.
The transcript of a seminar presented to the Albert Egges van Giffen Institute
for Pre- and Protohistory at the University of Amsterdam has been only slightly
altered to yield Chapter 5. A lecture to the Department of Prehistory and
Archaeology at Sheffield University formed the core of Chapter 6, while Chapter
7 is a composite based on lectures presented to the general public in Sheffield and
Southampton and on a talk given to the Prehistoric Society in London. Chapter 8
was given as a seminar at the London School of Economics in a series entitled
‘Patterns in History’, organized by Ernest Gellner and John Hall, but it also
includes sections of the discussion following a lecture delivered in Amsterdam.
Finally, Chapter g is taken from the tape of an informal lecture to undergraduates
at Southampton University.
    The resulting book, we feel, demonstrates very well the enormous breadth of
interest of the author. There is something here for every archaeological taste —
                                                             Author’s Acknowledgments

from the life of our earliest ancestors, through the origins of agriculture, to issues
about the development of civilization, or what archaeologists like to call ‘complex
societies’. Lewis Binford demonstrates moreover that the evidence used to study
our past, the archaeological record, is a great deal more complicated than many
of us may have imagined. He likens this evidence to an ancient language which
has not yet been deciphered. The purpose ofthis book — in fact of most of Binford’s
research, past and present ~ is to find ways to decode that language.

                                                                       John F. Cherry
                                                                       Robin Torrence




            Author's Acknowledgments

This book is a wide-ranging discussion of our knowledge of the past and of our
attempts to learn about it; as such, it represents something of my own experiences
during a career as an ethnographer, a student of animal behavior, and an
archaeologist. I must therefore acknowledge all the persons who have made my
work possible and who have given me encouragement along the way. Specifically,
this book owes its existence to the urgings of Colin Renfrew, Robin Torrence and
John Cherry. These three people more than any others talked me into recording
my European lectures and considering them seriously as the basis for a book; all
three have been untiring in their support, encouragement and insistence that this
book should be produced. I cannot thank them enough.
   While I was in Europe, Colin Renfrew, Clive Gamble and Klavs Randsborg
guided me, corrected me, and educated me in the European intellectual climate.
For this I am most grateful to these good friends. The European trip also made
possible a wonderful midday meal with Denise and Frangois Bordes on New
Year’s Eve, 1980. It was a fine visit, but sadly it was to be the last time I saw
Francois alive. For this opportunity I am indebted to my European hosts.
  As mentioned in the Preface, I refer in this book to a considerable amount of
unfinished research, an important part of which was either conducted during, or
stimulated by, a marvellous trip to South Africa during the summer of 1981 (the
result of an invitation to lecture at the University of Cape Town). During the
course of my visit I had the good fortune to make a trip to the Nossob River area
in northern South Africa, where for a short time I shared the experiences of
naturalists such as Gus and Margie Mills, who are currently studying hyenas. I
was also privileged to visit with Dr C. K. Brain, as well as Drs Elizabeth Voigt
12   Authors Acknowledgments

     and Elizabeth Vrba (all of the Transvaal Museum), and was thus able to see the
     sites of Kromdraai, Sterkfontein and Swartkrans and hear them discussed by
     these most knowledgeable guides in the world. Richard Klein and the staffofthe
     South African Museum in Cape Town made it possible for me to study faunal
     collections housed there, including those from the important site at Klasies River
     mouth (on which I hope to report in the near future). Miss Shaw of the South
     African Museum was most kind in guiding me through their collections of
     photographs and ethnographic materials.
        The efforts of a large number of people who collectively made possible my
     African trip are certainly reflected in this book. None, however, should be singled
     out ahead of John Parkington, who arranged the trip in the first place and made
     so many things happen for me while I was there; to John I am truly grateful for
     one of the most exciting experiences of my professional career.
        Here in Albuquerque various people have been important in the production
     of this book. I must mention the staff of the Instructional Media Office at the
     University of New Mexico, who have become close colleagues during the pro-
     duction of photographic copies of my drawings and who have rendered so many
     fine prints from my slides and negatives. The Department of Anthropology at the
     University of New Mexico, as always, has been supportive of my research. In
     particular, they funded much ofthe photographic work and supplied an assistant
     to aid in the preparation of the manuscript and in other concurrent research.
      Martha Graham and Signa Larralde, my typists, both worked hard and long to
     produce a good manuscript.
        Several people have contributed photographs for use in this book: Charles
     Amsden,    Jim Chisholm, Irven De Vore, Pat Draper, Diane Gifford, Robert Hard,
     Susan Kent, John Lanham, John Parkington, Edward Santry, Olga Soffer, and
     Norman Tindale. Credit has been given with all photographs not taken by the
     author. The work of these people has made this a better book and I thank each
     of them for their co-operation. Iva Ellen Morris drew the various reconstructions
     of early man’s ways oflife (ills. 2, 5 and 16), as well as the imaginative rendering
     of the “Garden of Eden’ (ill. 128), and I greatly appreciate her help and talent.
        Finally, I must emphasize the important role played by Robin Torrence and
     John Cherry in the production of this book. They oversaw the transcription of
     the tapes and the initial translation of the spoken word into manuscript. After I
     reworked these transcripts, they both worked long and hard editing my work and
     their suggestions about re-organization invariably resulted in a better product.
     To Robin and John there are no words adequate to express my gratitude,

                                                                        Lewis R. Binford
                                  Preface

This book represents the reworked transcripts ofa series of lectures given in Great
Britain and Scandinavia during the fall of 1980 and the first few weeks of 1981.!
The lectures were designed to achieve a number ofobjectives, but above all they
were intended to shed light on research in progress: that is, they frequently
touched on subjects which I was investigating or ideas that I was exploring, but
which had not yet been developed to the point of presenting a research paper or
monograph. This means that this book, like the lectures, represents not the results
of completed research and thought so much as a kind of progress report on
various ideas and investigations, as well as opinions regarding other people’s
work. Everyone must recognize that publication by archaeologists frequently
occurs long after the work was actually done; similarly, the stimulation of dis-
cussion and exchange of ideas which constitutes the excitement of research
commonly goes on among a small ‘in-group’ offriends and colleagues, and rarely
reaches the field at large until much later in those belated reports published upon
completion of all the work. Lectures tend to fill the gap between the excitement
of on-going research and the dull responsibility of preparing the ‘final’ report.
I hope that by publishing my current thinking and research some of this excite-
ment can be shared, so that others may be stimulated by the airing of unfinished
work. I have tried to provide sufficient background information to indicate how
I justify the pursuit of certain lines of argument, but I have generally not pre-
sented ‘conclusions’: indeed, in some cases I am not yet certain what conclusions
will be forthcoming. While my attitude toward the work of others is, of course,
tempered by my experiences and my current interests, I have tried to offer some
sort of ‘state of the art’ assessment with regard to certain areas of research.
   A number of years ago I outlined a long-term research program, in which the
investigation of faunal remains, the organized use of space, and systems ecology
were judged to be the areas most profitable for the development of explanatory
theory in archaeology.” I have published most of my work on faunal remains
(although one substantial piece of research, dealing with criteria for diagnosing
scavenging as a food procurement tactic, is yet to appear). Most of the discussion
here uses some of the results of these faunally orientated studies, but it focuses on
spatial analysis in terms of our understanding of variability both within and
between sites. Each of these interests, one near completion and one in the middle
of investigation, looks ahead to increased ecological studies yet to come. This
                                                                      4

                                         9
Preface

position within my long-term research program conditions what I see as in-
teresting and therefore worth discussion.
   In addition to being a series of glimpses at and critical assessments of contem-
porary work, the lectures were weighted differently in some cases in response to
my perceptions of the character of the audience. Almost all these lectures were
delivered before very varied groups and hence were pitched to different levels of
familiarity with archaeology and prehistory. There was an additional slant to
take account of what I saw as differences among the professionals present in the
audience. I was struck by the diversity that exists among my European colleagues,
both in their interests and in their recognition of the relevance of research con-
ducted outside their own particular fields of study. As one might expect, given
the fact that Palaeolithic deposits are either very sparse or non-existent in various
regions of northern Europe, there was much interest in agricultural and proto-
urban archaeology. This bias was not so apparent at gatherings of prehistorians
in southern Europe or Africa. Similarly, the archaeologists interested in stone age
research were most likely to be working on the remains of Mesolithic sites, i.e.
the by-products of fully modern, but pre-agricultural, man. I found that my
discussions of the problems of method illustrated by the materials covered in
Parts I and II of the present book were considered to be either irrelevant for their
work, or of interest only because of a purely academic concern for the Mousterian
or the Lower Palaeolithic. I had not expected this sort of reaction, although I
would certainly have gotten a similar response from a group of New World
archaeologists researching the Archaic or Woodland periods in North America.
As a response, I have tried in this book to present the discussions of early man and
the Mousterian in terms of methodology which I believe is of direct relevance to all
archaeologists, regardless of the periods of time with which they may be particularly
concerned.
   I was surprised too by how many people seemed to be unfamiliar with the
ethnographic literature on hunting and gathering societies. Discussions about the
archaeological remains of hunter-gatherers seemed to me frequently to be un-
informed and based on romantic ideas, rather than on any genuine understanding
derived from first-hand accounts. For this reason, I used a great many slides of
my experiences with hunter-gatherers, with the intention of illustrating how
mobile peoples ‘mark’ their environment with archaeological remains. This
should be particularly evident in Chapter 6, where I have deliberately left the
presentation largely at the slide-show level to.show how a single people can
produce many different kinds of archaeological remains. This reality — although
not new to archaeologists — seemed to be poorly appreciated and rarely con-
sidered when interpreting the archaeological record. I may be overstating the
case, since it is true that most of the archaeologists in the audiences were not
concerned with mobile peoples. But my lectures should be seen as a kind of
                                                                                 Preface

missionary work, pointing to some of the interesting problems of inferential
method that arise in dealing with hunters and gatherers.
   Many Europeans, particularly the Scandinavians, wanted me to discuss the
New Archaeology. Interestingly enough, this was largely thought of not in terms
of the issues which [had stressed in publications up through 1969, but instead in
terms of the arguments encapsulated in the papers by Fritz and Plog® and by
Watson, LeBlanc and Redman.* My impression was that most European scholars
considered these works to be a naive brand of positivism, an attempt to adopt a
philosophy for archaeology motivated by a desire to become ‘scientific’ or by
some strange American drive to ‘measure things’. I acknowledge that it is very
difficult to sell a particular set of tactics if the goal, the teleology, is not clear:
until you tell me where we are going, I cannot evaluate your suggestion for
getting there. Many of the programmatics of the New Archaeology were perhaps
ill-timed in this sense and some of the negative reactions to them were justified.
   In response to this reaction, I have tried to organize this book more in terms of
arguments from example and to emphasize the nature of the archaeological
problems stemming from different realms of research. At the same time, I have
tried to link these differences in approach to the need for an interest, common to
all archaeologists, in improving our methods for inference. I have not, however,
specifically discussed such epistemological issues, only the more practical and
tactical ones. If the reader appreciates the latter, then it is inevitable that involve-
ment in epistemological issues will follow. I am as convinced as ever that deep
concern for, and experimentation in, epistemological strategies is a key to the
growth of archaeological science. The direct call for the adoption of particular
positivist tactics was perhaps premature and many archaeologists, in any case,
failed to appreciate the basis for such calls. What I hope to illustrate here, through
a series of discursive examples, is the need for a real concern with epistemology.
   There seem in Europe to be two clearly distinguishable types of archaeologists:
the specialists and technicians representing ‘science in archaeology’,> and the
‘social philosophers’ (structuralists, Marxists, ‘morphogenesists’, etc.). This book
represents something of an attempt to suggest how the two might come together
and in so doing carve out a genuine science of archaeology. I do not wish to imply,
incidentally, that these two types are exclusive to the Old World — both are
certainly present in North America. But the contrast there is more between the
‘hard-digging field man’ who discusses the strength of the liquor in various
Mexican or South Dakotan bars, and the so-called ‘theorist’ who is more in-
terested in ‘what it all means’, regardless of whether or not there exist reliable
methods for getting answers to such a question. (Thankfully, there is much less
machismo associated with archaeology in the Old World; both the scientific
specialists and the social philosophers are more interested in intellectual issues
than are many of the New World ‘field men’. )
Preface

   The ‘science in archaeology’ approach so common in Great Britain apparently
sees the development of methods for inference as primarily dependent upon
other sciences. Thus there is an emphasis on zooarchaeology, geology, or some
other field working ‘in the service of’ archaeology. In one sense, this is a sound
approach: theories and explanations for observed phenomena developed in other
fields can certainly be used as a basis for inference in archaeology. Yet we
frequently find ourselves in the situation where the inferences so obtained are
perhaps neither useful nor germane to the solution of our problems as archaeolo-
gists. The result is that there has been a steady development oflittle technical
subfields treating archaeological remains in their own frameworks, but not
necessarily advancing the cause of archaeology itself. In such cases, the archaeolo-
gical evidence ends up serving the goals of other disciplines — for instance, when
breeding diversification in domestic cattle, sheep and goats is studied in purely
zoological terms, and the archaeologist then fumbles around for some context in
terms of which the work of the zooarchaeologist might be made relevant to his
own studies.
    It was exactly this conclusion which lead me to the study of fauna and the
eventual publication of my books Nunamiut Ethnoarchaeology® and Bones.’ The
support scientist, I found, would never do the research necessary to relate faunal
remains to the interpretation of past human societies. At best such scientists might
develop techniques for interpreting ancient animal populations,® but — alas — the
degree to which this is possible without a sophisticated understanding of archaeo-
logical formation processes is certainly suspect.” Only archaeologists can be
expected to do the research necessary for the accomplishment of their own
archaeological goals, even if allied sciences may help and may from time to time
provide valuable ‘gifts’.1°
    I think that most archaeologists have realized that the reliability ofan inference
about the past is only as good as the knowledge on which the inference is based.
We have also known for a very long time that our knowledge about some pheno-
mena is more dependable than about others. Christopher Hawkes"? implicitly
recognized this when he proposed his ‘ladder of reliability’ in 1954: for those
domains where knowledge and understanding were considered relatively secure,
inference was considered relatively easy.
   This basic link between ‘traditional archaeology’ and the so-called ‘New
Archaeology’ was nicely illustrated in a lecture I was privileged to attend while
in Southampton, The speaker was the distinguished archaeologist M. J. O’Kelly,
who has given so much to the excavation and understanding of the important
site of Newgrange in Ireland.’* Professor O’Kelly was quite happy to consider
how the great megalithic structure at Newgrange might have been built, what it
might have looked like during its period of use, and even what events might have
modified the archaeological record into the form observed at the time of excava-
                                                                               Preface   17
tion, All these inferences were made tenable by his linkage of archaeological
observations to principles and laws of causation drawn from the sciences of
mechanics, physics, and the related fields of applied engineering. Of interest,
however, was his reluctance to consider the nature ofthe society in which the site
had functioned. Why the difference in attitude? The answer must be simply that
there are no reliable principles or theories of culture and society to which
Professor O’ Kelly could appeal in justifying inferences to these domains from the
observations he had made. What I am suggesting here is that-archaeologists
cannot wait for other fields to develop the necessary principles which will permit
them to make reliable inferences about the past. They must themselves develop
a science of archaeology.
   The tactics of the social philosophers represent the opposite extreme.!* These
advocates of various points of view — Marxists, structuralists, materialists, ideal-
ists, and so on — believe their own preferred postures render the world under-
standable and intelligible."* They frequently use the archaeological record to
advance their points of view by what I call ‘post hoc accommodative arguments’:
that is, they interpret the past as ‘known’ in terms consistent with their particular
philosophical bias or adopted position. But not infrequently such arguments take
the form of syllogistic fallacies. My point is perhaps appropriately illustrated by
one of my experiences while in England.                                             c
    Having accepted an invitation to speak at Cambridge, I presented a short
historical introduction to the methodological ideas subsequently published in my
book, Bones.'* I then went along to an organized discussion session attended
mainly by students of Ian Hodder. This ‘discussion’ began with two students
reading prepared papers in which science, archaeology and my own writings
were accused of a long list of deficiencies, misdemeanors, and even intellectual
felonies (for instance, I was informed by Hodder that a serious deficiency of my
Nunamiut work was the fact that I had not questioned the Eskimos about their
attitudes toward dirt!°). After listening for a long time, it was my turn to
respond to the obvious challenge: ‘What do you say to that, Professor Binford?”
What could I say? The implication was clear: I had been complacent about, even
sympathetic with, many of the deficiencies in archaeological reasoning listed. I
tried to suggest that perhaps some of the accusations were falsely stated, did not
apply to my own work, or were simply untrue and misleading. These protesta-
tions were either laughed away as obviously incorrect or an accusing finger was
pointed to the fact that I had agreed that several of the criticized positions were
faulty.
   This incident at Cambridge is an example of a common form of argument used
by the social philosophers. First the victim is asked when he is going to stop beating
his wife. In reply, he states that in fact he does not beat his wife ;however, he does
agree with the accusers that one should not beat one’s wife. Alas, such sterile dis-
18   Preface

     cussions rarely result in enlightenment or intellectual growth. This whole pro-
     cedure is a kind of poor man’s exercise in the fallacy of the affirmation of the
     consequence, Nevertheless, it is a common occurrence among the philosophically
     oriented debaters, as opposed to those seeking the growth of archaeological
     science,
        False syllogisms, then, are common, as are other questionable tactics used by
     the ‘philosophers’. For instance, they frequently advocate the use of a particular
     observational language which, if used consistently, renders the world under-
     standable in terms of their particular philosophical stance. This practice is of
     course tautological, but then the tactics ofthe social philosophers are not scientific.
     In contrast to their approach, scientific epistemology was initially explored as a
     means ofevaluating ideas by appeal to objective descriptions ofreality.!’ This book
     is about how we give meaning to archaeological experience and how in turn we
     have used and are using such experiences, converted into meaningful statements
     about the past, both to explore the past and to evaluate our ideas about it.
     Nevertheless, philosophy without science is simply culture and science without
     philosophy is sterile convention. We must, therefore, integrate the two approaches,
     because then, and only then, will we be able to create a productive discipline
     capable of making contributions to the cumulative growth of knowledge and
     understanding.
                                          te
        Translating the Archaeological
                    Record
The Science of Archaeology

As | was riding on the bus not long ago, an elderly gentleman asked me what I
did. I told him I was an archaeologist. He replied: “That must be wonderful, for
 the only thing you have to be to succeed is lucky.’ It took some time to convince
him that his view of archaeology was not quite mine. He had the idea that the
archaeologist ‘digs up the past’, that the successful archaeologist is one who
discovers something not seen before, that all archaeologists spend their lives
running about trying to make discoveries of this kind. This is a conception of
science perhaps appropriate in the 1gth century, but, at least in the terms in
which I myself view archaeology, it does not describe the nature of archaeology
as it is practiced today. In this chapter, I want to explain why I believe archae-
ologists are more than simply discoverers.
    Like many others, the gentleman on the bus was quite mistaken in thinking of
the archaeologist ‘discovering the past’. The archaeological record is here with us in
the present. It is out there, under the ground, quite likely to be hit by someone
building a new road; it is very much part of our contemporary world and the
observations we make about it are in the here and now, contemporary with
ourselves. They are not direct observations that remain from the past (as in the
case, say, of a historian who uses information from a 15th-century diary which
conveys observations actually made by the author in the 15th century). Since
observed facts about the archaeological record are contemporary, they do not in
themselves inform us about the past at all. The archaeological record is not made
up of symbols, words or concepts, but of material things and arrangements of
matter. The only way in which we can understand their meaning — if you will,
the way in which we can state the archaeological record in words — is by knowing
something about how these material things came into being, about how they have
been modified, and about how they acquired the characteristics we see today.
That understanding is dependent upon a large body of knowledge which links
human activities (i.e. dynamics) to the consequences of those activities that may
be apparent in material things (i.e. statics). Indeed, one could think of archaeo-
logical facts as a sort of untranslated language, something that we need to ‘decode’

                                         19
20   Translating the Archaeological Record

     in order to move from simple statements about matter and its arrangement to
     statements of behavioral interest about the past.
        The challenge that archaeology offers, then, is to take contemporary observa-
     tions of static material things and, quite literally, translate them into statements
     about the dynamics ofpast ways oflife and about the conditions in the past which
     brought into being the things that have survived for us to see. That challenge,
     most archaeologists feel, is enormous and one not easily met, for it demands of us
     a better understanding ofour own interactions with the material world. After all,
     we rarely pay much attention to the ways in which our behavior may modify our
     material surroundings and leave clues about what happens in our daily lives; we
     simply do not view the world from that perspective. The archaeologist, however,
     must train himself to do so. He must become concerned with quite mundane
     matters. How do people dispose of their rubbish? How do they decide that a tool
     is worn out and whether they need to buy a new one? At what point do they
     decide that something is no longer useful and may be torn apart to be re-used for
     some other purpose? Information about decisions of this kind, decisions which
     modify the form and arrangement of material objects, is critical if archaeologists
     hope to be able to ‘decode’ and ‘read’ the archaeological record in terms of those
     aspects of the past that interest them.
        How can we meet this challenge? Can we begin to accomplish our objectives
     simply by digging more sites and discovering new things, as the man on the bus
     implied? My answer must be a resounding ‘No’, If (as I suspect) most people will
     find that surprising, it is because they imagine that archaeologists simply dig
     sites: they are unaware ofall the research that must be done to help decode them.
     What suggestions can be made, then? Are the methods of history, or of the
     natural sciences, or of any other disciplines appropriate to the particular prob-
     lems of archaeology?
        The first idea we should reject is that archaeologists are simply strange historians
     working at a disadvantage: historians, that is, without written records. It has to
     be recognized how fundamentally different are the types of data used by the two
     disciplines. Whatever their specific interests in the past may be, historians work
     with the written record in one form or another — with chronicles, letters, diaries,
     or any other sort of literary record of the past which was purposefully produced
     by one person to transmit information to another. Yet, as we all know, letters
     home may be embellished; diarists in practice often write for some unknown
     future readership; bureaucratic records are-all too susceptible to alteration for
     personal advantage. The fact that people are not always honest inevitably
     presents the historian with the problem of understanding the motives that
     individuals might have had for producing a written record of the past. Now
     archaeologists, at least at one level, rarely face this particular difficulty. For
     instance, suppose that during the excavation of a site a hearth were found next to
                                                 Translating the Archaeological Record   21


an area filled with rubbish: it would be strange indeed to imagine that someone
in the past had deliberately distorted that little piece of the archaeological record
for his own purposes, or that he had modified what he threw away as a means of
communication with someone in the future. This is not to say, of course, that man
doesn’t use material things for communication. The clothes or jewelry we wear
convey our status or other aspects ofourselves; whether a man is a policeman or a
fireman is indicated by the wearing of a uniform that carries very specific in-
formation about his job, But, while material things most certainly do communi-
cate coded information, they are rarely coded for the purposes of deceit. The
archaeologist works with a very different kind of material than does the historian,
at least from the standpoint ofthe symbolic and communication systems that man
employs.
    Certain historians have proposed that the best method for finding out about
the past is empathy’ — that is, merely to imagine what actions or circumstances
would bring about the conditions observed. For instance, I might find a hearth
bounded by stones, with charcoal in the center and broken bones and rocks to
the side. So I say to myself: ‘I am a man. IfI were sitting at a hearth, what might
I have been doing that would have resulted in the things that I now see?’ At this
stage I may well be able to come up with a set of ideas about what the past was
 like. But getting such ideas is just the first step, involving the use of imagination
and our cumulative understanding of the relationship between human behavior
and material objects. Far more important is how we evaluate these ideas. How do
we know that there are not other circumstances that could have happened in the
past that might also have produced the patterns we observe in the archaeological
record today? Without some methodology for evaluating ideas, we are in the
position of having a free hand to generate lots of stories about the past, but not
having any means of knowing whether these stories are accurate.
    Is the best way to approach the challenge, as some archaeologists have
suggested, to follow in the footsteps of others who have gone along the road before
us: to adopt, for instance, the methods of the social sciences? The suggestion
sounds beguiling. But we should remember that the social sciences were developed
to deal with dynamics, with interactions in a social setting. Archaeologists, as I
have already emphasized, do not observe social facts; they observe material facts,
all of them contemporary, so that the procedures of the social sciences are in a
practical sense inappropriate for archaeology. Archaeology must face up to the
nature of the data it employs and the uniqueness of the challenge it faces — how
to get from the present to the past. What is needed is a science of the archaeological
record, one that deals with, rather than ignores, the special problems we en-
counter in trying to use that record to learn about the past.
   If we are not really historians or social scientists, what about the methods of
the natural sciences? This is a rather more germane suggestion, for there is no
22   Translating the Archaeological Record

     expectation among natural scientists that their observed facts will ‘speak for
     themselves’.   Physicists, chemists,    biologists,   and   so on, do not imagine   that
     observed relations between things have meanings which are self-evident. They
     are continuously engaged in giving meaning to such observations and then
     evaluating how useful those assigned meanings actually are in practice. Surely,
     this is the position in which the archaeologist finds himself: giving meaning to the
     (contemporary) archaeological facts he observes and then trying to evaluate how
     realistic his picture of the past might be. It is for this reason that I have always
     advocated that archaeology should adopt the methods of the natural sciences.”
     They are the only techniques of which I am aware that can help the archaeologist
     in his special and peculiar dilemma: the availability only of contemporary
     observations about material things whose causes are unavailable for observation.
        What implications does this conclusion have for the procedures we follow in
     digging a site? Do we need to worry about what archaeological remains mean,
     before we actually excavate them? Ifso, does this bias the results of excavation?
     Certainly, the archaeologist-as-discoverer must be concerned with such questions.
     We would not know anything at all about the past, of course, if our energies were
     entirely devoted to developing a perfect research methodology and we failed to
     collect any archaeological facts about the past. Yet, on the other hand, if we had
     a complete archaeological record and no way to give meaning to it, we still would
     be no nearer to knowing the past. Obviously, the two sides of archaeological
     research must necessarily develop together, but that is easier said than done. We
     may do too much digging, without enough research to allow us to interpret the
     things we observe; or else we may be doing too much methodological research and
     find when we actually get around to digging a site that the things we need to
     observe just aren’t there. Archaeologists are often heard to say ‘Well, X is a
     theory man’, or ‘Visa field man’, or to level the criticism that ‘So-and-so digs lots
     of sites very well, but he doesn’t interpret them very well.’ The message for
     archaeology is the need for balanced growth between the development of tech-
     niques which permit us to make accurate inferences about the past, and the
     making of archaeological observations which provide us with the materials for
     interpretation. I don’t think you can dig a site very well unless you also know what
     potential the excavated data might have for making inferences about the past.
     For example, if I did not know about radiocarbon dating techniques, I would
     have little reason to save charcoal from an excavation; it is only once I know that
     the analysis of uncontaminated charcoal samples can give an independent
     measure of elapsed time that I realize the need for collecting material of this kind
     and keeping accurate records about it. In short, good excavation techniques
     depend on an awareness of potential ways of making inferences about the past.
     But excavation techniques themselves are what continually lead us into more and
     different kinds of methodological research, because we always find things we do
                                                 Translating the Archaeological Record   23
not understand and about which we are curious, things that demand further
research before we can use them in making inferences about the past.
   Archaeology, then, is an interactive discipline, one that cannot grow without
striking a balance between theoretical and practical concerns, Archaeologists
need to be continuously self-critical :that is why the field is such a lively one and
why archaeologists are forever arguing among themselves about who is right on
certain issues. Self-criticism lgads to change, but is itself achallenge — one which
archaeology perhaps shares only with palaeontology and a few other fields whose
ultimate concern is making inferences about the past on the basis of contemporary
things. So archaeology is not a field that can study the past directly, nor can it be
one that merely involves discovery, as the man on the bus suggested. On the
contrary, it is a field wholly dependent upon inference to the past from things
found in the contemporary world. Archaeological data, unfortunately, do not
carry self-evident meanings. How much easier our work would be if they did!



Letting the Present Serve the Past

We are all familiar with the cliché that we study the past in order to learn mere
about the present. We are less comfortable, perhaps, with the idea that we study
the present in order to understand the past. At least, many people seem not quite
willing to accept the concept of archaeologists going out to live with the Australian
Aborigines* or following !Kung Bushmen on their hunting trips.° These are not
exactly the sorts of activities in which archaeologists are supposed to be engaged.
But, alas, many of us are so engaged nearly full-time, at least during some phase
of our careers. In fact, there is even a project underway in the United States, in
the modern city of Tucson, Arizona, where the rubbish disposal practices of
modern urban dwellers are being studied ;® the archaeologists walk around with
the garbage men! I take the fact that such things are now being done as a sign
that the field of archaeology is growing and becoming more sophisticated. As a
result, it should offer the world more enlightening and provocative notions of our
past than we have ever been able to provide before from archaeological facts.
  The   archaeological   record,   as I have   already   noted,   is a contemporary
phenomenon and observations we make about it are not ‘historical’ statements.
We need sites that preserve for us things from the past; but, equally, we need the
theoretical tools to give meaning to these things when they are found. Identifying
them accurately and recognizing their contexts in past behavior depends upon a
kind of research that cannot be conducted in the archaeological record itself.
That is, if we intend to investigate the relationship between statics and dynamics,
we must be able to observe both aspects simultaneously; and the only place we
can observe dynamics is in the modern world, in the here and now.
24   Translating the Archaeological Record

        Let me give an example. One very common class of finds made by archaeolo-
     gists is stone tools. Since we hope to gain a better understanding ofthe context in
     which men make, use and dispose ofstone tools, it would naturally be very helpful
     to see some people using them. This, indeed, was the concern that sent me into
     the central desert of Australia several years ago, to do fieldwork among a group
     of people who knew about stone tools and periodically did still use them for
     various purposes. I hoped to be able to relate information about the actual
     behavior of these people (the dynamics) to the consequences of that behavior, as
     seen in the distribution, design and modifications ofstone tools (the statics). Some
     of this work is described briefly in Chapter 7. My aim was to study the relation
     between statics and dynamics in a modern setting. If understood in great detail,
     it would give us a kind of Rosetta Stone: a way of‘translating’ the static, material
     stone tools found on an archaeological site into the vibrant life of a group of
     people who in fact left them there.
        The linkages, then, between what we find and the conditions that brought
     these finds into being can only be studied among living peoples. I myself have
     worked on this linkage problem with the Nunamiut, a group of Eskimo caribou
     hunters in Alaska,’ and with the Navajo, who are sheep herders in the American
     Southwest; and I have several students working with the !Kung Bushmen
     in southern Africa. All these pieces of fieldwork are designed to study in a direct
     way the linkages betweeen the things we find as archaeologists and the various
     behaviors that resulted in the production, modification and eventual disposal of
     those things.”
        Experimental archaeology’® represents another area of research in which the
     present is used to serve the past, with the aim of providing insights into the
     accurate interpretation of the archaeological record. A great deal of this sort of
     work was pioneered in Great Britain. It involves the experimental re-creation of
     happenings or processes that we know must have occurred in the past, in order
     to observe what the archaeological outcome would have been. For instance, if a
     house burns down"? and erosion of the remains takes place over a long period,
     what would be the outcome as seen by archaeologists? In what ways would the
     original structure and its contents have been modified? Those are questions we
     can tackle by experiment. Research in this vein allows us to evaluate the degree
     to which we can accept what we see as directly referable to the past or as some-
     thing distorted in various ways by intervening processes. Another important role
     for experimentation is in attempts to re-create the skills of ancient craftsmen: that
     is, teaching ourselves to make stone tools,’ pottery or other products of pre-
     historic technologies and using those skills in different situations to solve problems.
     Once again, such work can offer genuine insights into the archaeological record.
     I think it is safe to predict that archaeologists will soon come to employ such
     experimental methods much more than they have in the past, as they begin to
                                                   Translating the Archaeological Record   25


  Soe        ited




                                                                                    MG ATATIA RA




                                                          Gi/wi   BUSHMAN



1 Distribution of some contemporary groups mentioned in the text.


realize that merely finding something does little good unless they can give mean-
ing to it.
   Historical documents constitute a further major source of information which
archaeologists have only just begun to tap. The object of ‘ethnoarchaeological’
research, of course, is to seek a kind of control on the formation of the archaeo-
 logical record. By living in a site and observing the various activities of its
 occupants, the archaeologist hopes to see certain archaeologically observable
 patterns, knowing what activities brought them into being. Now simply being
 there and looking is not the only way we can get that kind of control, for there
 exists a wealth of written documents about man’s actions in the past. Often
historical records can be used not only to identify former living places, but also
 to tell us what went on there — what level of craft specialization existed there, for
 instance, or something of the former social organization of the site. Armed with
 controls of this sort about the dynamics of the site, we are in a position to excavate
the site and relate what we find to reports of the activities and processes that took
place long ago. This use of history as a form of experimental control is still in its
infancy, but we can surely expect considerable development in this direction.'?
Clearly, the number of people who still make stone tools for hunting and follow
a fully mobile lifestyle is decreasing every day. Future generations of archaeolo-
gists will be afforded very limited opportunities to go and study stone tool users,
as I have done. But so long as we have historical documents which preserve
Translating the Archarological Record

observations, made by people actually present, about the dynamics ofplaces in
the past, we have the option of excavating those places and, walking through
history, as it were, alongside an historical character, trying to relate what we find
in the ground to what he reports as having occurred there.
   Naturally, the written word is not the only type of historical document that
exists: it is fortunate that, at least for the last century or so, we have had the
capability of taking photographs. There exists a wealth of photographs taken at
the turn of the century, when there were far more peoples living technologically
unsophisticated lives than there are today. How can we take such pictures and
convert them into usable archaeological information? My own current research
in this area suggests that it is not at all easy. You need to know a number ofdetails
such as the focal length of the camera lens, in order to convert an oblique photo-
graph (that is, one taken by a hand-held camera looking out across the landscape)
into a map which is in any way analogous to the ones an archaeologist would
produce when digging a site. When these technical problems are solved, as I am
quite certain they will be, we will be able to make much greater use of the tens of
thousands of ethnographic photographs taken in the relatively recent past.
Photographs, of course, have a wonderful immediacy: you can see a real person
from the past sitting right there in front of you and see what he was actually doing.
Consequently, one can relate the spatial relationships of people to hearths, of
houses to people, of hearths to houses, all in a behavioral context that is normally
difficult to establish, even with the help of the written word. With photographs,
one gets a glimpse of past behavior and some sort of ‘map’ simultaneously, an
enormous advantage on which archaeologists will surely capitalize in the future.
   These, then, are three important areas — the study of contemporary peoples,
the creation of experimental situations where we can control causes in order to
study effects, and the use of historical documents of various sorts — which con-
temporary archaeology has only just begun to develop to any significant degree.
As they become more important, the popular image of the archaeologist in a pith
helmet discovering a new tomb will give way to that of an eclectic, someone who
pokes his nose into almost every domain of human activity with material con-
sequences which might be reflected in the archaeological record.



The Big Questions of Archaeology

Whatis it that we want to know about the past? It is always difficult to determine
whether a suggestion is a rational one, if you don’t know what it is that you are
trying to accomplish: that is as true of archaeology as of anything else. So what
we want to know about the past strongly influences how archaeologists go about
conducting excavations and investigating the archaeological record. Unless they
                                                  Translating the Archaeological Record   ~I



have some clear ideas in this respect, it is difficult for them to know how to
approach archaeological data or what kind of research to conduct to interpret
them. Obviously, then, what we think the past was like affects archaeological
research and the development of the field as a whole. It may be useful to discuss
briefly not what we-know already about the past, but rather what we would like
to know from the archaeological record: what are some ofthe Big Questions about
man’s past that we can hope to answer through archaeological research?
   Adopting a typically archaeological approach, let’s begin at the beginning! I
believe it is extremely important to have some idea of what the behavioral
characteristics of our earliest ancestors might have been. We have their bones, of
course: fossils of early men, some of them as much as 8 to 6 million years old. But
when did the typical behavior, unique to you and me as members of the same
species, come into being? The answer is that we simply don’t know. We have
learned when the size of our brain case changed, when our body size changed,
how the shape of our pelvis has changed. It is not yet possible, however, to speak
with confidence about when man began to use language, when he began to live
in small monogamous families, or when he began to share food among adults.
And it is these characteristics, after all, which distinguish us from most of the rest
of the animal world. How old is such typically human behavior which we all take
for granted? What in fact were our earliest ancestors like? These seem to me to be
central issues of archaeological research.
    Certain archaeologists are currently engaged in a controversy over the question
whether already 2 million years ago man was hunting animals, eating meat
regularly, sharing food and living in base camps.'* Such characteristics take on
significance when viewed in the context of animal behavior in general: primates
other than man, for instance, tend to sleep in trees rather than on the ground and
eat where food is to be found rather than where they sleep, as man does. When
did a terrestrial way of life involving hunting and food-sharing begin? Was it the
hunting of animals, or some other form of behavior, that was critical for the
evolution of language? What caused these changes and how should we explain
them? Only when we have established what actually happened in the past can we
begin to ask why it happened. And only archaeology, I think, can enlighten us on
such central issues. The comparative biological study of the human fossil record
cannot by itself answer our questions. The answers will come from the integration
of a wide variety of archaeological facts that have survived: not simply informa-
tion about the anatomy of our ancestors, for example, but also where their skeletal
fossils were found in relation to their stone tools and the by-products of their meals.
Past arguments about such matters, however, have frequently not been very
sound.
   For instance, most archaeological textbooks assert that early man was a hunter
of animals. The basis of the argument is that sites such as Olduvai Gorge in East. 4
                                                                         4
Translating the Archaeological Record

Africa, which have produced the earliest hominid fossils and stone tools, have also
yielded a profusion of animal bones; and since these bones are in association with
stone tools, they probably represent the meals of early man. But this is not
necessarily so. The sites where we find these very ancient stone tools are geological
deposits created by natural agencies, not by man. Man was simply present in the
environment during the time that the natural processes which formed the sites
were going on and there is no necessary reason to suppose that all the finds at such
sites refer to the same events. A recent, widely publicized set of finds at another
East African site consists of hominid footprints preserved in rock about 3 million
years old.'* They were not the only footprints in the deposit :there were also those
of elephant, giraffe, guineafowl, even tracks oflittle worms. Now it would surely
be rather absurd to argue that the association of hominid and elephant footprints
implies that early man was herding elephants. Yet precisely the same kind oflogic
is used by archaeologists who would argue from finds of stone tools and giraffe
bones in the same deposit that man must have killed the giraffe. In fact, the
giraffe may have died there from natural causes, while the stone tool was used
and left at the site hundreds of years later, perhaps in the context of cutting plant
material. If archaeologists want to understand the past correctly, they will have
to solve this problem of separating the various processes and behaviors that lead
to the formation ofa deposit; these are matters that I discuss in rather more detail
in Chapters 2 and 3.
   Another interesting controversy in archaeology revolves around the question
whether the characteristics we take to be quintessentially human all came into
being at once. Or were they emergent, in the sense that one characteristic came into
being in one context, and another in a different context? Is the evolution of the
very essence of man, so to speak, best considered as some kind of ‘quantum leap’
or rather as a process of accretional growth? Once again, we simply don’t know
yet. It has been argued, for example, that man’s adoption of an upright posture
on two legs constituted such a quantum leap, because it freed the hands for use;
use of the hands made possible tools; tools made possible language; and language
paved the way to many changes in social organization, such as food-sharing and
altruistic behavior, That is an evolutionary path about which I am rather
doubtful. Personally, I feel we should not underestimate the degree to which
planning was necessary in early man’s hunting activities (i.e. solving the problem
of what to eat during the season of the year when plants are not growing), It is in
the context of hunting, perhaps, that information storage and processing began
to play a greater role in our own evolution than in that of other primates, My
point, however, is that the challenge of investigating the past is to devise ways of
discovering whether such statements are correct or not.
   Among the most important questions we can hope to examine through
archaeological research, then, are when the behavioral characteristics we think
                                                  Translating the Archaeological Record   29
distinguish us from other animals came into being and how we can understand
their development. A second, related group of problems is one which remains -
quite justifiably — a subject of fascination and speculation for many people besides
archaeologists. It is concerned with the origins of agriculture and the conditions
that led man to settle into ways of   life which were much more sedentary than at
any time in his mobile hunting and gathering past. Why did man stop moving,
settle down and begin to intensify his food production within smaller and smaller
pieces of space? That, after all, is what agriculture is really about. Why did it
apparently happen in many different places in both the Old and New Worlds?
And why did these changes all occur in such different regions within what is, from
an archaeological standpoint, a very limited time period of 2,000 years or so? In
Chapter 8, I make some suggestions about the direction we might take in seeking
answers to these questions. If we could understand even a few of these things, I
believe we would be beginning to grasp something of the distinctive operation of
our adaptation, our way oflife and our particular niche in the animal world. I say
this because the adoption ofagriculture and sedentism constitutes a most distinc-
tive set of changes: it represents a major re-adaptation of a species without, as far
as we Can see, major accompanying biological changes. For this second, crucial
set of Big Questions for archaeological investigation there is, of course, practically
no written historical information to help us.
   The third problem area is again one ofgreat general fascination: the origins of
civilization. The political systems under which most of us live and the complex
urban lives which we nearly all lead are still further removed from the mobile
hunting and gathering way of life that clearly provided the context in which our
biology was moulded. So what brought about this kind of lifestyle? What made
agriculturally based societies move in the direction of increasingly complicated
political and bureaucratic types of organization? What caused the tremendous
increase in specialization — in crafts, in social roles, in task performance — that
characterizes   a modern city, or an ancient one, for that matter?
    This is necessarily an area where archaeology begins to link up with history,
political philosophy and many other branches of the social sciences, for we can
still see some of these processes going on in remote parts of the modern world not
yet affected by the industrial revolution. The archaeologist, then, can bring his
own data in this realm to bear on problems held in common with the other social
sciences. I was interested to see that, at each of the three international conferences
I happened to attend during 1981, the focus of discussion was the appearance of
complex political systems, the possible role of trade in bringing them into being,
and the extent to which monopolies over production do, or donot, affect the level
of political development (matters on which I give some of my own views in
Chapter g). The point of interest is that these discussions almost exclusively in-
volved archaeologists. Such questions have certainly been addressed in the past by
30   Translating the Archaeological Record

     historians, by political philosophers, and by many others besides ; but archaeology
     is now beginning to participate in the debate on equal terms with the more
     historically oriented fields.
        Archaeology, therefore, starts in the remote past at the very beginnings of our
     biological history, a time period for which our ignorance about human behavior
     is almost total, and it brings us all the way up to the complexities of the modern
     world, on which archaeological discussions may have some bearing. Such is the
     span of archaeology! Do archaeologists offer any specifically archaeological per-
     spectives that differentiate them from other fields, in dealing with, say, the origins
     of sedentism or the appearance of complex political systems? I think the answer
     must inevitably be ‘Yes’. Archaeologists start with material objects and, quite
     naturally, adopt a materialist viewpoint; they often advance arguments of a
     pragmatic nature in contexts where psychological or motivational forms of
     argument are much more common. They can be of service, if only by providing
     a concrete basis for certain high-flown debates in the modern world.
        The fascinating Big Questions I have touched on above and which I discuss
     later in this book depend for their answers on an interaction between observation
     on the one hand, and research to give meaning to observations on the other. This
     generates a momentum of its own and that momentum is growing, like the
     discipline of archaeology as a whole: there are many more archaeologists today
     than there were fifty years ago. Consequently, there exist many areas of research
     which are no longer simply pipe-dreams about what archaeology might achieve,
     but very realistic problems that can be addressed intelligently and that can be
     solved. In place of vague generalities about the past, we can expect to obtain
     reliable information, Yet our Big Questions cannot be solved by working on a
     small scale in our own country or province: they require research spanning huge
     time periods and broad geographical areas. The archaeological research com-
     munity is increasingly an international one and the archaeological literature has
     grown to embrace many languages. Really exciting research is in progress.
     Solutions to our main problems are not far away, and in some cases they are
     within our grasp.
                                     Part I
          WHAT                      WAS IT                          LIKE?

What was the past like? How did men once live? How variable were their lifestyles? Such
questions are perhaps among those most commonly asked and readily appreciated, by
archaeologists and laymen alike. They have also come to be associated in the archaeological
literature with one of the aims ofarchaeology : ‘reconstructing the past’. If we are to achieve
any part of this aim, however, we must develop rigorous methodology for interpreting
archaeological remains. In this first section, I hope to demonstrate the need for interpretive
techniques specific tc archaeology and to discuss, by way of example, some of the problems
involved when we ask what it was like about 1 million years ago, during the period of our
early hominid ancestors.
   Although the goal of reconstructing the past has frequently been associated with challenges
to the field of archaeology made by the American archaeologist Walter Taylor in 1948," his
aim was actually very different from what many archaeologists have in mind.? Taylor was
concerned with the construction of past ‘culture contexts’, which he considered as a state of
mind or ‘configuration’ :

   I belveve that there would have been much less of this uncertainty if the archaeologists had
   viewed their material in some such light as that proposed in the present study, uf they had
   viewed culture traits as ideas and not as material objects, if they had envisioned cultural
   behaviour as mediate between ideas and material objects, in short uf they had recognized
   the difference between their own empirical, descriptive groupings and the cultural and
   culture categories pertinent to the peoples they were studying.*

As this passage indicates, Taylor was not advocating that archaeological remains should
be investigated in terms of the mechanical and behavioral processes which brought them
into being, both formally and contextually, but instead that they should be considered in
the intellectual milieu in which they operated. He clearly had in mind a model of ‘mental
templates’ representing the ‘ideas which lay behind the artifacts’.*
   In the following chapters, I wish to demonstrate that we often seek to know certain facts
about the past which have little, if anything, to do with ideas, mental configurations, or even
culture in the strict sense. In order to study certain kinds of behavior, there 1s no need to
discover the ideas responsible for the artifacts or for the patterns observed in the archaeological
record. Sometimes our questions about what it was like in the past involve finding out the roles
which our ancestors played in their environments : the information required will therefore be

                                                31
32


     behavioral and ecological, not ideological. In fact, it is important to point out that archaeologists
     do not always necessarily attempt to recreate a ‘technicolor version’ of all aspects of man’s
     early life. A complete reconstruction of the past is a largely unrealistic goal. The attention of
     scholars who espouse it tends to be biased toward spectacular archaeological sites with
     extraordinary preservation — little ‘Pompetis’ where time has been stopped because of unusual
     circumstances.° By and large, it is these scholars who consider that the nature of the archaeo-
     logical record limits the types of interpretations and reconstructions which archaeologists can
     make. This has been particularly true when the goals of ‘reconstructionists’ are linked with a
     strict empiricist or inductive epistemology which dictates that we can only generalize about
     those parts of the past which leave direct traces.
         Although Taylor worked in terms of a more or less idealist approach, he did recognize that
     the reconstruction of the past from archaeological remains was based on inference. He also felt
     that, if archaeologists were to go beyond what he considered to be sterile descriptions of the
     archaeological record itself to make interesting statements about the past, they had to make
     inferences. Taylor named this inferential procedure the ‘conjunctive approach’ — the linking
     of emptrical observations of the archaeological record to ‘phenomena . . . inferred to have been
     pertinent to the culture and people under investigation.”© His was not a totally new idea;
     previous scholars had also noted that the past 1s ‘created’ by archaeologists using observations
     made in the present and that it 1s inferred or constructed in terms of the data which archaeolo-
     gists feel are significant. In contrast, researchers who feel intellectually secure solely with the
     view that we can only generalize from empirical observations suppose that inferences are to be
     avoided altogether. Taylor countered the arguments of these empiricists and made an inspiring
     appeal to archaeologists to go further with their data; but unfortunately he offered no guide-
     lines about how to proceed in practice. He explored neither methods for making accurate
     inferences, nor for evaluating or verifying them once they had been made.’
        Nevertheless, archaeologists have always made inferences in order to reconstruct the past,
     regardless of the quality of the methods used to generate them. In this section, I will review the
     history of some important research on early man and, in so doing, I will illustrate ways in
     which some archaeologists, myself included, are now trying to develop methods for making
     inferences that are more reliable than those proposed previously. If our efforts are successful,
     someday we may really know something of what it was like in the past.




                                                                                                         Dair
                                                                                                          Rs
                                                                                                           ep
                                                                                                           yib
                                                                                                            a
                                          2
             Man the Mighty Hunter?

What sort of creatures were our ancient ancestors who inhabited the African
savannah about 2 million years ago? It is only in relatively recent times that we
have obtained any concrete knowledge of the beings from whom modern men
evolved, where they lived, or even what they looked like. So the methodological
challenge of learning about their behavior is itself something new. Archaeologists
would be doing well, I think, if their methods could let us know what life was like
in such a remote era. The Lower Palaeolithic, in fact, is a sort of testing ground
for archaeological methods and techniques: just how far can they inform us about
a past so ancient that we can scarcely imagine it realistically on the basis of modern
experience? In this chapter I try to give some feeling for the changing intellectual
climate in this field of research and suggest a framework for analysis which may
prove fruitful.



Man the Bloodthirsty Killer: the Views of Dart’

About sixty years ago a South African anatomist, Raymond Dart, was holding
practical classes in Pleistocene anatomy. As an exercise, Dart asked his students
to search in the local countryside for fossils and broken bones on which they might
use their new skills of identification. One young lady brought in information
regarding what she thought was an interesting bone. This led shortly thereafter
to a major discovery in a limestone quarry near Taung, 130 kilometres north of
Kimberley, South Africa. Dart later recalled the chills that ran up and down his
spine as he saw for the first time what is now a very famous fossil known as the
‘Taung baby’, a small juvenile individual of a very ancient form of man. Today
we know that its age is probably greater than 2.7 million years, but at the time
no one knew how old it might be. In fact, no one had any idea that some of our
ancestors might even have looked like that. Right from the start, I think, Dart
was convinced that the Taung fossil had an important place on the ancestral tree
of man, but his first published anatomical descriptions of the skull led many
European anatomists to disagree with the identification and to suggest instead
that it was the fossil of a chimpanzee or of some other animal. Dart made a trip to -

                                         33
34   Man the Mighty Hunter?

     England and elsewhere in Europe, bringing his little fossil with him for examina-
     tion, and there arose a major controversy as to whether it was, or was not, in the
     ancestral line of man.
        To Dart it seemed obvious that there was no agreed anatomical basis for making
     a judgment one way or the other: the.fossil skull, with its preserved brain case,
     was extraordinary, something so different that no clear-cut criteria existed for
     deciding if it was indeed a fossil man. It was while he was in England that Dart
     began to change his way of thinking about the problem. The question ‘Is this a
     man?’ could not be addressed solely from an anatomical standpoint, because the
     most important thing about early man was his behavior rather than what he looked
     like. One thing unique to man, he reasoned, was that he is the only primate that
     eats meat regularly. If we were to find clear evidence of primate predation, that
     would itself tell us that we were dealing with man (or an ancestor of man) and
     would allow us — assuming we were lucky enough to find the bones — to discover
     what the anatomy ofearly man was like. Similarly, man is unique in making and
     using fire. So if traces ofire were to be found in association with fossils, we would
     know man had been present. The same logic applied to man’s manufacture of
     tools. Dart used several other criteria besides, but these three were the most
     important: they defined man not anatomically, but behaviorally.
        This reasoning led Dart towards a kind of research very different from that
     then current in palaeoanthropology. Previously, anatomists had tried to learn
     about man’s earliest history by the investigation of anatomical facts, archaeolo-
     gists by studying stone tools. What Dart was saying, effectively, was this. Man is
     behaviorally unique. What traces would this unique behavior leave behind?
     Finding bones associated with the behavioral traces of the kind expected ought
     to provide a way of discovering something about man’s physical appearance in
     the remote past — which was, of course, the issue in dispute. Thus, in the years
     either side of World War IJ, Dart studied in great detail the huge quantities of
     non-primate animal bones from various deposits in southern Africa, particularly
     the limeworks at Makapansgat. He did so in the hope of determining whether or
     not the creature responsible for the bone accumulations, if indeed they were the
     bone refuse of animals that some creature had eaten, might be early man.
        History will judge, I believe, that Dart got a little carried away on this quest.
     In fossil-bearing deposits at another site, for instance, he observed some dark
     stains, from which he inferred that fire had been present and therefore that man
     must also have been present. Consequently, the fossil later found at Makapansgat
     was given the cumbersome name Australopithecus prometheus, or ‘fire-using southern
     ape-man’.” If (and only if) Dart’s interpretation of the stains as hearths were
     correct, one of his criteria for recognizing human behavior would have been
     satisfied and would therefore have supported his view that the fossil man-apes
     from the deposits were ancestors of man.
                                                                   Man the Mighty Hunter ?       ot




2 Our Heritage? Hunters ofthe Plio-Pleistocene boundary. ‘Mighty hunters’ are depicted killing
animals and dragging back both food parts and bones (for later use as tools) to a ‘home base’
in a cave or rock fissure. This scenario implies a strict division of labor: the ‘aggressive’
males go out after food, while the females and children stay behind waiting for the male
providers to return. (Pencil drawing by Iva Ellen Morris.)



  His studies of the bones went further than this, however, and led him to the
recognition of some interesting new patterns not previously noted: the bones in
these deposits were not present in the frequencies at which they occur in the anatomies of
modern animals.* We know without any controversy, of course, how many bones
there are in an antelope or lion skeleton, because those animals are still around
and we can actually count the numbers of different kinds*of bones in their
skeletons today. So we have a model, a set of expectations, to use in asking if the
archaeological record is the way it ought to be if it was composed of whole, un-
modified animal skeletons. When Dart used this reasoning to examine his bone
deposits, he found that the patterns observed did not conform to these expecta-
tions at all: there were lots of fragments of skulls, mandibles, and lower legs, but
markedly fewer ribs, vertebrae and pelves. How could observed patterning of
this kind be explained?
   Using that most important of human resources — his imagination — Dart
supposed that the reason for the differential bone frequencies was that some
ancestor of man was hunting and killing animals at a distance from where he
lived;that some anatomical parts were left behind at the location of the kill, while
others were brought back to be eaten; and, most significant of all, that some bones -
                                                                                /
Man the Mighty Hunter?

were carried home to be used as tools, Suddenly, we have a whole new model of
the past, a new notion of man! For if Dart’s imagined picture to account for what
he saw were correct, then man at this period of great antiquity behaved much
like you or I. He hunted (sometimes in-particularly violent ways), he had a
permanent home base, he slept repeatedly in the same place, he carried food back
to his sleeping area, he lived in houses of some sort ~ all behavioral features dis-
tinctive of man and quite unlike those of other primates. By combining observa-
tion with imagination, a picture had emerged not merely of a very ancient
ancestral form -of man, but of those ancestors as mighty hunters, ‘confirmed
killers’ :*
   Man’s predecessors . . . seized living quarries by violence, battered them to
  death, tore apart their broken    bodies, dismembered    them limb from limb,
  slaking their ravenous thirst with the hot blood of victims and greedily devour-
  ing livid writhing flesh.°
   There was a further source of variation in this bone material that seemed to
support the argument. Dart reasoned that it is only natural that man should
experiment with objects near at hand and, if these small-bodied ancestors ofours
were indeed predatory killers, then some of the most likely objects to have
experimented with would have been the bones of dead prey. That man’s first
tools should be bone clubs, bludgeons and saws makes sense, Dart thought,
because animal bones have natural properties that are directly usable. An
antelope’s lower jaw can be used without modification as a saw; its dense upper
limb bones make nice daggers when broken, since they tend to break with a spiral
fracture producing pointed ends. Surely, our ancient human ancestors, those
mighty hunters, would have used such bones as tools?


Doubts about Dart


The interpretive picture outlined above appeared in the literature largely during
the 1950s,° but it did not become widely known at that time. The man mainly
responsible for its dissemination and popularization was the writer Robert
Ardrey, who adopted Dart’s views after a trip to Africa: his first book African
Genesis, which presented a graphic depiction of our early ancestors as bloodthirsty
killers, became a bestseller and was translated into several languages.’ This model
of the distant past also appealed strongly to psychologists such as Konrad Lorenz,
whose work on human aggression was influential at about this time.® On the other
hand many people did seriously question Dart’s behavioral model of the past, but
it was not until later that anyone actually executed research designed to evaluate
it. As I mentioned at the outset, the development of our conception of early man
is a contemporary phenomenon, something very much of our own times.
                                                           Man the Mighty Hunter ?    on
   One of the earliest direct challenges to Dart’s ideas came — appropriately
enough — from physical anthropologists. How, they asked, could this little animal
Australopithecus, only go pounds in weight, have been a mighty hunter capable of
accumulating all the bones that Dart had been studying? Why could some other
agent not have been responsible? A paper published in 1957° suggested that
Australopithecus, far from being the hunter, was the hunted; that he had provided
a useful meal for the African spotted hyena and that the actions of hyenas, not of
men, were the cause of the bone accumulations.
   Now this was a most interesting proposition that triggered some really profit-
able research, If it is being argued that the bones were accumulated by hyenas,
then it is a simple matter to check whether hyenas do, in fact, do this today. So
A. R. Hughes, a colleague of Dart, excavated pits in a hyena layer near the
Kruger National Park in South Africa; finding no bones in them, except those of
a single tortoise, he concluded that hyenas did not accumulate bones and that an
explanation of that kind was not a valid objection to Dart’s hypothesis.'° On the
other hand, there existed a sizeable literature in palaeontology suggesting that
they did. Many strata in British Pleistocene sites, for instance, had traditionally
been interpreted as hyena layers. Even Roman generals had complained of
hyenas digging up the bodies of dead soldiers and eating them.'’ Some of Dart’s
opponents felt that Hughes’s work was insufficient to decide the issue definitively
one way or the other. So they began to gather relevant information on the
behavior of hyenas and other animals.'* It became increasingly clear that, under
certain conditions (and even then not invariably), hyenas did accumulate bones.
But spotted hyenas did so more often than brown hyenas. Their behavior varied
in different settings (for instance, whether or not they were competing fiercely
with lions). Hyenas, leopards and lions each do different kinds of things with
bones under different circumstances. Obviously,-we needed to know much more
about these animals if we were to understand their potential role as the agents
contributing to deposits containing evidence of man himself.
   The public image of the archaeologist is hardly that of a man who goes into
the field to observe hyena behavior. But much of the important work on animal
behavior starting in the late 1950s was in fact done by archaeologists. ‘Their own
researches had confronted them squarely with the problem: what processes in the
past led to the formation of the archaeological deposits we observe today? To be
sure, archaeological observations were available; there were patterns in the
archaeological material that hinted at the causal regularities that might have
brought the record into being; use of the imagination could even suggest what
some of these might be. But there existed no method of evaluating these ideas. It
was only a couple of decades ago that archaeology in Africa (and elsewhere)
began to enter a new and very different era, in which research was oriented
towards techniques which might allow ideas about the past to be tested.
                                                                      ¢
  38      Man the Mighty Hunter?


       Ta          a
  re
IMPORTANT                               7
  Eariy   NWonminio
ReseacrcH   LOCATIONS

                           Blast   ana


                   Koosi     FoRaA—~,
                                    J       8



                                   *
    OLDUVAI       Qor qe Tears



                                   mi
 KUISEB
 HoTTENTOTS
                                                AKAPANSGAT
  meee                                      STERKFONTEIN
  pe                                        SWARTKRANS
  Seen            ee                        KROMDRAAI        3 Distribution of some important
        ee                         TAUNG                     early hominid research locations
                                                       LE.   :     5
                                                        =    in Africa.




          Leakey’s Alternative

          At about the same time as the emergence of these methodological interests,
          another man began to make discoveries that were crucial for our understanding
          of early hominid behavior. Louis Leakey, despite his immense investment of
          energy and his great interest in early man, had been unsuccessful in recovering
          major fossil material in over thirty years of work. He had carried out extensive
          surveys in Olduvai Gorge in East Africa in the 1930s; he had examined large
          areas at a major Middle Palaeolithic site at Olorgesailie in the 1940s, using Italian
          prisoners-of-war to expand his labor force; and after the war, he had reinstituted
          survey work — always with the great dream of finding some fossils that would
          inform us in significant ways about the nature of human evolution.
             The dream was realized in 1959, when Leakey’s wife Mary spotted a little facet
          of bone exposed at the edge of very ancient deposits at Olduvai and recognized
          it as a man-like creature’s tooth arc, resting upside down in the ground.'*
          Excavation of the deposit followed almost immediately and revealed the extra-
          ordinary fossil skull which Leakey called Zinjanthropus. It was clear from the
          moment it emerged that this skull was that ofa creature quite different from those
          initially described by Dart. The latter were relatively small and gracile, with
                                                               Man the Mighty Hunter?    39

jaws of moderate size. But the jaw of this specimen was something to behold: the
surface area of the third molar tooth was almost as big as an American quarter or
a British two pence coin. The jaw muscles must have been enormous, because
there was not enough space on the surface of the head to attach them all and an
upstanding ridge of, bone, known as the sagittal crest, was necessary for further
muscle attachments (just as it is on a dog’s skull). In these and many other
respects, <injanthropus did not look at all like modern man; yet it seemed clear
 that he walked upright, had bipedal posture and a large brain case. The Leakeys’
 discovery of this ‘robust Australopithecine’ at Olduvai further complicated
 already complex anatomical arguments, Similar forms had been found earlier
 in South Africa, but their relative chronology was not certain. Were they ancestral
 to each other or were they largely contemporary?
    Importantly, however, the fossil skull of Zinjanthropus lay in a deposit alongside
 what were unquestionably stone tools. Unlike Dart’s bone ‘tools’, no imagination
 was required to see tools. Archaeologists already had well-developed criteria for
 recognizing tools produced by the hand of man from stone, and most people
 qualified to judge agreed that the stones found in the deposits with the ‘inj’ skull
 were indeed tools. So there could be no argument that one, at least, of Dart’s
 criteria had been met.
    Here then was an opportunity to see if Dart’s picture of ‘man the mighty
 hunter’ was correct, for the deposits contained a hominid in association not only


4 A view of Olduvai Gorge at the first fault. (Photo courtesy of Diane Gifford.)
40    Man the Mighty Hunter?

      with stone tools, but also with a lot of bones of other creatures. In the first reports
      to the media in 1959, Leakey announced that the associated bones were those of
      little birds, birds’ eggs, tortoises and baby pigs.'> The impression received was of
      early man as essentially vegetarian, but a vegetarian who occasionally ate meat
      as opportunity afforded. Ifhe happened to run into a bird’s nest, he stole the eggs ;
      if he chanced to step on a lizard, then he probably ate it; if he came upon a pig
      which had recently given birth, he would probably steal the young ones. As
      Washburn and Howell commented:

        The extraordinary new discovery at Olduvai Gorge has clarified some . . . im-
        portant questions concerning australopithecine behavior. It affords clear-cut
        evidence that these primitive hominids were to some extent carnivorous and
        predacious, augmenting their basically vegetal diet with meat, particularly
        from small animals and the young of some larger species. It is very unlikely that
        the early and small-bodied Australopithecines did much killing, whereas the
        later and larger forms, which probably replaced them could cope with small
        and/or immature mammals. There is no evidence to suggest such creatures
        were capable ofpreying on the large herbivorous mammals so characteristic of
        the African Pleistocene.!°

        This interpretation, however, was based only on the results from an excavated
      area about 4 metres by 6 metres! In view of the enormous interest in the findings,
      the National Geographic Society decided to provide substantial financial support
      on a long-term basis for Leakey’s work at Olduvai Gorge. A much larger floor
      area was opened up around the initial tiny excavation at this location (known as
      FLK22).'’ The preservation was astonishing; even small rodents, insects and
      insect-casts were recoverable. But the most surprising aspect, in view of Leakey’s
      earlier remarks, was the number and variety of species represented within such
      a limited space. In one area were the bones of an okapi (a Pleistocene form of
      giraffe), in another the fragmentary remains of Pleistocene pig, horse and a
      variety of African antelope. Remains of exotic animals also turned up: catfish
      skulls, rodents, chameleons, turtle bones. In fact, by the time the excavations
      were over the inventory of larger mammals included many different species. It
      was rather reminiscent of one of those wonderful Victorian pictures of man with
128   all the animals in the Garden of Eden.
         So it began to appear that the data from these excavations actually supported
      Dart’s original view of early man. Certainly, a. scenario involving hunters good
      enough to handle horse, large antelope, okapi and other animals seemed incom-
      patible with Leakey’s first notions of a timid vegetarian who sucked birds’ eggs
      and apologized for stepping on lizards!
         The Olduvai material seemed reasonably clear cut. Most researchers were
      prepared to believe that, in the associations between tools and bones, they were
                                                            Man the    Mighty Hunter?

seeing ‘living sites’ generated by the actions of ancient hominids, For instance, at
the FLK NN3@ site it seemed fairly certain that Leakey was dealing with an ancient
land surface that had not been greatly disturbed: the intact remains of anumber
of land tortoises were found on the floor with their bones roughly in correct
anatomical position. Near the tortoises were the in situ vertebrae and ribs of a
single African antelope with stone tools scattered around it. Although some sites
were not viewed as quite so simple as this, many locations with bones and stones
in association were accepted as living sites, Given that the contents of these sites
were attributable to the actions of hominids, then the picture of man the hunter
was not contradicted by the seemingly self-evident finds. For instance, at the site
called FLK, Mary Leakey’® excavated a level containing the remains of a
Dinotherium. This strange Pleistocene animal had teeth as huge as elephant tusks
protruding from its lower jaw like a front-end loader, which it used to root through
the marshes for plant foods. One of these great beasts lay there at FLK partially
disarticulated, and close by were found quite definite stone tools. Opposition to
the idea of early man as a mighty hunter was, understandably, quieted.
   Unfortunately, Louis Leakey died in 1972 while raising funds for yet further
excavation; his work has been carried on by his wife Mary and son Richard in
other places. Leakey’s evidence from Olduvai, however, serves as the basis for
the most common, current views of the nature of early hominid behavior, the
views to be seen in virtually all today’s textbooks. Admittedly, no traces of fire
were ever found in any of the Oldowan (1.e. earliest Olduvai) deposits thus far
studied, nor did levels with stone tools contain obvious examples of the kinds of
bone tools Dart envisaged: so the lack of evidence for two of Dart’s criteria offered
a basis for questioning his arguments in those respects. But the story of the stone
tools and fauna appeared to many unequivocal.
   The new orthodoxy is nicely represented in the many writings of Glynn Isaac,
one of the leading contemporary Africanists.'? The picture of the past which he
paints is vividly expressed in the following passage:

  If an observer could be transported back through time... what would he see?
  _.. Far across the plains, a group of four or five men approach... . As the men
  approach the observer becomes aware of other primates below him. A group
  of creatures have been reclining on the sand in the shade of a tree while some
  youngsters play around them. As the men approach these creatures rise and it
  becomes apparent that they are bipedal. They seem to be female, and they
  whoop excitedly as some of the young run out to meet the arriving party... .
     The object being carried is the carcass of an impala and the group congre-
  gates around this in high excitement. There is some pushing and shoving and
  flashes of temper and threat. Then one of the largest males takes two objects
  from a heap at the foot of the tree. There are sharp clacking sounds as he squats
                                                                        ¢
42   Man the Mighty Hunter?

       down and bangs these together repeatedly. The other creatures scramble
       around picking up the small sharp chips that have been detached from the
       stones. When there is a small scatter oflakes on the ground at his feet, the stone
       worker drops the two chunks, sorts through the fragments and selects two or
       three pieces. Turning back to the carcass the leading male starts to make
       incisions . . . each adult male finishes up with a segment of the carcass, and
       withdraws to a corner of the clearing, with one or two females and juveniles
       congregating around him. They sit chewing and cutting the meat with morsels
       changing hands at intervals... One of the males gets up, stretches his arms,
       scratches under his arm pits and then sits down. He leans against the tree, gives
       a loud belch and pats his belly . . .7°

        Drawing on the generally accepted understanding of the relevant Pleistocene
     deposits, Isaac has argued that already about 2 million years ago man was a
     hunter who brought back the products ef the hunt to his sleeping places to share
     among both males and females (for he lived in family groups with division of




     5 Our Heritage? Sociable altruists of the Plio-Pleistocene boundary. A tightly-knit ‘band’ of early
     hominids is depicted. Food sharing among adults is indicated by the pair at the right;
     instruction in tool making is suggested by the adults and child seated at the left. The group
     responds with curiosity to a pair of males returning from the food quest. What are they
     bringing back to their ‘home base’ — plant foods or meat from hunted or scavenged animals?
     (Pen and pencil drawing by Iva Ellen Morris.)
6 The Koobi Fora hippopotamus site (FxJj3) under excavation by Glynn Isaac. (Photo
courtesy of Diane Gifford.)




labor by sex). The claim, in short, is that several kinds of essentially human
characteristics were present as a behavioral repertoire at a surprisingly early stage
in hominid evolution. We may justifiably ask how the vivid picture presented by
Isaac was inferred from deposits of this remote era.



Brain’s Approach

The discoveries at Olduvai Gorge effectively silenced many members of the
scientific community who had previously been unhappy about Dart’s conception
of the nature of our ancient ancestors. An uneasy quiet in this controversy about
the ‘mighty hunter’ concept reigned for some years. But today, as a result of fresh
excavations in Africa and methodological research there and elsewhere in the
world, a very different kind of interpretive approach is beginning to emerge, one
which in my opinion should provide the basis for a far more realistic examination
of this early material. Much of the impetus for it may be traced to the innovative
work begun in the mid-1960s by the South African C. K. Brain.”
44




         7 C.K. Brain (right) studying bones excavated from Swartkrans, August 1981.



        Brain’s early work had been in South African deposits similar in some ways to
     those which Dart used as the basis for his arguments about the use of bone tools
     and the hunting of animals by the Australopithecines. I have not mentioned so
     far that there were other important sites in South Africa yielding faunal assem-
     blages in association with Australopithecine remains. One of the leaders in the
     investigations at the site of Sterkfontein and others in the same area was R. Broom;
     with G. Schepers he offered the opinion that the bone accumulations were prob-
     ably the work of hyenas rather than the living places or home bases of very
     ‘predacious’ early men. In fact, the view developing among many eminent
     researchers”* prior to Leakey’s discovery of tools on the Zinj floor was that the
     materials in South African sites were perhaps attributable to other animals or the
     result of scavenging behavior by our early ancestors. Leakey’s finds seemed to be
     inconsistent with such ideas.
        The initial problem to which Brain addressed himself was how the deposits
     Dart studied for so many years had come into being: what formation processes were
     involved ?Remains ofancient hominids had been found sporadically within dense
     pockets of animal bone. Brain believed, quite rightly, that understanding the
     conditions that brought such deposits into being would put the interpretation of
     what was in them on much firmer ground, His earliest observations in this regard,
     however, were largely incidental to the problem itself. He had noticed an
     interesting feature of the landscape around a number of the South African sites
                                                               Man the Mighty Hunter?

with which he was very familiar. It was a classic savannah environment with low
scrub merging gradually with desert formations; but the trees, instead of being
stunted and scattered as is normally the case, were clumped and often quite large.         8
The cause, he found, was geological. Solution of the deep limestone deposits in the
region had produced chambers in the rock which acted as natural catchments,
with deep pools resulting from the percolation of groundwater or from surface
run-off. It was this water resource, of course, that the big trees were able to tap
in what is otherwise a very dry environment. So Brain and others began to wonder
whether the beds investigated by Dart represented not caves or rock shelters that
one could walk into, but deep trap-like fissures into which bones had been washed
and living animals had occasionally fallen.
   While in the early stages of his investigation, Brain linked this observation with
a second one: that leopards tend to drag their prey up into trees when harassed
by other predators.7* Such behavior, in fact, together with the tendency for
leopards to use rock shelters and fissures as lairs (especially when a female has
young), was acknowledged even by Dart as a possible agent contributing to these
deposits.2* But was information of this sort sufficient to create a convincing
picture of the past in terms of formation processes? Clearly not. Brain needed
                                                                                      —




8 A view across the excavations at Swartkrans, looking toward Sterkfontein, August 1981.
Note the trees growing beside limestone fissures on the left.
Man the Mighty Hunter?




                9 C. K. Brain excavating at Swartkrans, August 1981.



more detailed and relevant observations from natural history before he could
advance interpretive arguments, so the next obvious step was to learn something
about leopard behavior. What he discovered was that most of the carnivorous
predators of Africa can easily out-compete a leopard in a direct confrontation:
the leopard has adapted to this by dragging its prey up into a tree, in order to be
relatively safe from competitors (particularly hyenas). The prey is draped over a
branch with its legs dangling down on either side. As the leopard begins to con-
sume the prey along the central axis of the back, various parts start to fall to the
ground, Among all the predators of Africa, apparently, leopards are unique in
behaving in this way.
   Comparative study of bones left on the surface below the trees and around the
fissures as a result of leopard behavior produced some useful results. To cite only
one example, the skull bones characteristically showed many depressed fractures
and puncture wounds. Contrary to the impression given by Tarzan movies, the
big cats, whenever possible, kill by closing their mouths over that of their prey
and by keeping them closed until suffocation occurs ; that way, the prey is almost
hypnotized and lies still without flailing its legs (something dangerous for the
predators who are likely to have their stomachs ripped open). This behavior
results in a systematic pattern of skull punctures which can be matched with the
spacing between a leopard’s canine teeth,*> Armed with various modern anatom-
                                                           Man the Mighty Hunter?      47




10 Reconstructed scene ofa leopard
eating an early hominid in a tree
above a limestone fissure. (Pen
drawing by Mary Coombes re-
produced with permission from
South African Museum Bulletin No. 9,
1968.)



ical observations of this kind, Brain re-examined the Swartkrans material and         9)
was able to show that there too the skull fractures were probably the result not of
club blows by man (as Dart had thought), but of death by suffocation in the way
just described. In the bones from Makapansgat, likewise, the contrast between
intact lower limb bones and largely absent vertebrae could be related to the
typical pattern of consumption by leopards. In fact, the breakage patterns were
essentially indistinguishable from the ones Brain was finding in his studies of
contemporary leopard behavior.                                                        10

   Here, then, was a most provocative situation. The geological context produced
clumps of trees, offering shade and protection in an otherwise open landscape;
such environments formed the natural habitat for the consumption of food by one
of the major predators; and such food consumption resulted in the accumulation
of bones at the very edge of natural fissures. This combination of circumstances
convinced Brain that these same processes and conditions, operating over millions
of years, had contributed to the formation of the palaeontological deposits then
being excavated in South Africa.
48




     11 Schematic summary of the formation sequence ofthe South African early hominid sites: Early stages.

     The initial step (a) is the formation of an underground cavern by the solution of the
     dolomitic limestone under the water table. Erosion over long periods results in the down-
     cutting ofthe rivers and lowering ofthe water table, so that the solution chamber eventually
     becomes a cavern or hole in the limestone, high and dry above the water table.
        At this point (B), the percolation of groundwater initiates the formation of travertines
     within the cavern, while the percolation fissures leading in and out are enlarged by
     solution and mechanical erosion. Further caverns may be in the process of forming within
     the zone of lowered groundwater below the original one, which becomes a conductor or
     groundwater to them. Large blocks fallen from the roof modify the internal shape of the
     original cavern and channel water percolation through it.




         Nevertheless, Brain did not stop with the study of leopards. He studied the
     African porcupine, which was known to accumulate bones in its lairs. He also
     examined the roosting behavior of owls which had certainly contributed con-
     siderable quantities of bones from small creatures to the deposits in the limestone
     sites. He researched the behavior of hyenas and (unlike Dart) realized that the
     actions of this interesting animal could account for many characteristics of the
     faunal assemblages from the early ‘ape-man’ sites. All these studies of animal
     behaviour were coupled with continuing excavation and investigation of the
     important site of Swartkrans.
        The insights stemming from Brain’s methodological research have now made
     it possible to develop a picture of the processes by which some of the South African
     deposits were formed. Ills. 11 and 12 present a generalized illustration of how
     their contents were conditioned by a sequence of events taking place in the context
                                                                    Man the Mighty Hunter ?         49




    Sa    eH            Et




           CAVERN   FORMED
           BELOW    WATER    TABLE




                                                                    DOL     OMIT E




           NEW   cavern
           FORMING   BELOW                                         WaTER.     TABLE
           WATER    TABLE
                                      FORMATION    SEQUENCE
                                 SouTtH ArFRican   Hominin Sites
                                                                                     LE   Binrorp




of geological processes. In reality, of course, the situation is very much more
complex. But the major point should be clear: these deposits are the result of a
large number of processes, which can be related to a large number of agents acting
under changing conditions. While evidence of hominid behavior and actual
hominid remains may be present, their associations are referable to dynamics at the
ecosystem level of organization (rather than to the specific behavior of a single species,
as Dart assumed). Brain’s work on formation processes, then, represents the
development of methods for inference — that is, the investigation of properties
which permit the ‘diagnosis’ of a deposit and the accurate attribution of its
components to the agents and processes responsible for their occurrence.
   At this juncture it is reasonable to speculate. If the cave and fissure deposits of
South Africa are accumulations formed by many different and varied processes
which operated in the past environment, might the same not also be true of the
                                                                                          4
12 Schematic summary of the formation sequence of the South African early hominid sites : Later stages.
Small fissures develop (1), linking the surface to the cavern below. Trees grow around these
sinkholes, whose openings provide opportunities for a wide variety of animals: owls and
bats roost within, while primates (including hominids) sleeping at the entrance attract
hunting leopards and scavenging hyenas. The specific interactions among these animals
largely determines the content of the very gradually accumulating deposits (Member I)
washed down into the cavern.
   In time, the fissures become larger through erosion (2), allowing an increased volume of
surface water run-offto begin to flush out the cavern and carve drainage channels through
the previously accumulated deposit. The opening of such channels accelerates the erosion
of the surface and leads to considerable changes in the size and shape of the fissures and
their immediately adjacent areas.
    Major periods of erosion result in some openings becoming clogged with fallen rock and
soil, while others might become enlarged — particularly where the fissures intersect the
plane of the surface at an angle, producing small rock shelters or cave-like entrances (3).
These modifications at the surface affect the appropriateness ofthe place for use by differing
combinations of animals, including the hominids. For instance, once less agile animals like
the hyena can gain access to the protected cave mouths, primates would find less security
there as sleeping locations; leopards, in turn, would encounter fewer primate prey during
their nocturnal visits and more formidable competitors. Under such conditions, the major
contributors to the deposits in the cavern below (Member II) are the hyena and perhaps
other carnivores (although at Swartkrans sporadic finds of hominid fossils and tools in the
Member II deposits indicate that members of the family Hominidae occasionally used the
gallery entrance).
    Finally, the deposit becomes relatively stable (4), although further erosion and deposition
of more recent age may in practice result in a complex stratigraphic intermingling.




open sites of East Africa? If they too are palimpsests of this sort, how would we
recognize the fact? And how could we set about doing research, analogous to
Brain’s work on caves, as the first steps in gaining a new understanding of the
East African material? If the associations between artifacts and bones are not
necessarily clear cut and the bones are not a ‘self-evident’ witness to the nature
of early man’s diet, then maybe the behavior of the early hominids was quite
different from the orthodox reconstructions proposed by researchers in East
Africa.                                                    |
                                                              Man the Mighty Hunter?           51




                                                       EROSION     oF
                                                       MemBeER      T.
     MEMBER         LT

                               TRAVERTINE                                DoLomire   ee




 Nore:
   THIS   15 A   GENERALIZED
   EGOS           WIRES   oN            FoRMATION   SEQUENCE
   SwarRTKRANS.    SEE          SOUTH   AFRICAN     HOMINID     OGITES
   Brain  198), Fig 185                                                                  EFA   A REPTS,




Help from Contemporary Studies

It will be recalled that Dart had observed that the different parts of ungulate
skeletons were not present in the Makapansgat population in direct proportion
to the frequency with which they occurred in the anatomy of living animals. He
reasoned that the bias in anatomical parts was to be understood in terms of
selection of parts for use as tools and food by the Australopithecines, Brain had
noted that his leopard feeding data showed that certain parts tended to be eaten
                                                                         4
onto
       Man the Mighty Hunter?




       13 A view of a large tree at the mouth of a limestone fissure at Swartkrans, 1981: what
       early man might have seen from within his sleeping area.




       and destroyed, others to survive the leopard and even the scavenging hyenas.
       Although these observations were thought-provoking, most of Brain’s samples
       were small and he was not convinced that he understood the causes of the
       phenomenon noted by Dart. To gain some further understanding, he started an
       ethnoarchaeological project with a group of contemporary Hottentot pastoralists
       living in Namibia.”© These people keep herds of goats which they kill and eat
       right in the villages in which they live. Since they do not trade meat in or out of
       their settlements, all the bones should be there — at least in principle. So Brain was
       keen to see whether the goat bones recovered in such a setting occurred in the
       ‘correct’ proportions. But in fact the Hottentots keep large numbers of dogs which,
                                                            Man the Mighty Hunter?

being unfettered, have free access to all the garbage in the village —and, as we all
know, dogs are pretty good with bones! In his collection of several thousand bones
from more than one village, Brain found a tremendous bias in the relative fre-
quencies of anatomical parts — a bias in favor of mandibles and the distal ends of
most bones, and against vertebrae, ribs and proximal ends. Since there were
scavenging animals in the past too, it hardly seemed surprising that there should
be a great deal ofsimilarity in the bone frequencies in the Hottentot villages and
in the Makapansgat deposits associated with Australopithecus.
   All the foregoing evidence, some of it drawn from controlled observations in
the modern world, made Brain fairly certain that Pleistocene leopards and other
animals, not man, were important agents responsible for these deposits. Accord-
ing to this new interpretation, Australopithecus had not necessarily lived where his
bones were found: he was merely eaten there! The sites were not living places,
but various natural traps and sleeping places.
   It can be exciting when two people, literally half a world apart and each
unaware of what the other is doing, find themselves thinking along very similar
lines, At the time Brain was studying leopards and Hottentot goat bones, I neither
knew him nor had any idea of what he was doing. Yet it turned out that some
ethnoarchaeological studies of my own, merely incidental to ethnographic work
I was doing with the Navajo Indians of New Mexico, were moving in much the
same direction.”’.
   During fieldwork I had noticed in a casual way that the frequencies of bones
in the rubbish dumps of the Navajo winter camp at which I was a visitor seemed
to be very different from those at summer sites. Being well aware of all the prob-
lems of interpretation posed by variations in anatomical part frequencies among
the Lower Pleistocene remains discussed above, I decided to start a small student
project to study whether my initial impression about bone frequencies was correct
and — if it was — what caused the differences. Working in a remote area of the
Navajo reservation, we had no problem getting access to suitable material:
indeed, the Indians laughingly encouraged the insane professor and his students
to come and clean up their front yards! We collected the bones from sites for
which we had information about the people who had lived there, about the
duration of occupation, about seasonality, and so on. I had imagined that the
Navajo simply killed and ate sheep and goats from time to time and that the
pattern would be a straightforward reflection of this behavior. But our study
revealed that there were vast differences in the relative anatomical part frequen-
cies on Navajo winter and summer sites.
   Once we saw the differences, we began to consider what caused them. These
sites were in a high desert area with severe winters in which there is often deep
snowcover in January and night-time temperatures regularly drop as low as o’F
(— 18°C). Consequently, many of the lambs born the previous spring, together
cr
J4        Man the Mighty Hunter ?




            14 A Navajo woman preparing to butcher a sheep. (Photo courtesy of J. Chisholm. )


          with a good number of the old animals, simply freeze to death in winter: these
          the Navajo either eat themselves or (if they are only skinny little lambs) feed
          directly to their dogs. So winter sites produce an archaeological faunal record
          with a biased age frequency. On summer sites, it is fat sheep in prime condition,
          chosen for their good health, that are selectively consumed.    In both situations,
          dogs had free access to the garbage and, obviously, the bones of the old ewes
          offered them more of a challenge than the soft bones of the little yearlings. Our
     a)   laboratory studies of bone density in relation to growth allowed us to generate
          graphs showing how changes with age in the hardness of each bone in the body
          affected their probability of survival. We could demonstrate easily that markedly
          differential frequencies would result from subjecting all the bones equally to the
          same agents of attrition. So it-seemed to us that what determined the variable
          frequencies of anatomical parts wzthin the Navajo sites was the bone densities of
          animals of different ages, while the differences between sites lay in differences in
          the age structure of the animals whose bones were being gnawed or eaten by dogs.
             The logical next step was to see whether such a simple model based on bone
          density could help us understand variation in the frequencies of anatomical parts
          at archaeological sites such as Makapansgat. Most of the animals there were
          antelopes, many of them as small or even smaller than sheep, although with a
                                                            Man the Mighty Hunter?

rather different birth sequence. But the same processes ought to be relevant, if we
were indeed dealing at Makapansgat with the work of a predator, such as a
leopard, which preferentially kills very young and very old animals; and we did
in fact find a very good match between the frequencies of bones in the modern
Navajo sites and bone survival at Makapansgat. Here was further support for
Brain’s prior conclusion — that the differential occurrence of ungulate bones was
simply a reflection of their differential potential for surviving attrition by
carnivore gnawing or stream-bed abrasion, rather than the result of Australo-
pithecine hunting activities.
   Both Brain and I were studying dynamic processes in the modern world as the
basis for the development of methods for making inferences about static remains
from the distant past. We were both very much aware that archaeologists must
be able to identify the agents responsible for a deposit before they can begin to
interpret it. In my fieldwork with the caribou-hunting Nunamiut Eskimo in
northern Alaska”® (see Chapter 6), I saw a further possibility of obtaining con-
trolled comparative information from the modern world relevant to the contrast
between animal and human hunters in their treatment of bones. For example, I
had the opportunity to observe thirty-six wolf kills and to get back later to twenty-
four of them in order to make an inventory of the bones that remained (the other
kill sites were destroyed in the interim by grizzly bears or by the melting of the



15 Students engaged in a sheep
butchering experiment designed to
investigate how the properties of
bone vary with age; Albuquerque,
1973:
i)6   Man the Mighty Hunter?

      lake ice), I also investigated a number of wolf dens and recorded the composition,
      breakage and gnawing patterns ofthe faunal assemblages there.*” A little later it
      came to my attention that the British scholar Andrew Hill®° was doing exactly
      the same type ofstudy on the open kill sites of lions and hyenas in Uganda and
      southern Ethiopia and he had been successful in gathering a large and interesting
      body ofdata. Hill had no information on dens, however, and my own was not a
      sufficient basis for generalizing about what animals do to bones when they drag
      them back to their sleeping areas. Fortunately, this lacuna could be filled to some
      degree, for the archaeologist Richard Klein*! had detailed records of the large
      faunal assemblage from his excavation of ahyena den in South Africa.
         When all this material was put together and compared — Hill’s predator kill
      sites, Klein’s hyena layer, my own wolf dens and kill sites — a very repetitive
      pattern emerged. Wolves, hyenas and the large cats, it seems, behave very much
      alike and produce extremely similar bone assemblages, even in quite different
      settings. The chief difference lies in the frequency with which each species intro-
      duces bones into layers at their sleeping places: lions don’t seem to do it, hyenas
      do it all the time, while wolves behave like packrats in bringing back everything
      they can. Amongst all the species, what varied was not so much the types of bones
      resulting from predatory behavior, as the quantities in which they occurred. So by
      combining various kinds of information, it was possible to obtain a realistic
      picture of the nature of assemblages which can occur as the outcome of predatory
      animal behavior.



      Back to the Pleistocene


      How can this kind of information help the archaeologist reconstruct human
      behavior over 2 million years ago? My reasoning goes in the following way. Where
      we have archaeological or palaeontological contexts in which many factors may
      have contributed to the formation of a deposit, we need to find ways of removing
      the known or recognizable elements that are not of direct interest, in order to see
      if anything ‘unknown’ is left that might be related to man’s activities. Chemical
      qualitative analysis follows just the same strategy, of course. You are given some
      compound in a test tube and asked to say what the unknown substance is: the
      classic procedure is to extract and identify all the known elements in the com-
      pound until you are left with an unknown (but relatively pure) residue which is
      sufficiently unambiguous to be identified from the textbook. Archaeologists un-
      fortunately have no such textbook, but their analytical tactics can still be similar
      — moving from known to unknown conditions by isolating the residues.
         I took as ‘known’, then, the structure of bone assemblages produced in various
      settings by animal predators and scavengers; and as ‘unknown’ the bone deposits




                                                                                             ae
                                                                                             a
                                                             Man the Mighty Hunter?     cf
                                                                                        0) 7

excavated by the Leakeys at Olduvai Gorge. Using mathematical and statistical
techniques, I considered to what degree the finds from Olduvai Gorge could be
accounted for in terms of the results of predator behavior and how much was ‘left
over’. This proved to be an exciting analysis. My expectation had been that all
the variability in the Oldowan faunal material would be attributable to the
activities of predators and scavengers, that Zinjanthropus was there because he got
eaten by some other animal. But when I actually looked at my results, I con-
sistently found that in sites with relatively high tool frequencies there was a
recognizable amount of residual material which could not be explained by what
we know about African carnivores. Mandibles and minor skull parts occurred at
marginally higher frequencies, but the really big differences lay in the regular
excess of lower limb bones (for instance, metatarsals and distal ends of the tibia).
What could our ancestors have been doing? After all, there is not much meat to
speak of on such bones, only the bone marrow in them is of any food value.
    This bit of information in itself is suggestive. The African predators and
scavengers compete for meat, while bone marrow is mainly consumed only by
juvenile animals, especially of the canids and hyenas, gnawing on bones. Now in
any intimate set of relations between animals a very common adaptation is for
one species to live off the by-products of another — herds of antelope have an escort
of dung beetles, for instance. A species carving out a new niche for itself almost
never competes directly with others already present, but investigates the edges of
the energy system, as it were, to find a way ofusing the entropy of other animals,
Might this account for the residual bone frequencies? The food item most
commonly left unconsumed at predator kill sites, even after scavengers like
hyenas have left, is the marrow trapped in bone reservoirs; and this would have
been something early man could readily have consumed without competing
directly with all the other predators in the environment. I have always been a
little uneasy about the supposed machismo of little go-pound Australopithecines
confronting 350-pound African lionesses!
   The interesting thing about these faunal analyses is not simply that the (con-
ceptual) removal of material which can be understood in terms of animal
behavior regularly left clear residual patterns, but that such patterns were them-
selves very similar from case to case. I detected a repeated residual pattern that
made some sense in terms of scavenging behavior; yet its magnitude was also
largely proportional to the quantity of stone tools in each deposit — something
that in no way could have been a result of my analyses of the bones themselves.
Despite much discussion, the fact remains that the earliest Oldowan tools are
simply smashed rocks which could probably have served only as hammer-stones,
clubs or choppers. The flakes struck off them were not in general utilized, for in
the lowest deposits cutting tools are rare, while morphologically sophisticated
tools (such as scrapers) are entirely absent.
58   Man the Mighty Hunter?

       These observations must be set in the context of the stratigraphic sequence at
     Olduvai. The various excavations there are in geological deposits spanning an
     extremely long period of about 1.2 million years, from the lowest levels dated
     about 1.8 million years ago to the upper excavated deposits of Bed II dated around
     600,000 years ago, Contrary to what one might assume, it is the lowest and oldest
      beds that are the best preserved. The early levels represent activity beside a lake
     whose margins gradually receded; the upper levels are much more disturbed by
      local hydrological processes, which have given rise to slope-wash deposits full of
      gravels and rolled-materials. As one moves up through the beds at Olduvai in the
      same location, there is a sequential change from lake-edge sediments to braided
      stream-channel deposits. That same sequence exhibits related changes in the
     faunal assemblages, from lots of bones and relatively few teeth in the bottom levels,
      to lots of teeth and few bones in the upper levels. Tooth enamel, of course, is
      effectively the hardest part of an animal’s body and is the most resistant to
      mechanical destruction or to solution by soil acids. So the regular directional
     change in the tooth-to-bone ratio in the Olduvai deposits from bottom to top
     warns us not to treat the rate of bone attrition or transport by water as something
     constant through time.
         Where water transport occurs — as seems to be the case in the upper levels at
      Olduvai — some mechanical sorting of tools by size can be expected to affect the
     frequencies at which they appear: the more violent the stream-flow, the more it
     will wash away small pieces of stone, leaving only big ones. Knowing what we do
     about the geological contexts, we would predict lots of small flake-tools in the
     lower in situ deposits and lots of large heavy tools in the uppermost ones. But the
     reverse 1s true! Erosional processes, then, cannot be the main agent responsible for
      the changing composition of the stone tool assemblages. So there are grounds for
     suspecting that what we are monitoring in the increased use ofcutting-edge tools
     is a dim reflection of some really important behavioral changes amongst hominid
     populations over this enormous span of time.
         This suspicion is buttressed by a further intriguing correlation. As the relative
     frequency offlakes and flake tools goes up, so too does the frequency of animals of
     large body size: the upper levels contain relatively large numbers of hippopo-
     tamus, giraffe, elephant and rhinoceros (all generally represented by teeth). Of
     course, this is essentially what we would expect from the erosional patterns I have
     Just mentioned, Small animals would be washed away altogether, giving a bias
     in favor of the teeth of larger animals. But if in the lower levels we have the record
     of man scavenging mainly for bone marrow around the fringes of predator kills
     and other animal death-sites, and if there is indeed a shift through time towards
     increased use of cutting tools, then it is at least reasonable to imagine that man
     was gradually beginning to compete as a scavenger for meat (rather than bone
     marrow). And if that were so, he would surely tend to focus his activities increas-
                                                                    Man the Mighty Hunter?




16 Our Heritage? Eclectic foragers of the Plio-Pleistocene boundary. A foraging group of males,
females and children encounter a relatively fresh carcass of adead animal near a water
source and begin to scavenge, while others approach to join in the feeding. Various animals,
also frequent users of the same place, are indicated. This scenario implies nothing about
home bases, division of labor, the taking of food back to sleeping areas, or even food
sharing. (Pen and pencil drawing by Iva Ellen Morris.)


ingly on larger animals. When a lion eats a Grant’s gazelle, there is nothing left
over. But with an elephant carcass, even after the Malibu storks have finished and
all the hyenas in the region have bloated themselves and left, something edible
still remains for the really persistent scavenger, if he gets there soon enough.                  16
Simply on a statistical basis, meat scavengers will tend to be more successful more
of the time, if they concentrate on animals of large body size.
    How much of this picture is correct we do not yet know. Still, it is worth
stressing that around two dozen floors, spanning 1.2 million years and increasingly
disturbed as they get more recent, constitute much of what we have to work with
in modelling the behavior of our earliest ancestors in the Pleistocene. Yet pattern-
ing does exist in the data. Some of it at present remains merely suggestive. The
repeated pattern of residual bone frequencies in the lower levels, however, I feel
more sure about: this is evidence of man eating a little bit of bone marrow, a food
source that must have represented an infinitesimally small component in his total
diet. The signs seem clear. Earliest man, far from appearing as a mighty hunter
of beasts, seems to have been the most marginal of scavengers.
                    Dd
     Life and Death at the Waterhole

Where did Early Man Eat and Sleep?

We have seen in Chapter 2 how Brain’s studies of certain processes operating in
the world today have gradually created a body of knowledge and understanding
which makes it possible to interpret the South African cave deposits from the
perspective of the dynamics of their formation. Such an interpretation, in turn,
gives us some idea of the role which early man played in the ecosystems reflected
in these deposits. For instance, it seems that hominids sought out protected sleep-
ing places during the cooler months, in much the same way as baboons do today.’
Equally interesting is the general lack of evidence that food was brought back to
these sleeping areas and eaten there; most food consumption at such places was
by predators, particularly leopards, which preyed on the sleeping primates.


17 Baboons at Gilgil in Kenya sitting on a protected rock ledge. Protected rock crevices
and shelters such as this are often used as sleeping areas (cf. Brain 1981, 271-3). (Photo by
Barbara Smuts, courtesy of Anthro-Photo, Cambridge, Massachusetts.)
                                                      Life and Death at the Waterhole   61



                                            DENSITY     OF    Bone   —-——

                                  y                          MopERATE            Had




                                 d
                                  W
                                  w)
                                  4
                                  r)
                                  fe
                                 ”)
                                  u
                                  Co)

                                  :
                                  ”
                                  Z
                                  ul



 18 Matrix for classifying
site function using Isaac’s
dimensions of artifact and
faunal densities. (After Isaac
1971, fig. 10a, p. 285.)                              SITE      Wres
                                                    AFTER       1s 4c, /97]



  Now, the South African sites discussed in Chapter 2 are roughly contemporary
with the famous ‘floors’ at Olduvai     Gorge, and with Site 5 at Koobi Fora,’
another important research location in East Africa. Archaeologists working in
East Africa insist that the hominids there were living in home bases to which they
brought food to be shared and consumed within small family groups. The South
African deposits, by contrast, document the fact that for one form of hominid, at
least, the activities of sleeping and food consumption had not yet been linked
together spatially at this time. So there is an apparent inconsistency in the con-
clusions drawn from the South and East African evidence. What, then, is the
basis for the opinion of East African researchers that at this remote period, over
1 million years ago, hominids were behaving in a typically human manner, in so
far as sleeping and eating in the same places were concerned?
   The answer to this question leads us to recognize that a series of conventions
and ‘post hoc arguments’? have been used by archaeologists working in East Africa
to warrant their opinion that the so-called ‘living floors’ were in fact home bases.
Glynn Isaac’s observation that ‘The habit of creating concentrated patches of
food refuse and abandoned artifacts is amongst the basic features of behavior that
distinguish the human animal from other primates’* amounts to an operational
62   Life and Death at the Waterhole

     definition of an occupation site as a place where man works with tools, consumes
     food and sleeps, As a result, the association of stone tools with animal bones has
     become accepted by convention as indicating a home base: a site where man
     lived, worked and slept. Some scholars, as outlined by Isaac (ill. 18), have gone
     even further to suggest that relative differences in the densities of bone and artifact
     distributions can be accepted as evidence for different types of sites. A high
     density of bones and a low density of tools, for example, is held to define a kill or
     butchery site, whereas high densities of both lithic and faunal remains are
     expected to occur at living sites, Further attempts by Isaac and his co-workers to
     refine these conventions set out in 1971 have in general led them to the same
     opinion as before:° sites are thought to be home bases, places to which food was
     brought by hominids to be shared among members of the group. Several justifica-
     tions are commonly offered for this belief: (1) bones and stone artifacts are said
     to co-exist in ‘anomalously high concentrations’; (2) the pattern of damage to
     the bones is believed to be a result-of hominid behavior; and (3) the compositions
     of bone present are said to be at least ‘not incompatible’ with the inference that
     hominids accumulated the bone.°
         It is perhaps a little ironic that such reasoning involves what are essentially the
     very criteria used by Dart to justify his claim that hominids were the agents
     responsible for creating the accumulations of bones in the South African caves!
     It seems to me that — as with Dart’s arguments — we would be ill-advised to use
     the conventions advocated by Isaac and his colleagues for interpreting the
     archaeological record, until we know rather more about the processes responsible
     for the production of these deposits in East Africa. In my opinion, the most
     helpful clue to the solution of this problem is the one I have already mentioned,
     namely, that the South African evidence appears to be inconsistent with the idea
     that the early hominids ate and slept at the same sites. This is precisely what the
     East African archaeologists assume from the outset to have been the case, so that
     it is inevitable that they should interpret the concentrations of bones and artifacts
     as occupation sites or the remains of home bases. How might we begin the task of
     investigating properties of the contemporary world (what are sometimes called
     ‘actualistic studies’) to help us make accurate diagnoses of the behavioral charac-
     teristics of our early ancestors? How do we find out, in fact, what it was like in
     those times so long ago?



     Learning from Modern Waterholes

     Just as with Brain’s studies of the processes leading to the formation of cave
     deposits, we must begin the study of ecosystem dynamics by focusing our attention
     on waterholes, stream channels or lake margins in otherwise relatively dry land-
19 Dry bed of the Nossob River in the southern Kalahari Desert (see ill. 3 for exact location.}



 scapes; for it is in environmental settings of this sort that the East African open
sites conventionally interpreted as home bases once existed. It is difficult for most
of us to visualize in detail the relevant classic savannah and interior grassland
environments of Africa, characterized by dense concentrations of game animals.
The scene is a vast landscape punctuated by clusters of trees and shrubs, often in
dry river channels or around waterholes. For one unaccustomed to seeing wildlife
in great abundance, the environment has a tempo which is breathtakingly
dramatic,
   My own first experience of such an environment in Africa’ began one morning
when I entered an area rich in game and walked along a dry river bed. Around                      WY)
each turn in the valley there came into view groups of ungulates clustered near
waterholes. Lying in the shade of great trees near one water source might be
groups of blue wildebeests: ten, twenty-five, even forty individuals would not be
uncommon. As we approached, a great bull would rise to its feet, shake itself and,                20

engulfed in dust, lower its head slightly to gaze in our direction. Ostriches ran
across our path. The ubiquitous springboks would stare at us but go on feeding,
slowly wandering along the valley towards shade or an area of tawny grass. The
valley, with its water sources, was truly the domain of the ungulates.                            21

   The only clue to violence in the landscape was the occasional vulture perched
in the tree tops or soaring above us, eventually to land and add its number to a
                                                                                 4
64   Life and Death at the Waterhole




                                                            Pe
                                                             “a i         is
                                                                    € ‘




     20 Blue wildebeest bull and gemsbok near a water source.



     feathered group taking a meal around a dead animal. When one looks around
     the environment in a little more detail, carcasses or parts of them are easily
     spotted: silent indications of violent death are constant features of the land
     surfaces around the waterholes.
       If one remains in the area for some time, however, the ostensibly placid rhythm
    of the land is seen to be anything but subtle. The ungulates certainly rule the
    water sources at high noon; but as the sun begins to kiss the western horizon, they
    begin gradually but deliberately to move back towards the valley margins and
    climb the dunes out of the valley. The abandonment of the daytime domain of
    these animals is striking, as they disperse out into the vast rolling landscape away
    from the water and disappear. In the slanting light of sunset, the predators, lords
    of the night, move into the valley to occupy the waterholes and exercise dominion
 22 over the land used by ungulates during the day.
       Generally, the hyenas are the first to arrive, approaching the waterholes slowly
    and passing old carcasses of ungulates killed previously by predators and of other
 23 animals which died less violently near water. The hyenas may gnaw on these
    relatively dry bones, but eventually go in to drink, for they almost always take
    water before hunting. The actual search for food may not begin in earnest until
    much later in the night, so it is not uncommon for the hyenas to remain in the
                                                      Life and Death at the   Waterhole    65




21 Springbok feeding in the Nossob River Valley.



immediate area of the water source, gnawing bones, moving body parts around,
and engaging in various social activities. After dark some calling (the character-        24
istic “whooping’) may occur; later on, the hyenas leave rather deliberately to
make a kill and secure fresh meat. Lions and leopards, too, often visit the water
sources during the night, since they also need water during the active hours of
hunting and pursuit of game. The roars of the lion are commonly heard late in
the evening between ten o’clock and two o’clock, when they may travel great
distances visiting waterholes along the way before stalking and attacking prey.
    Between about two o’clock and four-thirty in the morning, activity seems to
subside: at least, the sounds of predators dwindle away and the night becomes
still. Just before sunrise, lions’ roars increase; predators tend to be moving along
well-travelled routes which frequently take them through or past water. As the
full rays of the sun flood the landscape, the vultures are already soaring, searching
for the previous night’s carnage. Gradually, as the warmth of the sun returns to
the valleys, the ungulates reappear, moving back to the water sources. The cycle
begins again.                                                                         25
    Primates, ourselves included, are creatures of the daylight. Our eyes are day-
time organs and we are ill-adapted to killing, foraging or even protecting our-
selves at night. One wonders how a creature so poorly fitted for activity in the
66   Life and Death at the Waterhole




                                       22    (Above)  Spotted hyena
                                       approaching a waterhole just
                                       before sunset. Note wildebeest
                                       in the background moving out
                                       of the valley away from the
                                       waterhole. (Photo courtesy of
                                       John Parkington.)

                                       23 Carcass of a blue wildebeest
                                       which died near a water source.
                                  Life and Death at the Waterhole   67




24 Bones from several car-
easses which were dragged
together by hyenas on the
night of 14 July 1981. Parts
of   eland,   wildebeest   and
gemsbok are present.

25 (Below) Gemsbok         near
water   source in          mid-
morning.
68   Life and Death at the Waterhole

     dark could safely maintain a sleeping place immediately adjacent to a water
     source in the sort of African landscape I have just described. It is unsurprising
     that the modern hunter-gatherers who live in relatively remote African environ-
     ments generally do not locate their camps immediately adjacent to water sources;
     they use fire to discourage predators and, of course, have the option to employ
     relatively effective weapons against them if necessary. The place I would never
     choose to establish a camp in the African savannah is next to a water source!
     Nevertheless, archaeologists tell us that our hominid ancestors habitually located
     home bases in exactly these places. At this point, it becomes relevant to ask whether
     the three criteria used by the East African researchers (see above) really permit
     the reliable recognition of home-base occupation sites.
         Let us begin thinking about the problem by accepting the stone artifacts at face
     value — that is, as objects produced and used by hominids. What is of interest 1s
     the degree to which the behavioral context in which these tools were used involved
     precisely the same setting as that in which the associated bone was deposited. My
     observations at African water sources illustrate several points relevant to this
     problem: (1) natural deaths are common near these water sources; (2) predator
     kills also occur there; (3) hyenas gnawing on relatively dry bone in the vicinity


     26 Contemporary Bushman camp at /Gausha pan, Namibia, 1976. This camp is located
     nearly 1.5 kilometers from the nearest water source. (Photo courtesy of the South African
     Museum,   Cape Town.)
                                                        Life and Death at the Waterhole   6g




27 Eland bones gnawed and broken by hyenas at a waterhole. These bones were scavenged
from a dry carcass such as the one in ill. 23. (Photo courtesy of John Landham.)




28 Fragments of bone collected by the author from the faeces of one lion. Much similar,
small bone from both defecation and regurgitation could accumulate around the daytime
lounging spot of lions.
70        Life and Death at the Waterhole

          of the water sources may drag together bones from several different carcasses ;
     SI   and (4) considerable quantities of bone may accumulate as much as 100 meters
          from the water, These facts mean that considerable quantities of bone can be expected
          to occur around water sources. The actual amounts probably vary with the rate of
          burial and with the reliability and accessibility of water sources in the region.
          Furthermore, lions often drag prey into the shade for consumption, nor is it
          unusual for them to concentrate in relatively large groups under trees by water
 to co    during the day. Consequently, small bone fragments, regurgitated or passed
          in their feces, can contribute considerably to a deposit, particularly if they
          accumulate over a number ofyears before burial.* Such observations are thought-
          provoking and it clearly seems possible that bones can be expected to occur
          around water sources, even though hominids may have played no active part in
          the process of accumulation, But we need to seek additional evidence that
          ‘natural’ bone deposits of this sort in fact occurred in the past.



          The Archaeology of am Ancient Waterhole

          While in southern Africa recently, I had the opportunity to visit the truly
          spectacular site at Elandsfontein, which probably dates to the period between
          200,000 and 400,000 years ago.” The interpretation of this site is anything but
          secure, but it is the structure of the associations observed there with which I am
          principally concerned here. Most scholars agree that the deposits were built up
          in the environmental context of a spring and the associated water sources of a
          variable internal drainage. Today, the site consists of aseries of sand dunes which
          are actively moving, although there is good reason to believe that their de-
          stabilization is a relatively recent phenomenon.
             As the sands blow and shift about, a truly remarkable assemblage of fossil
          animal bones is being uncovered. In some places, there may be what are certainly
          the remains of the carcass of a single ancient animal, whose bones have been
          slightly scattered in just the same way as a modern carcass might be dispersed by
 29       scavengers or as part of natural decay processes. In some cases, a hand ax or even
 30       several tools associated with a recognizable carcass can be observed; in the vast
          majority of cases, however, no obvious evidence of man is present. For example,
          during an afternoon spent walking over the major exposures, I noted only one
          recognizable concentration of bones (probably those ofa single animal) in which
          there was any evidence that long bones had been broken open for their marrow
          by hammering or impact; one solitary manuport (i.e. a stone carried to the loca-
          tion by man) was the only associated item. In certain spots, there are bone groups
          seemingly concentrated into particular clusters by some agent in the past, whether
          animal or natural, but the conditions under which these aggregates formed is not
                                                       Life and Death at the   Waterhole   ir




29 Bones exposed by wind on
the surface of the Elands-
fontein site. (See ill. 3 for
location of the site.




30 Hand ax exposed on the
surface of the Elandsfontein
site.
                                                  =          y


well understood. Elsewhere, there is evidence
                                            for the former existence of carnivore
lairs; hyenas,in particular, are represented by ‘coprolites (fossilized feces), while
concentrations of small bone splinters and gnawed fragments like those found
around spotted and brown hyena dens are also present.
                                              =                          “3
72    Life and Death at the Waterhole




                                                                   31 Plot showing the dis-
 ELANDSFONTEIN                    ~— CUTTING                       tribution of artifacts at
                   ARTIFACTS                                       ‘Cutting 10’, Elands-
               DSCcALE     IN     METERS                           fontein   site.   (Infor-
                                                                   mation obtained from
                      &     Ko)    4a   2)
                                                                   Singer    and    Wymer
                                                                   1968.)




        Besides the variety of patterns mentioned so far, there are certain locations
 31   which yield substantial concentrations of both bones and artifacts.'° There is
      evidence from one excavated example, ‘Cutting 10’, that a number of different
      agents contributed to the deposit. Yet viewed from the perspective of the inter-
      pretive conventions of the East African archaeologists, the association between
      tools and bones would lead directly to the conclusion that this was a living site,
 32   the base camp of some of our Pleistocene ancestors. This may indeed be true. But
      the presence of concentrations of tools at a single small location, surrounded in all
32 Distribution plot of              ELANDSFONTEIN                 — CUTTING        IO
bones at ‘Cutting 10’,                                  Bones
Elandsfontein site. (In-                          SCALE  IN METERS
formation      obtained
from Singer and Wymer                                    za    3    a       S   ©

1968.)



directions by large and variable distributions of animal bones, does not support
the idea that the association between tools and bones in this case is unique. In
fact, itis hard toimagine any part of the site where tools could have been deposited,
but which would not also have been a place where there were substantial quan-
tities of animal bone.
   The Elandsfontein site can be seen as a kind of palaeontological ‘cautionary
tale’: as such, it would repay extensive research to determine the range of
variability in faunal patterning in a setting where ancient bones tend to be well
                                                                        /
Life and Death at the Waterhole

preserved, The next step would be to establish whether there is any particular
form of patterning in terms of the mix of animal species and in the anatomical
parts represented which co-vary with recognizable tools. If co-variant patterning
could be demonstrated in faunal assemblages from favorable sites such as
Elandsfontein, it would teach us something in general about the make-up of bone
samples recovered with tools; and that would allow us to separate analytically
the associations seen on early man sites.
   If nothing else, this site illustrates the simple point that many different patterns
of faunal assemblage composition can be expected adjacent to water sources, in
the past as much as today. It also makes it clear that, since evidence of man or
hominids is relatively rare at Elandsfontein compared to the abundance of well-
preserved fauna, it is not at all unreasonable to expect that, at the few locations
where tools do occur, substantial quantities of bone will also be found. So if bones
and water sources ‘go together’, regardless of the presence or absence of man, it
remains for us to discuss the particular conditions under which tools might also
be deposited by hominids in such places.



Developing a Plausible Argument

Ever since I began studying the archaeology of early man, I have been puzzled
by several repeatedly observed facts of Middle Pleistocene archaeology: (1) many
sites of the Acheulean period (Lower Palaeolithic) yield large quantities of stone
tools;'! (2) in most cases these tools appear to be relatively unmodified by use;
(3) the use of caves and rock shelters during the Middle Pleistocene seems to be
rare, and the earliest known examples tend to be in temperate environmental
settings; and (4) most of the locations which archaeologists have called ‘sites’ are
directly associated with water sources.
  _Now most authors agree that sites of this period with large aggregations of tools
can reasonably be considered to be palimpsests of tool distributions accumulating
in the course of many separate occupational episodes. If so, however, it is rather
difficult to imagine the circumstances under which the substantial scatters of tools
lying on the surface were seemingly ignored. The implication must be that, despite
the abundance of stone materials already present at the site, its occupants con-
tinued to introduce more and to discard them after what must have been quite
minimal use. Such a situation to me seems incompatible with the notion ofa group
which needed to use tools at the site where it lived.!? After all, which is the more
likely — that the occupants of the site would first search its immediate area for
appropriate tools and/or raw materials, or that, ignoring the litter of relatively
unused tools discarded previously, they would travel to other places where fresh
raw material could be obtained and return with tools and/or raw materials?
                                                        Life and Death at the Waterhole

   Sites characterized by the four traits mentioned above'? in fact seem to repre-
sent the endpoints of very short episodes in which planning was involved. Some-
thing like the following probably took place. Hominids leave a sleeping place and
begin foraging for food in the environment. They make tools suitable forthe
scavenging tactic being executed and carry them with them until successful: the
most likely setting for success would be around water sources where carcasses are
apt to be concentrated. Having used the tools for removing edible parts from
scavenged carcasses, they discard them and either eat on the spot or return certain
parts to a living and sleeping site, or to the nearest waterhole, where consumption
might take place. Taking scavenged food back to living sites was probably a
characteristic of hominid behavior by the Upper Acheulean and on into the
Middle Stone Age of Africa (or the Mousterian in Europe).'* However, the
extent to which this was also the case during the earlier time ranges is precisely
what we are trying to determine. The high frequency offinished tools, the lack of
evidence that they were used much, and the concentration of tools near water
sources where scavengeable carcasses could be found are all conditions that are
consistent with the view that these places were locations for the procurement and
consumption of scavenged meat and bone marrow, rather than occupation sites
where hominids lived in home bases and shared the products of their own hunting
activities. '*                                                         =
   The scenario presented above may appear plausible. It may even account for
more facts than the interpretation of such locations as ‘living sites’. But plausibility
does not render the interpretation true or accurate; it simply emphasizes the utility of
investigating such possibilities. In advancing these arguments, we are in the same
intellectual position as Brain, when he questioned Dart’s interpretations and was
able to posit reasonable alternative scenarios: the fact that his new ideas made
sense did not make them ‘true’. Plausibility simply demonstrates that a given line
of research is a rational endeavor. Research stemming trom such arguments of
plausibility ought to result, one hopes, in the production of reliable methods for
inference. In studying past human behavior, we must develop criteria which go
beyond simple conventions, such as the ‘meaning’ attached to the coincidence of
high densities of artifacts and bone remains.



Current Research


Research on early man sites in East Africaat the present time rather reminds me
of my own work in the period between 1966 and 1969 on the ‘Mousterian
problem’, to be discussed in Chapters 4 and 5. The numerous research reports
produced by the team members investigating the important sites in the Koobi
Fora area!® indicate that one person is looking for butchering marks and bone _
                                                                           4
76   Life and Death at the Waterhole

      breakage patterns; another is studying the steps involved in stone tool manufac-
      ture, refitting flakes and tools to establish the sequence of core reduction; yet a
      third, presumably, is studying the spatial patterning among these bones and
      tools; and I am sure still others will investigate the materials from these sites in
      terms ofurther observational domains, Each new study of this type results in the
     generation of more facts from the site, but they are all statements about the archaeological
     record alone. In the absence of robust methods for inference, all that can be accom-
     plished is the gathering of more and more facts, whose significance in terms of
     past behavior is unknown. These facts are commonly interpreted using the
     method of‘multiple working hypotheses’ — put baldly, we recognize that things
     might have been this way or that way and we exercise judgment as to which
     appears the more plausible.’’ Only in rare cases have established methods for
     justifying the inferences advanced been achieved. One such exception is Lawrence
     Keeley’s'® recognition that flake tools had been used to cut meat as well as some
     type of plant material: here an established method for measuring tool use,
     independently tested and rooted in physically founded arguments of necessity,
     stands behind the inference.
         One wonders, indeed, what middle-range research’? would justify the inter-
     pretations which will surely be drawn from newly-acquired facts about spatial
     patterning, cut marks on bones, frequencies of species, etc. Many archaeological
     researchers seem not to have accepted fully that studies of the archaeological
     record provide the stimulus for research in the modern world which, in turn, one
     hopes can render our archaeological observations into accurate statements about
     the past. Large numbers of archaeologists still try to make discoveries which are
     thought to carry self-evident implications for the past. That the past unfolds for
     those who make careful observations is a cheering thought: unfortunately it is
     wrong. Research in East Africa must begin to ask the next important question:
     ‘What does it mean?’
                                       eart []
      WHAT                      DOES                   IT         MEAN?

 In Part I we considered the situation in which a particular curiosity about what behavior or
 events in the past were like led to attempts to monitor the relevant behaviour in the archaeo-
 logical record. This section, by contrast, deals with problems which arise from the accumula-
 tion of detailed observations and which are therefore only recognizable after intensive
 investigations of the archaeological record itself have taken place. When the archaeologist has
 conducted studies resulting in the recognition of interesting patterns in the archaeological
 record, the question that then arises is how to understand what such patterns mean. In other
 words, what happened in the past to bring into being the forms ofpatterning that archaeologists
 have observed?
    Most of us realize that we do not simply invent methods for studying the archaeological
 record and then use these procedures as a completely objective way of searching for patterning.
 Quite the contrary: we develop procedures for studying the archaeological record because we
 think they permit us to make relevant observations about those properties of the past we seek to
 elucidate. Typically, archaeologists have invented procedures for classifying the things they
find and have used various conventions for giving meaning to the classes so recognized. These
 taxonomies or classifications then guide their observations concerning the distributions of
 things, in terms of time and space. Similarly, archaeologists have expectations about the
 character of the patterns which should result from thew studies, for they set out with certain
 ideas about what these classifications measure.
    I have used the term ‘convention’ above, since it 1s argued here that the ‘theory’ with which
 archaeology normally operates has assumed a set of conventions for giving meaning to
 observations from the archaeological record. These conventions ensure that no empirical
 materials could come into conflict with prior assumptions. It must be emphasized — given that
 all statements about the past are inferences — that there 1s simply no way to reason from a set
 of assumptions to a conclusion which conflicts with those assumptions. As Popper noted : ‘For
neither a deductive nor an inductive inference can ever proceed from consistent premises to a
conclusion that formally contradicts the premises from which we started.”
    Archaeologists frequently make assumptions about the way the archaeological record was
conditioned in its formal and distributional properties. For instance, it ts commonly assumed
 that cultures were internally homogeneous and were strongly integrated, by virtue of their
participants’ ideas and values. In this view, the expectations for patterning in the archaeo-
 logical record are quite clear: ‘. . . the types and their proportions are stable and constant

                                               ria)
78

        within a single culture during a given period in a given region, at least within certain limits. a
        In simple terms, we should find that sites are more similar, the closer they were to one another
        in both time and space. If the real world differs from these expectations, what happens 1s that
        endless ‘auxiliary hypotheses’ are generated to accommodate the observations to the theory.
            Thus the tactic followed by conventional archaeologists ts to offer additional arguments
        which, ‘if true’, would bring theory and reality back into correspondence. Popper® has dubbed
        this strategy ‘immunizing’ a theory from testing. Archaeologists have been committed to such
        a strategy : their attempts to immunize thew prior assumptions in this way have become their
        reconstructed histories of the past. If, for instance, they fail to observe similarities through
     ;/
        depositional sequences, their theory of cultural transmission 1s ‘protected’ from these facts by
        postulating a migration of new people into the area. This hypothetical migration, in turn,
        becomes a built-in part of the ‘true’ reconstruction of the past which archaeologists are
        supposed to be seeking. ‘A nice adaptation of conditions will make almost any hypothesis agree
        with the phenomena. This will please the imagination but does not advance our knowledge.”
           Archaeologists are particularly prone to this type ofphilosophical and methodological trap,
        since all statements about the past must be inferences and the methods which tend to justify       o

        their inferences consequently cannot be tested by experiment with archaeological data. Put
        another way, we can never use the inferred past to test the assumptions we make in generating
        such inferences. It is not surprising, therefore, that most archaeologists unquestioningly accept
        their methods for making inferences and argue about data, rather than the validity of such
        methods themselves. Only rarely can we gain sufficient perspective to ‘get the message’ that
        our methods for inference may be faulty. When this does happen, however, there can begin the
        methodological search for some better understanding of the dynamic conditions which brought \
        into being the forms of archaeological patterning we have documented. Once we can answer —
        the question ‘What does it mean?”, we can begin provocative research aimed at learning ‘what
      it was like’,
                    4
     The Challenge of the Mousterian

Businessmen and politicians sometimes give their opponents the derogatory label
‘Neanderthal’. For most of us, the name conjures up the picture of a stocky,
somewhat hairy individual with a receding forehead, large features and a fur skin
draped around the waist. This creature is generally depicted staring blankly at a
bewildering world from the cave-mouth, surrounded by the garbage from
carnivorous meals. Neanderthal    man’s public image is of a rude, dumb, uncul-
tured animal motivated by the most basic human drives for food, sex and creature
comfort. In contrast, the archaeological textbooks tend to give Neanderthalers
an innovative role in human history. It is frequently pointed out that they were
the first of our ancestors to use pigments,’ to bury their dead” and perhaps to
practice some type of ritual focused on cave bears.? In the days when we tended
to view the past as a saga of man’s emergence from the realm of beasts into the
human domain, the Neanderthalers were usually depicted as the creatures which
exhibited the first gliimmerings of our modern interest in aesthetics (i.e. art and
religion), behaviors far removed from the dominant basic concerns characteristic
of our bestial ancestors. In the more recent literature, particularly that produced
by our biologically oriented colleagues, the Neanderthalers are considered to be
a racial variant of fully modern man; they are not uncommonly assumed to be
similar to us in behavioral terms, since the origins of such very human behaviors
as speech with true language are thought to have occurred prior to their appear-
ance. Given this last perspective, speculations regarding our evolutionary history
are therefore commonly focused on eras preceding the Middle Palaeolithic of the
Neanderthalers.                                                       -
   While it is true that there have been differing views regarding the behavior of
Neanderthalers (a ‘What was it like?’ question), it was not in fact this diversity
of opinion which stimulated the controversy and research which I will discuss in
this chapter. Here I want to consider the problem of the Mousterian (the archaeo-
logical name for the period associated with Neanderthal man, about 125,000 to
30,000 years ago), a problem which arose out of strictly archaeological, methodo-
logical concerns. It represents a different kind of discussion from that presented
in Part I, For instance, the controversies examined in Chapters 2 and 3, regarding
whether early man was a hunter and whether he lived in base camps and shared _
                                                                     7


                                       79
80   The Challenge of the Mousterian

     food, concerned the contents of the archaeological sites in question and whether
     they were exclusively attributable to the behavior of early hominids. Once this
     hurdle could be negotiated, there was little else of methodological concern
     relevant to these issues. The challenge for early man studies was quite simply:
     how do we know the past? The debate which centered around Neanderthal man
     had different historical roots, since it arose out of archaeological research per se.
     In addition, the discussion has been based on dissimilar units. With early man the
     focus was on the behavioral interpretation of the associations recorded among
     many kinds ofthings at individual sites; the Mousterian problem, however, arose
     in the context of controversy regarding the meaning of variability observed within
     a single class of items recovered at many sites, Furthermore, it arose because
     increasingly complex patterning among the formal taxonomic units used by
     archaeologists was recognized for the Middle Palaeolithic.



     The ‘Relic and Monument’          Period


     From the very beginning of archaeology, two basic questions have remained
     fundamental: (1) how do we describe in formal terms the variability in things
     remaining from the past and (2) how is the observed variability distributed
     chronologically and geographically? In the early days of archaeological work
     many things, relatively speaking, were collected, but the context of the finds was
     not well documented. Archaeologists could classify and recognize similarities and
     differences among artifacts and constructions — that is, organizations of matter
     which were clearly referable to the hand of man. These things were known as
     ‘relics and monuments’: a hand ax, a bronze spear, Stonehenge, the spectacular
     passage grave of Newgrange in Ireland, and so on. As archaeologists worked to
     discover the distributions of the various classes of finds, they found that certain
     properties of these materials yielded distributional results, while others, at any
     given stage of research, seemed to show less recognizable patterning. For instance,
     in the early, seminal work of C. J. Thomsen in Denmark it became clear that the
     type of raw material from which tools were manufactured exhibited significant
     chronological patterning; hence, the Ages of Stone, Bronze and Iron were born.*
     In Palaeolithic research it began to emerge that the design of tools within a single
     category ofraw material was meaningful both in a chronological and geographical
     sense. Hand axes seemed to occur only in certain types of geological deposits and
     in association with certain types of fauna. On the other hand, retouched pieces,
     such as those recovered from Solutré in France, occurred in very different
     geological and faunal contexts,
        The attributes which seemed to exhibit chronological and/or geographical
     patterns were isolated as indexes to ages and areas. The model for this type of
                                                              The Challenge of the Mousterian   81




                                                      he
                                         MUSHROOM   CLUB




                                                    i]
                                                    fel
                                                    i!|
                                       i
                                      a|
                                                                                         oo.




             BOOMERANG                                                                               aqu3iHs




        LEANGLE




                                                                                    ONIMOBHL
                                                                                    WOILS




     WAR
     OR
     MALGA
     PICK



he                                                    LANCE




33 General Pitt-Rivers’ proposed reconstruction of evolutionary lines of development
from the simple stick to more complex tool types: a characteristic 19th and early 20th
century view of the past. (Reproduced with permission from Myres 1906, pl. 111.)



approach was the obvious success achieved in geology and palaeontology, where
index fossils could be shown to be diagnostic of different ages and eras in the
earth’s history. Linked with the belief that taxonomic study involved the dis-
covery of natural order in archaeological data was the idea that man’s past was
characterized by progress. The idea of progress is perhaps most clearly stated in
the writings of General Pitt-Rivers, one of the ‘fathers’ of archaeology, at least in
the English-speaking countries:
     The task before us is to follow .. . the succession of ideas by which the mind of
     man has developed, from the simple to the complex, and from the homogeneous
     to the heterogeneous; to work out step by step... the law of contiguity by which
     the mind has passed from simple . . . states of consciousness to the association
     of ideas, and so on to broader generalizations.”
82   The Challenge of the Mousterian

         At first for most archaeologists the sequence of man’s development towards
     civilization was also a logical, progressive, evolutionary sequence from simple to
     complex. It was a playing out of a logical succession in which one piece of know-
     ledge conditioned the next, and so on, General Pitt-Rivers epitomizes this
     approach.° In ill. 33, for example, we see the origin of a variety of industrial
     ‘phyla’ in a simple unmodified stick. Under one set of initial modifications we
     can monitor a progression leading to the Australian shield, while under another
     set of initial conditions a second sequence leads to the war club and so forth. When
     viewed in this manner, mankind was seen as progressing through a series of
     interdependent stages of progress. Since the sequence was thought to be dependent
     on serial order, all mankind should have proceeded through the same series of
     stages. Variability in the modern world was seen as representing various degrees
     of arrested development, such that some contemporary peoples had become
     stabilized in stages which had been passed through by other peoples at a much
     earlier period, This view of cultural evolution justified the common practice of
     fleshing out prehistory by drawing heavily on descriptions of contemporary
     primitive societies. For example, in order to recreate Neanderthal man’s way of
     life, the Australian Aborigines were frequently used as a model. I quote from a
     wonderful little book written from a classical, cultural evolutionary perspective
      based on the assumption of progress (Everyday Life in the Old Stone Age, published
     in 1922):

       We must search for some primitive people living under similar conditions, and
       at about the same stage of civilization as the Mousterians, and see if we can
       draw some useful comparisons. The aborigines of Australia are such a people.’

        Within the intellectual climate in which the idea of progress dominated, there
     were several other important points of view which were sometimes maintained
     independently and at other times were merged in various ways into a kind of
     generalized vitalism. The concept of emergent process saw the evolution of man
     as resulting from the realization of his potential, assumed to be an essential quality
     or intrinsic ‘spark’ which grew and developed in slightly different ways under
     differing biological or physical environments. For instance, in accepting the
     (fake) jaw® found at Piltdown in England in 1908 as evidence that our very early
     ancestors possessed a larger brain than Pithecanthropus (which at that time was
     thought to have been younger in age), Henry Fairfield Osborn and others were
     lead to the following type of conclusion:

       If Pithecanthropus is truly of mid-stone age, as now appears, it must be regarded
       as a surviving primitive type of Dawn Man sequestered in the forests of Java.
       ... This survival of a primitive type of man shut off from competition with
       more vigorous types is by no means a unique occurrence, because we still find
                                                      The Challenge of the Mousterian

  many very primitive types of humanity living in remote and isolated parts of
  the earth, such as the Tasmanian     natives.”

In line with this view, the linkage of evolutionism with a kind of racism was also
not uncommon; and other elitist ideas besides were mustered to explain the
differential achievements of man. For instance, the ‘great man theory’ (which
sees progress occurring by virtue of the behaviors of especially gifted individuals)
was common in the past and is still very much a part of archaeology, as is well
illustrated in comments made by Francois Bordes as recently as 1969:

     . intelligence and creative intellect ought not to be confused. The latter is
  rare, even today, and it appears that one can deduce from the history ofdiverse
  civilizations that the proportion of creative intellects is, cultural conditions and
  the pressures of environment being constant, a function of the total number of
  individuals. Then it is possible that generations among Palaeolithic peoples
  which were not very numerous have come and gone, within the same group,
  between the appearance ofcreative intellects. Progress then has been slow even
  though the populations may have been intelligent and have put to good use
  the data already acquired.'°

This view is also accepted by Grahame Clark who wrote in 1979 that ‘the course
of history has been shaped less by popular heresies than by the original thinking
of outstanding men.”"
   In the early days of prehistoric archaeology, regardless of the exact theory
which one preferred for explaining how things came to be, few questioned the
progressive view of man’s past. Given such a perspective, the goal of archaeology
was, logically enough, the discovery of the actual sequence of progressive change.
In 1893 Otis Mason, addressing the founding fathers of American archaeology,
said: “The most profitable inquiry [of archaeology] is the search for the origin of
epoch-making ideas in order to comprehend the history of civilization.”!* Much
the same aim and understanding of archaeological goals was stated by N. C.
Nelson half a century later: ‘... our science is called upon to demonstrate the
time and place of origin of all the principal inventions and to trace their spread
over the world.’!°
   By the first quarter of the 2oth century Palaeolithic archaeologists considered
many of these goals to have been achieved. The Old Stone Age was conceived in
stages. The earliest period, that of the ‘Drift’, represented by open-air sites
located along river beds, was characterized by heavy core tools, the hand axes
which had been discovered by Boucher dePerthes to reveal man’s great antiquity,
The next state of cultural development was the Mousterian period or the era of
‘cave men’, typified by tools made on flakes and most commonly retouched on
only one side. The Mousterian was followed by the Aurignacian, Solutrean, and 34
84   The Challenge of the Mousterian




                                                         BLADE
                                                       CULTURES




                                                 4      Ea
                     MousTERIAN                      FLAKE     CuLTURE
                                                                               vA



                                                           Core            |
                     CHELLEAWNL
                                                       CULTURES
                                                                           |

                   "EVOLUTIONARY                         MopEel
                                                                               LoKedS:


     34 Model of cultural evolution as conceived by prehistorians during the late nineteenth
     and early 2oth centuries. The names of periods are listed on the left, the major tool types
     correlated with them on the right.




     Magdalenian periods during which men lived both in caves and in the open, made
     stone tools on blades but also used bone, antler and ivory, and practiced art and
     ritual, !*+


     The ‘Artifact and Assemblage’ Period"®

     If early Palaeolithic archaeology can be characterized by its concern with how
     relics and monuments       indicated    the relative achievements       of mankind,     the
     subsequent ‘artifact and assemblage’ period saw increased concern for the
     classification of artifacts and the description of assemblages, defined as aggregates
     of associated artifacts thought to be contemporary. The character of assemblages,
     in turn, was thought to be referable to identifiable ethnic peoples. The spirit of
     this view can perhaps best be summarized by this famous statement written by
     V. Gordon Childe in 1929 for the introduction to his book, The Danube in Pre-
     history:
                                                          The Challenge of the Mousterian     8 0)c


                 Flake        Peyuum           Core         PHYLUM




                   SOLUTR     EAN



                  AURIGNACIAN ~—


                  Mouse RIAN’ Em                      EXTINCTION


                 “Sete rerinl a                ACHEULEANL




               ANA                             sacl

                 PaRALLEL <asTE petil
                                                                       LR.              =


35 Model ofparallel phyla as popularized by prehistorians after c. 1930. Different cultural
groups, represented by particular types of stone tools, were thought in some cases to be
contemporary, rather than to follow each other in a strictly evolutionary sequence (as in
ill. 34).


   We find certain types of remains — pots, implements, ornaments, burial sites,
   house forms — constantly recurring together. Such a complex of regularly
   associated traits we shall term a ‘cultural group’ or just a ‘culture’. We assume
   that such a complex is the material expression of what would today be called
   a ‘people’.16

   The idea  of ethnic history, of course, was not new and had been debated since
at least the turn of the century in contexts younger than the Old Stone Age.'’ In
Europe there were several theoretical positions regarding the role of pure races,
versus what today we would call hybrid vigor, in stimulating progress. Similarly,
there were considerable differences of opinion regarding the inventiveness of
man. Some scholars thought that man was extremely conservative and innova-
tions were rare, while others considered that since man reacted to the same
stimuli in similar ways, one could expect many inventions to be made independ-
ently at different times and places. In general, those who believed in pure race as
the mediator of cultural progress saw man as uninventive and hence expected to
86    The Challenge of the Mousterian

      find cultural traditions to be highly stable and to have great time depth. On the
      other hand, those who took a more liberal view saw man as relatively creative and
      envisaged culture as being subject to change from within as well as from diffusion
      of ideas from outside ;hence they felt it was difficult to trace cultures back in terms
      of pure lines.
         These arguments, combined with the generalized growth of various historical
      schools of interpretation, had little significant impact on Palaeolithic research
      because the study of the Old Stone Age seemed to demonstrate progress according
      to stages of cultural growth. In other words, the empirical materials seemed to
      be in tune with the older evolutionary ideas: arguments against evolutionism
      seemed irrelevant for students of the Palaeolithic. This was all changed, however,
      when in the early 1930s the Abbé Breuil'® advanced his views that parallel phyla
      (or, in more modern terms, major cultural traditions) existed contemporaneously
      during the vast time spans of the Old Stone Age. The impact of Breuil’s ideas is
      well illustrated by a statement made in.1938 by Dorothy Garrod:

        In the old system, the Palaeolithic cultures appeared as a straightforward
        succession with clear-cut horizontal divisions as in a diagrammatic geological
        section. For the pioneers of prehistory these cultures developed logically one
        from the other in an orderly upward movement, and it was assumed that they
        represented world-wide stages in the history of human progress. Today pre-
        history has suffered the fate of so many of the component parts of the orderly
        universe of the nineteenth century. New knowledge has given a twist to the
        kaleidoscope, and the pieces are still falling about before our bewildered eyes.
        The main outline of the new pattern is, however, already beginning to appear.
        We can distinguish in the Old Stone Age three cultural elements of primary
        importance. These are manifested in the so-called hand-axe industries, flake
        industries, and blade industries, and we know that the first two, at any rate,
        run side by side as far back as we can see, and we are beginning to realize that
        the origins of the third may have to be sought much farther back than we had
        suspected, Only a moment of reflection is needed to see that we have here the
        old divisions of Lower, Middle and Upper Palaeolithic, but with a new axis;
        we must be careful, however, not to make these divisions too rigid. In fact, these
        culture streams do not run parallel and independent; such a view of human
        history would be absurdly artificial. They are perpetually meeting and in-
        fluencing each other, and sometimes they come together to produce a new
        facies.1°

         This statement by one of Britain’s most eminent prehistorians demonstrates
 35   nicely just how revolutionary Breuil’s ideas were. It is interesting that, while there
      was certainly opposition to this radical reinterpretation of our past, ‘parallel
      cultural phyla’ became the orthodox view rather rapidly. Furthermore Breuil
                                                      The Challenge of the Mousterian   87
elaborated his notion of the past by suggesting that the independent cultural
traditions exhibited somewhat contrasting distributions with respect to time and
environment:

   . . we find biface industries alternating with flake industries, The flakes come
  before and after the peaks of cold and the bifaces in the interglacial periods, It
  seems reasonable to deduce that this alternation was due to the movements of
  human groups which as the glacial conditions came on, followed the animals
  they hunted to the south and west.?°

It did not take long before an equation was made between these contrasting
traditions and the belief then current that different forms of ancient men were
contemporary:

  It will appear that during the earlier part of Pleistocene times. . . two different
  races occupied the area. At first industries belonging to a flake tool culture
  (Cromerian) appear, but later in the west the Chello-Acheulian culture,
  spreading up from Africa and belonging to the core-tool civilization swept the
  board ... with the coming of the last glacial maximum the coup-de-poing
  makers retired from the scene and cultures belonging to the flake-tool civiliza-
  tion occupied the whole area.*"

The view that there was a ‘flake-tool tradition’ manufactured by neoanthropic
forms (hominids ancestral to modern man) contemporary with a ‘core-tool
tradition’ produced by a palaeoanthropic form (which did not contribute to our
immediate ancestry) was popular in the 1930s and 1940s and was still widely
discussed during the 1950s.?”
   In 1936 D. Peyrony extended the reasoning about parallel phyla to the Upper
Palaeolithic. He argued that what had previously been designated Aurignacian
in the scheme of de Mortillet was more appropriately viewed as two different
cultural traditions, the Aurignacian proper and the Perigordian.”* His argument
was widely accepted and remains the basis for much of the classification of French
Upper Palaeolithic artifacts.”*



The Tree of Life


Following a reorientation in the way a science views its subject, there is usually a
change in the methods and approaches used in classifying or ordering observa-
tions. In the case of Palaeolithic studies, the work of Frangois Bordes has been        36

instrumental in this regard.?° Bordes developed both the most widely adopted
system for classifying stone tools, as well as the techniques used for describing
assemblages quantitatively. His quantitative summaries of the forms of stone
88    The Challenge of the Mousterian




                                                              36 Francois Bordes on a trip
                                                              to Australia, 1974.


      tools found together in excavated levels became the primary units of comparison,
      and from this work came assemblage-based systematics of the archaeological
      record, In addition, Bordes argued that the techniques used in the manufacture of
      stone tools should be treated independently of the actual forms of tool design. The
      latter attribute was manifested in such traits as relationships between the orienta-
      tion of the original flakes, the shapes of the working edges and the orientation of
      the working edges relative to the form of the flake on which the tools were pro-
      duced. In opposition to design traits, the techniques used in the production of
      flakes were argued by Bordes to be conditioned by the character of the raw
      materials available in different places and therefore of little utility for recon-
      structing culture histories, for detecting the emergence of distinct peoples, or for
      studying social interaction among separate cultural groups of distinct peoples.?°
         With these points in mind, Bordes energetically set about the study of previ-
      ously excavated materials and also began a series of long-term excavations”’
      which were to change considerably our views of the past. Using his standard list
      of types, he could classify all the tools recovered from a recognized archaeological
      level. The frequencies of the various tool types could then be summarized by
      means by a cumulative graph.”* When the shapes of these graphs for sites of the
      Middle Palaeolithic Mousterian period were compared, Bordes recognized what
 37   seemed to be a repetitive pattern: there appeared to be just four basic forms of
                                                                                                                 The Challenge of the Mousterian                                       89




           MOoOUSTERIAN
           ASSEMBLAGE                                                       TYPES




                                                                                     CHARENTIAN                  — >
                                                                                          GRoUP




                                                                    7YPICAL-
                      Fs                                 )          MOoUSTERIAN                          9-O
                                                                                                    oo


                                                                                     cy
                                                                                     V
                                                                                ef                                              |
                                                                           O°             MousTERIAN               oF     ||
                                                                           ta              ee               7RAD.
                                                                       1
                                                               0S




                                                               =           a


                               ae                   GRENAL                 LAaveR         /2 (Ez)



   12345678       9   iol!   i213   415   \617   16819   eee   wera          26 27 26 29   503)   32 35 34-35
                                                                                                            356 57 3639 404) 42 43 44 454647
                                                                                                                                          48 49 50 5) 52   535455 5657   SB SO G06!   62 63

  : Points        / Sipe            ScrRsaPERS               TRANS-                        |)UPPER  PaLeo,|                    |Nor|       UTM
                                                             \veese!                           Group        |                  |DEnt       IZEO

                                                             Wee            List             of      F.’ Borepes
                                                                                                                                                             4.2    Sinroro




37 Graphic definition of Bordes’ Mousterian assemblage types. The tool types are listed
along the horizontal axis. A plot of the cumulative percentages of each tool type within an
assemblage generally conforms to one of the four major shape categories. The controversy
that resulted from these data was about the meaning of the four distinctive curves.
              s



graph represented by many examples, with only a few judged to be ambiguous
or intermediate cases. The four types of Mousterian recognized by Bordes can be
summarized as follows:
  1 Mousterian of Acheulean Tradition
  This assemblage is generally recognized by the presence of hand axes, moderate
  numbers of side scrapers, many denticulates and notches, and a distinctively
  high frequency of backed knives. The distinctive shape of the graph is a low
  curve,
gO    The Challenge of the Mousterian

        2 Typical Mousterian
        This type generally forms a diagonal graph (because most of the tool types are
        present in roughly equal proportions). It differs from the Mousterian of
        Acheulean tradition primarily in the rarity of hand axes and the lower frequen-
        cies of backed knives and other tool types analogous to common Upper
        Palaeolithic types.
        3 Denticulate Mousterian
        The distribution ofthis type normally comprises a low, concave graph, because
        there are few scrapers but many notches and denticulates. Hand axes are rare
        to absent; scrapers are poorly made; and backed knives are rare.
        4 Charentian Group
        A final group of assemblages is recognizable by a high, convex graph dominated
        by scrapers, Denticulates and notches are infrequent, while hand axes and
        backed knives are rare to absent. Bordes recognizes two subtypes of the
        Charentian: (a) a Quina type in which the scrapers are typically transverse in
        form and the Levallois technique is rare to absent; and (b) the Ferrassie type
        characterized by scrapers produced on the sides of flakes and by the frequent
        presence of the Levallois technique.

      In current terminology I would label Bordes’ early studies as ‘pattern recognition
      work’, because he defined and refined in an ordered manner the properties of
      things which he could systematically observe. He then made many observations
      about the archaeological record and recognized structure in the data.
         What shocked some archaeologists at the time was the nature of the patterning
      which began to emerge from the application of La Méthode Bordes*?. An observa-
      tion made previously (and both verified and clarified by the application of Bordes’
      methods) was that the stratigraphic sequence of changes in the forms of stone tool
      assemblages was not necessarily directional, nor did it appear to represent either
      gradual or transformational patterns of change. This had been observed for the
      Mousterian by Peyrony,°° but was forcefully demonstrated by Bordes, particu-
      larly through his excavations at the now famous site of Combe Grenal.*! Using
      his techniques Bordes showed the existence of three characteristics of the data
 38   which were

        1 Alternating Industries. Throughout a long stratigraphic sequence with
        successive levels of beds, one type of Mousterian, for instance Typical, might
        be followed in time by Denticulate, but then a still later level would yield a
        Typical Mousterian assemblage again. In this pattern the types of Mousterian
        assemblage maintain their distinct identity through time, but alternate with
        one another in various ways through particular sequences.
        2 Parallel Phyla. Seen from the perspective of the region as a whole, however,
        the different types of Mousterian preserved their identity through long spans
                                                           The Challenge of the Mousterian        91



               ACHEULEAN     TRAD.
              ACHEULEAN      TRAD.
               ACHEVLEAN     TRAD.
              ACHEUL EAN     TRAD.
              ACHEULEAN      TRAD.
              ACHEULEAN      TRAD.
                   TYPICAL
                   TYPICAL
                   TYPICAL
                   TYPICAL
           DENTICULATE
           DENTICULATE
      -BvVOVoHNsuUn-
      UP DENTICULATE
      B DENTICULATE
      iS   DENTICULATE
      16   DENTICULATE
      \7
      18




                         FERRASSIE                                ComBeE        GQRENAL
                   TYPICAL                                   SECTION  ON       14 MereER     Line
                   TYPICAL
                  TYPICAL                                              SCALE   IN METERS

                   TYPICAL
                         FERRASS/E
                                                                                   LR   BINFORD




38 Archaeological section from the Mousterian site of Combe Grenal in France, illustrating
alternating assemblages.




  of time and they co-existed as recognizable cultures.** The implication was
  that when they were absent in the sequences of one site, they would be repre-
  sented in the patterns seen at some other contemporary site.
  3 Tenacious Cultures. The patterning uncovered by Bordes could be further
  described   as indicative     of tenacious   cultures:   that is, forms of behavioral
  organization represented relatively unchanged in the archaeological record
  over long periods of time. These different assemblage types were also unaffected
  by contact with other equally distinct cultures which were present in the same
  general area.
92   The Challenge of the Mousterian

        The general view ofthe past produced by the use of Bordes’ methods supported
     the picture proposed by Peyrony and argued by the Abbé Breuil, namely that
     there were different cultural lines which extended far back into antiquity.** These
     lines or phyla maintained their formal integrity much as biological species do and
     therefore were not capable of hybridizing readily with different ‘species’. The
     distribution of these cultural species ebbed and flowed back and forth across
     geographic space, resulting in archaeological deposits in the form of assemblages
     which might alternate with others and which might come and go in the same
     region through time. The concept of assemblages as representing cultural species
     has recently been.characterized as the organic view of the past:

       Culture history can be regarded and accounted for in essential organic terms.
       This notion more specifically entailed two unspoken assumptions. The first was
       that a direct parallelism exists between the cultural and organic worlds of such
       a kind that we can expect to find a one to one correlation between archaeo-
       logical and natural stratigraphy. The second was that any given cultural com-
       plex, like any given paleontological complex, should be more or less invariant
       in the manner in which it expresses itself. This last means that the cultural
       entities recognized in archaeological systematics are to be regarded as natural
       categories, which — in the manner, say of organic species — are inherently dis-
       continuous and do not modify their form from one context to the next. It
       follows that a specific tradition should give rise to but one characteristic type of
       industry in any specific block of time and space in the archaeological record.**

        So, in spite of his major refinements of method resulting in the demonstration
     of patterning in the archaeological record with a level of accuracy never before
     achieved, Bordes’ innovations were nevertheless integrated within an older view
     of culture and the past compatible with a biological model: the tree of life, as
     A. L. Kroeber aptly called it.



     The Present: A Conflict of Views


      It was the crisp patterning, developed and demonstrated with Bordes’ refined
      techniques of observation and description, that really forced myself and others to
      recognize that the view of the past to which the archaeological record was being
      accommodated by our French colleagues was in conflict with the general notion
    _ of culture developed by Americanist scholars through the study of modern, native
      peoples in the New World. This difference has been described by Americans as a
 3) contrast between the organic view, illustrated by the tree of life, and the cultural
      view, represented by the tree of culture. The cultural view had been derived by
      researchers studying the spatial distribution of traits and complexes among known
                  “               a“

                      ORGANIC                     FCoLCTOURAL.
                      MopEelw                       Move       LW


          39 Comparison of organic and cultural views of the past in terms of
                the ‘Tree of Life’. (Based on Kroeber 1948, fig. 18.)




ethnic and social groups across vast regions of North America. One result of this
work, for instance, was the finding ofa strong correlation between the distribution
of distinctive cultural forms and kinds of environment,’> but archaeologists
working with the materials studied according to Bordes’ methods have generally
denied that such correlations might have occurred in their data.*° In addition,
American anthropologists have found it difficult to distinguish regional boun-
daries between social or ethnic groups.°’ Variability among such socially defined
units tended to be graded across many groups, rendering the recognition of
ethnically distinct groups a nearly impossible task. In marked contrast, ethnic
distinctiveness was considered by those holding the organic view to be character-
istic of past peoples. In summary, there was a direct opposition between the views
of culture underlying Bordes’ techniques of archaeological analysis and those
based on observations of the distributions of things produced by ethnic groups in
the modern world.
   At this point a critical question had to be faced: was the past so different from
conditions documented in the modern world, or were there characteristics of the
way we look at the past which created an image in our minds different from what
we saw in the modern world? It was of vital importance to know what meaning
had been assigned to the observations made on the archaeological record when
using Bordes’ procedures for description. In short, what was Bordes’ taxonomy
The Challenge of the Mousterian

actually measuring and what was really indicated by the contrasts in assemblage
composition seen at different sites? In 1966, together with Sally Binford, I
suggested conditions which — if they had obtained in the past — might have led to
some of the forms of patterning observed by Bordes.** Our work at that time was
based on the realization that this inconsistency between views of the past de-
manded research designed to investigate the way the archaeological record was
formed and to identify the kinds of variability that are derived from different
forms of systems dynamics. These issues are pursued further in the next chapter.
   The history of research in the case of the Mousterian is very different from the
disputes about early man (Chapter 2), in which research quickly became orien-
tated towards understanding the archaeological record in terms of the conditions
which brought it into being. The Mousterian problem was less clearly about
method, since the techniques used by Bordes were accepted by most as being very
sophisticated and were therefore seen as the methodology. The patterns revealed
through the use of Bordes’ approach were considered to be empirical and hence
not subject to question. The conflict did not lead to a scramble for methods which
could be used in support of one’s interpretations of the past. The meaning to be
given to the patterning seemed to follow from the data in a self-evident fashion.
There were tenacious cultures and alternating industries: how could this be
disputed? As more and more archaeological patterning was demonstrated at a
higher and more rigorous level of documentation, it gradually became apparent
that the patterning illustrated over and over conflicted with one view of the
nature of cultural variability. Only when the archaeological record was made to
‘speak’ through the improved descriptive procedures of Bordes did the previously
hidden conflict between the views of culture guiding the methods of Bordes on
the one hand, and the concepts derived from descriptions of American Indian
material culture on the other, become apparent. The recognition of fundamental
differences in assumptions about the archaeological record, as well as about
culture itself, was therefore prompted by the emergence of the Mousterian
problem.
   While the discussion about early man has a certain theatricality involving
frequent argument and ‘playing to the wings’, research on the Mousterian
problem has been relatively quiet. Nevertheless, it too is likely to havea substantial
impact on archaeology in general: for with the Mousterian controversy we are
engaged in questioning our basic ideas, those related to the very nature of culture.
                         2)
            An Archaeological Odyssey

Discovering the Past

Those of us who began our careers in archaeology in the late 1950s and early
1960s were trained in rather traditional ways. Most of our teachers had spent
their careers trying to solve chronological problems by studying changes in artifact
forms and various types of sequential arrangements of material, largely without
the aid of stratigraphical information, So the minimal methodological training
that I and my age grade received involved learning how to compare assemblages
and arrange them in series, in the hope that such series somehow reflected time.
Seriation was emphasized over stratigraphy, because there was a myth abroad
at that time — at least in eastern North America — that there were few or ne
stratified deposits.‘ Archaeological methodology was almost exclusively con-
cerned with questions of chronology.
   What changed all that and led some of us to start making noises in the late
1950s was the invention and application of radiocarbon dating, Many of us
thought that C14 would solve, once and for all, most of the traditional problems
of chronology to which our teachers had devoted so much effort. And if those
problems were at least partially solved, then it would become possible to use
archaeological remains in a more economical fashion.” That is, if chipped stone
tools and pottery and the other artifacts archaeologists study had so far been used
only to solve a chronological problem which could now be solved simply by
analyzing lumps of charcoal, what was to be done with all the artifacts? There
must be other kinds of information to be extracted.? The breakthrough in radio-
carbon dating was not the only factor involved: other dating techniques (such as
dendrochronology), a renewed interest in geology, and the late recognition that
there did in fact exist good stratified sites in North America were also important.
But our response to all these changes was to begin to look for ways of getting new
information about the past and about subjects other than chronology itself.
   In retrospect, I think that much of the work in those early days followed a
strongly inductive strategy. We reasoned that if we wanted to know about the
past in new ways, we would have to work out new ways of looking : as the invention
of the microscope had shown, if a new way of looking is found, then lots of new

                                        9). =                          r
An Archaeological Odyssey

facts will be seen and, in principle, those new facts should refer to new kinds of
phenomena, That, at any rate, was our early idea. So I began to work, for
example, on mortuary practices.* Similarly, although it now sounds amazing,
there was little experimental work by Americans with chipped stone tools at that
time; John Witthoft was really the only American archaeologist in my prede-
cessor generation who had done any experimentation on the manufacture of
stone tools.* I started to try thinking of lithic assemblages in terms of reduction
sequences, examining the by-products all the way from raw material to the
production of finished tools.° Stimulated by Witthoft’s work I began to play
around with techniques for the analysis of   lithic waste.’ But all these approaches
were a search for new ways oflooking, for ways of isolating new kinds of facts from
the same old material. At that point we never thought to ask ‘How do we give
meaning to what we see?’; we looked only to see new things. We were optimistic
that we would somehow ‘know’ their meaning.
   It was in that context that I began to write about sampling in archaeology*
and about the potential applications of probability and statistics to the excavation
and analysis of archaeological materials. But far more important, as it turned out,
were two new kinds of problems that I became involved in. The first of these was
the question of the origins of agriculture,’ an old problem that archaeologists had
already discussed for years. This was essentially a question of explanation: how
and why did it happen? In Chapter 8 I will discuss this type of problem as well
as my current thinking about how it could be solved.
   The other problem was something rather different: it concerned the meaning
to be given to variability in the archaeological record and, specifically, to the
variability isolated in the European Mousterian industries by Francois Bordes
(Chapter 4). This was something I became very familiar with in the early 1960s
and argued about long and hard before anything was ever published, because it
seemed to me that this was an altogether new kind of problem. The argument was
not about the nature of the archaeological record. Most of us knew the archaeo-
logical facts, the sites themselves and what had been found in them; we trusted
Bordes and had no argument with his typology. What we were arguing about
was something quite different — the meaning of the patterning demonstrated to
exist in the archaeological record. Before the Mousterian problem arose, this kind
of difficulty had not been faced squarely (or certainly not in my own studies of
burials, chipped stone, and so on). As a student, I can now see, most of the
arguments I had learned were about the conventional interpretation of archaeo-
logical finds. Someone might say, for instance, ‘I’ve found a site at X and a site
at Y, both of the same date, so I think there ought to be another one somewhere
in the middle at <’; then someone else would say ‘No, I don’t think there’s one
at <°. Almost all the conversations and arguments in which I had participated
were of this kind, concerned with the character of the archaeological record. The
                                                          An Archaeological Odyssey   97

Mousterian argument, at least as I conceived of it, was something very different.
   Yet even though I recognized this distinction, I still tried to work towards a
solution of the problem through discovery techniques. As I knew that further
excavation could not solve the problem, I thought it might be possible to solve
it by analyzing in a different way the material that already existed. So I began to
explore what I now refer to as ‘pattern recognition techniques’, using multi-         40
variate techniques which help us to isolate and recognize patterns that in one
way or another are inherent in the data of the archaeological record.'° I was
pleased with the strategies for pattern recognition we began to apply early in the
1960s, not only to Mousterian finds but to many other areas besides : Bob Whallon,
Henry Wright and several others were all using and exploring these approaches
for a wide variety of archaeological material.'! But the basic argument, of course,
did not go away. It just got more intense.


40 Bordes’ initial response to
the functional argument for ex-
plaining assemblage variability
in the Mousterian. The pro-
cedure followed by the Binfords
is simple: pour stone tools into
one end of a computer and
Neanderthal man walks out at
the other end! (Cartoon drawn
by Pierre Laurent on the inside
cover of an offprint by de
Sonneville-Bordes 1966).           2




                                                                              or]
                                                                              youve
                                                                         oe ° 000

                                                                       DANA
                                                                       gn ee
                                                                        #00   See
  98

        The Facts do not Speak for Themselves

        In 1967 I received funds’? to go to Europe for a year to work more closely with
        Bordes in Bordeaux. My program for research was the following. If we could not
        study the chipped stone directly, perhaps we could study faunal remains and the
        horizontal distributions, on excavated archaeological floors,'* of both fauna and
        chipped stone. Then it might be possible to relate variability in the lithics to these
        other properties of the archaeological sites in question, properties that had not so
        far been studied systematically. Different kinds of activity, I reasoned, must have
        combined in different ways to produce these assemblages, so there should be some
        sort of correlation between at least some activities and some ofthe by-products of
        food consumption (e.g. animal bones); equally, there should exist some form of
        relationship between some, if not all, of the tools related to the procurement,
        processing and consumption of animals, I worked for a year in France, identifying
sy ee   and plotting all the stone tools and animal bones by anatomical part and by
        breakage pattern.
           Then began the first of awhole series of disillusionments. When the sites were
        excavated, it turned out, each stone tool had been plotted using three-dimensional
        spatial co-ordinates, so that they could be plotted horizontally and vertically in
        order to reconstruct their distribution on past ground surfaces; the bones, on the
        other hand, had been collected only by level. The quality of the data was high,
        but not high enough to allow me to analyze one type of information in the same
        units I was using to analyze another one. It was possible to run cross-correlations
        between whole faunal assemblages and whole lithic assemblages, but not to look
        for distributional correlations between bone and stone within levels. Nevertheless,
        I performed one correlation study after another — so many, in fact, that I needed
        a great steel trunk in order to carry all the papers back to the United States. I
        could tell you cross-correlations between any pair of Mousterian tool-types,
        between tools and bones, between bones and the drip-lines in cave sites, between
41, 42 Examples of work sheets from
the Combe Grenal research con-
ducted in France in 1968. Ill. 41
(above) is a plan of part oflevel m at
the site. Ill. 42 (left) is a graph
summarizing a factor analysis of
Combe Grenal tool assemblages, in
relation to independent measures of
environmental change.
100   An Archaeological Odyssey

      almost any type of data you care to name. What I found, of course, was many new
      facts that nobody had seen before. But none of these new facts spoke for them-
      selves, just as the initial facts had not. By generating more and more facts and by
      detecting more and more patterns, I had simply increased the scope of the
      problem without reaching any solutions. None ofthe correlations carried sufficient
      information to tell us why they were that way: they simply stood as increasingly
      complex patterns ofstatic association in the archaeological record.
          It is important to realize that it was with such a wealth — not a dearth — of in-
      formation that it gradually began to dawn on me that none of the approaches I
      had followed possessed any explanatory potential. None of them was likely to tell
      me what meaning should most appropriately be associated with any ofthose facts.
      My metal trunk was so big and heavy that I decided to return home by boat and
      that five-day trip from Le Havre to New York gave me an opportunity for some
      disconsolate self-reflection. The whole project was obviously a total failure. What
      had I done wrong? What had I not done that I should have done? Could it really
      be that archaeologists simply cannot learn anything about the past? Where was
      I missing the real problem?
          I still have at home a little notebook in which I made a logical outline of my
      thoughts, starting from some really fundamental concepts: a sort of Lecture to
      Myself. (Many of those thoughts have been incorporated into Chapter I.) The
      first heading says ‘What zs the archaeological record?’.Underneath I wrote “The
      archaeological record is static’, and there follows a long series of jottings to the
      effect that (excluding earthworms) there is nothing dynamic in the archaeological
      record itself. Now what we are interested in about the past is dynamics: what
      people did, how they lived, whether they competed or collaborated. Here, then,
      is the basic and fundamental problem, one not unique to the Mousterian period
      but endemic to archaeology — how can we make inferences from statics to
      dynamics? Lower down, my outline says “The archaeological record is contem-
      porary; it exists with me today and any observation I make about it is a con-
      temporary observation’. Yet of course it is the past that interests us as archaeolo-
      gists. Thinking about that, it seemed to me that archaeologists must be among the
      world’s biggest optimists. Unless we know the necessary and determinant linkages
      between dynamic causes and static consequences, how can we ever justify an
      inference from one to the other? The dynamic aspect of the past is long gone.



      The Contemporary World Offers a Solution?

      By the time we steamed into New York City, just before the New Year of 1969,
      some of the answers to these problems were suggested, at least in my thoughts.
      I prepared a research proposal to go to the Arctic in the spring of 1969 to live
                                                           An Archaeological Odyss ey      IO]




43 Young Nunamiut Eskimo girl wearing her parka with a wolverine ruff and a colorful
cloth over-cover; Anaktuvuk Pass, Alaska, 1971.




with a group of Eskimo hunters. My reasons for going there were little more
specific at that stage than that it could hardly fail to be a good educational
experience. If I was ever to be able to make accurate inferences from archaeo-
logical facts, I was convinced that I had to understand the dynamics of living
systems and study their static consequences.
  The Eskimos were my choice, however, for several good reasons. In the first
place, in Bordeaux I had studied reindeer bones from Mousterian sites to the            43, 44
point where I thought I never wanted to see another one, but here was an
opportunity to study a living group of people who were still hunting the very
same animal that I had studied archaeologically. Secondly, it was possible to           740)
study a group who were still almost entirely dependent on hunted foodstuffs,
something which is no longer very easy to observe in the modern world. Thirdly,
their environmental setting was Arctic and thus not dissimilar from that of the         46
French occupation sites I had studied (which contained little arboreal pollen
                                                                                                                                        NCOBMIavD ANIaNnsaAcy
                                                                                                                                         VWasay   PNINIVD               OABH
               DNIAtIWvD Vauy
           xI1Ld=aw   nogiavySG2ABH




                                                                                                                                                                           Ki          D[
                                                                                                                                                                                 WAT        ¥
                                                                                                            :f                                                                              =
                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                              i Al
                                                                                                                                       a             ,
:              ‘                                     aefee                                            \          afi                                                   =—
    a     D119     oan                                                                                           a.
                                                                                                                                                         eS
          SALNIM SONVS                                                                                           a
                                         )4 A>“pe                                                 ~   op      a                      ro) <<                            ee
                                                                                                                                                                      ——
                                            a             =              =                                    ne                                              =
                                                                                                              ae               b Nie?                                               vaay.
                                                                    Le                                 <==,                    _      oaiect arian                          ao      avy     AVLSd
                                                                                                                               =-aa3
                                                                                                                                      aSnva              .

                                                                   ADVW3209               HLAON                  VASWAy
                                                    HNIMOCHS AadNA¢g VAY
                                                                       7                                                 NOINaIaAsigQ                    .
        is 2             i                                           Jo                 NOSBIav\D FSAAAH                                                          e        X
                   NIA        va
        7                    ae                                                            amr-~wlS                                                      ae
         TO         SNIadS             NoLvabip                                                                                                                   Stwis
                                                                                                                                                                     340           vaewWy
        —s         rt              cat              f°)       cE      O9     O06   OZ    OG!    OBI   OIZ   Oe    OCLZ   COS   SBN
                   b>
                                                              :aL0opy wivgNo                     NoGiavD              LNSWNSAC=:
                                                                                                                             NANVL WoOad             DSNINWSH
                                                                                                                                                          \L61
                                                                                                                                                                               Y'T7         CHAOINID


                                  FF      deyJo     yys0u          vyseTy     Surmoys
                                                                                  ay)          UoTLd0]
                                                                                                  Jo             YNANIYyeuYy
                                                                                                                      sseqUT     UOHLIed
                                                                                                                                    0} ay}                  JO
                                                                                                                                                         UONNAINsIp HOGHe ‘Sproy
                             Ar = Archaeological Odyssey   103




45     Zacharias     Hugo
skinning a caribou in
Anaktuvuk Pass during
the   spring    migration.
(Photo courtesy of Robert
Rausch.)

46 (Below) View toward
the    southeast    across
Anaktuvuk Valley from
just north of the Eskimo
village of Anaktuvuk Pass,
Alaska, Spring 1971.
104   An Archaeological Odyssey

      indicative of a wooded landscape). In short, I was led to the inescapable con-
      clusion that there existed no way to develop archaeological methods ofinference,
      except via the study of contemporary living peoples, or by controlled experiments
      under laboratory conditions, or by doing archaeology in situations whose dynamic
      component is historically documented. ‘Ethnoarchaeology’, ‘experimental
      archaeology’, and ‘historic sites archaeology’ seemed to me to be the only chances
      we have for the development and perfection of methods of inference dealing with
      humanly-generated artifactual material. Work in experimental physics, after all,
      had resulted in the techniques of radiocarbon dating — techniques that are not
      strictly speaking archaeological, but which are of great value to archaeologists.
      So, too, these three approaches were not developed specifically for the purpose of
      developing an inferential framework for archaeology, but could certainly be
      useful in that way.




      47 Crew from the 1969 field season at Tulugak   Lake, Alaska.   Left to right: Richard
      Workman,   Charles Amsden, Don Campbell and Lewis Binford.
                                                             An Archaeological Odyssey   105




48 Dan Witter collecting bones from Eskimo meat caches during the 1972 field season.



    I spent several seasons, in the period from 1969 to 1973, doing ethnoarchaeology
in the Arctic (Chapters 6 and 7), many of the results of which are now published 47
in my book Nunamiut Ethnoarchaeology.'* Much_of this research was concerned
with animal exploitation and faunal analysis, but I also wanted to return more 48
directly to the problems of interpreting lithic assemblages; so in 1974 I| travelled
to Australia'> to work with some aboriginal people who were still manufacturing
stone tools for their own use (Chapter 7). One spin-off of this work was the re-
kindling of my earlier interest in the origins of agriculture (Chapter 8). That
fieldwork experience of living with hunters and gatherers had convinced me that,
if we wanted to get good models and explanations for agricultural origins, we had
to understand accurately the range of variability — ecological, economic, social —
in the organization of hunting and gathering peoples; it was on this range of
variability, after all, that some kinds of selective forces operated to bring into
being new kinds of production involving agriculture and domesticated animals.
This led me to begin in 1971 a long-term project to accumulate comparative
ethnohistorical and ethnological information on the world’s hunters and gatherers,
106   An Archaeological Odyssey

      concentrating in particular on how they vary in their organization with environ-
      mental factors.
         So there have been three main themes in my research throughout the 1970s:
      (1) methodological studies of animal bone assemblages (Chapter 2); (2) the
      spatial organization of activity debris and the structure of archaeological sites
      (Chapters 3, 6, and 7); and (3) comparative studies of hunters and gatherers on
      a worldwide basis. All three relate back directly to the two problems mentioned
      earlier — the origins of agriculture and the question of variability in the Mous-
      terian, Interest in the early time periods has developed out of my faunal studies.



      Nonsense and the New Archaeology

      Those who are familiar with the archaeological literature of the past fifteen years
      will perhaps have noticed something odd in the chronology of the research pro-
      gram I have just outlined. One of the landmarks in the development of the so-
      called ‘New Archaeology’ was the publication in 1968 of the volume of essays
      entitled New Perspectives in Archaeology. It made quite an impact and generated a
      lot of discussion in the early 1970s. Most of the ideas and work by my colleagues
      and students that appeared in it came into being earlier in the 1960s and certainly
      before I left for France to work on the Mousterian, The publication of the book
      was roughly coincident with the major switch in my own work towards
      methodologically oriented research: just as it appeared in print I took a right-
      angle turn and went off on another tack. All the time I was away doing fieldwork
      or analyzing the results, I tended to avoid many of the arguments that were
      common in the archaeological literature of the 1970s. I stood on the sidelines
      and watched some of the themes and arguments I or my colleagues had introduced
      picked up and sometimes taken in directions I really did not think they ought
      to go.’® So it is perhaps not inappropriate to consider briefly how I viewed the
      relationship between my own research program and some of the things that
      happened to the New Archaeology in the USA during the 1970s.
         It was in a paper published in 1967 that I began to discuss the logic of the
      philosophy of science in relation to archaeological research.'’ At that time, I was
      simply trying to make a negative point, an argument against particular viewpoints
      that were then current about the interpretation of the archaeological record. My
      claim was that when one looks at a body of archaeological data and says ‘This is
      what it means in historical terms’, an inference is already being made. The only
      appropriate strategy I could see for evaluating an idea which one already had
      was to deduce consequences of it for further empirical conditions that might exist
      in the world. It was assumed, however, that some set of ideas about the past was
      already in existence.
                                                            An Archaeological Odyssey    107

   What happened was that certain archaeologists followed this line of reasoning
by doing a little reading in the literature of logical positivism and then claimed
that we should all do research following deductive principles. I do not understand
this suggestion, and I never have! I think the way we do research is that we look
at data, we recognize patterns, and we have flashes ofinsight, or bright ideas, or
simply revive worn old notions that have been around for years; but wherever
ideas come from, we try to give meaning to what we see. We should do so by using
the form oflogic which concentrates on the implications of our ideas for the real
world. This is the important place for deductive reasoning, It has to be stressed,
however, that this is not to say that it is in this way that ideas are obtained in the
first place, nor that a deductive form of logic is to be used when talking about
observations per se, rather than the evaluation of ideas. As an example of the sort
of confusion that exists, I might cite a research proposal I evaluated for the
National Science Foundation in the early 1970s, The authors of the proposal
proclaimed that they followed the ‘logico-deductive method’ of doing archaeo-
logical research. They intended to survey the such-and-such river valley. Their
hypothesis was that camps existed along the levees and deduced from it that there
must therefore be artifacts to be found on the levees. The proposed field program
was intended to test this hypothesis. Obviously, this is complete nonsense; it is a
proposition about the character of the archaeological record which, if correct,
would tell us only about the author’s good judgment.’® Suppose (to give an
analogy) I hypothesize that this book is 6 inches wide and it does indeed turn out,
when we take a ruler and measure it, that it is 6 inches wide. The fact that I was
right has no intellectual implications whatsoever, except for my ability to judge
the width of books accurately. Deductive reasoning is only important if evaluating
some intellectual implications derived or deduced from a body of ideas, an
argument. Empirical propositions, such as the examples I have just given, never
have such implications.
   This, then, is one aspect of the New Archaeology that is somewhat confusing
and the way in which the question was presented and argued in much of the
American archaeological literature has, I feel, been counter-productive. I would
be the last to deny the importance of deductive reasoning. But while I probably
have to shoulder some of the blame for the poor arguments about deduction and
hypothesis testing that were so prevalent in the 1970s, I should like to think that
I’m not entirely responsible.
   Some comment is also called for on the confusing and slightly disagreeable
sociological aspects of American archaeology in the aftermath of the upheavals
of the 1960s. I suppose I must take some blame for these also, since — as Albert
Spaulding once commented — I’m the oldest new archaeologist in town. In the
early 1960s I scored some successes in arguing with my colleagues and fellow
archaeologists. It was our ‘opponents’, not we, who coined the term ‘New
108   An Archaeological Odyssey

      Archaeology’; Robert Braidwood went so far as to call it a religion. The result
      was that many other young archaeologists, modelling themselves on some of the
      successes of the 1960s, felt they had to define a still newer kind of archaeology:
      Behavioral Archaeology, Social Archaeology, Astroarchaeology, and so forth.
      Much time and energy has been spent in recent years arguing about these new
      ‘fields’. Personally, I have tried to avoid such debates, for they do not concern
      serious proposals within a scientific discipline, but rather a form of sociological
      posturing within the organization of American archaeology. They have confused
      the archaeological literature, especially for those who are not themselves involved
      in archaeology in America. So this is an aspect of the New Archaeology from
      which I should like to dissociate myself.



      Ultimate Concerns


      In a nutshell, then, this is the path my research has taken over the last two
      decades, a path often divergent from that of the New Archaeology itself. It reflects
      what I believe should be the priorities in the development of the field of archae-
      ology. I believe very strongly that we need a robust methodology for making
      inferences and that so far we do not generally have one. Archaeology has not been
      a science: it grew up with a rag-bag series of conventions which most archaeolo-
      gists, at one time or another, have used for ‘interpreting’ their finds. Most such
      conventions have never been tested and we simply do not know whether they are
      valid and useful. Just around the corner are other methods which I think will
      allow us to make much more accurate and interesting statements about the past.
      Such methodological research is obviously crucial, but we should not forget about
      the more substantive problems of archaeology — for instance, the origins of
      agriculture, or how cultural variability is to be explained, or what causes differ-
      ences in stylistic and ethnic phenomena. All these aspects must grow together,
      because methodological research cannot be done in isolation, but within the
      context of problems for which, in the long term, some solution is hoped. In my
      own Case those ultimate concerns have been to explain the origins of agriculture
      and variability in the Mousterian. So in a sense, while of course I have been
      involved in many different facets of archaeology over the last twenty years, I have
      really worked on no other problems in my entire career.
                           6
                Hunters in a Landscape

A Stationary View of a Dynamic Landscape

Excavated sites are the archaeologist’s bread and butter. His view of the past
is necessarily restricted to these discrete, isolated points in the landscape. It is a
stationary view, whereas past behavior — especially that of hunters and gatherers
— was highly mobile. Each site, therefore, presents a limited, biased picture ofa
whole range of activities, depending upon its unique position within a regional
system of behavior. One could imagine, for example, that the different Mous-
terian stone tool assemblages described by Bordes (Chapter 4) are simply tiny
segments of the way oflife of ahunting and gathering group. There is the further
complication that if the pattern of activities during the Mousterian was not
precisely the same at different times and in different places, then consecutive
levels at each site would represent slightly varying ‘snapshots’ of the past.
   These simple ideas, together with my conception of how people behaved during
the Palaeolithic, formed the basis of my challenge to Bordes’ interpretation of the
patterns to be seen in Mousterian assemblages. He thought that differences
between them reflected the ethnic identities of the various groups which had
made them. My own approach, on the other hand, revolved around the idea that
at each site Mousterian man’s use of both space and technology had been a
specific response to unique circumstances. In other words, I was envisaging a
cultural system in which different activities took place at separate locations.
Furthermore, I imagined that the tool technology was flexible enough to cope
with situational variations in demand placed upon it, so that if necessary, for
example, the same activities could be carried out at several sites with different
tools.
   At the time I was questioning existing notions of archaeological variability in
the Palaeolithic in this way, ethnographic accounts of how hunters and gatherers
use their landscape suggested that my view was at least plausible; but there were
no detailed investigations of the links between the way locations (i.e. sites) were
utilized and the adaptive organization of the system as a whole. Similarly, varia-
tions in the role of technology in response to site-specific circumstances had not
been studied. It was largely to pursue these issues that I went to Alaska to observe

                                         109                            y
     Hunters in a Landscape

     the Nunamiut Eskimo (see Chapter 5). During my ethnoarchaeological research
     there, I attempted to view the dynamics ofthe settlement pattern throughout the
     seasonal cycle of movement from an archaeological (i.e. a site-orientated)
     perspective. Although this research confirmed my most general assumptions
     about site formation, my observations clearly indicated that archaeologists
     currently lack appropriate methods for detecting in their data the immensely
     complicated patterns of landscape use exhibited by hunters and gatherers such
     as the Nunamiut.
        In order to illustrate the nature of such interpretive problems, I will describe
     some of the sites-which I recorded during my research among the Nunamiut
44   Eskimo in Anaktuvuk Pass, Alaska. I will begin with land use and settlement
     patterns at the regional scale and go on to describe how certain levels of behavior
     must be understood in terms of whole groups ofsites or in terms ofactivities within
     individual locations, The examples which follow should demonstrate some of the
     sources of variability which characterize the archaeology of mobile peoples.



     The Scale of Land Use


     The use of space by the Nunamiut on an enormous scale demonstrates that
     archaeologists need to recalibrate their perspective of hunters and gatherers from
     the 5 foot square excavation unit at a single site to an area of more than 300,000
     square kilometers. If we discount certain exceptional cases in the equatorial zones,
     such an enormous area represents the scale of the domain over which a typical
     hunter-gatherer group, composed of perhaps only thirty to forty people, monitors
     its environment. Rarely does the band exploit all this land at any one time, but it
     requires the entire region to be available in order to provide a secure set of options.
     In order to understand how a small band of people makes use of such a large
     amount of space, it might be helpful if I first examine the spatial unit utilized by a
     group during one season and then demonstrate how variation in this unit over a
     long period of time eventually leads to the exploitation of an immense region.
49      As a baseline we can take the area in which one group of Nunamiut Eskimo
     established settlements or base camps throughout the seasonal cycle of a single
     calendar year. This residential core area usually extends up to about 5,400 square
     kilometers, although the land which is exploited by means of trips out from the
     main camps may cover an area as great as 25,000 square kilometers, The Eskimo,
     it must be emphasized, are by no means atypical in terms of their use of space:
     the residential core area used by one G/wi Bushman family over a period of eleven
     months shows that other hunter-gatherer groups also exploit vast regions.’
        The archaeology created by a small band of people moving throughout their
     territory in this way must be immensely complex, if the Nunamiut case is repre-
                                                             Hunters in a Landscape                     111




                                                             \ June 21—-Avug.20, 47
                                                             z AvG@.2)1—~ Sept), 'A7
                                                             3 Sepr 3S—APRIL)O,/48
                                                             4a   Aprit_|ll-24,
                                                             5 APRIL 2Z9— 28,
                                                             6 APRIL 297 May 27
                                                             7 May 287 JUNE ©
                                                             8 JONE T— JONE 9
                                                             ©) JONE 9O—VUONEeE/S
                                                             JO JUNE    JQ—JUNE             16
                                                             \) JONEL   ITWHVUONE            24


                                                             Nore:  Tora  cimcuiT
                                                             DISTANCE  — I29OmMILES




 |          ANNUAL       RounNrP —OnceE           Nunamiutr   Fanmitr
                        June   21,1947 —          June 24, 1948
                                 Dele        IN   Miles


                                                                             a    AV   ha   OO   Kee.




49 Location of the sites occupied by one Nunamiut family during an annual round of
settlement in 1947-8.                        ;
Lr        Hunters in a Landscape




                                                                          BOUNDARY Of
                                                                          RESIPENTIAL
                                                                          MOVEMENT




                                                                   @     sNGLEeE   OccuPrPATION

                                                                   ©     MucTtiPLle     OCcCcVvrPaTIONns
                                                                   i
                                                                        _NUMAERS     OF OVERLAPPING
                                                                         OccuPaATIONsS

                                                                    )    Turuv@eaKk LAKE
                                                                   2      Kon@aumuvur—
                                                                   3S     ANAKTUVUK_
                                                                   4     Ov1rp Morry’s         cCAme
                                                                    S    PuseituK
                                                                   6G     CHANDLER        WIEN     Camp

               a            —


                    RESIPENTIAL        Core    —NounAamivut            RANGE,         I9S47T~ 1982
                                              Scale   IN   MILES




          sentative. The locations of the residential sites created by five Eskimo families
          during a period of five years are shown in ill. 50. The first point to note is the size
          of the residential core occupied by such a small group of people. Surprisingly
          enough, these five Nunamiut families covered about as much space as is repre-
     ey   sented by tue entire Dordogne area in France, where the classic Mousterian sites
          are located. Given the large scale on which hunting and gathering groups
          typically operate, Bordes’ argument (Chapter 4) that differences in the com-
          position of the toolkits deposited at various levels in these sites represent four
          distinct cultural groups is hard to sustain. The problem is that archaeologists have
          been approaching their research on Palaeolithic sites from a modern sedentary
                                                                          Hunters in a Landscape                       113




                                                                                                                 Sh.
50 (Opposite) Location                             wt                                                            Leese
of the residential sites        ena                Eva               MEM PESimEN MLL              OT TS           ye
  :   .        .   .    r             Z   IAL    MOVES    OF         VSEQ    BY     NINE
occupied by five Nuna-          SMG       Saw     FARTS              GA      ay     LR edyeas
                                                                                                   \
                                                                                                   meee
                                                                                                        :        eat

miut families over a            ES   tagged       lara               EK        Mag tte             af        .
                                                                     YEARP    PERIOD
period of five years. The
distribution ofthese sites
                                                                                  —LeE     MousTrieER
is equivalent to the res?-
dential core area of this            mage ee N                               Xfi
Eskimo    group        during        Sig
                                       = Saree,                                    \ya        —PECH         0f   LAZE

this period.

51 Comparisons of the
sizes of the residential
core areas among the
Nunamiut Eskimo and
the G/wi Bushmen with                     Ase;    VaUr REY     ‘             \ \—comae-Geenar
the area in which the                                    DorRbogNE          AREA
‘classic’   Mousterian                                             estan bee
archaeological sites of          COMPARATIVE                      REGIONAL                  SCALES
the Dordogne region of                                         SCALE IN MiLes                     i.

Chapter 4).                                                                                                 Leswroes         |


view of the world. Since the hunting and gathering peoples which we are trying
to study probably did not share that view, we must try to bring our perspective
closer to reality.
   A second important observation emerges from ill. 50. Not only is the number
of sites considerably greater than those used by one family over one year, but the
archaeology also becomes very complicated, chiefly because certain locations in
the territory were occupied repeatedly from year to year whereas others were not.
The pattern of re-use at these sites has to a large degree determined their size, in
terms of the distributions of artifacts and features; consequently, locations
occupied repeatedly are considerably larger than those used only a few times.
This means that variability in the amount of space occupied by a site, a property
normally recorded by archaeologists, would not be due to differences in the size
or social organization of the group who resided there, but would merely reflect
the degree of repetitiveness in the way the landscape was used by the same mobile
band.? The reasoning used by Richard MacNeish® and other archaeologists
whereby differences in the size of sites are equated with various scales of group
organization (such as ‘micro-bands’ and ‘macro-bands’) is therefore likely to be
faulty. Judging from my observations of the modern Nunamiut, it is obvious that
114    Hunters in a Landscape

       we can no longer make simple equations between variability in site size and nature
       of the group which resided there, until we know more about all the other factors
       which contribute to the spread of debris at a site. In other words, archaeologists
       have to know about the formation processes of the archaeological record — that is, the
       way sites come into being.



       Lifetime Cycles of Land Use

       The land-use pattern of the Nunamiut illustrates yet another factor which affects
       the archaeological record. Rather surprisingly, many hunters and gatherers do
       not reside exclusively in one territory, but — contrary to the assumptions of most
       archaeologists — exploit a series of discrete areas, occupying each one until the
       environment becomes degraded. Often after a period of years, the firewood or
       animal resources become depleted and, at the point of diminishing returns, the
       group simply moves to a completely different territory, where the resources have
       been allowed to regenerate. Among the Nunamiut, for example, the length of
       stay in any one residential core area is approximately ten years.
          On the basis of interviews with old Eskimo men, I have constructed an idealized
       model showing the way the Nunamiut expect to exploit a region during one
  52   person’s lifetime.* The basis of the model is a cyclical pattern of land use. The
       residential core area that the group occupies when a person is born is known as
       that person’s birth territory. If the band had recently moved there, he or she would
       expect to live in that area for about ten years before moving to another completely
       separate residential core area which had not been occupied for about fifty years.
       This second area would be known as the becoming territory, if you were male, and
       the courting territory, if female (because girls are married about the age of sixteen
       whereas males wait until they are around twenty-eight years old). As a male
       within this area, one would begin to learn to hunt and would travel extensively,
       becoming intimately acquainted with the environment. After another ten years,
       it would be time to move again; now a male would enter his courting territory,
       while his sisters would be having their first babies. When a male finally marries,
       he will generally go to live in the territory of his wife’s family for several years.
          Six to eight years later, when a male is likely to be at his peak and most effective
       as a hunter, he will enter a further completely different area. In his final territory,
       a successful man might contribute to the folklore or cultural tradition connected
       with the landscape. Some of the land might be remapped in the minds of the
       Nunamiut in terms of some of this hunter’s exploits; key points, such as the
       location of rocks marking points where streams can be crossed, might be renamed
       after him. After about the age of forty, a hunter’s skill declines rapidly, because
       most males begin to lose their eyesight, have difficulty climbing mountains, and
                                                                                                             Hunters in a Landscape            It5




             ANNUAL       RaNnaqe         X
             Time      Cty) 28-32         Yeaes
              1500   se: MiLeEs
                         Wire's      Country)
                           KANGIANIG MILT



                                                               ANNUAL         RANGE         C.
                                                               Time ,)        \I9-2T       Years
                                                               736     24; Miles
                                                                                          (Courting        Country)
                                                                                           Basy       Country)?




                                                                                                      ANNUAL         Range       B.
                                                                                                      Time C2) 10-18 Years
                                                                                                      e 23500 sq, Mi_eSs
                                                                                                      7 CBECOMING             Country)
                                                                                                      2 CCourting         CouonTtRyY)
          ANNUAL        Range   D.             ANNUAL            RAnGge A.                                  BOS WieeA
          Time Gs)      33-41 Years            Time (t,)        1-9 vears                 bed         Noire:
          << 2400sq.    Mites                  e< 2100 sq Mites                 ~~                    MAP 1S BASED ON A SKETCH
           (HoNTeR’Ss    Countrey)            42(irtTH          CoontRY)                              MADE     BY     Simon     FANEACK
               le Ores                                  KAN MAUINGMIUT
                            Sp
                         “TERRITORY                OF    ONE           Nounamiutr                 Bann
                                               oc       8500      sq. MILES
                                                        ScALE     IN   MILES

                            o        ir       24          36     48      60          Te          84   96       108      120
                                                                                                                                         BES


2 Idealized model of Nunamiut land use during one person’s lifetime, based on interviews
vith Eskimo informants.                                 -



o on. At this point in his career, a hunter will probably move back into his birth
erritory, completing the cycle of long-term land use; and with old age setting in
1e will gradually become dependent on others for his basic subsistence needs.
   In summary, the overall area in which a single male resides during his life
consists of around five different territories and can extend to as much as 22,000
quare kilometers. During his lifetime, however, a typical Nunamiut male will
1ave travelled over more than 300,000 square kilometers in the normal course of
1unting for game. Asa result, at any point in time, a group of Nunamiut Eskimos
1as available to it approximately four times as much land as it is currently using.
[he same pattern of land use can also be found among the Aborigines in the
Jentral Desert of Australia and the Naskapi in Newfoundland. Hunter-gatherer
     116        Hunters in a Landscape




                                                                                                                                                        LeEGEnod
                                                                                                                                                        DisePeERSED          HUNTING          \
                                                                                                                                                          STANDS
                                                                                                                                                       4     WeeseR*2
                                                                                                                                                       2     WenmerR*3
                                                                                                                                                       3.    Rigavuo*i
                                                                                                                                                       A     Rigauo*3
                                                                                                                                                       5.    Rigauo*4
                                                                                                                                                       6.    REB *6
                                                                                                                                                       Z     TULUGAK
                                                                                                                                                       Bitty Morry’s                 Site
                                                            \        '                              (                                              1   Complex
if                                                           \           &                           \          "                                      8.  OrRYING  Camp
                                                                          (                                      '                                     9   PRocessing   Site
                                             )                   \
                                             ))                              NY                          (          \                                  10. Kir sire
                                                                     v                              P                i Akvatutax        Cf             OTHER   SPRING   SiTEs
                                         -                               3                          =                |                                 1.    Site #64
                Notre:                                                   hf                         a                H                            am   12.   TULlugaK             Site   ZA
                Base     Map        TAKEN                                vA                                         i                  le              SumMMeER         SITES
           yr   From     U.S.    GeEoLOGg ICAL                           2€                                      H                     ‘               13.   HigH       KonqumovuKk
           3    SuRVEY,       CHANDLER                               3 =                                 ) Anavik                                            HonNTING             Came
       gf Lake, ALAsKaA-1956                                      5                                          Hi ‘                                \                       SS
          QUADRANGLE                                              z            i                              ae                   ait            Lt Wd
                Contour         INTERVAL »)                      5
                       100°     Fee,    ec




                                                                                                             Primary
                                                                                                             RveER CROSSING




                                                                “6                   /u
                                                                                                                    is        ANAKTIQTAUK—*—                                 ae
                                                                                   /Pe              a pearson “=: oo Peres                                      oa)     hs
                                                                               a               ie
                                                                              i           Smconvagy                      ON    SN      ss              ee
                                                                              fi          River          Crossing
                                                                              1           :
                                                                            1
                                                                           ee
                                                                           Loe
                                                                          ity
                                                                          if Sumer




                                                                             ANAKTUVUK                          oN
                                                                              Virtage                                    Re                    cad &

                                                                                                                                    InqsTreo
                                                                                                                                       Mr


                                                                                                                                     ee
                                                                                                             Giany        Cree


                                                                                                                                                               A)
                                                                                                                                                  \             D       L.2. Binrorp

                                        Map       oF       ANAKTUVUK                                         PASS,            ALASKA
                                                            Scace                             in         Mites
                                o            1         2         3                            4a                s              e             T         6            9




     53 Map of Anaktuvuk Valley, Alaska, showing the location of sites mentioned in the text.
                                                                           Hunters in a Landscape        17

groups such as these utilize an enormous range of space which is occupied over a
long period of time by means of a series of smaller discrete territories. Such is the
vast scale we must consider, if we are to understand variability in the archaeolog-
ical sites of mobile hunters and gatherers.



Anavik Springs Site Complex

Having looked at how hunting and gathering groups exploit a series of discrete
territories, we can now examine the way tasks are organized within the boun-
daries ofa single residential core area. One productive way to view the organiza-                    oe
tion of activities at this level is as a cluster of localities which I call the site complex.
When a series of events are linked together as part of an overall strategy, the
separate locations where the integrated set of activities takes place together com-
prise a site complex. Several examples of these major ‘building blocks’ of terri-
tories can be provided from my ethnoarchaeological study of Nunamiut Eskimo
settlements.
   The Anavik Springs site complex is composed of three distinct sites which are                         54
utilized in conjunction with each other during the hunting of caribou on their
spring migration northward through Anaktuvuk Pass along their route to the
flat, open tundra. The sites belonging together in this case include-(1) a hunting




                                                                      STONE CAIRN
                                                                    ROE BUTCHERING         |
                                                                                                              Se
                                                                                                          7s
                                              CaR/BOU                 ‘        SITE
                                               TRAILS Z     6




                                                                                                         i
                                                           ANAVIK. SPRINGS
                                                            CAMPS         ey,




54 Location of the
various    components
within    the Anavik
Springs site complex.


                                        SITE        ClLusTeERS                 AT     “ANAVIK
                                                       Decale    iN        KILOMETERS


                                                       e                  as          2         s
                                                                                                    LR    EINE ORD
118     Hunters in a Landscape




       TENT   RINGS                        ONE     KILOMETER
                       y                   TO     HUNTING
                                           SITE




                                                               55 Hunting camps located in a
                                                               stand of willow trees at Anavik
              HONTING  CAMPS  IN WiLLOWS                       Springs.
                   ANAVIK SPRINGS
                      Saati   Tian   cos                       56 (Opposite) Lovers’ Camp. Plan
                                                               of the late summer hunting campJ
                                                               at Anavik Springs.


        camp (including a specialized ‘lovers’ camp’), (2) a kill site with specialized areas
        for butchering, and (3) a series of stone caches where meat was stored. Completely
        different activities took place at each of the locations, which are separated by as
        much as one kilometer, but all three sites are components of the same major task
        (the exploitation of caribou) and commonly all have been used on a single day
        by the same group of people.

         Temporary Hunting Camp

  55    The first constituent of the site complex is a temporary camp used mainly during
        the caribou migration. From an archaeological point of view, this location at
        Anavik Springs appears to consist of one single site extending for halfa kilometer,
                                                                                                                                                                             Hunters in a Landscape             119


                                                       AugustTr                            /964                                        at                    os
                                                                                                                                   }                     ca
                                                                                                                       ire                              a.
                                                                                                                   )              sae                   SEZ

                                                                                                  2                                                                         ek 69),
                             2            S                                                       4.                                                                       fsx
                  aes                                                                                                                                        6          22-):
                  we    ce                                                                                                                                              tee             ©     Ku
                  o~                               x                                                                                                                         @-°,
              ae                                                                          ’                                                                            -               .@


        +         Se                          Ss
        L         ,                  ar
                  /              {    25           )
                                     nes
                                      vb                                                                                                                                <    =~
                                      ~            ;   a
                                                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                                                                      te Z   eo    1
                                      >                    :                                                                                                          da.@
            Dog   Yaron                                                                                o                                                                    Sa


       Note:                                                                                               5                                                           f(
        AREA     oF SITE                                       ‘
        CLEARING
               -
                      ew                                           =   >             Srove                     e
                                                                                                                        ae &
        504 ™M                                                             = \       Szveves                 ne            we                            ¢                       Moss       Coveren
                                                                       Tamas                                       A S             ac                        =                MEAT           STORAGE
                                                                       {     4         }                                ~    zs    =                                         STRUCTURE
                                                                             2
                                                               eae                    6           ois                         %                                                                            =
                                                                                                  ( 7 ‘\                                    TENT        WEIGHTS
                                                                                                  Nee‘




       SumMMER                            HUNTING                                                 Camp                            wpe
                                                                                                                                        —        ANAVIK                      SPRINGS
                                                                                          ScALE                        IN         METERS

                                 =             °           2                     a            6        i=)              10         12       1a     le            18     20         22

                                                                                                                                                                                        Lk    BINF   ORD




over which an uninterrupted distribution of debris can be monitored. In fact, the
continuous scatter is not the remains of one occupation by one group at one time,
but represents the re-use of the location over a period of at least 100 years. Since
the remains of the many separate occupations over this long period of time overlap
with each other, the result is an enormous palimpsest of archaeological materials,

The Lovers’ Camp
Fortunately, with the aid of informants who had camped at Anavik Springs, I                                                                                                                                    56
was able to separate out several discrete camps from among the continuous
distribution of archaeological materials. At one of these,° called site J, one can
observe that a pattern — a ring of stones for weighing down a tent and an outside
hearth — is repeated three times. This group of tent rings represents a single period
of occupation. Site J is not part of the spring caribou hunting complex; it is,
nevertheless, interesting in itself, because its history illustrates a division of labor
 120    Hunters in a Landscape

        which is common among hunter-gatherer groups, although not discussed in any
        detail in the ethnographic literature.
           By the late summer the stores of dried meat put up by the Eskimos after the
        caribou migration have become depleted and are unpalatable: the remaining
        meat is tough, the flavor has been leached out by the rain, and all the tasty fat will
        have been consumed, Furthermore, at this time of the year there is no game
        readily accessible in the local environment. The majority of the caribou, except
        for a few bulls which can only be found in the vicinity of glaciers located high in
        the mountains, are grazing far to the north, while mountain sheep are difficult to
        locate in this season. In order to encourage someone to go hunting despite the
        difficulty of achieving success, the Nunamiut have created a fascinating incentive.
        At the end of the summer young lovers are allowed to live together —not in the
        main residential camp, however, but only in hunting camps a long way away.
        The result is that in the long run everyone benefits: the old people subsist on the
        dwindling supplies of stored meat and the youngsters feed themselves out in the
        bush. If the young people are successful at hunting, they will bring fresh meat
        home to share with everyone; if they do not find game, they are hungry but
        nevertheless happy! The same type of strategy has been reported for the Washo
        Indians, hunters and gatherers who lived near Lake Tahoe in California.® During
        the hungry period in the early spring when food stores were low, young lovers
        there were also allowed to set up camps in distant areas where the chances of
        obtaining food were quite low. This strategy of hunters and gatherers is based on
        the ability of the young people with the greatest physical skills and endurance to
        take risks — given the right incentives.
           Since campJ is one of these lovers’ camps, the distribution of archaeological
        materials across the site does not conform to other types of hunting camps, such
        as the majority at Anavik Springs. Normally the choice cuts of meat would be
        shared at a corporate hearth. In this case, however, each group of young lovers
        consumed their meals separately in their own tent. The archaeological remains
        at site Jalso contain no debris from the manufacture or repair of tools. Although
        these differences are minor, they are exactly the type of data which archaeologists
        could use to identify this type of division of labor by age groups in the past.


        Processing the Kull

        The second component of the Anavik Springs site complex, the location where
        the killing and processing of caribou took place, is completely different from the
        small clusters of tent rings observed at the temporary hunting camp. When the
        caribou move through the valley, they are shot from hunting stands located on a
        knoll.” After the animals are killed, they are dragged to another location for
57,58   butchering. The scatter of bones recorded at this location after the spring hunt
uth of An
                                         aval
                                          HIE ART HIS




                                                         apo       J                                :                  BVYTCHERIN
                               fos,                      y,        =                   €           A                              Beak
                         Ay     y    or                   =        =         K                     Ke —                                                    }
                                           4                   ~         %                                    c
                    Ls                                         bs,                             .                  by                               f
                      Maw           ¢                         rt                  2oe                     ry |                    -            Pe              ,


                                                                                                                                               ‘               :              oy
     Note:                                                                       tee                                                           p ebea                                     \
     1 ONLY      UNWEATHERED             BONE                      A
      FROM THE       197) HUNT 16                              =       Dvn                                                                                                               cig
      SHOWN  IN      BUTCHERING                                                                    f                                  aS
      AREAS.                                      BU                                               My             Ss
-—   2 BoNe      6PLINTERS      SHOWN                f
      AROUND TWo  HEARTHS                WERE    .                                                                                    {
      RECORDED IN I972.                          &                                                                       ea                                                        f

     @-   HEARTHS        USED       IN   1971
                                                                         £|45                                          E|50                                    e|55                                 E
          HEARTHS        NoT    USED      IN

          Gal:                                                                                      ANAVvIK.                          Kitt  —”> Buren ere
                                                                                                                                       ANAKTUVUK.    PASS

                                                                                                                                                                        ScaALeE    IN    Mer


              LR    BIN FORD                                                               1            ie)        1     2    3       4a   5           6           We     8   9     10         Wt
              35




                    59 Plan of the Anavik Springs kill and butchering site after the spring caribou hunt,
                    showing the distribution of hearths and faunal remains.

                    60° Detailed plan of the hearth and conversation area at the Anavik Springs caribou
                    butchering site.

                    61 Close-up of the butchering area at the Anavik Springs site showing the circular areas
                    in which the caribou were dismembered and the location of the waste by-products.
                                                   REMAINS        oF
                                               PRE-GUN            HUNTING
                                               BLIno




                                                                                                                                                OF   HEARTH


                                                                                                               so
                                                                                                                    a      Cee   VSED   FOR
                                                                                                                    \         FILLETING

                                               i            :          SSR     cAAY

a
                                                                                      =.
                                                                                      id             ~       Aa
=         éd                                  PILED         For oe                    DE salah B/StT Fakes
A                                                                                     FILLETING
                                              TRANSPORT             —




                                                                                                                                        \
                                                                                                                     AREA  USED FOR     \
                                                                                                                     BUTCH ERING        We
                                                                                                                                            ‘
                                                                                                                                                           LRRBINF ORD

                                             HEARTH—              ConVERSATION                       é       ADJACENT           Activity                 AREAS

                                                                             Anavik     Kitt~— ButcHering                        Site
                                                                                           Scare          in        Merers




                    E    |es

=              Com           PLEX                                                          TILLETING              DEBRIS                         FARTS    PILED     FOR
                                                                                                \                                               TRANSPORT

a         KAY                                33         %                                      my
                                                            MAG

|   ist        ie       mw     is   1   20
                                                            Vas Se      BUTCHERIN       fs                              i
                                                                                                                                   a5,
                                              ANIMAL
                                             YURGED To
                                              Be Sick”




                                                                                                                                                     BUTCHERING


                                             oe                                 >
                                                       ee                    aes                                                                          AREA    {2
                                                                TOSSED                    Ss




                                                                                               BUT CHERING
                                                                                                    ArEeA "35



                                                                 ButcHERING   AREA    DETAILS
                                                                ANAvVIK KILL~BUTCHERING   SITE
                                                                                      CALE           in        METEES

                                                                                                                                                         LEBING   ORD
124    Hunters in a Landscape

       represented a minimum of fifty-four caribou, although in all we know that 111
       caribou had been butchered by the Nunamiut at this one site. On the plan ofthe
       site the hollow spaces within the distribution of bones represent discrete areas
       where one caribou was dismembered. In order to remove the skin from a caribou
  60   and prepare the joints of meat, the animal is laid down in a clear area and a man
       works around it. The result of this behavior is that a circle is created, with the
       waste products deposited on the periphery away from the area where the butchery
       took place. Similarly, the by-products from retouching and resharpening the
       stone tools used in butchering would also be deposited on the edge ofthe circular
       area used to process the animal.
           At the butchery area four hearths were used by the hunters. A windbreak was
       placed around them using bull antlers shed in the fall (on a site utilized in the
       spring!). While butchering, one’s hands get very cold and so occasionally the men
       sit out of the wind to warm their hands over a fire and perhaps eat some marrow
       removed from the fresh bones of the kills. Around the hearths one would find a
       completely different distribution of bones than in either the butchering area of
       this same site or at the associated hunting camp where the men would return after
       finishing the various tasks here.

       Storing the Meat

       The third member of the site complex is represented by the site where meat was
  62   stored in a large stone structure up to 4 meters in diameter. Stone meat caches®
       are permanent facilities which are usually located near kill sites. They act as
       central places to which individuals can return throughout the year to collect food
       for the group, thus avoiding the burden of carrying all the meat with them to each
       of the several residential sites they will occupy as part of the seasonal round of
       activities. Layers of meat, inter-bedded with stones or strips of wood to ensure air
       circulation, are placed in a radial pattern inside the cache and then are sealed off
       with additional stones. ‘The reason for the high investment of labor in the con-
       struction of stone meat caches is the critical importance of stored meat in the
       subsistence pattern of the Nunamiut.

                                                               62 Large stone meat cache
                                                               like those located in the talus
                                                               along the north side of the
                                                               valley above the Anavik
                                                               Springs kill site. The example
                                                               illustrated here is actually
                                                               part of a similar site complex
                                                               located at the mouth of
                                                               Kongumuvuk Valley. (See
                                                               ill. 53 for exact location.)
                                   63 Alleged house-pits excavated
                                   at a Russian Palaeolithic site.
                                   (Photo courtesy of Olga Soffer.)




64 Caribou meat drying
rack from a spring kill site at
Kongumuvuk Creek. (For
location see Site 8 on ill. 53.)


65 Caribou meat hung up to
dry on willow branches along
the north edge of the Kongu-
muvuk fall hunting stand,
Site 13 on ill. 53.
126          Hunters in a Landscape

                                                SCHOOLTEACHER
                                                                Sita


       Joe    Cerrar       1956-59                                                                                                                                         Big
                                                                                                                                                                        SURROUND

                                                        1956-59        Winter               SITE                                                                   So_viem Rocks
                                                                                                                                                                   In SPRING                              x
                                                                                                                                                                  Carinou                       ~~
                                                                                                                                                                  Drive     *4                rh     SA
                1962   WintTeR   site




                                                                                                                                                          Longe    Roepe    Caimn ——~



                 cs         J                  i            |                             -                         AMALGAMATION
                                    nit                         |      \             PP    ih NV             edie     Sire
                                       ;                                         '         Sire
                                     KN                                                                                                                                            >
                                                                                                                                                             a                   :                   per
                                                                                                                                                                  rk                         el,
                                                                                                                                                                  LESS >Ss SRG
         Soroserm      RocKs               ,            |                                                                                                               ie                                    ie
         Iw   Face     Carimou
         Drive       * 3




                                                   \h
              Carisov      TRAILS                   \|
                                                   WX
                                      y            AN

                                                    \                                                                                        \\                                               i!      7B
                                                                                                                                                  \          SorouerR      Rocks             Hii]
                                                                                                                                                  \          im SPRING                   :           “wh
                                                                                                                                                      \      Carisovu                ;                    4




                                                                                                                                        H
                                                                                                                                        |
                                                                                                                                       ilI



Notre:                                                                                                                                                            / \   mpi
                                                                                                                                                                                   Se as
                                                                                                                                                                   \
Oniy 41% oF THE
DocUMENTED                                                                                                                                                         \\     EAT                STORAGE
ARCHAEOLOGICA                                                                                                                                                     \                            Sad
SITES IN THIS
AREA ARE
SHOWN  HERE




                                                                                                        NK ie anens§
L.R.    Bin Fore

                           Map             of       TULUG@AK                                    Lake                Area,          ALasKna
                                                                                            Scarce
                                                                                                                                                  Mer
                                                                    100    200            300   400    60S   600     700   800   900                        ay
                                                                                                                                                                   Mites
                                                                                                0.50                       O78



              66 Map of Tulugak Lake area showing location of sites and site complexes.
                                                             Hunters in a Landscape   127
  To an archaeologist these impressive stone structures might resemble a house,
but they were never used as such by the Nunamiut. The use ofstone caches near
kill sites is reminiscent of some of the ‘pit-houses’ described for certain Palaeo-
lithic sites in Russia,” suggesting that these structures too were really not houses 63
but, as with the Eskimo stone structures, simply meat caches.
    Meat can be stored at kill sites in a variety of ways besides the stone cache,
When the temperature is below freezing, butchered meat or even whole animals
can simply be stacked on the ground. Antlers usually serve to mark the location
so that hunters can return even after it has snowed. At other times ofthe year meat 64
is placed on wooden racks to dry. Temporary meat caches used at hunting camps
often consist merely of joints of meat strung out ona line or placed on the branches
of trees along the edge ofa stand of willows. Archaeologically, the remains of these
caches would be indicated by a linear distribution of large bones. Meat caches of
all types provide important centralized, secure resources which the Nunamiut can
draw on as they move around the habitat in search of additional food.




Tulugak Lake Site Complexes

My study of groups of interrelated sites has revealed that a sequence of activities
in any one task did not necessarily take place all at one site. Furthermore, sites
which appear to be very different may in fact belong to the same general category
of behavior which was highly differentiated into various sets of activities. One of
the most fascinating group of site complexes used by the Nunamiut Eskimo is
located in the region around Tulugak Lake, an area very rich in resources. The 66
lake is deep enough to support a type of highly desirable, fatty fish called lake
trout; spring-fed streams which flow into the lake are surrounded by large stands
of willows, an important source of firewood; there are also a number of caribou
migration trails which pass by the lake.

Drive Lines

The complexity of archaeological remains resulting from the exploitation of
caribou in the vicinity of Tulugak Lake is tremendous. Caribou were driven
between linear barriers which take advantage of natural features in the landscape,
such as parallel rows of glacial hillocks (called eskers), but also incorporate man-
made features which would have been very difficult to detect without ethno-
graphic information, When not in use, the basic components of a drive line simply 67
look like piles of stones which I call soldier rocks. In contrast, during their use by
the Eskimo to help channel caribou up a hill or into partly natural enclosures
located at one end of the lake, the hunters placed moss around the rocks to form
128    Hunters in a Landscape




       67 ‘Soldier rocks’ forming a caribou drive line running up the mountainside   east of
       Tulugak Lake. (See ill. 66 for exact location.)



       the shape of a man; old clothes were added on top of the moss to scare the caribou,
       keep them moving, and restrict their movement to the path chosen by the hunters,

       Hunting Blinds

       Along one caribou drive which goes up the mountain adjacent to the lake (taking
       advantage of a caribou’s natural instincts to run uphill when threatened), we
       located seventy small hunting blinds from which two Nunamiut men could
  68   ambush game. Each of the blinds consists of a permanent structure made by
       excavating a hollow into the rock talus slope or by building a low wall. They have
       a dual function: not only can the hunters hide there, but the shelters also provide
       a measure of protection from the wind while the men wait for the game to appear
       —as long as eight or even twelve hours, if necessary. Obviously, they can get very
       cold in that time, but since lighting a fire is not conducive to attracting caribou,
       they have devised a different means for providing heat. Upon arrival at the blind,
       the men take down its walls and build a big hearth. After the fire is burning well,
       they pile the stones back on top of the fire and let it burn down. As the warmth
       of the fire heats the stones, the men can huddle up against the wall and keep warm
       while maintaining their vigil for the caribou. Again, the association of hearths in
       the walls of structures has also been noted for some Russian Palaeolithic sites.°
       One wonders why on earth anyone would build fires in the walls of houses,
       particularly if the proposed reconstruction with a skin tent atop the stone walls is
                                                                                                                       Hunters in a Landscape                           129



                                          _ 22)                                                   <           ;   4           )
                                                                                                                       Bee            &
        Nore:                             ce   ;                                              Cay                 My     i
                                                                                                                       ETE?
                                                                                                                                          \        OISTAL    METATARBAL
             THESE        BLINDS          ARE          REALLY
        SHOOTING          LOCATIONS                  FoO3e
        ARCHERS.              THEY        ARE         PL 4CZED
        ALONG       WELL   ESTABLISHED
        GAME        TRAILS   COVES CFEN
        TERRAIN.              THEY        AZE          mtosr
        OFTEN           YSBSED       IN        THe
       CONTEXT            OF     AN       ANIMAL
        DRIVE.
            THE     BL/NOS            SHOWN             HERE                            Sow    FRAGMENT
       ARE        CHA   RAC     TE   R/SDTIC            or     THOSE
       ON    MODERATE                 SL0ores.               B2In03                                                           PRESAURE             FLAKING      CHIPS
       ON    LEVEL  GEOUND  OC OW CeESTS
       OF    RIDGES  ARE COMPLETLY
       CLOSED           OVALS        OF   STONES.




                                                                                                                                  LIMITS      OF    7




                  feet     o-        Diary” fre
                                                                                  Bone    Wuice       Frags

       Bonk        SPLINTERS

                                                                                                                                                      ANTLER
                                                                                        FIRE   CRACKED
                                                                                               ROCKS


                                                                                                                                      °
                                                                                                                                  *.
                                                                                  Bowocce                                         pw
                                                                                  CONSTRUCTION
                                                                                                                                  o




       LIMITS  OF                                                        fxrro0s£o
       SHALLOW                                                           Se0orocx
       EXCAVATION




                                                     Mip-I9™          Cewrury     Nounamiot           Hunting          Bunos
                                                                       Torvgaxn        Lake       ,   AL asKra
                                                                             Scac_ce     iN    METERS

                                                                                                                                                             4.R. BinroRO




68 Plans of three 1gth-century ap hunting blinds located along a caribou drive on the slope
east of Tulugak Lake. (Exact position is marked on ill. 66.) Note the presence of waste by-
products from snacks and tool repair, as well as a cache of antler for use in the manufacture
of arrowheads. The hearths (represented by checkerboard shading) have been placed
within the walls of the blinds to warm the hunters while they wait for caribou.



correct. Could these sites actually be hunting blinds similar to those used by the
Nunamiut?
   In plan the Eskimo hunting blinds appear as small semi-circles about 2. 4 meters
across.!! The debris found in one of them, dating to an era before guns were used
by the Nunamiut, demonstrates the types of activities which took place at these
locations. Bone splinters from cracking bones for marrow, together with tiny bone
fragments from pounding up articular ends of bones to make broth, represent the
‘snacks’ that were consumed, Industrial debris from tool manufacture and repair
is represented here by a broken bow and some lithic flakes. The tools necessary
for hunting are not made at hunting blinds, but would have been prepared before-
130    Hunters in a Landscape




       69 Hunting stand R & Bat Anaktuvuk Pass showing a caribou skin bed where a man slept
       while his partner watched for game. (Exact location is noted on ill. 53.)




       hand so that the hunter would be constantly ready for any animals that might
       appear along the migration route. This means that debris from the primary stages
       of production are rarely represented at hunting blinds. Instead, to while away the
       time the men usually brought along a broken tool needing repair or performed
       some other partially completed task. The activities carried out at this type of site
       were thus not directly related to the task at hand (hunting caribou), but were
       directed simply to the reduction of boredom. Another type of artifact found at
       the hunting blind shown in ill. 68 was an antler arrowhead which has been cached
       for future use, but was never needed.
          Men occasionally will stay at a hunting stand overnight, rather than return to
  69   the base camp. Usually, one man stays up and watches for game, while another
       sleeps in his clothes on a caribou skin in a different area of the site ; after a while
       they change places. Since they remain there over a relatively long period of time,
       the hunters will generally make a separate hearth away from the wall of the blind,
       so that they can prepare a meal of broth or roast meat. Although similar to the
       hunting blinds described above, the site generated in this way will be more
       complex in archaeological terms and one would have to be careful not to confuse
       the hunting blind and hearth with a base camp occupied by a family group.
                                                              Hunters in a Landscape

Base Camps

Another component of the site complexes at Tulugak Lake are the residential
camps situated near the lake, where firewood and fresh water are in ample supply.
The Nunamiut select locations for base camps largely on the basis of the heaviest
resources that they exploit, rather than merely the presence offood. Food-getting
allows a flexible strategy because, as we have already seen, it can be cached and
then transported ;water and fuel are more difficult to move around. Residential
sites, then, are positioned with respect to these basic resources and people adjust
their trips out from the base camp in terms ofthe distributions of sources of food.
   At Tulugak Lake we find a continuous distribution of archaeological remains,
rather like the overlapping camp sites at Anavik Springs. There, however, the
site was repeatedly used for the same basic function: the lakeside at Tulugak, in
contrast, has been occupied at various times of the year for different reasons, For
example, settlements in the summer were located here to take advantage of the
lake trout, whereas winter villages were situated close to the abundant source of
firewood. If this site were excavated, one might expect to find a summer residen-
tial camp on top of a fall hunting stand, or a winter village overlying a spring
fishing camp.
    As archaeologists how would we distinguish all the overlapping components
ofa complicated site such as Tulugak Lake? Could we recognize all the specialized
types of site in the vicinity: the caribou drives, meat caches, and hunting blinds?
Would we be able to reconstruct the associations between various locations and
recreate site complexes? At present, archaeology lacks methods for coping with
the complicated archaeological residues typically created by hunting and gather-
ing peoples. We must begin to devise a means to untangle the palimpsests of
overlapping occupations and to discover ways to recognize associated activity
areas separated by as much as several kilometers.


Putting the System Together

One of the most important lessons to be learned from my ethnoarchaeological
research among the Nunamiut Eskimo is that one has to conceive of all their sites
as part of a larger system. Besides residential locations, an enormous variety of
areas were used for special-purpose tasks which are merely parts of the overall
pattern of making a living in the Arctic. We have seen how individual sites fit
together to form site complexes, how site complexes can be grouped together
within the territory exploited by one band of people and, finally, that several
territories can be utilized sequentially during the course of a single person’s life-
span. In order to reconstruct the entire pattern of land use, archaeologists have
to be able first to identify the specific function of each separate site and then to
           132    Hunters in a Landscape

                  fit all the individual parts together. The difficulty involved is rather like attempt-
                  ing to reconstruct an automobile engine on the basis of disconnected parts: one
                  needs to know how the engine operates, in order to identify       its relevant compo-
                  nents — the carburetor, battery, cylinder, and so on — and to put them together
                  correctly, In the same manner, archaeologists must identify each type of behavior
                  that took place at each site they find and then begin to fit the pieces into place to
                  make up a prehistoric system of land use. In other words, archaeology’s basic unit
                  is the individual site, but its goal is to employ these units to study past human
                  behavior; and in order to accomplish this task, we need to develop an appropriate
                  methodology for identifying the role of single sites within an overall system,




                 70 Plan of the fall hunting stand in Kongumuvuk Valley, Site 13 on ill. 53.


                                                              MEISEL Peers
                                                               Se


                                                              »)
                                                                     ae   Oy ita


                                                                          TA        nS PSA
                                                                                            c


                                                                                                             De
                                                                                                                      <


                                                                                                                          RNS
                                                                                                                                ae         23




                                                                                 ACN                     SKPe
                                                                               Poe                                    SS.
                                                                                i    eee,                         -                      DRYING
                                                                                                                                         AREAS




                                                                                    >)                        CaReiaou
                                                                                                              Lowze              LEGS
                                                                                                Vs       .                                        4

                                                                                                >
                                                                                                     7
                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                            J




                                                                                                                    Saw Dering
                                                                                                                  ai WEIGH rs



                                                                                                                                     ‘
et
 os +                                        o
                                      2                            DECAYING          SKIN
                                                                   § welignrs




  Micron                       KONQUMUVUK        —~VaLLEY           HUNTING              STAND
  AREA= 1520 mt                                  BeeEe a th   MERE
                      fi) Wo      3       wae:       9        12          1s                18           21           23
                                                                     Hunters in a Landscape       133




71 Circle of small stone weights used by the Nunamiut for holding down caribou skins
while they are drying. (See ill. 70 for exact location of this feature at the Kongumuvuk fall
hunting stand.)



Special-Purpose Sites                                                                      2

The value of archaeological studies of modern peoples is that, by observing the
different types of sites which they occupy, we can begin to appreciate the range
of variability which we are likely to encounter in the archaeological record. Asa
further attempt to make my point clear, it would be helpful to describe some
additional special-purpose sites which I documented among the Nunamiut.
   Some of these sites were surprisingly large. Typically, archaeologists expect
activity areas to take up small amounts of space and to be internally homogene-
ous; but in the case of one non-residential site which I documented, a wide range               790

of tasks took place over an area covering about 1500 square meters. At this site
at Kongumuvuk, utilized during the fall migration of caribou, men hid in a stand
of willows in order to camouflage themselves. While waiting for the game, some
consumed snacks (such as marrow from fresh bone) around a small hearth and
others repaired tools. The caribou were actually hunted and killed at quite some
distance from the site itself. So as not to interrupt the movement of herds of
caribou arriving subsequently, the Eskimo hurriedly butchered the animals in
the location where they were shot and then dragged the desired portions of the
animal back behind the willows to the Kongumuvuk site. Once out of the path of
the migration, the men finished butchering the caribou, some of the meat being
cached or placed on temporary drying racks. One major activity that took place
at this site was the preparation of skins. The hides were laid out to dry and were 71
134   Hunters in a Landscape

      weighted down with stones to keep them from blowing around, with the result
      that there are large numbers of small circles of stones, all of about the same size,
      distributed over the site. As archaeologists, would we recognize that the distinctly
      different areas at this large site — the eating area around the hearth, the location
      of craft activities, the meat caches and drying racks, and the places for preparing
      skins — all fit together, or would we divide them into separate sites?

      Tent Rings

      Small rings of stones also occur on other sites occupied by Nunamiut hunting
      parties, but they could have been created by one ofseveral activities besides dry-
      ing fresh hides. For instance, at a site high in the mountains, normally occupied
      by parties of hunters seeking caribou bulls in summer, one finds small stone rings,
      about the same size as the circles at Kongumuvuk, associated with a small hearth.
      In this case, however, the size of the stones in the rings is larger than in the previous
      site because they were used to weight down the sides of caribou skin tents. The site
      differs from the hunting stand at Kongumuvuk in another way too. Unlike the
      combination of highly differentiated areas seen there, this site is composed of a
      series of identical units — a tent ring and a hearth — repeated over and over across
      space. Special-purpose sites, then, may vary in the degree to which the modules
      of which they are composed are homogeneous or are highly variable.



      72 Hunting stand positioned in a natural swale near Little Contact Creek in Anaktuvuk
      Valley. (See ill. 53 for location.) This site is functionally identical to the site illustrated
      in ill. 69, but is located in different terrain. Note that some firewood and two old coffee
      cans used to boil water for tea have been cached at the site for future use. The sled was
      also cached here in the spring after the snow melted.
 73 Deadfall trap constructed for catching a wolf. These traps are always built in the fall
 before the first heavy snowstorms.



 Hunting Stands

Hunting stands are one of the most common types ofsite in the cultural landscape
of the Nunamiut. They may be very complex (such as the site at Kongumuvuk,
or the Mask site’* to be discussed in the next chapter), relatively simple (as with
the ambush locations at Tulugak Lake), or extremely ephemeral. As an instance
of this last category, one can find locations where a hunter merely hid behind a
large boulder and, perhaps, built a small fire. Natural features of the landscape,            TP?

such as boulders or swales, are commonly used for hunting stands, At such sites
one may find only a small hearth, some fire-cracked rock from stone boiling, anda
series of tools which have been cached for later use.

Facilities

 The soldier rocks along the caribou drives at Tulugak Lake can be classified as a
 particular type of tool called a facility (see further discussion in Chapter 7).
 Another member of the same class of artifacts are traps. The Nunamiut employ a
‘wide range of these, of which the deadfall is one of the most common, The location 73
 of each deadfall trap should be considered as a special-purpose site. Often they
 are constructed in association with meat caches, in order to keep competitors
     Hunters in a Landscape

     away from the stored food — although, in another sense, the meat cache is itselfa
     source of bait to lure foxes and wolves into the area of the deadfall. Small walls
     are constructed around the deadfall to ensure that the animal enters in exactly
     the desired manner. The trigger for the trap is positioned far enough inside (i.e.
     beyond the length of the animal’s neck), so that it has to place its front feet over
     one of the sills before the huge rock on top crashes down on top ofit. Even if the
     stone does not kill the prey, it should land on its shoulders and prevent it from
     getting away.
        Deadfall traps such as the ones constructed by the Nunamiut are probably very
     common in the archaeological record. I have observed similar constructions in
     sites associated with Neanderthal man and it is also clear that many sites described




     74 Plan of the Tulukkana site where fifty caribou were processed for storage during a
     period of only twelve days. The enormous accumulation of bone is due to the preparation
     of the meat: it is not a reflection of either the number of people who occupied the site or the
     length of its occupation.




                                                                                  FEATURE FP
                                                                           Sy    POTENT RING
                                                                                Oe.
                                                                                                                                                                    LIMITS        OF
                                                                                                                                                                        EXCAVATION
                                                     e@
                                                ¢
Ne   ae
     We
        ee                                                                                                   peGwar,
                                                                                                                  sawore)
       SEaTuRe #5                                                 -f             4 ss
      Gmace wore)                                                      ™. are
                                                                                INFERRED       TENT     POs/Tion
                                                                                                                                                     ‘

                                                                                                                                                             ,e
                                    (NF ERED    Dooceway-
      io                                                                                                                                                 \




                 Ns             \      a    &                          “          Feature *5                                                    g@                      e
                                                              K         ‘ke ———         Sone     Joke        Dume           a                                     sim       pics
                                                                                                                                                                              —


                                      £\3
                                                                                           FEATURE 6A (Cooxing HeaserH)
                                                                                          -o ~     68( KETTLE Surrcer)


      Leqeno
                                                                                                                                  FEaTuRe                *7
           Rock on
           SumrFace         oF
           Kame

                                                       is
                                                                                                                                     at
                                                                                                                                     athe
                                                                                                                                            y    d
                                                                                                                                                              4
           Rock       IN
           PLACE           IN                             ;                                                                      a     a        OE
           THe    Kamm

           Flar Rocrw
           ON Kame
           Sumrace

           Doq Turos

                                                                                                      Paka


                                                                                 TuLcukkANna                 Site
                                                          SumMir                Lake     Kame ~Anaxtuvuk                    Pass
                                                                                           Scarce
                                                                                                               +     s       o   Maerees
                                                                                       Hunters in a Landscape        137




  Notre:

  DENSITY   1s   SHOWN        b                                       DEAE:                  Sos, ,
                                                                                                  L>
  IN INCREASES OF                          :                  VY           Af,        SLES        ROK RK >
  FIVE BONES/M?                   ,            x                        ey          Neictclelstcts
                                                                        g/          RSS   2s               q
                                      xy                                                Se
  Excavatern  AREA
  16 256 9. METERS




                         Tutuxxana                    Sire        —     Bone     Density
                                                   Scarce    in       MetTers




75 Contour map of the density of caribou bones found on the Tulukkana site (cf. ill. 74).



in the archaeological literature of North America as children’s burials, ritual
cairns, or storage pits are really deadfall traps. Archaeologists need to be able to
identify accurately the very small and highly specialized sites of this kind used
in the past.

Processing Sites
Although a large number of Nunamiut sites relate to the hunting of caribou, there
are also many others where the processing of game took place. I have already
mentioned the butchering site at Anavik Springs and the hide drying location at
Kongumuvuk. Another example of this type of site documents an occasion when                                     74
   138      Hunters in a Landscape

            a family had killed about fifty caribou by driving them into a nearby lake. All the
            processing of meat for drying took place during a period of only twelve days or
     ~IOo
            so, yet the amount of debris deposited at the site was absolutely staggering. ‘wo
            huge dumps of marrow cracked bone were created ;the meat represented by this
            enormous quantity of bone, however, was not consumed there and the dumps,
            therefore, do not signify the remains of separate meals, For this reason, the
            quantity of debris provides an accurate measure neither of the number of people
            who occupied the site, nor of the length of time they resided there. This site, in
            fact, illustrates the danger of using a simple equation, such as that proposed by
            Yellen,'* for relating quantity of waste to duration of occupation. Before we can
            interpret the nature ofthe data found on archaeological sites, we must determine
            the types of behavior which generated them in the first place— we must reconstruct
            the function ofthe site. Certainly, my research among the Nunamiut has demon-
            strated that archaeological sites are formed by a wide variety of different activities,
            It has also demonstrated, however, that because these variable types of behavior
            leave different traces in the archaeological record, it will be possible to develop
            techniques that will allow us to recognize similar special-purpose locations used
            in prehistoric times.


                                                  OvTER       RING       (arg)


                                                       L     ACTIVir y
                                                 ole                         4h
                                                           R RING    (
                                                  nv                     ‘Nar,

                                                       ae
                                            >A
                                            ey
                                                                    NUCLEAR
                                                                      AREA




                                            a) oe
76 Model proposed by John
Yellen of an idealized !Kung
Bushmen camp. (Reproduced
with permission from Yellen
1977, fig. 12, p. 126.)




            The Layout of Residential Sites

            Ata still lower level of analysis, archaeologists need methods to study the patterns
            of use that take place within individual sites, Residential locations, as well as
            special-purpose sites, can be conceived of as being composed of small ‘modules’.
            One of the most basic building blocks of sites are the structures in which people
            live. Studies of hunting and gathering groups demonstrate that, since the nature
            of the residential modules and the way they are distributed in space can vary
                                                                    Hunters in a Landscape     139


                                                                                               SMe
                                                                                                   Pe




 77 Residential camp occupied by Nharo Bushmen living in the central desert of Namibia
c. 1927. The Ring Model described by Yellen (ill. 76) is clearly illustrated in this photo-
graph. Note the meat hanging in the tree to the right (cf. ill. 65). (Photo by L. Fourie,
courtesy of the Africana Museum, Johannesburg).



widely, archaeologists must be able to recognize_all the possible permutations in
their data.
   Yellen’* has proposed a general model for !Kung Bushmen residential camps 76
in which the huts housing individual families are tightly grouped in a circle. In
the middle of the ring ofhuts is an empty space used communally by all the people
in the group; scattered around on the periphery of the ring of huts is an area where
special-purpose tasks are carried out. The Bushmen camp pictured in ill. 77
provides a good example of the spatial structure summarized in Yellen’s model.
Similarly, a very tight cluster of huts with the hearths only about 3 meters apart
can be observed at dry season camps of the Birhor, a group of hunters and 1
gatherers in India.’
   Not all Bushmen camps, however, conform to this idealized pattern.'® And
other hunter-gatherer groups exhibit forms of internal site arrangement which
deviate from Yellen’s model: for example Seri Indian camps in Mexico are laid                 78
140    Hunters in a Landscape



        fj




       78-Seri Indian camp located on Tiburon island, Sonora, Mexico. The structures in the
       settlement are laid out in a linear fashion which contrasts strongly with Yellen’s Ring
       Model of settlements (ill. 76). The huts currently in use have been placed in and among
       the remains of previously used structures, some of whose remains are visible in the far
       right of the photograph. For an excellent description of Seri settlements, see Ascher (1962).
       (Photo by E. H. Davis, 1922, courtesy of the Museum of the American Indian, Heye
       Foundation.)



       out according to a linear pattern and considerable space is left between the
       shelters of different residential units. As with the Bushmen sites, the distribution
  19   of single dwellings varies among different Birhor settlements. For instance on one
       occasion when four bands were camped at the same location, each of the bands
       maintained its individual integrity by establishing a separate camp. In addition,
       the huts were not placed according to Yellen’s ring model, as on other occasions,
       but in a semi-circle. Although this is clearly a single settlement despite the spatial
       separation of the different groups, the archaeological remains of such a site could
       easily be misinterpreted as a series of discrete unintegrated settlements, for there
       would be clear gaps in the distribution of debris between the clusters of huts
       represented by the different bands.
          The use of physical space to represent social distance, as demonstrated in the
       Birhor case, may be a principle common to all hunter-gatherer sites. If true, this
       generalization could be useful for guiding the interpretation of archaeological
       sites. There is, however, a further complication that is well illustrated by Nun-
   EDGE   oF
   HicH   GROUND-




                                               ‘é
                                    Hur   Locations~        i SS




                (        /    Camp  oF Banc  A
                               > LOCATED  ON                 fe)
                                                            {>
                              Xx CENTRAL   ELEVATED
                              KNOL                     ag



                                                                                                                   4

                                                                                            Hut    Locarions
                                                                                                               3

                                                                                                                   @'
                                                                                                                   2




                                                      PancwH         Pera    Came    196!
                                                          Four         Birnor   Banos
                                                                    Binar, INDIA
                                                                        Scace   in Feer
                                                                   eo     8s    wo    120   40    %O   180




79 Map of the camp occupied simultaneously for four Birhor bands (see ill. 1). Note the
large distances between each band and the non-circular grouping of the huts in relation to
each other. (Cf. Williams 1968.)



amiut summer residential sites. At these locations, although the distinct social
groupings or bands set up camp in different areas of the same site, the various
houses within each band are often spaced out over large distances. At one site,
for which the documentation is particularly good, there was an average of go
meters between the residences of members of the same social unit. How would an
archaeologist interpret this spatial distribution represented by separate scatters
of debris: as different sites, as many separate social groups, or, as it actually was,
two bands composed of several families?
142   Hunters in a Landscape

         If we were to examine a large number of additional ethnographic cases, great
      variability would be apparent in the way residential modules are distributed
      through space. Both the arrangement of the structures (clustered or dispersed, in
      circles or semi-circles, etc.) and the distance between each unit varies from group
      to group and within the seasonal cycle of any particular ethnic group or band.
      Archaeologists have to recognize that this type of variability exists, to understand
      the factors that cause it, and to create methods for monitoring it in the archaeo-
      logical record.



      The Challenge to our Methodology

      As I have documented in this chapter, the settlement pattern of hunting and
      gathering groups may be seen as being organized on a series of levels ranging
      from the enormous area covered by a group in the lifetime of one of itsmembers,
      through the residential core area and site complex, down to the distribution of
      houses and hearths at a single site. (The analysis of features on individual sites is
      considered in greater detail in the next chapter.) In order to understand the
      archaeological record of hunter-gatherers, therefore, we have to conduct research
      on all these different levels. Not only do we need to develop methods which will
      allow us to recognize the kinds of organized dynamics which took place at each
      scale of landscape use, but we must also be able to detect variations through time
      between different groups of hunters and gatherers in the organization of behavior
      at the regional level, the residential core level, the site complex level, the individual
      site level and the activity level.
          It will be clear that in this chapter I have not attempted to develop methods
      for inference in relation to patterns of prehistoric land use, although hopefully
      some of this material will indeed eventually be used to achieve that goal.’ For
      the present, I have merely tried to illustrate something of the nature of the
      problem which faces archaeologists. It is possible, however, on the basis of the
      examples presented here, to summarize several lessons to be learned by archaeolo-
      gists and to suggest some ways forward.
         In the light of the Nunamiut data presented here, the assumption that a single
      group of people generates sites which are internally homogeneous is not realistic.
      Similarly, the expectation that the closer sites are to one another, the more they
      should be alike, is also not sustained by the experiences reported above. The
      existence of site complexes, in which behavior related to a single activity is in fact
      carried out at three or more distinct places, is inconsistent with the way many
      archaeologists in the past have attempted to give meaning to similarities and
      differences in artifact assemblages, At least in some regions and with some hunter-
      gatherer societies, we may expect that the more intense the utilization of a par-
                                                                 Hunters in a Landscape     143
ticular locale, the more diverse will be the separate types of settlements and sites
placed in the locale — as for example at Tulugak Lake, which merits consideration
in more detail. For instance, it is generally true that within the environment
exploited by many hunting and gathering peoples there are certain places like
Tulugak Lake which provide both a greater nucleation of critical resources and
also better chances for success in obtaining mobile resources. Archaeologically,
such places will be extremely complicated.
   Each site thus reflects the unique sequence of uses to which that particular
place has been put in the past. Clearly, the internally differentiated nature of
activities and the spatial segregation of the places where different tactics are
executed is consistent with some of the problems in the Mousterian data reported
by Bordes (Chapter 4). But make no mistake: these ethnoarchaeological experi-
ences do not provide direct solutions to the ‘Mousterian problem’. The conclusion
we can draw from my work among the Nunamiut is not that my functional
arguments about Mousterian variability were correct, but rather that archaeo-
logical methods for inference are in general very inadequate. Clearly, the con-
ventions used by most Palaeolithic archaeologists have been shown to be incap-
able of coping with the variability and diversity of land use illustrated by the
Nunamiut case. The challenge provided by ethnoarchaeology of this sort is to
forge better methodologies,                                                             -
   How can we take the lessons derived from this research about the dynamics of
land use and apply them to studies of prehistoric stone tool assemblages       ?1* How
should we move from the overall ethnographic picture of one complete dynamic
system to the stationary, site-based perspective utilized in archaeology? What is
clear is that the individual sites which belong to the same hunter-gatherer system
of land use are in fact different. For this reason, a site classification scheme using
similarity in structure as its criteria is not likely to group correctly sites which
were produced in the context of one type of environmental exploitation or even
within the life of a single individual. This brings us back again to the methodo-
logical challenge: how do we recognize that different things found at different places
represent components of the same system?
   Much of my own work along these lines has previously focused on animal
bones,’? because they are elements common to the present and the past. It has
been possible to show that the skeletons of animals have been modified and
distributed on sites according to particular principles which were ultimately
determined by the basic activities which were also carried out at different places
in the landscape, in much the same way as I have illustrated in this chapter. In
the next chapter, I wish to turn to other avenues of research which might aid
archaeology in diagnosing in other forms of data (such as lithic assemblages)
variability caused by differences in the use of places, as illustrated in this chapter.
This new research concentrates on the study of site structure.
                           /
               People in their Lifespace

Site Structure: A Challenge to Archaeological Interpretation

As we saw in the first three chapters, one of the Big Questions archaeologists are
currently seeking ways to understand is how early man organized his life space —
the location and the spatial relationship of activities such as sleeping, eating,
food-getting, tool manufacture, etc. We want to find out to what extent early
man, like his modern counterpart, made consistent and specialized use of space.
For instance, once they began to utilize tools regularly, did our ancestors organize
their use of space so that tools were ready where needed, or did they simply
produce and discard them in the places of their use? Did they share food, as
modern man tends to do? In other words, the study of past use of space asks the
fundamental question: how were man’s activities organized at different places?
   We saw in the last chapter how certain modern hunter-gatherers move among
a number of localities, carrying out different types of activities at each one. As I
tried to emphasize there, if the archaeologist is to understand the dynamics of
similar systems in the past, he must be able to diagnose the nature and organiza-
tion of the tasks conducted at each site. Likewise, if the ‘Mousterian problem’ is
to be resolved, we must be able to reconstruct at least some of the activities that
took place at Mousterian sites, and to do so in terms of data which are independent
of the make-up of lithic assemblages, since we would like to find out if the com-
position of stone tool assemblages varies in regular ways with other facts which
might be understandable in terms of the past. More specifically, archaeologists
would like to be able to interpret in terms ofprehistoric living conditions facts such as
the various frequencies of tools, the differences in the distributions of tools and
animal remains, or the relationship of particular types of debris from stone tool
manufacture with respect to the tools themselves.
   The study of site structure — that is, the spatial distribution of artifacts, features,
and fauna on archaeological sites — was one of the challenges I took up when I
began ethnoarchaeological research. My ethnographic experiences impressed
on me the fact that there were generally clusters of variables which, depending
on the situation, to a large extent determined the way behavior at different
locations was organized. For instance, in hunting camps the relative success of

                                           144
                                                               People in their Lifespace   145
the hunting party affected very substantially the patterns of food consumption,”
the activities conducted, and in many instances the duration of the camp’s
occupation.   On the other hand, in residential camps such situation-dependent
conditions were rarely apparent and, where they were, they reflected drastic,
system-wide conditions of stress which triggered emergency strategies never seen
in hunting camps.*‘In short, I observed that different patterns of assemblage
variability were referable to functionally different types of sites. Nevertheless,
despite these functional differences there also appeared to be an underlying stable
set of traits characteristic of the internal spatial organization of life at a site.
Consequently, while researching the problem of assemblage variability in fauna,
I took every opportunity to document the spatial pattern of finds within sites
whose function, duration of occupation, season of use, and so on, were known; I
did so in the hope of building up, as it were, a ‘library’ of materials which could
perhaps serve as the basis for developing criteria for recognizing factors which
conditioned the spatial organization of activities on sites, regardless of function.
   One of the elements common to all sites, past and present, is the physical size
and structure of the humans who use them: perhaps this simple fact is the key to
interpreting site structure? If one could show from ethnographic cases that certain
types ofspatial patterns are the result of simple body mechanics, then one would
have a basis for making inferences about the past — or at least as far back as our
ancestors had basically the same type of body. The relationship between the
human body and the spatial patterns would act as an ‘eternal object’ (to use
Whitehead’s* term) for this research domain, because it could be assumed to be
uniform between the past and the present.
   Just as the bony skeleton provides the framework for the body around which
the muscles and organs operate, so the arrangement of facilitzes on a site provides
the skeleton around which activities are organized; the flow of persons and goods
is accommodated to the facilities within a site. Phillip Wagner has defined
facilities as follows:
  ... containers like baskets, and pottery, vessels, boxes, buildings, . . . bases like
  roads and platforms . . . and barriers like fences, dams, walls . . . Facilities
  representa rearrangement of features of the environment, or the addition of
  features to the environment. . . they control or prevent the movement of solid,
  liquid, or gaseous material and animate beings.”

The ‘skeletal morphology’ of a site — what I call the szte framework — is the arrange-
ment of such facilities. From an archaeological perspective, we see the facilities
as features and the use areas and circulation pathways as item patterning and/or the
spatial clustering of artifacts. |am convinced that fundamental clues to the character
of activities, the labor organization employed in their execution, and the antici-
pated use of a location in terms of the overall subsistence-settlement system, are
146    People in their Lifespace



                         Site   FRAMEWORk_




                                                                               BONE     SPLINTER
                                                                                DumPe
 CONSTRUCTION
  House   ——;
            /




            Bone    SPuNTeRs

            HeaerH
                                                     STONE
                                                     BOlLing        HEARTH
                STONES

                                                                                      WINTER   IOUS &
            Wood



                               PALANGANA     SITE;     House             *1   AREA
                                   TULUGAK     LAKE,           ALASKA
                                               aaa             ee




       80 Site framework for a Nunamiut Eskimo winter settlement, the Palangana site. (Location
       ofsite is marked on ills. 53 and 66.) There was almost certainly also a meat rack here, but
       it was not discovered. The small structure noted as a ‘construction house’ was erected for
       the men to stay in while they built the winter house and was not in use during the occupation
       of the house. For a description of this site, see Binford (1978a, pp. 431-49).



       coded into the organization of the site structure. We need to learn about the
       factors which affect how people establish, lay out and use a location; equally
       important is the way a group maintains a site.
  80      The best way to illustrate these general points is by example. At a typical
       Eskimo winter house site, there is a characteristic site framework composed of
       several basic facilities, including a house, a meat rack, dog tethers, and outside
       hearths. Distributed around and among these features are a variety of specialized
       activity areas. These might include a household midden, a dump of bone
       splinters, a dog yard, work space, a wood pile and associated chopping area, a
       children’s play area and, finally, areas for human waste disposal. Such areas are
       not facilities per se, but are places where particular functions relevant to the life of
                                                                People in their Lifespace    147
the social unit present are carried out. The land surfaces upon which certain
activities are regularly conducted may not involve their actual modification in
any intentional manner, although they may be cleaned or maintained, Archaeo-
logically, they would not appear as soil disturbances or an arrangement of natural
or manufactured materials (as in the case of ahouse or hearth), but we would see
the archaeological clues to their functions in the form ofthe spatial arrangements
of items, both tools and debris, which had been incidentally produced at the area
or placed there intentionally. Woven into the structure of facilities and use areas
are paths and avenues of access for both people and materials.
   From an archaeological perspective, given the outline above, what seems most
appropriate is a descriptive and analytical procedure which attempts to define
the site framework in terms of features and which is followed by a study of the
relationships between this skeletal framework and the dispersion of items. Un-
fortunately, the real world of archaeological remains rarely provides such an ideal
situation, It is a simple fact that in many, if not most, archaeological sites facilities
are not equally preserved and identifiable, thus complicating the proposed pro-
cedure. For instance, a hearth may be recognizable, but the former presence of
a house around the hearth may not be indicated by post molds or other such
structural clues.
   Our methods at present are inadequate for this task. For example, Leroi-
Gourhan® has advanced a model of site structure which attempts to infer the                 81
presence of a house from patterning in the dispersion of items. Not only is his
inference suspect because he chooses the cluster of items after assuming the
existence of a house in the first place,’ but I also find his suggestions less than
convincing given my own ethnographic experiences. Archaeologists need criteria
for distinguishing patterns that may appear in the absence of a house, or on sites
where residential types of facilities were not present.
   Adopting the viewpoint of formation processes, we see that sites are organized
by components or modules of the kind already described in Chapter 6. In the
example of the Eskimo site, I could speak quite meaningfully of the outside cook-
ing hearths, the dumps, the dog yard, the play area, etc. Long ago I referred to
such modules as activity areas. There has been considerable confusion in the
literature about this and related concepts, due at least in part to a failure to
distinguish between the properties of a living cultural system and patterning in
the archaeological remains (a confusion rightly anticipated by Schiffer and
Rathje® a number of years ago). Before continuing further, I must clarify exactly
what I mean by such concepts as ‘activity’, ‘toolkit’ and ‘activity area’. A toolkit
is a set of tools used in the execution of a task. An activity is an integrated set of
tasks, generally performed in a temporal sequence and in an uninterrupted
fashion. It is recognized that identical tasks may be integrated into different
activities: for example, the task of cutting meat may be integrated in the activity
148   People in their Lifespace




      81 Leroi-Gourhan’s model for a residential site. The hearth (Zone A), located in the doorway of
      the house or structure, is conceived as the focus of organized activities on the site; it marks
      the transition between space inside and outside a structure. The inside is conceived as the
      area of domestic usage and can be internally differentiated into two zones. In Zone B*
      persons sit around the fire and conduct various activities and social acts; it is likely to have
      been kept fairly clean as a place where the more delicate activities are conducted. Leroi-
      Gourhan describes Zone B! as the area where archaeologists will find small tools and ochre.
      The second area within the structure is Zone C, the sleeping area, where little in the way of
      artifacts or debris is to be expected. Around the hearth outside the structure is a further
      domestic space, Zone B*, which is considered to be the place where more crude activities,
      producing larger quantities of debris, are thought to have been localized. Such things as
      the waste from primary flint work, antler and bone processing, and stones used in cooking
      could be expected outside in Zone B*. Beyond are a series of concentric circles, Zones
      D, E, F, and G, which are conceived as follows: (D) zone of concentrated dumping and
      repeated disposal ; (E) zone of dispersed dumping; (F) space ofrare dumping, and (G) space
      of isolated finds. Given this model one can expect high and low density sides of a hearth
      with the high density side consisting of the area outside a house and the low density side on
      the inside. This is a good example of how a formation model can be used tojustify a series
      of conventions for interpreting archaeological remains. (Reproduced with permission
      from Leroi-Gourhan and Brézillon 1972, fig. 174, p. 254.)




      of butchering, preparation of meat for cooking or eating, etc. Activity areas are
      places, facilities, or surfaces where technological, social, or ritual activities occur.
      We can readily imagine individual activities which made use of a number of
      toolkits and, conversely, different activities which integrated one or more identical
      toolkits. It was because I expected this kind of mixing of components to be
      present in the archaeological record that a number of years ago I advocated the
      use of multivariate statistical techniques for the analysis of interassemblage
      variability.”
         Returning to a spatial viewpoint, it is consistent to anticipate that areas within
      sites could be equally complex: some might be multi-purpose locations, others
      places where individual activities or individual tasks were conducted. This line
      of thought leads to the conclusion that there is not necessarily an exact cor-
      respondence between a location and a toolkit, or even a single activity. It does
                                                                                                          wi




                                                                                                         ph
                                                                                                          —a
                                                               People in their Lifespace    149
not follow, however, that the location of artifacts has no structure and therefore
carries no information about the character of the past cultural system, Quite the
reverse: the challenge of interpreting site structure is no different from the
challenge of archaeology in general. How do we give accurate meaning to the
patterns we observe?!°
   We can begin the search for appropriate methods by studying how patterns in
site structure are formed in the present. In the remainder of the chapter, therefore,
I will illustrate some of the thought-provoking observations that I have made
among living peoples. I will focus on the spatial modules which underlie the
structure of the position and layout ofactivities (activity areas) and the associations
of items (toolkits), both of which archaeologists could detect through pattern-
recognition studies of site structure.



Working Around a Hearth

When people are working at a job which requires the use of a hearth, they tend
to carry out the task according to a spatial pattern which appears to be universal.
For example, a !Kung Bushman woman living in Botswana cracks mongongo                      82
nuts on an anvil located within an arm’s distance of the fire where the nuts are
roasted. For this chore she does not face the fire directly, but sits obliquely to it.
If she were actually facing the fire, there would not be adequate workspace in
front of her and she could not, of course, work in the embers of the fire. This same


82 Young Bushman male using
a bowdrill in a camp located at
Gautsha Pan. Note that he does
not face the fire directly but sits
sideways to it. The hearth is
located only a short distance
from a shelter within which
bedding is visible. A second
anvilislocated close to the hearth
on the opposite side from the .
seated worker. (Photo taken in
1975 by J. Kramer, courtesy of
the   South   African   Museum,
Cape Town.)
150    People in their Lifespace

       pattern is typical of work carried out by one person at or around a hearth: the
       worker sits with his or her body at right-angles to the hearth and within arm’s
       length of it. Similarly, an Aborigine from the Central Desert of Australia will sit
       with his side to the fire when he is warming resin in the embers for hafting a stone
       tool to its wooden handle, The same positioning can be observed when a Navajo
       woman prepares bread at an outside hearth. The pattern has been recorded by
       anthropologists for a wide variety of ethnographic settings; I have also observed
       it frequently in the course of analyzing a substantial number ofold ethnographic
       photographs.
          Having noted-a basic pattern of activity around a hearth, additional features
       associated with it or important differences from it become significant. Inside
       substantially built houses, stones are typically placed next to the hearth to be used
       as small tables for cutting meat, laying out food, or placing containers. When a
       whole group of people are working around a hearth, the pattern differs from the
       solitary seated worker model. In order for all the people to have adequate work-
       space, everyone moves out away from the fire; consequently, one observes a
  86   circular arrangement of debris around the hearth rather than the perpendicular
       distribution associated with one worker.

                                                                83 Alyawara Aborigine man
                                                                from central Australia at a
                                                                small processing site pre-
                                                                paring spinifex resin for haft-
                                                                ing stone      tools.   While
                                                                working he sits with his side
                                                                to the hearth.




                         ‘           :   nie   oe We    “z      84 Navajo woman from the
                  ie             ;             Se,      “       southwestern   United States
              “      :       3           x     eos     hee      preparing bread at an outside
                                                                hearth. Note the position of
                                                                the hearth in relation to the
                                                                woman     and her artifacts.
                                                                (Photo courtesy of Susan
                                                                Kent.)
                                                                                                                      People in their Lifespace                            151


                                                                                >     INFERRED
                                                                                                   OUTER         ENGE       OF       Tveunin
                                                                                                   (M036        wouse)




          EDGE   of
          EROSION        —__,




    CH.    HIEARTH       A                    eas     E,          oe SO                            oe       Z         ae.                      ?

                     g           }       i,      ia        Sol        ot        :          fe     fp                             :     aE = Sone    Meal   -eom
                                 y   4           4    Mea        sy.                   J               .              ,                     BONE   JUICE PRODUCTION
          Limits  oF Bone                                                                                                              We   FiRE   CRACKED  ROCK
          DISTRIBUTION               Sige       Rs    CLL        ae                             DENSITY          OF       BONE
                                                                                                                                       @ = R0cKs     Nor        iwsiru
                                                                                                SHOWN      BY     CONTOURS




                         CLEAN   Lappy         Site        —          KOENQUMUVUK                           CREEK                    , ALASKA
                                                      ScALeE               IN       MetrTeERs


                                                                                                                                                           LR    Binrord




     85 Map of the Clean Lady site at Kongumuvuk Creek, Anaktuvuk Pass, Alaska showing
     the arc-shaped arrangement of rocks forming a-table adjacent to the hearth (D) inside the
     moss house. This pattern is typical when a single cook habitually uses a particular place
     around a hearth. Note how clean the area inside the rock table is. An outside hearth (A) is
     present on this site as are a small door dump to the right of the house entrance and a very large
     bone midden to the left of the door.



86 Family group of !Kung
Bushmen processing mon-
gongo nuts. Note the circular
arrangement of the group
seated some distance back
from the hearth located in
the    foreground.     (Photo
courtesy of Patricia Draper.)
152    People in their Lifespace




                                                              87 Debris from stone tool
                                                              production as it lay just after
                                                              a worker had finished re-
                                                              moving flakes from a core.
                                                              The activity took place in
                                                              the men’s camp         at the
                                                              Bendaijerum     site occupied
                                                              by Alyawara       in   central
                                                              Australia.


          Another important observation about site structure can be illustrated by stone
       tool manufacture among the Alyawara Aborigines in Australia.'' In one case I
  87   watched a seated worker knocking flakes off acore. The tiny impact chips created
       as a result of this flaking would later provide a clue to where the man had been
       seated, because they fell between his legs and were left in place. The flakes, how-
       ever, were arranged carefully in an arc in front of him. The shape and size of this
       arc were determined by the length of the man’s arm. A similar pattern was also
       created in a very different part of the world (northern Alaska), where I have
       observed some very old Eskimo men working stone.
          Spatial models of seated workers are often complicated by the presence of more
       than one individual. Similar but parallel actions by different individuals, as well
       as their different actions, generate overlapping distributions. Ill. 88 illustrates
       nicely a classic hearth-centered seating arrangement involving a number of
       individuals, I think the reader can appreciate the complex nature of the spatial
       patterns generated by the items dropped by such a group of seated persons. This
       type of distribution has been converted into an idealized model (ill. 89) based on
       actual observations made at an Eskimo site where a group was frequently observed


                                                              88 Classic circular arrange-
                                                              ment around a hearth as
                                                              demonstrated     by Nharo
                                                              Bushmen at Ganzi, Bots-
                                                              wana, c. 1969. (Photo by H.
                                                              Steyn, courtesy of the South
                                                              African    Museum,      Cape
                                                              Town.)
                                                                     People in their Lifespace   153


                                            FORWARD
                                                       ae
                                           Joss Area
                                                                 EN?      bab
                                                                          (
                                                               Cin                   Fe
                                                        ae           v          oN




                                                               BACKWARD
                                                             TOSS  AREA


89   Model   of drop and     toss
zones as developed from ob-          "MEN’S"       Outsip=                HEARTH           MopeEL
servations at the Mask site in                         2S            Mane
Anaktuvuk    Pass, Alaska.   (Cf.    Cee          Se                     ————

Binford 1978b.)


sitting in a circle around a fire. The debris which was dropped produced a ring of
small items centered around the hearth; the disposal of large items, however, was
different, these objects being tossed behind the people away from the sitting area.
    Let me illustrate this general seating model by reference to a specific case
recorded among the Nunamiut, in which men in a hunting camp were pro-
cessing caribou bone for marrow. If we look at the spatial distribution of the tiny
bone chips created by breaking open the bone to get the marrow, we see that there
is a concéntration around the hearth — the drop zone. These small fragments of
bone are analogous to the small impact chips formed during the reduction of
stone cores (ill. 87). As in the case of the lithic waste, the tiny pieces of bone were
left in situ by the Eskimo at the location where the marrow cracking actually took
place. On the other hand, the spatial distribution of the large pieces of bone — the
toss zone —is different, because the ends of the bones were tossed or placed behind
the men in an open area after the marrow had been removed. This tossing aside
of larger items is described by the Eskimo as a kind of ‘preventive maintenance’ of
the seating area. When I asked the men about these different modes of disposal,
they would say ‘Who wants to sit down on a large bone?”
   The presence of several individuals engaged in different actions around a hearth
can contribute to variability in both content and form of the debris distributions,
154   People in ther Lifespace



                               KOASTING       AND
                               WARNING        HEARTH




            HIEARTH      FOR
           BOING       WATER                                      SMALL     Bone
              ;                                                   SWick   Qumr


                       BeHnaviorar. OBSERVATIONS
                   HearrHs   A& B AnaxktieTtrauK KILL SITE
                                      ScALE         IN    METERS

                                     °        1       2       3      4        5
                                                                                  L.R.   BINFORD




      go Behavioral observations made at Hearths A and B on the Anaktigtauk kill and butchering site at
      Anaktuvuk Pass, Alaska, (Location given in ill. 53.) Two men (nos. 2 and 3) were seated at
      Hearth B cracking caribou bones and eating the marrow. Bone splinters discarded around
      them as the bones were broken entered the drop zone. Larger articular ends of the bones were
      placed to one side or thrown slightly behind them in the éoss zone. Person no. 1 arrived and
      suggested that they prepare some warm broth from the boiled fragments of caribou ribs
      which he had with him, as well as from some ofthe broken articular ends of the long bones
      left over after marrow eating. For this purpose a quick flaming fire was kindled at a second
      hearth (A) and a coffee can was suspended over the fire for boiling the broth (cf. ill. 72).
      Individual no. 1 attended the fire and kept the pot boiling until the broth was considered
      ready. It was then poured into cups and the bone fragments remaining in the can were
      dumped across to the other side of Hearth A. Preparation of the broth was carried out by
      no. I in a standing position. After the broth was consumed, no. 1 collected many of the
      fragments from the extraction of marrow and prepared a second pot. After it was served,
       the scraps of bone were dumped behind the sitting position of no. 1.
                                                                                            People in their Lifespace               199

In the situation illustrated in ill. go, individual no, 1 is engaged in boiling up bone
fragments to produce a kind of broth, an activity for which a separate hearth is
being used (although this is not always felt to be necessary). The important point
here is that, after pouring off the broth into cups for himself and the others to
drink, he dumped the contents of the boiling can across the fire or threw them
directly to his left as he stood and faced the hearth: these areas are labeled ‘small
dumps’ in ill. go. This action — the disposal of an aggregated mass of refuse, as
opposed to the discrete items we have been discussing so far — obviously produces
homogeneous concentrations of items, Such localized distributions break up and
punctuate the pattern of dropped and tossed items accumulating simultaneously.
On subsequent days at the site, when more men were present, a third hearth was
built in a position towards the bottom of ill. go. The prior existence of the small
bone juice dump located behind individual no. 1 acted as a sort of ‘magnet’
attracting further disposal, so that most of the items tossed away by men seated
at the later hearth were added to the earlier dump, still visible from the previous
day.




gi Activities observed at the Mask site, Anaktuvuk Pass, Alaska, on a spring afternoon. _

                                                                                      Loe
                                                                    |    MASK      SITE          |
                                                                OBSERVED LOCALIZATION OF ACTIVITIES
                                                                                   AFTERNOON JUNE 5


                                                      CARIBOU   SKIN- SLEEPING




                                                                                                     We                    ——
                                                                                                    NE =o
                                                                                                      CJ         eATING/ TALKING


                                                                                                        Sy ‘@
                             a       ie                     :                 Bi      4                 ie       CRAFT ACTIVITIES

                                                                                                             A
                                 :                         a                  Slee                               WATCHING FOR
                                     O We         /         ss                                                   GAME
                                          WP Ro                   5
            ACTIVE HEARTH.                '                               ;



                                           :,


                                                                                       eS   IN METERS
                            Note:  Bone  DisTRISUTION
                            FROM  LEROI~ QOURHAN    e
                            BREZILLON                   19603   Fiqg.59
                                      \¢                    -    Se
                        .
                        See

                      frm ts,                      NS
                 an          aa       an       0   FORWARD           JOSS
                                           x            ZONE     -




                                                                               92 Toss zone model for men
                                                                               seated around an_ outside
                                                                               hearth superimposed on the
            Bone                  DisTRIBUTION
                                                                               actual distribution of bone
RELATIVE   TO "MEN'S"             ouTsiDe  FlEARTH                   MovoeEL
                                                                               artifacts on    the site of
           Py NCEVENT       No.                            1                   Pincevent    One.   (Archae-
               SCALE IN METERS                                                 ological data based on Leroi-
                                                                               Gourhan and Brézillon 1966,
                                                                               fig. 59, Pp. 335-)


          So far, these examples have illustrated three different modes of disposal: (1)
       dropping discrete items 7m situ, (2) tossing away discrete items, and (3) tossing
       away aggregated items en masse. In the case of dropping, the items tend to come
       to rest in the immediate area where they were processed or worked; larger items
       or aggregates of smaller items, in contrast, are tossed to the periphery of the work
       areas where they were used.



       Hearths, Inside and Outside

       The distribution of debris around a hearth gives us clues as to whether the activity
       in question took place inside or outside a house, For instance, I was able to
       document the way the Nunamiut Eskimo used space in a hunting camp (the
       Mask site) over a long period of time. On my plan of the site (ill. 91), one can see
       the patterns of activity which were taking place at one moment in time: one man
                                        WALK         our   Toss              1
                                                ZOnNe=     bobs soe   Nor


                                   PERSON             IN




                                                                                          AREA     Not
                                                                                          "EXPLAINED"


                                                                                                   ae
                                                                                          BY   ROTATION




93 Formation model for the              y        :
                                    -       RotateEnp         HEARTH
hearths at Pincevent One. In                >        DIsTRIBUTION
response to a change in wind
direction (symbolized by the
broken arrows), the occu-
pants rotated their position                                                 Poss)BLE
from one hearth to another
adjacent hearth. Such an
                                    FoRMATION                     MopEL    DEVELOPMENT
extensive use of space would
                                       RotareD                    Toot. DisteiBuUTION
not be characteristic within
the limited shelter ofa house.                       PINCEVENT                      No.   1
(Archaeological data based                                   SCALE          IN   METERS
on      Leroi-Gourhan      and
Brézillon   1966,   fig. 56, p.                                                                o     ry


331.)
                                                                                          LR BINFORD




was sleeping on a caribou skin; another was seated to one side, making tools; a
third was watching for caribou; as in the previous example, most of them were
arranged around the fire chatting. Predictably, the men seated in a semi-circle
around the fire had tossed their unwanted food debris either into that area around
the hearth where the smoke was most dense due to the wind direction, or else over
their shoulder, thus creating a distinctive ‘toss-zone’ spatial pattern,
   These distinctive dumps and toss zones would not occur inside a house, because
people rarely throw waste materials against the walls of their home. Put another
way, maintenance tactics in intensively used spaces inside a house tend to be quite
different from those in extensively used contexts outside. As a further consequence
of such behavior, outside and inside hearths vary in the degree to which the
distribution of ash and other debris spreads away from the hearth. In my experi-
ence, hearths used for cooking inside houses are usually lined with substantial
stones to prevent the flooring of the house (vegetation, skins or mats) from catch-
ing fire. The stones containing the hearth also prevent the ash from being
         People in their Lifespace

         dragged out into the seating and work areas which are concentrated abouta hearth
         in the confined space of a house. On the other hand, outside hearths are generally
         not so contained, When plants or animals are being cooked, the constant search-
         ing in the ashes for the roasted foods causes ash and fire-cracked rock to be
         dragged away from the center of the hearth; over time this results in considerable
         smearing of ash, charcoal and other hearth debris all around the seat of the fire.
         Ill. 94, for instance, shows a Masarwa Bushman woman scraping ash out ofa
         hearth in order to recover roasted nuts. As fires are kindled over and over again
         in the same general area and this smearing increases, the center of the fire tends
         to drift. Large distinctive hearth features occur solely in areas outside houses,
         where space is less constrained and activities may be more extensive in character.
             Our knowledge about the meaning of the distribution of waste can be used to
92, 93   interpret the behavior that took place at the French Palaeolithic site of Pincevent,
         dated to the Magdalenian period about 15,000 years ago.'? If one takes the
         seating model of men around a hearth from the modern Eskimo hunting stand at
         the Mask site, readjusts the scale, and applies it directly to the distribution of
         debris from stone tool manufacture at this archaeological site, it fits exactly. The
         excavator of Pincevent, Leroi-Gourhan, interpreted the pattern of archaeological
         remains at this site as evidence for a house, but I doubt that he is correct: as we
         have seen in the ethnographic record at least, the doughnut-shaped distribution
         of waste material is typical of activities which take place out-of-doors.
            Ethnoarchaeological research provides additional evidence to support my
         interpretation of Pincevent. When people are sitting outside with no shelter, they
         alter their position frequently in accordance with the wind direction. For instance,


                                                           94 Masarwa Bushman woman
                                                           dragging ash out of a fire while
                                                           recovering nuts which had been
                                                           roasted. Note the arrangement of
                                                           the hammer, anvil and nuts where
                                                           a seated worker had been working
                                                           earlier (cf. ill. 82). (Photo courtesy
                                                           of the National Cultural History
                                                           Museum, Pretoria.)




                                                                                                    77.i




                                                                                                      ie
95 Leroi-Gourhan’s reconstruction
of the three hearths at Pincevent
One. (Reproduced with permission
from Leroi-Gourhan and Brézillon
1966, fig. 78, p. 363.)


if there is a flat area where people prefer to sit, they will locate their hearth accord-
ingly; if, however, the wind direction changes so that the smoke begins to disturb
them, they do not abandon their preferred position, but simply turn around on
the spot and build a new fire. In this way, they donot have to move all their gear
to another side of the original fire and sit where they had previously been tossing
their garbage. When one is not constrained by a house or a temporary shelter,
then building another hearth is easier than relocating oneself relative to existing
facilities. Since wind direction has no effect on the orientation of debris with
respect to a hearth within a house, the rotation of hearths would only be expected
for fires used outside.
   The distribution of the debris in relation to the three hearths at Pincevent             92, 93
suggests that only one person dominated the use of two hearths. What appears to
have happened is that the wind changed direction and the seated worker simply
rotated 180 degrees and built another hearth to avoid the smoke. Since wind only
affects hearths outside, Leroi-Gourhan’s reconstruction of a complex skin tent              95
over all three hearths!? cannot be sustained, at least in terms of our new under-
standing of site structure derived from ethnoarchaeological research.
160    People in their Lifespace



                             ~@                            SLEEPING                                         PIE ARTH
                                                            EPRESSIONS
                                                                       nny,
                                                                                                                    sth
                                            a mi) oS         wn,                                               wo         %
                                                                                  Z                     =     5               nw
                                                                                                                               =
                                                                                      ZZ               y$                     ::
                                                                                           My “iyanw’ Sy       2 “Haw *




                                   N@ATATUARA                       MEN'S     BUSH               CAMP
                                            REDR4WN            FROM   GOULD   I977,        Fig. 22

                               AUSTRALIAN                              ABORIGINES

                   Baek     BEOS


                                                                                                                          NU ita,
                                   ay,                                                                                     Wine’
                                   eK            t,




                                    REDREAWN                 FROM     VELDER      1963,             Fig.2




                                                  " \y7
                                             S         %                                                       OS
                                        =             ww




                                                                                                             I Ora’
                                                                                                             ASS


                                                              BED  OF WOVEN
                   BED    OF DRY                              PALM BRANCHES                                 7 ©)
                                                                                                              Yn|
                   LEAVES

                                   MraBrR)                  Came       * 4 —12                 Aputtrs

             HUNTER—               GATHERERS                           OF         NorRTH                            THAILAND
                                                            ScALE       IN    METERS

                                                                                                                                   =         10
                                                                                                                                       LE   BINFORD



       96 Comparative sleeping arrangements documented among the Australian Aborigines
       and Mrabri of North Thailand (see ill. 1). Note the recurrent patterns of alternating beds
       and hearths. (Based on Gould 1977, fig. 22; Velder 1963, fig. 2.)



       Sleeping Areas

       Another way in which the size and basic mechanics of the human body affect
       patterning in the archaeological record may be seen in terms of the space required
       for sleeping. Although many different arrangements for sleeping have been
  96   observed in the ethnographic record, they all depend ona limited series of known
       factors. For instance, in a Ngatatjara Australian Aborigine camp occupied by an
       all-male hunting party,'* an alterating pattern of beds and hearths occurred. In
       contrast, when married couples are present at the camps, as has been recorded
                                                                                                                                                                         People in their Lifespace                                      161




                                                                                                                         \ lag ,
      j                                       hi                                             :
                                          bint
                                            oe                                           \
                                                                                           cS                      S
                                                                                                                    aS                   ()
                                                                                                                                            i



                                                                                             ©

                                                                                                                               \
                                                                                                               z              RY                                                                                            =
                                                                                                                   fay"            lay                                                                                      =
                                                                                                                                                1uA\                                                      Dp           S=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ¥
              SLEEPING                    AREA                           M                                                                                                    %/ “fyy vilowhi"'S              s’
                               Scarce     iN        MerTreERS                                                                                                                     Ee          aca         ”
                                                                                                                                                                         //                        “amy




                                                                 t                                                                 —2.15
                                               Y ny,                                                                                     Le
                                                       ;$|       |        :                                                              Vix%          xES
                                                        qs            s                                                                     ZaN
                                                        5:           N=                                                                      “aN
                                                             5       N


                                                                 ©

                                                                         “%,                                              a               Ss
                                                                                                                                            y,
                                                                                                                                            SY %                 S
                                                                                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                                              yj ys                      “Annu


                                                                                                           nn            nH ENN F977                                                                                                }
                      ust BHF yer,                                                   2               5
                                     %          5                                        z           5


                           / \ \=                                                        BB                                                                                                    Q
          d                          {i                                              =           E                                                                                             a


                 tn              ow ws                                              S5               z%y
                Been                                                           ro                        ninininitigy®
                        52                                                                                 —                   1.9) ——
                        2.08                                                                                                   235                           :

     L                                                                                                                                                                                 LR BINFORD                               |



97 Sleeping area models: a generalized diagram of the arrangement and size of sleeping
areas based on observations among a large number of hunter-gatherer societies.




for the Mrabri (a hunting and gathering group in the tropical rainforest in
Thailand),!> the hearths were interspersed with double rather than single beds;
both single and double beds separated by hearths were laid out when the social
composition of the group was mixed. Regardless of slight variations in the number
of single and double beds, the basic arrangement, including the alternation of
beds and hearths, appears to be found all over the world.
   The size of the beds is not determined solely by the number of people sleeping
on them: more space is required, for example, if people sleep in clothes, rather
than under a cover. Given the relevant factors seen in contemporary situations 97
162   People in their Lifespace


                                                 f+              WAL    OF        ROCKSHELTER
                                        J i[E    NZ   Z| |B
                                                                                             peed        model


                                                                                        mm          +H        eE ARTH
         MaAssSiVE                                                                    RRR           '
                                                                                        x           ‘
         ROCKFALL                                                            ee         8    ST t LITHIC
                                                                                  /             ! DEBRIS

        Limits oF
       Ke Mey eTION




                                        OA.

                                                ye feen
                                                HEARTH




                 FORMATION           MopDELS                  FOR      TWO             LEVELS                 AT
               AsBri       Patauno      ,       Les            Evyzies                , FRANCE
                                       ScaAceE        iN      METERS

                                                                                                    ut
                                                                                                         L&   Binrors



      98 Formation model of the sleeping arrangements for several levels in the Abri Pataud
      rock shelter. (Archaeological information from Movius 1975.)



      analogous to those of prehistoric times, one could hope to calculate how much
      space would be required for a bed, in just the same way that an architect today
      determines how much space to allot for particular areas within a modern house.
         The sleeping arrangements typical of rock shelters are especially interesting,
      because variations in the positions of the beds are determined by the season of the
      year. In winter, beds are usually located parallel to the back of the shelter; for a
      single bed a hearth is placed about 1.20 meters from the rock, or about 2.00 meters
      in the case of a double bed. In summer, when ideally one would like to reduce
      exposure to the heat from the sun which has been absorbed by the rock, the beds
                                                                 People in their Lifespace   163

  are placed perpendicular to the back wall and people sleep with their heads away
  from the source of the heat; in this arrangement hearths are located between the
  beds.
     Just as with the models of seated workers around a hearth (discussed above),
  these general patterns of sleeping arrangements derived from the ethnographic
  record can also be applied to the interpretations of archaeological sites: the basic
  structure of the human     body, after all, has remained    the same   for a very long
  period. The value of this approach can be demonstrated by an analysis of the
  distribution of hearths at the Upper Palaeolithic site of Abri Pataud in France,
  excavated by H. I. Movius.'® By superimposing standard bed sizes, for which I
  have extensive ethnographic documentation, on the plan of a level belonging to
  the early Aurignacian I phase at Abri Pataud, I found that an arrangement of               98
  single beds in between the hearths fits the archaeological spatial patterns ex-
  tremely well. Among modern groups, as I have already mentioned, the alterna-
  tion of hearths and single beds typifies the sleeping patterns of all-male hunting
  camps. The combination of this form of bed distribution with the presence of
  roasting pits located in front of the sleeping area suggests to me that, at this date,
  the site was not used for residential purposes (as Movius originally proposed), but
  was a temporary camp.
     Another level at Abri Pataud, belonging to the Perigordian VI phase, should
  also be regarded as representing a temporary hunting camp, because of the
  spacing ofthe hearths. An interesting feature of the hearths in this level, however,
  is that the side which faces the sleeping area at the back of the rock shelter is flat;
  from ethnographic data, we know that hearths are often built this way to prevent
  bedding from catching fire. On the other hand, in a slightly different lens of the
  same level, there are some hearths located about 2.00 meters from the rear wall
  of the shelter, suggesting that double beds were positioned there. In front of the
  sleeping area is a group of stones which I would interpret as a windbreak. The
  archaeological remains of this portion of the rock shelter suggest that we are
  dealing with a small family camp, something quite different from the hunting
  camp previously described and probably representative of a different part of the
  overall settlement pattern of the Upper Palaeolithic people who lived in this area
  (cf. Chapter 6 for a description of variations in hunter-gatherer settlement
  patterns).



  Breakfast in Bed

  One further interesting fact has emerged from these ethnographic studies: the
  bedding area of a site is often not necessarily used exclusively for sleeping. Com-
  monly, people conceive of a bed as a private, personal area. If, for example, a




———————
      164             People in their Lifespace

                      man goes and sits on his bed, it is a signal that he does not want to be bothered.
                      He may do a variety of tasks while there — think quietly, make tools, comb his
                      hair — but the rest of the community knows that he does not want to talk. I have
               99     found this same relationship between personal space and sleeping area among all
                      the hunting and gathering groups with whom I have worked. I have even
                      observed men in hunting camps make beds which are in a sense symbolic, since
                      they are not used at all for sleeping, but simply as a place where one can repair
                      tools in peace and quiet or just be by oneself,
                         Such use ofbeds as personal spaces at a camp creates some interesting distribu-
                      tions of material which we can also hope to monitor in the archaeological record.
                      Hunter-gatherers usually consume a prepared meal as a group in the evening,
                      but often everyone takes some of the left-overs from the meal, such as cold meat
                      or a rabbit bone, and puts them by their bed so that they can have a snack for
                      breakfast. Understandably, in the morning when it may be cold and people are
                      likely to be sleepy and slightly grumpy, they are content to sit on their bed and
                      eat in silence. As a result, a small midden or deposit of waste is created around
                      each bed. In addition to left-overs from the previous day, the middens around the
                      beds may contain the bones of small mammals which have not been shared among



—
                      the group but cooked in the hearths by the beds and consumed there. The waste



                                                                 Oe         of        EXCAVATION



                                                                                                            99 Pintupi Aborigine camp
                   ETHNOGAPHIC                                                   =
                                                                                 N;
                                                                                      a   ¥
                                                                                              AN
                                                                                                            showing small hearths and
                   CONTEXT                                                                                  waste fragments from break-
                   KNOWN~
                   EXCAVATION                                                                               fast snacks around the sleep-
                   BY  BRIAN                                                                                ing areas. (Based on Hayden
                    Hav Pen,            IS79                                                                1979, fig. 125B, p. 152.)


                   "Corporate ”
                     hearth


                                                                                                                                            U)Fe
                                                                                                                                             PI



                                                                                                                                            3




                                                                                                                                            3
                                                      Bed        hearth                                                                     ?
                               \)   /                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                            ;
          %                    "
          %                \                A
              “y                            =
              Ny      ts
    Sea        My
                ting ws
                   iiF                  =2                                                >
‘                                       ®
                                                                          4=THREE             YOUNG   MEN
                                                                          2=MAN & Wire
                                                                          @= GRINDING 4sTONE


                   PINTUPI                  —         AUSTRALIAN                              SITE
                                                ScaALeE     in     METERS
                                                                       People in their Lifespace     165




                                   cen
                                    a                                                                Ow
                                   *
                                   %

                                    \.   y:    a                                            4


                                                                                           4 Ae      2000
                                                                                                =    OUMP




                                         CENTRAL
                                          TOSS epee




                                         Note: CONTOURS
                                         INCREASE   IN
                                         INCREMENTS    OF
100 !Kung San camp no. 7               5 BONES PER 5O              ‘
                        >                  .                   /
as recorded by-: John Yellen.          ge
                                       MAP   was REDRAWN    te
                                                               ;
Note the door dumps to the             FROM YELLEN 1977     \,
right of the entrance to the
huts. These contain the waste
from   breakfast   which   was                     ,
consumed on beds inside the              IKUNq@ SAN      Camp *7—~ NIABESHA
huts. (Based on Yellen 1977,                  SITE SoM venore & Ouaetelye Det sir
unnumbered      end-plan   of              SS
camp 7.)                                                                          ion                       eee



from individual snacks and from communal meals, therefore, can be expected to
be differentially distributed on archaeological sites,
  The debris from ‘breakfast in bed’ is not always deposited around the area
where the meal was consumed, At a Bushmen camp after everyone has woken up                          100

and eaten their individual snacks in bed, the debris from the meal is collected in
the skins or blankets which make up the bedding, carried to the door of the hut
and discarded there.!’ This behavior creates a breakfast dump just to the side of the
sleeping area or immediately next to the door. I have also observed door dumps at
Eskimo and-Australian Aborigine camps and have additional data of the same
sort from settlements occupied by horticulturalists,



Extensive Activity Areas

Some tasks, since they are performed from a standing position rather than when
seated, create large and extensive scatters of debris. One good example of an
activity which takes up large amounts of space in this way is the preparation and
use of roasting pits out-of-doors. The Alyawara Aborigines with whom I have                         101-6
                            101 Alyawara Aborigine butchering a
                           female red kangaroo. A small hole is
                            cut in the abdomen and the viscera
                            are removed exclusively through
                           this small opening. The hole is later
                           closed by using a small twig as a
                           pin; this prevents ash, soil and
                           charcoal in the roasting pit from
                           entering the abdominal cavity as
                           the animal is cooked.




                           102 Digging the roasting pit. The pit
                           is dug in a relatively clear area, the
                           loose soil being tossed on one side of
                           the hole with the explanation that
                           ‘it's better to heat up dry soil’
                           (which refers to the fact that the
                           fire is kindled alongside of the pit
                           as well as inside it). The soil heated
                           up on the platform next to the pit is
                           later shovelled into the pit to seal
                           the earth oven for cooking (cf. ill.
                            105).   In   this picture   firewood   is
                            being placed on the platform next
                            to the pit.




                            103 Singeing the kangaroo. After the
                            firewood is arranged inside the pit
                            and on the platform, it is ignited.
                            Once the fire is burning well, the
                            kangaroo is tossed on to singe the
                            hair and then flipped out again, so
                            the scorched hair can be scraped
                            off. This procedure takes place
                            because the hair is excellent insu-
                            lation and, if left on the skin, tends
                            to retard or even prevent cooking.
                            Since the hair does not burn off all
                            at once, the animal must be flipped
                            in and out of the fire several times.



106 (Opposite) Map of the Alyawara roasting pit area. Note the
location where the Aborigines consumed a snack while waiting
for the meat to cook; ‘LRB’ and ‘JO’C’ indicates the area where
the archaeologists consumed their own snack of canned beans!
The map illustrates nicely the extensive area occupied byan
activity such as cooking food in a roasting pit.
104    Preparing the charcoal. The
burning wood is flamed up to a fast
burn. Singeing the game as well as
occasionally beating the burning
wood results in the accumulation of
a substantial bed of charcoal. Once
it is judged that enough charcoal
has been scaled off the burning
wood, the remaining burning sticks
are pulled out and tossed to the side,
leaving only the charcoal in the pit
and on the platform as shown here.
The circular walk area around the
pit can be clearly seen, as can other
food to be cooked      (laid on a small
table of leaves to keep it clean).




105 Placing the food in the oven. The
kangaroo is nested in the charcoal
within the pit, followed by the
birds wrapped in leaves to hold in
the juices formed during cooking.
Once the hot sand and charcoal
from the platform are shovelled into
the pit to cover the meat, the
cooking begins.



       LIMITS     OF     FIT    USE
      AREA      © 1/712




                                                            RoasTtine
                                                              Pit




                                                             DENSE
                                                             CHARCOAL




                                                   Ss IOQMETERS       TO
                                                   BUTCHERING          AREA
                          HEARTH


       ALYAWARA                  FieLD          Cookinae     SITE
                               SCALE      IN   METERS

                                                                  o
      People in their Lifespace

      worked use roasting pits for a wide range ofunctions, but one occasion in particu-
      lar which James O’Connell and I had the opportunity to observe illustrates nicely
      how the construction and utilization of a roasting pit itself contributes to the scale
      of the resulting activity area. At the time we were deep in the bush with a group
      of Alyawara males on their way to a stone quarry, but en route the men killed a
      female red kangaroo with a baby ‘joey’ in its pouch and three Australian bustards.
      On warm. days such as the one in question, field parties which kill game some
      distance from the residential camp normally cook the meat in the field to prevent
      it spoiling before they return with it to the camp.
         The men began their work by butchering the kangaroo with a stone knife and
      a metal ax which we had with us. Large animals of this sort are generally cooked
      within their own skins, so after the viscera had been removed through a very small
      hole in the abdomen ofthe kangaroo, the opening was plugged and laced up with
      a small acacia twig. Next, a roasting pit about 14 meters long and a little over
      4 meter wide was excavated to a depth of around § meter. Firewood was gathered,
      placed on the platform next to the pit and the fire was kindled. As the firewood
      was burning down, the kangaroo was tossed in to singe the hair so that it could
      be scraped off more easily. In the meantime, leaves were laid out nearby (to
      prevent the cooked meat from getting covered with sand) and the birds were
      partially plucked and wrapped with leaves which would absorb the grease as they
      were roasted. When the fire had died down, the Alyawara took a stick and beat
      the firewood so that the scale of charcoal fell off into the bottom of the pit. Finally,
      having determined that the fire was ready, the men placed in the pit the kangaroo,
      with its legs sticking up, and the birds in their leaf packets and then added the
      remaining charcoal. The meat was left to roast for about an hour.
         While this activity was going on, we noted the spatial patterns generated by
      all these tasks and we also made a map of the area, recording the location of all
      the features that would be potentially observable at an archaeological site. The
107   roasting pit, the area where the fire burned, the dirt from the pit, the place where
      the extra firewood was tossed aside, the boughs of trees for laying out the meat


                                                           107 A roasting pit repeatedly used
                                                           at an Alyawara Australian resi-
                                                           dential site. The substantial scatter
                                                           of charcoal which accumulates
                                                           around such a feature is very
                                                           obvious. Such ‘dirty’ and spatially
                                                           extensive features are almost always
                                                           located away from the core activity
                                                           of a living site.
                                                             People in their Lifespace   169

                                                               =Ss    RE og   Srey
                                                                aes   he




 108 Nunamiut Eskimo butchering
a caribou killed during the spring
migration. The circular work space
being used by Johnny Rulland
around the animal is similar to the
one around the Alyawara roasting
pit shown in ills. 106 and 107.


before cooking, the place where the tail of the kangaroo was processed while the
meat was cooking, even the area where Jim O’Connell and I had our own hearth
to cook our beans — all these were carefully plotted on the plan.
   One interesting fact that emerged from our study of this kangaroo roast is that
there is some regularity in the amount of space occupied by people performing
activities when standing (about 17—24 square meters of space). Furthermore, the
activity sequence I have described results in a classic feature-centered pattern
with the roasting pit in the middle, a work space around this feature and a ring
around the periphery, where any discarded items can be expected to accumulate.
The debris from the immediate use of the pit is concentrated around the pit,
whereas the other waste comprises a toss zone located around the feature, but at
some distance back from it.
   Another standing-up activity which produces a very similar debris pattern is
the butchering of animals. The principal difference between roasting and
butchery is that in the latter case no central feature remains for the archaeologist 108
to see. Typically the person cutting up the animal works in a circular area around
it; he may flip over the carcass from one side to the other, using the skin as a
protected work surface. The result is (1) an empty walk/work space focused 109
around the animal and (2) debris which has been tossed away from this work zone
and has accumulated on the periphery of the work area. According to my observa-
tions among the Nunamiut Eskimo, caribou butchery demands about 30 square
meters of space. In ill. 59 this model of butchering behavior can be seen super-
imposed on the actual archaeological distribution resulting from the cutting up
of caribou at the Anavik site. Butchering areas on Eskimo and Aboriginal sites are
interesting for another reason as well. Meat distributions among these groups’ ®
170    People in their Lifespace




                                                                                 7Oss
                                                                         ye      “LONE

                                   —ll———   STOMACH    CONTENTS      -
                                                              ee
                             =                             oe
                  BuTCHERING                          Activity               AREA
                                    ScALE        NI     METERS

                                                                3        a         Ss

                                                                      LE     BINFORD



       109 Activity area used by the Nunamiut to butcher one caribou. The structure of the work
       space is nearly identical to the Alyawara roasting pit pictured in ills. 106 and 107. The
       total area used is slightly greater in this case because unwanted parts have been disposed of
       on the periphery of the walk/work area.


       generally take place at the butchering areas themselves rather than in the
 110   residential area, because (as informants noted) sharing meat was the occasion
       for a different kind of visit than when kinsmen come to ‘talk’, implying that the
       etiquette of hospitality applied only within the confines of the ‘home’.
          Analogous distributions of debris at spatial scales similar to the butchering
       areas have been observed by Robert Hard among the Tarahumara of Mexico.
       These people cook desert plants in large roasting pits, which are usually positioned
       behind the house and away from the doorside activity areas. It is generally true,
       in fact, that activities like roasting and butchery, which monopolize considerable
       amounts of space, are located away from areas used intensively on a day-to-day
       basis. For instance, even on sites where only a minimal stay is anticipated,
       Australian Aborigines nevertheless construct their roasting pits in positions
       peripheral to the focus of camp life — areas used for sleeping, conversation, and
       small-scale food preparation and craft activities. I have observed a similar
110    Alyawara    Australian    dis-
tributing meat from a kangaroo
which was roasted at a pit located
on the periphery ofa residential
camp. Children are frequently used
as runners for carrying meat to
persons not present to receive their
share.




111 Bushman scraping an animal
hide at the Mokudi camp in the
Nyae Nyae area of Namibia, 1976.
(Photo courtesy of the South
African Museum, Cape Town.)




                                        112 Large roasting pit located
                                        behind a Tarahumara house in
                                        northern Mexico. The walk/work
                                        area around the pit is clearly visible.
                                        Here we have a spatial analogy to
                                        the butchering area seen among the
                                        Eskimo (ill. 109) and the roasting
                                        pit used     by the Australian
                                        Aborigines (ills. 106, 107). (Photo
                                        courtesy of Robert Hard.)
172    People in their Lifespace

       strategy of placement among the Eskimo and the Navajo: commonly their roast-
       ing pits are located adjacent to places used as minor dumps or for wood chopping,
       so as not to interfere with the normal activities of camp life. Along these same
       lines I have found that at Australian and Eskimo sites, spatially extensive, stand-
       up work areas are often next to each other. For example, in Eskimo sites butcher-
  Tp   ing areas are frequently located adjacent to sled loading and storage areas, all of
       which will be found on the edge of the residential core area, because they all
       require a large amount of space.
           Hide working is yet another activity repeatedly seen to occur in areas peri-
       pheral to the central parts of residential camps. When only one or two hides are
       being worked, they may be staked out just to the side of or slightly behind shelters,
       but if larger quantities are involved, they will be carried a greater distance from
       the center ofresidential activities, It is not uncommon for rather flat ground to be
       selected for hide working and for stones to be cleaned back from the chosen area
       if it is rocky; the“‘ring’ of stones produced in this way may subsequently be used
       as weights to secure the hide. In most cases, an archaeologist would interpret such
       a pattern as a tent ring or would infer the existence of some kind ofstructure from
       piles of stone which in reality had simply been removed to clear a surface for
       hide working.



       Site Structure: Combining the Models

       As described previously, sites are composed of different arrangements of facilities,
       surfaces and items. So far we have seen how these basic elements can be combined
       into general spatial models relating to particular activities (e.g. seated worker
       arrangements, group seating arrangements, sleeping areas, extensive standing-up
       work places, etc.). At this point we can now turn to the analysis of archaeological
       sites as wholes and begin to investigate how the models identified previously fit
       together to comprise a complete site. This is what I call the analysis of site structure:
       how spatial models mesh within the structure ofa site as an entity in its own right.
       While there is no room here to consider the entire range of variability in site
       structure observed ethnographically, we can begin to use some of the knowledge
       gained so far in order to give meaning to some of the spatial patterns observed in
       the archaeological record.
          As a first example, let us consider how activity models can be used to analyze
Te     the site structure of a typical Bushman camp. In the Kalahari Desert, people
       construct small huts more for protection from the sun than for warmth. The
       temperature can rise quite high at midday and at this hottest part of the day the
       Bushmen generally sit inside on their beds. Since they may use the time to make
       tools or carry out other tasks, debris from the activities which take place in the
                                                                   People in their Lifespace




113 Bushman camp in Angola, c. 1930. These are the so-called ‘Yellow Bushmen’, also
known as Sekele. (See Almeida 1965 for further details.) Note the position of the hearth
in front of the shelter erected to provide shade during the hottest part-of the day. (Photo
by J. Drury, courtesy of the South African Museum, Cape Town).




shade is distributed in the sleeping area. In contrast, the cooking hearth used for
corporate meals is located just outside the hut near the door; when food is eaten              114
at this hearth a doughnut-shaped ring of food remains is formed around it.
   This same pattern is found at many other sites. Examining data from three
different hunter-gatherer groups, !Kung Bushmen, Nunamiut Eskimo and                           115
Ngatatjara Aborigines, one can see that the spacing of the house, sleeping areas
and external hearth is very similar. The reason for the considerable consistency
in the measurements is simply that the factor which conditions them is the same
in all cases— the human body. In this instance, it is simply a function of the amount
of room required to seat a group of people around a hearth and still allow reason-
able space for access to the hut. The sizes of the huts at the Bushmen camp are also
nearly identical ;variation is due simply to the number of people occupying them.
The simple mechanics of the body contribute to both these basic repeated situa-
tions and, since these properties are the same for all humans, it is no wonder that
there is a tremendous degree of repetitiveness in the spatial measurements of
camps used by hunters and gatherers.
 174    People in their Lifespace


                              USED      BY    ONE                           AREA    OF   SCATTER*         8.5m*
                             FAMILY        FOR     TWO
                             DAYS  - ZADULTS
                             3S CHILDREN - AGES
                             4,7, £/3
                             °°   Bone
                             ~    BEAN       Poo
                             *    MeEeLon                             *
                             ¢    Fruivr
                                                       --09_,
                                             pees               we
                                        ad                            %




                                     #Toma’s                    Domestic           AREA
                                  Hut *2 —/TANAGABA~ Camp *5
                                    Reprawn                From           YELLEN     ,|I9TT
                                                 ScALE           IN       METERS

                                                   1                  2        3s             4                 5
                                                                                              LR   BINF   ORD




        114 Map ofa typical !Kung Bushman hut with associated hearth. (Based on Yellen 1977,
        unnumbered end-plan of camp 5.)




          Now, although the actual form of the various models is highly repetitive from
       site to site and from one group of people to another, differences among them can
       also be extremely informative. For instance, at the corporate      Nunamiut hearths
       (ill. 115) the most common seating pattern isa circle, with the attendant drop and
88, 89 toss zones as discussed previously. There are, of course, other ways of organizing
       food preparation and consumption, for instance, when there is a strong division
       of labor in terms of who cooks the meals. In many types of Nunamiut camps,
        females cook food at an outside ‘kitchen’ hearth, but serve the meal in a different
  116   area. Where this arrangement exists, a small brush windbreak is often placed
        around the hearth or, if it is very hot, a kind of ramada or sunshade may be
        erected over the kitchen to protect the cook. For example, ill. 75 depicts the
        distribution of items with respect to an outside kitchen hearth among the Nun-
        amiut. Access to the hearth is almiost exclusively reserved for the cook and this
        area is generally kept quite clean. Debris from food preparation may be dumped
  115   across the hearth, resulting in what I call a ‘butterfly distribution’ of waste. Once
        prepared, the food is then served to the men in a separate area which is outside
                                                                                     A=    SEAT                        C= BED
                                   aw!                                               B=    HEARTH                      D=lLivingq             SPeace

                       5.78                    |
          Bitty        Morry’s               Camp                                LEROI—~                 GOoURHAN’S                         Mover
          NunNamiutr              EsKimo




                                                                                  NonNAmMiut               RESIDENTIAL                        MoDoEL
          PuryKara            *1
          NGaTaTuaRaA              AUSTRALIAN




    9
                                     #TOMA’S         Camp
    ‘             Oe                     'KUNq      San
        ‘e,        :                                                      VG   vt         om         —                         3
          al                                                               ieo   “ans       oo a               \                   ;           Dror
                                                                               e838                                                            Zone
                                                                                               \               I
                                                                                      ac        “s         /

    a 2.66                                                                       Nunamiur                          HUNTING                  Camp


        CAMP               COMPARISONS                           ~—           Cases                        & MoveLs
                                                     ScALE       iN   METERS

                       1      °          5      2    3       a        5          ©         te        &             3      10
                                                                                                                                       LR   Bineora
=



    115 On the left, comparative sizes and layout of houses and hearths for three different
    hunter-gatherer groups, the !Kung Bushmen, Nunamiut Eskimo, and Ngatatjara
    Aborigines. Depicted on the right are three hypothetical models for site structure, the
    lower two of which are based on ethnographically documented sites.
  176     People in their Lifespace




          116 Blackfoot American Indian camp c. 1920 showing the outside kitchen hearth on the
          left, with a tripod supporting a sun shade. The house itself is located to the right. (Photo
          by H. F. Robinson, author’s print.)




          if the weather is fair, but is near their beds within a shelter if the weather is
          inclement. As a result of this behavior, in which meals can be eaten either inside
          or out-of-doors, a disposal zone of debris is formed on both sides of the wall of
          the tent.



          Inside Palangana’s House

          One of my most detailed studies of space use has focused on an ethnohistorically
80, 117   well-documented Eskimo winter dwelling, Palangana’s house.’? The distribution
          of small splinters, produced as a result of cracking marrow bones, forms a well-
          defined semi-circular pattern around the north side of the hearth; the position of
          these bits, which fell in the drop zone between the knees and alongside the legs of
          the seated men, betray the seating arrangement of those consuming meals, In
          contrast, the southeast side of the hearth contains far fewer chips and parts of its
          rim lack them more or less completely. This paucity of bone splinters identifies
          the place where the cook had access to the fire for preparing and serving meals.
          Although the larger bones are not shown in ill. 109, there is no toss zone associated
          with this bone splinter drop zone, for the Eskimo never toss the larger bones back
          on to their beds and into the recesses along the house walls where their belongings
          are normally stored. Two facts, both related to maintenance of this living space,
                                                                                 People in their Lifespace   177


           DIRECTION
                                  OUTSIDE        CacHEeE
           OF SUNLIGHT
              PRoB4aBLeE        <<      PLATFORM
                                             Ree          set
               WinDOoW                                      “*        7
                                      <                         PROBABLE    De

                                            ye                    “         Ne
                                       e™        %




                                                                              Post      Motos



                                                                                       Note:
                                                                                     DENSITIES
                                                                                     PLOTTED ini
                                                                                     TERMS   oF
                                                                                     50cm. Squares




                                                                            Limits  oF
               INFERRED                                                     EXCAVATION
               Limits   oF
               House




                             PALANGANAZS                          House
                             RoNnE=     SPUNTER                 DENSITIES
                                      SceocteE       in    METERS

                                                                                  LF    BINFORD




117 Contour map showing the density of small splinters of bone in and around an Eskimo winter house
(Palangana’s House) at Tulugak Lake, Alaska. (See ills. 53 and 66 for exact location of the
site.) The highest densities identify the general seating locations of male consumers during
meals and when eating snacks during the day. The distribution of splinters is mainly
centered around the hearth, although it is concentrated on the left-hand side, leaving free
an area of domestic work space largely used by the women during the preparation of meals.
The positions marked ‘a’ and ‘B’ almost certainly represent the habitual seating spots of
the man (B) and the woman (A) of the house.



reveal the distribution of bones and splinters as-one produced inside a structure.
(1) The presence of a drop zone composed of debris biased toward the smallest
bone splinters indicates that regular cleaning of the area took place; this size bias,
coupled with the existence ofa large outside door dump, further demonstrates the
tidying up of the intensively used space around the hearth. (2) The tell-tale
absence of the toss zone is also associated with ‘preventive maintenance’ following
consumption.
178    People in their Lifespace



                  DIRECTION
                     UL                 OUTSIDE Cé4CHE                      NOTES
                                                                           DENSITY   PLOTTED
                  Cia SO Suee hye ||     Ron                               ON A 20cm. Grip
                     PROBABLE
                      WINDOW                                ProBssLE




                                                                          Limits      oF
                                                                       a              Ion



                                                                               oS
                                     PALANGANAZS                House
                                   DENSITY     oF PRESSURE FLAKING     CHIPS
                                             Scale     iN METERS

                                                                                 LE   BINFORD




       118 Density map of pressure flaking chips from stone tool manufacture in and around Palangana’s
       House (cf. ill. 117). The distribution is distinctly window-oriented: that is, it is related to the
       position of natural light inside the dwelling during the limited hours of daylight in the
       arctic winter. Two concentrations correspond roughly to dense distributions of bone
       splinters marked ‘a’ and ‘B’ on ill. 117.




          By way of comparison, we can also look at the distribution within the house of
 118   the small chips produced as a by-product of pressure flaking stone tools. It is clear
       that these flint chips are densely distributed away from the hearth and are com-
       mon on the southwest side of the house (upper left in ill. 118), an area where low
       densities of small bone splinters were observed. This contrast must be understood
       in terms of the positioning of craftpersons relative to the source of light. People
       working and repairing stone tools presumably sat so as to take advantage of light
       coming into the house through the window. The bone splinters, on the other hand,
                                                                                             People in their Lifespace   179


           DIRECTION
                                    OUTSIDE   CacHE
           OF SUNLIGHT
               PRoB4aBLE             —PLaArrForm
                Window
                                                            PRoBsaSsSLE
                                                              ~ Door,




            GEnerRai
            Domesmnc
             SrPaceE ——             oe aR

            OuTrsiveE           i
            Work
             AREeEs     —,



                                                                                    ;   Nera        MoriDs



                                                             awstlni ff
                                                                          :
                                                    a              ie                   ae    Beps
                                                                                    1

                                                        J                     Fr
                                                            OLE       av
                                                                               E‘
                                                                          ve
                                                                                        Limits  oF
               INFERRED                                                                 EXCAVATION
               Limits oF             J
               House




                             PALANGANA’S                          House
                                     FORMATION       Movei
                                     ScecteE   nN   METERS


                                                                                               LE    BINFORD




119 Reconstruction of the spatial organization of major use area within Palangana’s House. The
symbols for seated figures indicate the major sitting places identified by the distributions of
bone splinters and flint chips (cf. ills. 117, 118). Individuals numbered 8 and g represent
the same person who adjusts his position to the hearth depending on whether food
consumption is going on (8) or craft activities are being conducted (g). The reason he often
moves back from the hearth is due to the presence of a roof support which served as a back
rest and was located just in front of the stone shown behind person no. g. In this case he
changes his seat when he needs light from the window to facilitate craft activities. Seating
positions nos. 3 and 5 are almost certainly those used primarily by the woman of the house:
position no. 3 being her ‘light-oriented’ seat needed for carrying out manufacturing or
repair of artifacts, while position no. 5 is the area reserved for the cook’s access to the hearth,
at which time it is quite likely that she sits on her bed. Note also the table rocks to the right
of her sitting position at the hearth (5). Seating places nos. 1 and 2 are located outside the
house in the sun where almost certainly men sat on rare warm days during the early and
late winter working on crafts and eating snacks.
      180     People in their Lifespace

              would be produced primarily during the evening meal which, in winter, is served
              after the few hours of available light have passed and the house is warmed by the
              fire used in food preparation; at that time, consumers are seated out of the major
              work space of the cook but in the light created by the hearth. Thus, differences in
              the distributions of these two classes of item (bone splinters and flint chips) are
              governed by where and when the tasks took place. Even so, there are also some
              features common to both distributions: (1) bone splinters and flint flakes are most
              densely concentrated at points A and B (ill. 117) and (2) they share a concentra-
              tion outside and to the south ofthe house itself. These correspondences betray the
              habitual seating position of people repairing tools or eating. The seating arrange-
   81, 119    ments I would infer from such data can be summarized in a model of space use
              inside Palangana’s house. The sleeping area shown in ill. 119 (corresponding to
              Leroi-Gourhan’s ‘Zone C”°) yielded little debris from manufacturing activities
              and had a lower overall density of artifacts than other areas inside the house, a
       120    characteristic anticipated by Leroi-Gourhan. The superimposition of the dis-
              tribution of industrial debris on the house plan reveals two interesting points.
                 First, there is a generalized scatter in the quadrant of the house nearest the
              window (the domestic work space). This area is equivalent to ‘Zone B’ in Leroi-
              Gourhan’s model, but its breakdown into two subunits, as that model predicts, is
              not-found here. In Palangana’s house what we see are: (1) hearth-centered
              activities derived from, or related to, food consumption and carried out largely
              during hours of darkness and (2) daylight-centered activities oriented to the
              source of daylight within the domestic space. The distinction made by Leroi-
              Gourhan between the ‘fine’ and ‘crude’ activities expected to occur on different
74; 75> 89;   sides of the hearth is much more likely to be applicable to outdoor hearths, where
   KOS 10s    aggregate materials are dumped to the side of work spaces.
                 Secondly, the Nunamiut characterize the different use areas around the hearths
       11g    within a house as the ‘women’s’ side (the light area of domestic space) and the
              ‘men’s’ side (the darker zone of domestic usage). These terms do not imply any
              rules for use or exclusive access to these spaces by men or women; they only
              describe the relative frequencies with which the different sexes do in practice use
              each area. In fact, most male crafts are conducted in a men’s house, a special struc-
   80, 122    ture common on winter sites. Not infrequently, the men’s house is the initial
              structure erected at a site for use as shelter while the men build the winter houses
              and before their families move to the site. Here men in groups spend many days
              working on crafts, often in the company of boys who are learning the techniques
              of tool manufacture and repair. In the men’s house, craft items may be left in
              place and need not be cleaned up when the woman of the house needs space, for
              example, to prepare meals or attend to the children before bed. Consequently, it
              is a special activity area, where tool manufacture and repair can be carried out
              independently of work space in the residential house. On less permanent sites or
                                                                          People in their Lifespace     181



           DIRECTION
                                OuTSIDE        CacHeE                Wee          eee. eee
           OF SUNLIGHT            “2 PLarrorem                       *   AntTier-Woom   DeEBRieES
              PROBABLE
               Window
                                                        PrRoBsasLE
                                                          ~-Door




                                                                         Post     Mortps




            STONES


                               3e.,   ee
                                           2         aee-            Limits  oF
              INFERRED                                               EXCAVATION
              Limits    oF
              House




                             PALANGANAZS                    House
                              MANUFACTURING             DEBRIES
                                  Scale         iN   METERS

                                                                             LF    BINFORD          |




120 Distribution of manufacturing debris within Palangana’s House. Rach dot represents an
item whose discrete position was plotted during the excavation of the site. It is clear that
there is a concentration of material in the quadrant of the house adjacent to the window
fer alls. 007, 118).



those occupied in warmer weather, there is usually a men’s seating area outside
the house, where males carry on crafts and even eat some of their meals; it is
usually in a well lit and relatively warm and protected place, quite often along
the southern wall of the house, as shown in the generalized Nunamiut residential
model in ill. 115. In very warm weather, when women’s activities too may move
outside, meals are prepared on the outdoor kitchen hearth, near which is usually
the women’s conversation area, where they sew, manufacture or repair items, or
simply keep an eye on the young children playing nearby. In summer, therefore,
the house becomes merely a sheltered sleeping and storage area used for other
activities only during bad weather.
182   People in their Lifespace



                DIRECTION               OUTSIDE   CacHE
                OF   SUNLIGHT       <—— PLATFORM
                     PROBABLE       \
                     Wistar                               ProBsasLE
                                                             ~ Door




                 GENneRaAi—
                 Domestic




                                                                      oe                i
                                                                      8,           “4
                                                                              @         <= HOSsT: MortDs
                                                       Wor
                                                       ho! Pywilyn,           ‘
                                                                              Ay




                                                          OOTTTTT Toa
                                                                       soFy
                                                                         /

                                                                      ve
                 STONE oN                                              /

                      CooK=

                                                                                    Limits   oF
                     INFERRED                                                       E xcAVATION
                     Limits   OF                               \



                [oer
                     House




                                   PaALANGANAYS                House
                                        FORMATION       Move.
                                        Scare     iN   METERS

                                                                                             LE   SINFORDS
                                                                                                             ot



      121 Formation model of activities at Palangana’s House. The distribution of manufacturing
      debris as shown in ill. 120 and the positions of tools or their parts has been superimposed
      over the seating and space use model presented in ill. 119. The open circles are stone tools;
      filled circles represent antler artifacts; the small dots are pieces of lithic manufacturing
      debris; ‘A’ represents waste from production of antler tools; and ‘W’ is debris from
      manufacture of wooden tools. It should be noted that the tools are grouped in small
      clusters on the right-hand (north) side of the hearth, as opposed to the isolated and
      dispersed occurrences to the left and above (south and west of) the hearth. Most of the
      tools were cached or tucked away and were not seen or were forgotten at the time the site
      was abandoned. This pattern of tool dispersal is very common in bedding areas of many
      sites.




                                                                                                                  eT
                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                  f ee
                                                                                      People in their Lifespace         183



                 DisTRIBUTATION      of   Bones




                                                                                         —   BONE    SPLINTER
  CONSTRUCTION                                                                               ceLehane
  House




             Bone   *MeEaL


             Bone   SeuNTerRs

             Heamrn

                                                               BoiLing       HEARTH
             STONES

             Wood                                                                                   WINTER   Flogs &

                                PALANGANA     Site;             House             *1     AgeeEA
                                    TULUGAK       LAKE,                  ALASKA
                                                                         4
                                                      METERS




122 The Palangana site, Tulugak Lake, Alaska showing the distribution of bones (except within
the house itself) (cf. ill. 80). Part of the scatter of bones is related to the feeding of dogs
which were tethered along the northwest edge of the site. Additional bone is related to
special features such as the stone boiling hearth, but most of it is scattered in the same
general area as the bone splinter dump, the most readily recognizable feature on the site.



   Returning to the internal organization of space within a house, it is clear that
the domestic space is defined by the dense distribution of artifacts and fragments                                     121
of debris from the manufacture or repair of wood and antler artifacts, Within this
area the distribution of artifacts is itself interesting. In the first place, there is a
major concentration between the beds and at arm’s distance to the right of seating
position no. 5 (the cook). Similarly, there are small clusters of artifacts to the rear
of, or just beside, all the male seating positions on the dark side of the hearth:
these tools are either disassembled items in the process of being manufactured or
completed tools in mint condition, which have been stored near the men’s
habitual seating spots or in sleeping areas. Cached items tend to be found less
     184      People in their Lifespace

              commonly in the domestic space, because it is regularly cleaned. I have noted
              that little caches are characteristic of sleeping areas, particularly where housing
              is permanent, so that the male or ‘dark’ side of the house is poorly lit at the time
              of moving; where a tent is taken down, however, the search for lost items on the
              dark side of the hearth is facilitated by daylight.



              Outside an Eskimo House


              Turning from the interior of a single house to the site as a whole, we can observe
              a contrast in the structure of space use between the highly differentiated and
              intensively used area within the shelter and the more grossly partitioned space in
  80, 122     the yard outside the house. In the area along the upper margin of the site plan
              (ill. 122), four dogs were tethered and between the dogs and the house was a big
              dump ofbone splinters. To the west of the house was a large and extensive feature,
              a stone boiling hearth used in the rendering of grease from caribou bones, It
              should be noted that the area occupied by the stone boiling hearth and its
              associated bone meal dump is almost as large as the house itself.
                  There are present on this site some special features which would be hard to
              interpret, were one to ignore the problems which the environment presents to the
Wilh, WARE,   Eskimo at different seasons, For instance, in ills, 119 and 121 there is shown out-
       22)    side the house a pile of rocks which is designated as a cache platform. In the Arctic,
              items laid on the ground prior to the major snowfalls during the months of
              October and November become frozen onto the surface and cannot be removed
              without the expenditure ofa great deal of effort in chipping the ice away. For this
              reason, bundles of rarely used items to be stored over the winter are placed on
       123    small platforms made of stones or (if stones are not readily available) of antler.
              Such special storage areas for goods needing special protection, but for which heat
              and light are not required, are a common feature around Eskimo houses: for
              example, a large winter meat storage rack is almost certainly located just south
              of Palangana’s house, in an area which was not excavated.
                 If we now stand back from the site for an overview of its spatial organization,
       122    what generalizations emerge? We can clearly see a core area — in this case the
              house interior, which was intensively used and internally partitioned in a very
              fine-grained manner. Immediately adjacent to it are areas more grossly differen-
              tiated in spatial terms, areas given over to activities which individually occupy a
              considerable amount of space: the storage racks and platforms, plus the door
              dump. Moving still further away from the house, we observe the largest and
              functionally most specialized areas: the dog tethers and the stone boiling hearth.
              Such empirical generalizations are useful and interesting, but how can we use
              these observations about an Eskimo winter settlement to help us interpret the
                                                                 People in their Lifespace




123 Caribou antlers used as storage facilities at Anaktuvuk Pass village, fall 1969. To
prevent items cached outside from freezing to the ground, packages of stored goods are
placed on top of antler platforms. This also facilitates access to the goods once the ac-
cumulation of snow has become substantial. (Photo courtesy of C. Amsden.)




archaeological record more generally? The answer is that we need to build theory
to explain patterns and structures of the sort noted at the site of Palangana’s house.



Constraints on the Use of Space: Heat and Light

Palangana’s house provides an example of spatial organization constrained by a
limited amount of sheltered living space. The house provided shelter for a wide
variety of activities distributed differentially in both time and space. Some of these,
such as crafts and food preparation, were conducted in the same spaces at different
times (intensive use), whereas others, for instance domestic activities and sleeping,
were more permanently segregated in spatial terms (extensive use). In essence, we
can consider the organization of space within the house primarily in terms of two
dimensions: heat and light. The position of heat within the building was roughly
symmetrical while light was distributed asymmetrically relative to the design of
the structure. Thus, activities requiring both light and warmth (various craft and
food preparation tasks) were localized in the lighted quadrant of the house and
were carried out sequentially, largely during the hours of daylight, but within an
area of intensive use; other activities requiring only heat and minimal light (e.g.
186   People in their Lifespace

      eating and sleeping) were concentrated in those areas of the house poorly illum-
      inated by outside light.
         Against the backdrop of general spatial organization — a compromise in the
      requirements for heat and light — we must view the effects of the division of labor
      in society, insofar as it was role differentiated in terms of sex and age. Many ofthe
      men’s activities, including the manufacture of tools and other useful items,
      required relatively large amounts of space and sometimes took a long time to
      complete.”! This being so, the setting up of specific use areas offered the advantage
      of not usurping or disrupting the daily cycle of space use in the limited domestic
      space within the confines of the house.
         Site structure, in addition to being affected by limitations on space use, must
      also be understood in terms ofthose factors which favor intensification within the
      utilized space, It is clear from the preceding discussion that the level of the outside
      temperature is a major factor contributing to site structure, for the colder it
      becomes, the more activities must be conducted in sheltered spaces, But this raises
      the problem that the construction ofa structure or the use ofa sheltered location
      tends to restrict the quantity and distribution oflight within it. Palangana’s house
      illustrates rather well how a limited quantity of light tends to favor intensification
      in the use of spaces with adequate light. The reverse is also true: when light is
      more generally available, a more extensive use of space may take place. Limita-
      tions on the distribution of heat should also increase the intensification of activities
      into more restricted spaces. For these reasons the more critical shelter becomes
      (mainly as a function of environmental conditions), the more differentiation of
      space use in response to lighting limitations may be anticipated.
         The effects of constraints on space use is illustrated by John Yellen’s*? observa-
      tion that the !Kung Bushmen move around during the day but, depending on the
      shifting distribution of shade, carry out essentially the same activities in a variety
      of different places. Such extensive use of space is really only possible if there are
      no other constraints on the appropriateness of places for doing tasks of short
      duration and with relatively small requirements for space. Faced only with the
      problem of maintaining an advantageous relationship between work space and
      shade, Bushmen workers are able to adapt their work space to take account of the
      distribution of shade. This example suggests that the more a particular task
      requires a very specific sort of setting for its performance, the more intense will be
      the concentration of activity in places which meet those requirements, The
      domestic space within Palangana’s house is a case in point.
         Regardless of environmental conditions, individual tasks differ in the degree to
      which they demand extensive use of space. For instance, a variety of tasks which
      can be accomplished by a single seated person might all be conducted in the same
      place, provided they did not overlap in time — a point to which I return below.
      On the other hand, activities requiring vastly different amounts of space for their
                                                                People in their Lifespace

execution tend to be independently distributed. We saw earlier in this chapter,
for instance, that a roasting pit is a facility dominating about 17 to 24 square
meters and its use considerably modifies the land surface (e.g. by the accumula-
tion of charcoal), making it unsuitable for use in many other ways. An activity
of this sort, therefore, will usually be given an area all to itself,



Turnover Rates


An additional factor which causes certain activities to take place in special areas
is variation in the time required to complete them. Tasks that monopolize space
for extended periods are rarely conducted in areas of intensive domestic use,
where the normal pattern involves activities of short duration which can be
slotted into the daily schedule of eating and sleeping. Many manufacturing tasks
require the production of parts which are gradually fitted together as each one is
completed, so that any interruption along the way is a real nuisance. We have all
experienced as children the frustration of laying out a puzzle or game on the
kitchen table, only to be told to pick up our things so that a meal can be prepared
— and, of course, the ‘picking up of our things’ largely destroys the progress
already made. For precisely the same reason, those tasks expected to take some
time are therefore generally relegated to areas where they can monopolize space,
while not interfering with tasks which require shorter periods of time (i.e. those
with a more rapid ‘turnover’ rate).?°



Effects of Bulk Processing

There is still another consideration to bear in mind when examining the organiza-
tion of space use: how bulky are the by-products generated by different tasks?
Regardless of its duration, any activity which creates a lot of waste takes up space,
not only during its execution but also afterwards, for until the waste is removed
its presence may make the surface inappropriate for other activities. This is true
no matter how fast the task is performed. When a Jemez Indian processes corn for 124
storage at harvest time, for example, a huge mound of debris is generated. It does
not take much imagination to realize that, as long as the debris from shucking the
corn is left in place, the area is of little use for other purposes.
   At sites occupied for a short time, activities producing waste products in bulk
may be located peripherally to intensively used areas and the debris from them —
allowed to remain in situ. On the other hand, with longer-term occupations, even
the activity areas located on the edges of the site may be tidied, so that the same
or different activities can be scheduled to take place later in the same place.
  188     People in their Lifespace




                                                         124 Jemez Pueblo Indian man pro-
                                                         cessing corn for winter storage, south-
                                                         western United States, October 1976.
                                                         (Photo courtesy of theMaxwell Museum
                                                         of Anthropology, University of New
                                                         Mexico. )




          Initially, I was surprised to observe the Nunamiut cleaning up their large spring
          and fall hunting sites, located at great distances from their village. They explained
          that the large quantities of bones and antler left lying around from previous mass
          butchering got in the way and were apt to cause accidents, Thus, during the off-
          season for caribou hunting, they collected the bones at key, repeatedly used sites
59, 125   and burned them.** Sites which were used only in response to one specific
          situation or which were otherwise unrelated to regular land use strategies were
          not cleaned up in this way. Il. 125 shows a site which is functionally equivalent
          to the hunting stand and butchering site at Anavik. The latter was cleaned up,
          since the site was intended to be used time after time, whereas the former was left in
          the state shown in the photograph, being judged unlikely to be used again. In
          short, bulk processing sites illustrate two points. Firstly, the size of the area re-
          quired and the quantity of debris anticipated may well determine the selection
          of the place where an activity is to take place. Secondly, the extent to which it is
          expected that the area will be used again, coupled with the durability of the
          bulky waste by-products generated there, affects how clean even peripherally
          located activity areas are kept.
                                                                     People in their Lifespace   189




125 Caribou kill and butchering site on the north slope of Anaktiqtauk River, Anaktuvuk
Pass, Alaska. (See ill. 53 for exact location.) Butchering debris which is scattered on a site
not intended for re-use is simply abandoned; but at other sites repeatedly used for similar
functions, the large antlers and bones are often gathered up and burned.                    =




Clean-up Strategies

The Eskimo butchering sites emphasize an additional factor which conditions the
structure of archaeological sites: site maintenance. Perhaps no archaeologist has
been more responsible for calling attention to this important aspect than Michael
Schiffer.7° In my experience as an ethnographer, site maintenance involves at
least two kinds of tactics: (1) preventive maintenance (the disposal of items away from
intensively used spaces) and (2) post hoc maintenance (the actual cleaning up of
areas and the transport of the debris collected to special dumping areas). Gener-
ally speaking, preventive maintenance involves some degree of anticipation of the
amount of rubbish likely to accumulate in the course of a given activity and this,
in turn, affects the differential placement of activities in the first place (as exam-
ples discussed earlier clearly indicate).
   In the case of activities occurring outside a structure, preventive maintenance
commonly takes the form of throwing waste out of the area of immediate action,
resulting in the build up of a deposit or toss zone on the edges of the intensively
used area. Technically speaking, this debris is primary refuse (in Schiffer’s terms’°),
190    People in their Lifespace

       because the items have been disposed within the immediate context of their use.
       Within a house, preventive maintenance is usually linked explicitly with clean-up
       strategies. For instance, inside an Eskimo dwelling items which otherwise might
       end up ina toss zone are placed instead in little piles around the hearth?’ orina
       bucket which is later taken to an outside dump. Likewise ‘aggregate’ refuse, such
       as that contained in a cooking pot, is deliberately carried out of the house to a
       dumping area, whereas in a more transient or unsheltered situation the same
  go   contents might be dumped directly to the side of the hearth. Both the distinct
       dumps created by preventive maintenance inside the house would be classified
       by Schiffer as secondary refuse (i.e. redeposited waste), yet they could contain
       exactly the same things as the toss zones around a hearth, which Schiffer would
       almost certainly recognize as primary refuse. The important difference between
       these two situations is the scale of the area being intensively used and maintained:
       In the former case it was quite small (the seating area relative to the peripheral
       toss zone), while in the latter it was the entire interior of a house, including the
       areas for seating, domestic work and sleeping. So understanding the organiza-
       tional relationships among items recovered from the site depends on teasing out
       structural patterns in the observed data, not on some conventional separation,
       made on purely formal grounds, between primary and secondary refuse.”®
          I think it is fairly obvious that the care with which an area is maintained is
       related to the intensity of its use, other things being equal. Areas used intensively
       are maintained the most thoroughly and will therefore be associated with
       specialized disposal areas. The degree to which this is true, however, is also a
       direct function of the length of time that such intensive use lasts — maintenance of
       areas used intensively only for short periods is minimal. This means we can expect
       a strong set of relationships in such areas between duration of occupation and the
       investment of effort in maintenance. Moreover, the longer the occupation, the
       more diverse are the activities which are likely to be conducted, so there should
       be a correlation between length of occupation and the numbers of special-
       purpose activity areas and/or the quantity of carefully maintained, large-scale
       areas on the periphery of the major activity area. This latter proposition certainly
       seems to be warranted by Yellen’s observations among the !Kung”? and is
       sustained by my own research, at least for residential sites.



       Building a Theory of Site Structure

       Enough has been said to indicate, albeit in a preliminary way, the directions that
       my attempts at theory building are taking with respect to site structure. Since
       both light and temperature are factors which vary in regular ways on a global
       scale, we should therefore be able to begin to suggest correlations between site
                                                             People in their Lifespace   IQ!

structure and geographical variations in both seasonal and day-to-day tempera-
tures, as well as in cycles of natural light. Other Se eonntentally conditioned
properties of settlement systems, such as mobility,*° may also be related in func-
tionally determined ways. For instance, the less mobile or more se dentary a group
is, the greater the likelihood of conflicts in the scale and duration of activities
carried out at any one place. We have already seen that variables ofthis sort affect
the extent to which different activities are likely to be spatially segregated or to
which space within sites is intensively or extensively organized. Similarly, the
more complex the technology and social organization ofa group using a site, the
more intricate will be the activities involved in manufacturing and processing
materials for use and consumption. This can only lead us to expect yet greater
complexity in site structure. If we also add environmental variables — for instance,
rain or intense sunlight, both of which have considerable influence on the use of
shelter — understanding spatial organization in human behavior becomes a still
more challenging and interesting area for research,
    I hope I have demonstrated how the investigation of functional relationships**
can help us develop methods for interpreting accurately observed patterns in the
archaeological record, Given some success in the development of interpretive
methods with faunal remains and with aspects of site structure, I think we can
now tackle the interesting task of trying to understand, in terms of the internal
organization of past systems, the variability in assemblage composition illustrated
by the ‘Mousterian problem’. The interpretive examples and resulting general-
izations discussed here should be regarded as illustrations of a particular research
strategy and I hope may also demonstrate the potential of this approach for the
study ofsite structure. Needless to say, however, much more has to be done before
we can take a scatter of artifacts and begin to reconstruct the dynamic contexts in
which such distributions took shape.
   Throughout this section of the book I have used the controversy about the
Mousterian to illustrate a much more general problem which archaeologists
simply have not faced: namely, that criteria based on similarity are insufficient
to demarcate the boundaries of past cultural systems. Recall for a moment the
different kinds of sites which were illustrated in Chapter 6: they demonstrated
repeatedly that a living system is composed of internally differentiated (1) places,
(2) labor forces, and (3) sets of tactics. Archaeologists must recognize that
different archaeological complexes represent expressions of functional differentia-
tion within single systems, not necessarily differences between systems. Simply to
group things which are similar ensures that we will never see a system in realistic
terms. We need ways of reliably bringing together all the different archaeological
aspects of a single system.               3
   These represent central challenges   9
                                       to archaeological   method. But there are
further implications to be drawn from the study of site structure for the discipline
192   People in their Lifespace

      as a whole. In Chapter 3 I discussed the difficulties experienced by archaeologists
      in recognizing the material expression of certain important types of sites in the
      past, such as base camps. The very notion of a base camp, for instance, carries
      with it implications about its inhabitants eating and sleeping in one and the same
      place, about the organization of social roles in terms of age and sex differences,
      about sharing behavior among those playing different roles, about how adaptive
      technology was supplied and maintained — all activities centered on discrete
      ‘living places’. Understanding the static spatial consequences of the way these
      different dynamic dimensions of organization were functionally integrated is a
      fundamental prerequisite for the accurate recognition of this or any other class
      of site in the archaeological record. This ability to recognize characteristics which
      are believed to reflect important, ‘pace-setting’ transformations is crucial, if we
      hope to discuss man’s evolutionary history in a realistic manner. Current con-
      ventions — for instance, arguments about artifact densities or the association of
      artifacts and bones — stem largely from wishful thinking and do not represent
      sufficient diagnostic criteria. We must abandon the idea that plausibility itself
      serves as ample justification for the meanings we give to archaeological observa-
      tions: better procedures than this are needed.
         Confronted with a recognizable pattern in the archaeological record, we have
      to begin by asking ‘What does it mean?’, But then we must follow the scientific
      approach that involves investigating properties of the external world in order to
      gain better understanding. Investigation of the relationships between dynamics
      (human behavior) and the resulting statics (artifacts, site structure, faunal
      remains) must be directed towards the development of reliable and accurate
      methods for inferring ‘what it was like’ in the past. In this section, I hope to have
      illustrated how research must move back and forth between (1) the recognition
      of patterns in the archaeological record, (2) asking the important question ‘What
      does it mean?’, and (3) conducting ‘actualistic’ studies in order to develop
      methods which aim to make inferences about ‘what it was like’ absolutely water-
      tight. Once we know something of the nature of the archaeological record, in
      terms of how it might have been formed, we will be in a position to make much
      more accurate statements about certain aspects of past reality.
                               Part lil
       WHY                  DID IT HAPPEN?

Certain events in the past we know must have happened. It isfairly clear, for instance, that at
one time we were all hunters and gatherers ; then somewhere, somehow, people started to plant
crops and to domesticate plants and animals, Similarly, it seems reasonably obvious that all
 mankind at one time lived in small, mobile groups, with little social superstructure in the
form of major political and religious institutions ;somewhere, somehow, these modes of life
changed and complex political systems came into being. So we can ask ‘Why did it happen?” ,
 without necessarily knowing much about the archaeological record of the times and places
 where such events occurred.
     To ask such a question is certainly not unique to scientists: cultured man has sought
explanations for known or imagined events ever since he has been capable of their cognitive
 appreciation. One of the main kinds of cultural variability recognizable in the world today,
indeed, ts the discrepancy among the intellectual biases favored in different styles of explana-
 tion. Certain events may be explained by a Marxist as deriving inevitably from the dialectical
 interplay of social forces ; a creationist may see the self-same events as the hand of God at
 work in all things ; those of other cultural persuasions will emphasize the causal role of human
 choice, population pressure, cybernetic looping, and so on. All such explanatory arguments
suggest necessary linkages between one set of conditions and another. They are arguments
about the kinds of causes that are thought to be operative.
     Once a problem (for instance, the origins of agriculture or the causes of complex society)
has been recognized, cultural bias alone can suffice to frame an explanatory argument. Given
only some form of received understanding of how the world works, it is possible to organize
 that understanding so as to provide a post hoc account for the ‘problem’ facts. In fact this is
 the commonest mode of argument in which cultural man engages, endlessly advocating this
position or that. He justifies his position by citing selected bits of evidence — observations
mustered for or against particular views of how the world works. The meanings of these
observations are generally assumed or taken to be self-evident. Since all such arguments are
based on assumptions about how the world worked at some time in the past, it is impossible
to reach a conclusion about the past which is inconsistent with the premises upon which the
argument is based. This means, inevitably, that there are as many explanations for past events
as there are fundamental differences in the basic assumptions made at the time of inference.
All arguments which try to make such inferences plausible by appealing to additional facts
which did not figure in the original argument are like advertisements : they are making claims

                                              193
194
       about the ‘utility’ ofthe mode ofthought being advocated.’ Most of the time such appeals to
      facts are equivocal, in that the meanings attached to the observations cited are not justified
       independently of the arguments to which they are referred as evidence.
           It is perhaps ironic that many of the general theories which archaeologists employ were
      generated, or at least stimulated, by the study of contemporary or historically documented
       cultural phenomena. Since I have in the past urged the crucial role of ‘actualistic’ studies in
       the development of our methods for inference,” obviously I do not disapprove of this situation.
       But it must be stressed that general theory is not middle-range theory. General theory
       involves arguments advanced to explain why the past was the way it appears to have been.
       Most of the theoretical propositions generated by the study of contemporary societies involve
       speculation about the sequences of events that might have characterized the transformation of
       one form of system into another. They take the form of extrapolations from one state of the
       system to another, with arguments about how the transformation took place.* What the
       theorist observes when viewing a living ethnographic situation, however, 1s the functioning of
      a system already in the state for which an explanation is sought.* For instance, in his classic
       argument relating irrigation to ‘Oriental’ forms of state organization, Wittfogel” suggested
       irrigation’s causal role on the basis of an observed correlation between hydraulic systems and
       socially stratified political systems. He understood from the functioning of such systems that
       the monopolistic control of irrigation technology seemed to provide the basis for the maintenance
       of power within the system. The next step was to suggest that this functional relationship
        between a productive monopoly and political power also caused the rise of socially stratified
       societies. A similar relationship must stand behind the essentially functional argument of
       Marshall Sahlins® that chiefs, since they function as redistributive agents, come into being
       under conditions which favor redistribution’ Such views are perhaps an inevitable outcome of
       having only ethnographic experiences to serve as the basis for speculations regarding evolution-
      ary processes.
          Archaeologists (and perhaps some historians) are the only researchers with facts of direct
       relevance to evolutionary episodes. All ethnographic observations are at best referable to the
      functioning of relatively stable systems: so why do we use them to prompt our imaginations
       regarding the evolution of systems? Archaeologists, in general, have not recognized the need
      for middle-range theory of their own. They have instead adopted the general theoretical
       arguments advanced by historians and ethnographers and accommodated observations from the
       archaeological record to them. It is merely an exercise in tautology when (as frequently
      happens) these observations in turn are cited as proof that the general theories are true!
          So archaeologists must abandon this profitless pastime. We need to concentrate on the
       development of middle-range theory — an area where ethnographic and historical observations
       are crucial in testing — and to use the methods for inference developed in this way to get answers
      to questions such as ‘What does it mean?” and ‘What was it like ?’. Only if reliable answers
       to these questions can be obtained might work on the question ‘Why did it happen?’ be
      profitable.
                       to}
         On the Origins of Agriculture

A professor of mine once remarked that you can spend your life trying to explain
why the earth is flat and be a total failure. He was quite right; if you ask a silly
question, you can waste a lot of time. In this chapter, therefore, I begin by briefly
sketching some of the basic models and arguments that have commonly been
adopted by archaeologists and anthropologists in approaching the problem ofthe
origins of agriculture — a global phenomenon beginning in some areas about
10,000 years ago, I shall point out what I think are some of the weaknesses in these
arguments and then proceed to outline a few research directions which seem
provocative. These new arguments are by no means finished; they are merely
probes. Even so, they indicate some slight but significant changes in the way we
may ask a question.



Approaches to the Problem of Agricultural Origins

I suppose there must have been speculation about the origins of agriculture as
long as man has been aware of his own history. Within our own cultural tradition,
writings by Charles Darwin! and by H. L. Roth” perhaps represent some of the
earliest serious attempts to deal with the problem, For all his insights into biology,
Darwin did not have quite such good ones into the origins of agriculture. In a
paper speculating about what would prompt man to realize that a plant would
grow from a planted seed, he approached the problem with the assumption that
the critical and determinant variable for the beginning of agriculture was
knowledge; he felt, that is, that agriculture was the inevitable consequence of the
knowledge that a seed planted in the ground would grow into a plant. This
erroneous view did not end with Darwin. There are still many who would argue
that agriculture is a mode of production with self-evident advantages and that
man will inevitably adopt it if he knows about them.
   An early form of mechanistic argument first emerged in England, initially
popularized in the writings of Peake and Fleure® and later in the works of V.
Gordon Childe.* It was a Darwinian argument (in the sense of Darwin’s biological
ideas) since there was some attempt to imagine what conditions in the past might

                                         195
196   On the Origins of Agriculture

      force man to experiment with new means of production. To what degree did man
      modify his behavior under pressure, because his existing strategies were failing?
      Did he adopt new strategies as a result of his own insight into what the future
      might hold? How far did certain pressures force man to cope with new problems,
      experiment with his environment and, eventually, become an agriculturalist?
      These important early ideas — ones with which we must still cope — were made
      popular by Childe and are well-known as the so-called ‘Propinquity Theory’ or
      ‘Oasis Theory’ of agricultural origins. In what now seems a charming but naive
      scenario, he imagined that as the Sahara Desert and other areas became increas-
      ingly desiccated at the end of the last Ice Age, all the animals (including man)
      progressively began to aggregate in the river valleys. There ensued a ‘crunch’,
      rather like catching a commuter train, in which animals and man, now cheek by
      jowl, had to find some mutual arrangement for working out their problems. In
      such favored environments where all forms of plants would grow, Childe wrote,
      men practicing agriculture would obviously provide the grazing animals with
      great amounts of food in the form of stubble. So there was envisaged a shift from
      man’s parasitic way of life as a hunter and gatherer, to the kind of symbiosis
126   between plants and animals which Childe believed characterized the agricultural
      way of life.°
         This-argument was not really an explanation, but what the philosopher of
      science Carl Hempel® might call an ‘explanation sketch’ ; that is, it included some
      variables and some ideas of mechanism, but it also included a model of history.
      Now the problem with successful model-building is that all the imagined events
      must be accurate (something theories do not demand). Where variables are



      126 The village farming community. An agricultural village established at the end of World
      War II on the island of Yaeyama (Ryukyu Islands) by displaced persons from Okinawa,
      Iwo and Siepan. (Photo taken in June 1953 by E. Santry, on assignment with the author.)
                                                          On the Origins of Agriculture




127 The herders’ village. Navajo settlement of Ah Tso lige near Red Lake in Arizona, c.
November 1935, at the time of counting sheep. (Photo courtesy of the Maxwell Museum of
Anthropology, University of New Mexico.)



 combined with events, there is the danger of attack on both fronts: your historical
facts may be proven to be wrong, or it may be argued that your variables were
inappropriate. Frequently, by showing one of these two elements to be ill-
 conceived, the other one is also rejected. This was exactly the strategy followed
 by Robert Braidwood (then of the Oriental Institute in Chicago) and his co-
workers, in attacking Childe’s argument based on mechanistic aggregation.’ He
 employed a variety of techniques, such as pollen analysis and sedimentology, to
 evaluate whether there had, in fact, been an environmental change prior to the
appearance of agriculture in the Near East. His conclusion, basically, was that
there had been no major period of desiccation.® If that was the case, then clearly
Childe’s model was wrong.”
   Braidwood’s own approach to the question was essentially idealist, since he too
shared the perspective that knowledge was a limiting factor. He argued that man
became more familiar with environments at the close of the Pleistocene and that
this familiarity built up to the point where he realized that he had enough
knowledge to manipulate the environment to his own ends. The concept is that
of crossing a sort of intellectual Rubicon. To use Braidwood’s own phrase, man
‘settled in’ to his environment,’® like the chicken getting comfortable on the nest,
and then — one must suppose — had great thoughts! If man settled into, and
accumulated knowledge about, an environment that contained potentially
198   On the Origins of Agriculture

      domesticable plants and animals, then there seemed to be a certain inevitability
      about the end results of the process.'' That is, ifhe settled into an area with wild
      wheat, he would become a wheat farmer; if he settled into an area with mountain
      sheep, he would become a sheep herder. This was more or less the level of under-
      standing of mechanism to be found in much of the argument about the origins of
      agriculture between the end of World War II and the early 1960s. The ‘settling
      in’ notion is still with us. I think it underlies much of the work by the late
      Eric Higgs and his associates,'* in which they argued essentially that domestica-
      tion was a protracted learning process, a very gradual dawning on man of the
      possibilities for manipulation offered by his environment. So the gradualism
      characteristic of Braidwood’s writing is not at all missing from the contemporary
      literature. In fact, a resurgence of this type of argument is apparent.
         It is worth noting, incidentally, that an additional element was often implicit
      in the idealist literature of pre- and immediately post-war periods. Those theoriz-
      ing about the origins of agriculture along the lines I have just mentioned would
      occasionally be confronted with an ethnographic counter-case in which, say, a
      human group lived in an area where wild corn grew, but did not domesticate
      corn. One explanation was that they were dull people who did not learn very
      well. Conversely, a group who practiced agriculture in an area where it did not
      seem they should had to be regarded as exceptional, since one of the determinant
      variables upon which the theory depended was a quality of the actor— that is, his
      ability to learn.
         The Childean approach involving the push-and-pull of selection, then, was
      replaced entirely by Braidwood’s view of agriculture as an emergent process — a
      view to which there were no effective alternatives in the archaeological literature
      of the 1950s. Indeed, this was a period during which ‘The Emergence of. . .” was
      a common title for articles and there was much discussion of the zncipience of
      various phenomena (with definitions of incipient, epi-incipient and post-incipient
      phases). The general picture was one of man’s gray dawning before illumination:
      he was floundering around in his environments, trying this or that. My own minor
      challenge to the Braidwood view, in a paper published in 1968,'* had some effect
      on the field. In fact, it appeared contemporaneously with other arguments in
      which population growth was cited as a major factor conditioning the appearance
      of technological innovations,'* as well as more complex forms of socio-political
      organizations.'> My argument was adopted for the data from the Near East!®
      and for a time enjoyed some popularity. Nevertheless, it suffered from some of the
      same weaknesses of Childe’s earlier arguments — namely, it was a combination of
      conjectural history and theory, an ‘explanation sketch’. I tried to use some
      variables that I thought were important in a model based on what we thought at
      the time the past had been like. Unfortunately, I was wrong about what the past
      had been like; and if that could be demonstrated, then it was also fairly easy to
                                                       On the Origins of Agriculture   199
dismiss the variables I had been working with as unimportant, In fact, after the
initial popularity of so-called ‘demographic’ arguments, there set in a reaction,”
Many authors today simply declare that such arguments are naive or have been
proved inadequate.'®
   Regardless of controversy over the importance of demographic factors per Sse,
the methodological message coming forth was the following. Agriculture is a way
of making a living, a solution to a fundamental human problem ~ getting enough
to eat. Now if agriculture developed in some way out of the practices of non-
agricultural people, then it seems reasonable to suppose that it arose to solve a
problem that some of them were facing. What on earth could that problem be?
Surely it was environmental, because the problems of food procurement for
hunters and gatherers must be a by-product of the dynamics of the environment
in interaction with man. Are the animals where they are supposed to be? Are
they there in the numbers they used to be? Are plant resources being over-
exploited? In other words, what is the interaction between man and the environ-
ment? Quite justifiably, therefore, there was a period of intense interest in the
analysis of environments, with the work becoming more and more detailed. The
archaeologists were still gradualists, but they were now working within an
ecological context.
    It was interesting, then, to see what happened when someone came along to a
lecture series and asked, say, ‘Why didn’t the Californian Indians practice
agriculture?’. The lecturer might respond by asking what kinds of plants they
had, and the audience would usually supply the data at this point: “They had lots
of acorns’. The question was then brushed aside by observing that the Indians
didn’t need agriculture in such a lush environment. This exemplifies an argument
that increasingly appeared both in lectures and in print. I call it the Garden of
Eden Proposition. Contrary to the Bible, it seems, there was not just one Garden of
Eden, but lots of them (and they are being generated rapidly as a function of the
number of people who write about the origins of agriculture!). Let me explain.
   There are many ethnographic accounts of non-agricultural peoples present in
interesting parts of the world during the period of exploration or colonial settle-
ment. Consequently, whenever an argument was advanced about why agricul-
ture was adopted, it was possible to do a quick test of logic by asking ‘If that’s
true, why didn’t the So-and-So have agriculture?’. Such continuous testing of
hypotheses was possible with the availability of ethnographic material, about
which, however, the environmental specialists knew very little. So there came to
be a wonderful game played between people who had ethnographic expertise and
people who thought they knew about the environmental background of agricul-
tural origins; it was a game I have seen played over and over in recent years.
   Someone might be offering an argument about the origins of agriculture,
urging the importance, for example, of diminishing quantities of pistachio nuts
200    On the Origins of Agriculture

                             gw




                               NY
                          ; )"eBf
                               ©
                             ©: |
                             ral




       128 ‘Man and all the animals in the Garden of Eden’. Many archaeologists have suggested
       that rich environments such as this, with plentiful food just for the picking, provided the
       setting for the beginnings of sedentary life and the origins of agriculture. (Drawing by Iva
       Ellen Morris.)


       among the hunters and gatherers of the Near East and pointing out that complex
       society is dependent on giving up hunting and gathering, when a member of the
       audience would point out that there were no pistachio nuts in Mesoamerica, yet
       agriculture was invented there; or, conversely, that there were all those complex
       societies in California and the Northwest coast of North America which were not
       agricultural! The speaker might confess that he had not considered those issues,
       but would point out that in Mesoamerica there was some other resource said to
       be diminishing, while in California and on the Northwest coast they had so many
       acorns or salmon that they had no need to invent agriculture. That is, people did
       not adopt agriculture if they lived in highly productive environments: little
       ‘Gardens of Eden’ where food was plentiful. In addition, it has been generally
       assumed that in such environments people will become sedentary; they will stop
       moving. For instance, the following summarizes what seems to be the consensus
       view of many archaeologists: ‘We have taken it for granted that, in general,
       sedentary life has more survival value than wandering life to the human race,
       and that, other things being equal, wherever there is an opportunity to make the
       transition, it will be made. . . .”!°
         This proposition is what I like to call the ‘Slug Principle’: a man doesn’t do
 129   anything to get a meal unless he has to. If he doesn’t have to walk, he will sit. If
                                                            On the Origins of Agriculture   201


there is a lot of food in one place, as for example on a shell bank, then he will sit
right there. Clearly, in a Garden of Eden man will not move about, These two
ideas, the ‘Garden of Eden Proposition’ and the gustatory ‘Slug Principle’ have
been woven together to make an interesting array of arguments,
   For instance, it has recently been suggested that there was a Garden of Eden
promoting sedentary life at the top of the Andes!?° Similarly, it has been proposed
that in the Great Basin of North America there existed a Garden of Eden along
various internal drainages, where big marshes produce vast numbers of edible
cat-tails. | don’t know how many tons of cat-tails there were supposed to be
within a two-hour radius of the site in question; but if you want to eat cat-tails
all your life, then perhaps there is a Garden of Eden there. At any rate, it was
argued — quite seriously — that this resource was the basis of sedentism and village
life in the region.*?
    Another suggestion, recently advanced by Perlman,” tries to identify aquatic
and estuarine resources as the ‘real’ Gardens of Eden. It is claimed that any
strategy which tends to optimize labor by minimizing effort and risk will be
selected. The Slug Principle dictates that there will be a gravitation towards
productive Gardens of Eden, which, in this version of the argument, are identified
as being coastal environments.      I admit that this was something I myself had


129 Rice drying for storage at Hoshino village, Yaeyama island in the southern Ryukyus.
Sedentism represents a major investment in facilities and the movement of goods and
products to consumers; it is also made possible by bulk storage of products over periods
much longer than they are available in nature. (Photo taken in June 1953 by E. Santry, on
assignment with the author.)
      On the Origins of Agriculture

      casually assumed at the time I built my own model of agricultural origins in
      marginal zones.” But I gave up such a position some time ago, since it seemed to
      me to lead one inevitably to the view that some peoples were ‘more perceptive’ or
      ‘smarter’ than others: why else would they have grasped so early the Great Truth
      of the Least Effort Principle, while others ignored its self-evident advantages ?
         Although it does not necessarily follow from these arguments that the idyllic
      sedentism made possible by a localized Garden of Eden led to agriculture, some
      archaeologists have made such claims, Kent Flannery found his Garden of Eden
      in Turkey. After Harlan?* published his well-known paper on the wild wheat
      fields there, Flannery”® suggested that these might indeed have been a sufficient
      basis for sustaining sedentism and he apparently thought the development of
      further arguments unnecessary. This suggestion was later linked by Hassan’° to
      environmental changes which brought into being in some places a Garden of
      Eden yielding resources said to be of increased seasonal and spatial predictability.””
      These resources were thought of previously only as starvation foods, but under
      changed environmental conditions their true value was realized and the use of
      these ‘environmentally stimulated’ high-yield resources promoted sedentism and
      led eventually to agriculture.
         Yet another example is provided in recent work by Niederberger.*® In her
      excavations at a site on the side of Lake Texcoco in Mexico, she found remains
      of ducks, deer, cat-tails — in fact, evidence for all the resources a man might need,
      all in one place. There was no reason to move from such a place. And so here is a
      whole set of arguments about the origins of agriculture. Man first became
      sedentary because he found a little Garden of Eden. Once he was accustomed to
      being sedentary, things began to go sour on him; for instance, perhaps the ducks
      didn’t come as much any more. Man began to foul his nest, so to speak, and was
      forced to move to supplementary production (i.e. agriculture). But if sedentism
      leads to agriculture in this way, then we are back where we were earlier. For why
      didn’t the Californians and the peoples of the Northwest coast develop agricul-
      ture? Such arguments overlook a very important bit of empirical evidence: while
      it appears that agriculture followed sedentism in the Near East, Mesopotamia,
      even in Peru, the data available from Mesoamerica and North America are clear
      in indicating that the adoption of domesticated plants preceded the appearance of
      sedentary ways of life in those areas.7?
         Although there are others, the arguments I have sketched above constitute the
      essence of the explanations so far offered for agriculture. In the gradualist argu-
      ment, man develops agriculture because he becomes more knowledgeable.
128   According to the Garden of Eden view, he does so faster in rich environments
      which encourage sedentism; sedentism, in turn, is seen as encouraging productive
      intensification, or experimentation with ways of producing sufficient food in the
      limited space around a permanent settlement (hence, agriculture), An alternative
                                                        On the Origins of Agriculture   203


to this view (and one which totally begs the question) is that the adoption of
agriculture requires increased sedentism; presumably, therefore, with agriculture
people settle down, because it offers that increased reliability which ensures that
the decision against mobility will be made according to the Slug Principle.*°
   All the views summarized so far incorporate various forms of gradualism into
the argument. In addition, all the ideas are teleological. The continuous but
gradual move towards the use of reliable resources, the adoption of techniques
which lead towards the assumed absolute goal of sedentism, or the move towards
the reduction of effort — all these notions assume that man’s evolution is goal-
oriented and that it is therefore progressing towards some inevitable end point.
It is worth noting that the approaches of structural-Marxists and general systems
theorists who consider processes of morphogenesis are not so different from the
earlier gradualist views, because change is seen as inevitable. In both of these
newer styles of discourse, it is assumed that ‘the cultural system has self-trans-
forming properties.... Rather than societies being in equilibrium they are
always in a state of becoming. . . .*' Here transformations ofsociety, we are told,
are to be plotted largely as a product of human choices, choices as to how to invest
one’s time or how to use the fruits of productive investments: ‘. . . how can one
speak of material causation of human actions when the unpredictable and
creative powers of the human mind are at work in nearly every situation ?”**
    There is a further form of gradualism which does not see the vital property
causing the change to agriculture as coming from within the system, but imagines
an external ‘prime mover’. This force is thought to be a continuous push from
 the environment. One might cite as an example the demographic argument of
 Cohen,*? who employs a nearly pure form of Malthusian theory about population
growth — namely, that since populations continue to grow unabated, there is a
 continuous and unrelenting pressure operating on a group to favor new methods
of increasing the food supply.
    It is my opinion that we need to give much more serious thought to Darwinian
 arguments, where the driving forces of change lie in the interaction between the
 environment and the adaptive system being considered. Given such a view, the
system of adaptation may enjoy relatively stable periods of varying duration,
representing times when it is able to cope successfully with the perturbations of
 the environment. Selection for change occurs when the system is unable to
continue previously successful tactics in the face of changed conditions in its
environment. The source of such changes may be the accumulated effects of the
system’s history, but such effects are build-ups of changed ecological relationships
rather than the continuous operation either of some inner vital principles or of
unrelenting external pressures. Childe made a probe in the direction of a selec-
 tionist approach of this sort, but he was knocked down on strictly historical
grounds, I feel it might be useful to try to move in that same direction once again.
204

      Mobility as a Security Option among Hunters and Gatherers

      Most of the arguments given above share one common assumption: that move-
      ment is something man tries to avoid and that sedentism is a desired condition.**
      Is that assumption justified and, ifso, why? From the standpoint ofa species such
      as our own, trying to gain a secure living, why should mobility be bad and sitting
      in one place good?
         The first thing that struck me was simply an empirical observation. Over the
      past decade or more, I and my students have had a variety of experiences living
      and working with mobile peoples — with Eskimos in north-central Alaska, with
  130 Central Desert Australian Aborigines, with !Kung Bushmen in Botswana, with
      mobile horticulturalists in northern Mexico. None of these peoples believed that
      mobility was bad ; indeed, in the case of‘pure’ hunters and gatherers, the idea was
      quite insane, for a simple reason, As one old Eskimo man expressed it, ‘When
      I’m here in one place, I don’t know what’s going on over there.’ He went on to
      explain that living a secure life was totally dependent on his making good judg-
      ments about where to move next, judgments that were possible only if he knew
      what was happening throughout an enormous area in which he was not actually
      living. It was necessary, that is, to monitor a huge amount of territory, in order
      to have sufficient knowledge to make prudent decisions regarding the resources
      pulsing through and across that space.
         When contemporary Eskimo men are forced by various bureaucratic means
      to stay in one place, they find it a very traumatic experience. In practice, they
      sneak away and make long circuitous trips over the territory. They come back
      with long narrations: how many moose tracks they saw, where the ducks are,
      how good the firewood resources are in a certain area, whether there have been
      forest fires, whether the snow drifts are up and over the lakes, how deep the ice
      is on ice-fishing lakes, and so forth. All this is crucial information, in order to be
      able to know what to do ifsomething transforms what had appeared to be a secure
      state — for instance, if grizzly bears get into meat caches and the stores are lost.
      Unless one can make good judgments about what to do next, based on informa-
      tion gathered from a vast area, one may not survive. So it turns out that most of
      the moves these Eskimo made were made not because they did not have food, but
      because they did have food. If there is plenty of food in one place, it is always
      possible to return there. It is a low-risk, secure strategy to take a long walkabout
      in such circumstances, to take chances on the availability of risky foods. In fact,
      much mobility occurs when there is also the most food. That hardly suggests the
      operation of the Slug Principle.
         I found exactly the same thing in the Central Desert of Australia. I was working
      with a group in an area of very high density of game: on one four-hour walking
      trip, for example, we counted as many as eighty-five kangaroos, You might
                                                           On the Origins of Agriculture   205




 130 Ngatatjara Aborigines moving camp in the Warburton Ranges in Western Australia,
¢. 1935. In contrast to the sedentary way of life associated with agriculture and other
intensive food-getting strategies, hunters and gatherers must continuously reposition
themselves within their environment. (Photo taken by N. B. Tindale, courtesy of the
Department of Anthropology, University of California at Los Angeles.)


suppose, if the Garden of Eden view were correct, that the group would just sit
there and work their way through the kangaroos. On the contrary, however, they
realized that the abundance of game gave them the total security they needed to
make a trip to see the other end of the territory, which they had not visited for a
long time; ifanything went wrong, they could always return to the known, secure
situation. I think that all hunter and gatherer systems work this way. They do
not stay in one place where food resources are nucleated and get nutritionally
drunk, but rather they use such circumstances as an opportunity to travel to other
areas, most often for purposes of information-gathering. So it seems to me that,
ifa system is to become a sedentary one, a set of circumstances must arise in which
information of this kind is no longer a help and the option of moving around in
unoccupied territory is no longer a realistic one.
   At this point, I must stress again the scale of hunting and gathering systems:
they are not all big, but none of them is really small, We saw in Chapter 6 that the
caribou hunters I worked with (admittedly, an extreme case) think of their
territory in terms of a life cycle. A group of three dozen people will use an area 53
                                                                                                  =
                                                                  AREA VSED
                                                                  DURING THE
                                                                  LOW     JN) CAR/BO0U
                                                                  NUMBERS
                                                                  24,500 SF MILES




                                                                      eer
        AREA USED
        BEFORE AND
        AFTER    THE
        LOW /N CARIBOU
         NUMBERS
            8,000s¢.      4
                 MILES
             a




                     NuNAMIUT    TERRITORIES
     BEFORE      é AFTER THE CRASH OF THE CARIBOU                         POPULATION
        Note:                                     SCALE          IN      MILES
       INFORMATION   TAKEN                       a               a                      |
       FROM  C.W.  AMSOEN  ,        IS77        (e)   20   40   60 380    100   «$320   «(180   «6160

                                                                            BINF ORD




131 Nunamiut territories before and after the 1910 crash of the caribou population. This
hunter-gatherer group’s response to food stress was to triple the effective territory they
covered for extracting food. (Based on Amsden 1977.) Coastal aquatic resources — what
some would see as a “Garden of Eden’ — were used as a back-up food supply during the low
in caribou numbers, but with the recovery of the herds, the Eskimo returned to mobile
hunting in the interior.


of about 22,000 square kilometers during their lifetime. That is a big area, but
the men know that much space — where the caches are, where the stream crossings
are, where the game trails are, and so on. During my fieldwork, for example, I
took an inventory of cached tools and subsequently interviewed the hunters of
two overlapping bands about their locations: almost every man could provide
me with an accurate list of cached tools dispersed over an area of nearly a quarter
of a million square kilometers. Such information was not gained by being seden-
tary! Their entire educational system, in fact, was designed to teach them about
that much space, to give them a series of alternative options.
                                                       On the Origins of Agriculture   207


   It is easy to see that in such a huge space there exist plenty of alternative
possibilities, if the resources in one particular micro-environment fail. For in-
stance, in north-central Alaska in 1910 the caribou population crashed, Outsiders
involved in the Yukon gold mining operations started forest fires which burned
off the winter range (an area the Eskimos never saw themselves), contributing to
a catastrophic decline in the population density of caribou. But the caribou
hunters were not at all at a loss when they found that their primary source offood
was gone: they had several other options, all involving mobility, and they knew
exactly what they were. Some moved to the Upper Colville River and began
putting up stores of fish; others began the seasonal hunting of mountain sheep in
the Dietrich Valley, a part of their range in which they had not actually been
living; others began to compete with Athapaskan Indians for access to another
caribou herd with a different breeding territory and winter range; yet others
moved to the coast and started hunting seals. None of these alternative strategies
had to be learned. The men already knew and had experienced all the funda-
mental subsistence strategies of their neighbors and could execute them very well


132 Okinawan man and his           ee   Sages.
wife preparing the soil for
planting   sweet  potatoes,
Yanbabu, 1952.




133     Transplanting    rice
seedlings     into    ground
paddies,    Nago   Okinawa,
1Q5I.
208     On the Origins ofAgriculture

        But the means to their knowledge of these other options was through mobility —
        mobility which led to the accumulation of an information bank, on the basis of
        which alternatives could be selected.
           We may turn back to our initial question about agricultural origins, but from
        a rather different angle. What would force a group of people to shift from a
        system based on an information bank (hunting and gathering) to one based on a
        labour bank (agriculture) ? Staying in one place to tend plants is a totally different
        way of gaining a livelihood from the mobile strategies I have just outlined. In my
        opinion, the critical constraint must have been something that prevented
        mobility asa security option, This leads me back to a set of arguments I advanced
        some years ago, Although the idea seems to be out of favour in certain quarters,
        I still think that population growth must somehow be relevant to the problem.



        Population Growth and Hunter-Gatherer Subsistence Options

        The archaeological record indicates that the widespread shift from hunting and
        gathering to agricultural strategies is largely a phenomenon of the post-Pleisto-
        cene period. If the arguments advanced to account for this involve the loss of
        mobility options as a consequence of demographic packing, then we must face
        the problem of why population growth only had some effect so recently in human
        evolution. This is a subject that is far from being well understood, but I feel that
        we may have been misled by assuming that explanations we give for events after
        the emergence of fully sapiens man about 30,000 years ago should also be relevant
        before that time. Pre-modern man may have been very different from ourselves,
        both biologically and behaviorally, as Ihave already suggested (Chapters 2 and 3).
           Now it is known that every species has zones in which its reproduction is
        optimal: corn grows better in Iowa, for instance, than almost anywhere else.
        Why should this not also be true for human hunters and gatherers? I therefore
 eyes   examined how population densities achieved among hunters and gatherers vary
        in relation to environment throughout the world. Summarizing considerably, the
        result was that the maximum densities occurred roughly at a mean earth bio-
        temperature (Mean Effective Temperature)** of 14.4°C — that is, right in the
        temperate zone, not in the tropical rainforest or in the desert. It seems, then, that
        fully sapiens man is reproductively most effective in the temperate zone, something
        I seriously doubt for pre-sapeens man; early man did not exist in the temperate
  52    zone and Neanderthal man was not very successful there. So modern man may
        have very much more reproductive potential in parts of the warm temperate zone
        than in any other place.
           Once man with this potential existed in the temperate zone there would have
        been a build-up of population. The process, of course, must have been compli-
                                                                                                                     On the Origins ofAgriculture      209


                        APPROXIMATE             MEAN      Famers
                        BPFECTIVE        TEMPERATURE
     ;   3
                                                             (ge
                                                            TEMPERATE
                                                                                         =                          Cees
                                                                                                                    SE ET)   AAI

     3                                                       ZONE                                    pear
             Qo
     =Q                                                           BOOS                                         TEMPERATURE
         .                        Coa                             ;                     Ss                      ZONE      SUPPORTING
         o 8                      TEMPBRATE                       \                                             MAXIMUM        HuUNTeER—
             9                    ZONE                            NN                                            GATHERER       DENSITIES
                                                                      h
         >                                                        NI
         be                                                           \"
     "i                                                            '
         z8                                                       NN
     O§      9                                                                  ‘              |               y=
                                                                                                                    Ceesgerse Zove,
                                                                                                                              ZW,

                                                                                                                          SEASON        pea
                                                e                                   \
         Z                                                8) e                      '                °.
         E 8      “TUNDRA
                  ZOon=E




     ee                                         ©7/6,                                         St’ ™                             iy               aie
                  Sem       lOM          mize       ISN   lees)           16s           17)    18.        [9        20 ZI 22. 23-2425
                   Baitreys              Errecrive                    TEMPERATURE

                  HUNTER—GseTHERER   POPULATION  DENSITIES
                  AcHIEVED IN DIFFERENT   ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                      ZONES                                                         -
 L                                                                                                                              LL.     BINF   ORD




134 Hunter-gatherer population densities achieved in different environmental zones. Ethnographic
hunter-gatherer societies have been grouped into five ordinal categories (curves A to E) of a
‘rainfall index’, derived by dividing the potential evapotranspiration at a locality (i.e. the
amount of water which would be evaporated and transpired if unlimited water was
available, given the amount of solar radiation recorded annually at the locality) by the
actual rainfall. By plotting mean hunter-gatherer densities for each effective temperature
and rainfall interval, it can be seen clearly that the maximum population densities are
achieved within a zone of warm temperate environments (shaded area). The actual
maximum density value in each rainfall category shifts with effective temperature (thick
checkered bar).



cated by climatic fluctuations during the Ice Age, which resulted in many local
extinctions of population. Nevertheless, in some places the build-up would have
occurred to the point where density-dependent effects came into operation. This
makes some sense in terms of biology: the main regulatory mechanism seems to
be mortality in the tropics and fertility in the Arctic, the two coming together in
the temperate zone. It is interesting to note that the rate of population growth in
comparable equatorial settings was enormously faster in the New World than in
the Old World, because in the New World there were no native disease organisms.
     On the Origins of Agriculture

     By the time man entered the New World he had evolved with these organisms in
     the Old World; he had gone through a ‘disease filter’ which allowed a population
     boom when he entered the equatorial zones of the New World. This accounts for
     the greatly truncated chronology of cultural development from hunters and
     gatherers to state societies there, something related both to nutrition and to
     intrinsically different rates of population growth in different environments
     (although the mechanisms are not yet known). At any rate, my main point is that
     we cannot think in terms of a constant reproductive potential for man in all
     environments,
         If we accept that discernible population growth would occur among hunters
     and gatherers in certain environments, we may ask what effects that growth would
     have on their normal strategy of subsistence. Let us take a typical situation in
     which we have a group of about thirty people in an annual range A which they
52   occupy for about ten years, making a lifetime range of approximately five such
     units. As the number ofpersons in the group increases, arguments about meeting
     kinship obligations sooner or later break out. Perhaps there are simply too many
     mouths to be fed with the available stored fish and, despite an ethic of generalized
     reciprocity, someone begins to go back on his obligation to feed a kinsman, One
     or two angry families decide to move away into the next annual range unit B. It
     is their territory and they certainly have a right to do so, but at this point nobody
     is yet living there; under normal conditions the whole group would not have
     moved there for another five years or more, so this segmentary move is, in a sense,
     premature. When the resources in territory A begin to give out, the remaining
     people there, since they are still angry with their kinsmen, move into territory C,
     rather than B. Ina very short space of time, in place of one kinship group there
     come to be two, both quite legitimately using different parts of the same lifetime
     range simultaneously. Instead of the territory being used serially, as it would be
     without population pressure, competition within the system tends to separate and
     segment people, resulting in the utilization of territory in leap-frog fashion. With
     further population growth, fights continue to occur (and I have some good
     examples documented ethnographically). The group in territory B may move on
     to D, while that in C might split into two mutually avoiding groups in E and F.
     When the group in D comes full circle and moves back into A, many of the
     resources necessary for living there will not yet have recovered: in the Arctic, for
     instance, willows used for firewood need about forty-five years before they are
     ready for use again, This presents no problem under normal conditions, since a
     group would not expect to return to the same territory for well over forty years.
     When they return in twelve, difficulties will obviously occur.
        As the region fills up, then, a band comes to have little or no option about where
     it can move next. By packing the region with people, mobility is restricted and
     resource exploitation becomes concentrated. Packing, in fact, thwarts the normal
                                                        On the Origins of Agriculture

strategy of hunters and gatherers to use mobility as a source of security, Among
the interesting set of responses to this problem is an increase in interregional
visiting by individuals (since whole groups cannot move between regions as they
once did). This may represent an attempt both to get through difficult times and
to educate the children about the territory as a whole, but the attempt is totally
unrealistic, given that the children will have no opportunity to move away into
other parts of the territory. A far more significant response, however, occurs in
terms of the kinds of food resources utilized.
   There exists a simple relationship between the body size of an animal and the
amount of space it requires to feed itself. The space needed to feed an animal in
the 120 to 300 pound body size range is fairly extensive (and in the Arctic is very
large indeed). Ifa hunter has an area of about 20,000 to 25,000 square kilometers,
he will probably be able to kill moose and caribou on a regular basis. If, however,
he is restricted to an area with sides of only 80 kilometers, he may still be able to
get caribou, assuming his territory lies on a migration route; but he will certainly
no longer get moose, because their range is bigger than his bya substantial margin.
The hunter who formerly killed moose and put up the meat for storage now finds
he must make do with animals of smaller body size — ducks, or fish, or in coastal
areas even shellfish. In short, he is progressively forced to move down the chain
of animal body sizes, as he is constrained spatially. Eventually, inevitably, he is
drawn away from animals and towards plants, because plants are aggregated in
small amounts ofspace. A very different set of strategies now comes into play. In
the first place, there is a switch to alternative animal species, often aquatic ones
(and, indeed, the first response to packing in the temperate zone seems to have
been the move to aquatic resources). Secondly, dependence on plants increases.
Thirdly, as population continues to grow in an environment which offers no
budding-off options, consumer demand increases within a space that is now
constrained: some form of intensive production system (i.e. agriculture) now
becomes mandatory.
   This packing model is not necessarily an easy one to work with from the methodo-
logical point of view. How can archaeologists measure population growth or
packing? Ina sense, the situation is rather like that of a medical doctor observing
the symptoms and trying to determine what the disease is. One of the interesting
‘symptoms’ that the packing model would lead us to expect is that hunters’
attempts at herd management and animal domestication should precede plant
domestication. In the archaeological sequences from Peru, where domesticated
camelids and guinea pigs appear some 2,000 years before any domesticated plants,
that certainly seems to be true. Similarly, the work of Dexter Perkins and others
in the Near East suggests that domesticated sheep and goats precede plants in
that region also.°*° A few facts of this kind, which could not be adequately dealt
with before, begin to make a little more sense.
On the Origins of Agriculture

   The beginning of a sedentary lifestyle constitutes another interesting symptom.
I have already noted that one major contrast between the Old World and Peru
on the one hand, versus Mesoamerica and North America on the other, is the
difference between the historical appearance of sedentism relative to evidence for
the use of domesticated plants; in the latter areas, domesticated plants precede by
some considerable time the appearance of sedentary settlements, while in the
former the reverse is the case. If it is accepted as likely that animal protein is
important both nutritionally and in terms of human reproduction,*’ then plant
agriculture itself never solves the packing problem. Alternative non-plant foods
such as aquatic resources*® and the actual domestication of animals help intensify
production for human use of non-plant foods. Under such conditions, moves
toward sedentism may precede the adoption of agriculture, which — while it may
increase in importance as a ‘calorie-seeking’ strategy — never solves the nutritional
imbalance between animal and plant foods. In Mesoamerica and North America,
as well as in some regions of temperate Europe, increased sedentism facilitated by
aquatic exploitation seems to have anticipated the adoption of agriculture. On
the other hand, where aquatic alternatives were not present and where domestica-
tion of animals did not occur, agriculture continued to be a calorie-seeking
strategy and mobility remained the only means of ensuring the acquisition of
animal foods largely from terrestrial sources, In these circumstances, sedentism is
only forced into being long after the adoption of agriculture as a ‘back-up’
strategy and at a much greater packing threshold.
   Yet another symptom is what Flannery®” called the ‘broad spectrum revolu-
tion’. But in fact this was a broad spectrum depression, not a revolution. As hunters
and gatherers were packed in a region, they were forced to move down the animal
body-size chain, to exploit a wider variety of species, to make use of increasing
numbers of smaller and smaller food packages, to compensate for the more
specialized (and no longer viable) strategies they employed as spatially unfettered
hunters. This change is itself perhaps one of our best clues to the processes involved
in the origins of agriculture. Using the ratio of species diversity against body size
as an index, I think it will not be long before we can predict with some precision
at what point in the archaeological sequences we should see the first signs of labor-
intensive strategies. For eastern North America, certainly, such procedures show
signs of working well. It can be shown, for example, that any group of hunters
which was forced to subsist on shellfish as early in the year as February was only
a short step away from adopting agriculture. In other words, where pressure on
resources resulted in such limited stores in the fall and such poor winter hunting
that shellfish were the only available foodstuff from so early in the spring, it
regularly seems to be the case that the growing of corn begins within a short time.
   The development of the ideas suggested above may be profitable. But there
is an important additional point to be made: all such theories or models for why
                                                         On the Origins of Agriculture   3
something happens cannot be tested in any direct sense against the archaeological
record. Almost all the different theories touched upon earlier in this discussion
assigned different meanings to the archaeologically demonstrable fact that smaller
and more stationary food sources were increasingly used through time. I have
already noted that Flannery termed this pattern the ‘broad spectrum revolution’,
a response by game hunters living outside their Garden of Eden. Hassan saw it
arising from a realization of the advantages of reliable resources triggered by
environmental changes. Cohen regarded these same facts as good evidence for a
linkage between subsistence strategies and population pressure in general; that is,
a decreasing ratio between available food and consumer demand resulted in an
increased use of less ‘desirable’ foods. Hayden considered that the greater use of
‘r-selected’ resources — those that reproduce themselves rapidly and in great
abundance — stemmed from the accumulated wisdom of populations who have
suffered continuous and unrelenting stress.*° I myself have argued here that these
facts reflect an intensification tactic. The operation of the homeostatic mechan-
isms which tend to maintain hunter-gatherer local groups at optimally small sizes
results in decreased effective territory for any given local group. As more groups
are generated, the locational options of all of them are reduced, thus forcing the
intensified use of smaller and smaller segments of habitat.
   All these archaeologists’ theories are ways of giving different meanings to the
same empirical pattern demonstrable in the archaeological record; and I am sure
that many other interpretations could be offered besides. I am equally sure that
there could be developed additional arguments about quite different causes for
agriculture, citing other empirical patterns (equally subject to ambiguous inter-
pretation). How do we choose among these alternative interpretations of the same
facts? How do we decide between theories and between their different biases?
   In the cases illustrated here, the rules for cognition generally derive from the
theories being advocated. That is, the meaning given to archaeological observa-
tions are consistent with the assumed mechanisms of causation built into the
theories. This means that any appeal to the empirical materials of the archaeo-
logical record will represent merely a ‘post hoc accommodative argument’, where-
by the theory is necessarily supported. In order to move away from this wholly
unsatisfactory situation, we must develop an appropriate language and instru-
ments for measuring variables which we observe in the archaeological record ; but
we must achieve some operational objectivity when evaluating theories.*? This
means that in order to make inferences archaeology needs to develop middle-
range theory*” which has been devised and tested in intellectual contexts divorced
from the theories about past behavior which we seek to evaluate. Archaeology, in
general, has failed to realize that in order to refute or support theories it requires
a strong body of inferential techniques, warranted independently of its theories
about past dynamics.
                               9
                     Paths to Complexity

Complex societies and civilizations arose at different times in different parts of
the world nearly always after the development of agriculture. How they came
into being is an-area of research in which I have long had an interest. My own
doctoral thesis, in fact, written over twenty years ago, was concerned with the
appearance of complex social systems in eastern North America,’ but since then
I have not worked directly on the problem. I have tried, however, to keep up
with the fast-growing literature, for my interest continues to be strong from a
methodological and procedural standpoint — that is, what strategies have
archaeologists followed in trying to explain such phenomena? I have to say that
I cannot concur with much of what I have read on the subject. So it will perhaps

135 A corner of the ‘palace’ at Labnd, Yucatan, Mexico. The impressive investment of
labor and craftsmen’s skills, as well as the elaborate symbolism underlying a structure such
as this, challenge our explanatory powers: why did it happen? (From the files of the late
Professor Fay-Cooper Cole, now in author’s possession.)




                                           214
                                                                 Paths to Complexity   Oo



be not without interest to consider briefly some of what seem to me to be limita-
tions in the patterns of thought that are currently prevalent.
   We should first dismiss entirely some ideas about the origins of complex systems
which were very influential in their day (and are still to be found in the contem-
porary literature). Earlier generations of anthropologists, for instance, used to
argue that knowledge — as with the origins of agriculture — must somehow have
been a critical limiting factor: explaining the emergence of civilization simply
involved trying to imagine what would lead man to invent art, philosophy, com-
plicated legal systems, and the like. Even in comparatively recent times some
historians and archaeologists have tried to claim that such wonderful achieve-
ments are possible only when leisure time becomes available to free man for
‘thoughtful’ activities. That too is quite wrong. If anything it is the other way
around, for hunter-gatherer groups seem typically to have more free time than do
complex societies. Then there are arguments of the orthogenetic variety, which
claim that certain human cultures had a sort of built-in dynamic, an inherent
tendency for progressive growth. People who started out in the right direction,
so to speak, had a much better chance of becoming civilized than those who
squandered their lives doing something not on the direct path to western civiliza-
tion! The total inadequacy of such arguments is not hard to see and they need
not detain us further.



Monopolists, Altruists and Big-Men

When I first began to learn about the origin of complex systems — and I did so
from a strongly American perspective which has no doubt colored my views —
two main lines of argument were current. In our respective doctoral theses, as it
turned out, I followed one line and Marshall Sahlins” followed the opposite one.
   I believed that power derived from productive monopolies and that monopolies
were toa large extent a functional response of societies which were very dependent
on storage and whose food resources were patchy or highly aggregated in space.
On the basis of ethnohistoric and archaeological data from eastern North
America, it seemed clear that anadromous fish (i.e. fish, such as salmon, that live
in saltwater but run up river to spawn in fresh water) constituted a critical
resource for some human groups dependent onstorage. Access to such a foodstuff,
however, was virtually ‘point-specific’: the fish cannot be caught readily in deep
waters, yet by the time they reach really shallow waters they are in such a poor
nutritional state they are not worth taking. So they are available only at certain
points in the environment. And the people who lived near ‘access windows’ of
this kind had an effective monopoly over a critical resource which they were able
to manipulate for their own political advantage throughout the region.
216   Paths to Complexity




                                                                                        <Q
                                                                                        W
                                                                                        x
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        0
                                                                                        W
                            9
                            La
                                                 e
                                                 y)                                     I
                                                                                        Ny)
                                FieesH   WaTER        F
                                  Zonk




                        DISTRIBUTION  OF
                     POWHATAN  SETTLEMENTS
                                               1JoOT
                                         SYMBOLS
                                         e@=   HAMLET
                                         @s= Viitace




      136 Distribution of Powhatan settlements in Chesapeake Bay, Virginia, 1607. Note the
      clusters of hamlets and villages in the fresh- to salt-water transitional zone, that which
      yielded most anadromous fish taken in impounding weirs; these fish provided critical
      foods during the least productive periods of the year (e.g. the month of April). Most power
      rested with the chiefs of the villages of the transitional zone.
                                                                  Paths to Complexity   217
   This simple model, I still believe, works very nicely for nearly all known North
American societies with high levels of sociopolitical ranking and a clear despotic
base. qe accunely, most of them were small political units, rarely exceeding 3,000
people.* Those that were much largerwere integrated quite differently, by
confederacies or other more ‘democratic’ political forms. The truly dictatorial
powers of life and death exercised by the chiefly individuals of the small systems
based on resource monopolies were not found in other types of native North
American society. Decisions about warfare or the adjudication of disputes in the
large political alliances usually depended on the unanimous consent of councils
made up of representatives from various social segments and kin groups.* Some
of the systems organized in this way could be very large indeed, with political
hegemonies covering over three-quarters of a million square kilometers and
integrating up to 200,000 people. Big contrasts, then, exist in the ethnographic
record of North America, One sees, on the one hand, the politically extensive
confederacies, with power vested in council organizations rather than individually
filled status positions ; on the other are the small, classic, internally ranked systems
based on productive monopolies over critical subsistence resources,
   Now Sahlins adopted a different viewpoint. With rather simplistic Marxist
notions in mind, he supposed initially that in emergent complex societies all chiefs
must be despotic entrepreneurs exploiting the masses; his now famous fieldwork
in Polynesia was designed to prove the point. What he actually found there was
something quite different. The chiefs seemed not to be nasty entrepreneurs, but
nice guys acting altruistically — in fact, they were somewhat harried individuals
forever trying to serve the constituency they represented by making alliances in
terms of external trade links. This necessitated the development by Sahlins of a
very different notion about the growth of power. He had to argue that chieftain-
ships and potentially powerful statuses came into being largely as a result of
altruistic behavior, whereby chiefly individuals redistributed goods (or served to
organize their distribution) so that all members of the population would have
equal access to products that were differentially produced in different parts of
the landscape. The model, of course, presupposes the existence of sedentary 137
populations. Sedentism, in turn, combined with environmental diversity was seen
as the mechanical basis for productive diversity at the regional level (since
individuals in different places will be unable to produce the same things). In the
short term, this diversity may put some people at an advantage over others; but
if the system is to maintain itself without competition there must be a ‘benign
altruist’ at the top, someone with overriding powers to take the excess production
of one area and disperse it in other areas which either produce something else or
are naturally less productive.°
   This classic redistributive model, then, came into being, in part, because Sahlins
discovered he liked the Polynesian chiefs instead of hating them! After his ideas
    218        Paths to Complexity



                             MYTHICAL. ANCESTOR                      137 Model of redistribution of
45 = =     Accumulation               !                              goods among kinsmen occupy-
<—        =Redistribution            ty                              ing      different   environmental
                                PAST CHIEF                           zones;               results in
                                                                               redistribution
                                                                     symbiotic linkage among pro-
                                                                     ductively diverse areas. (Re-
                                                                     produced with permission from
                                                                     Flannery and Coe 1968, fig. 4,
                                                                     p. 280.)

Deceased

Living




              had been submitted as a doctoral thesis to Columbia University, critical articles
              began to appear,° in which it was argued that the model was nonsensical in terms
              of the data Sahlins had himself used. These critics pointed out that on the high
              islands of the Pacific where environmental diversity is great (an implicit element
              in the argument) political territories ran from coast to interior rather than parallel
              to the coast, so that each polity included within its domain the full range of
              ecological variability present in the region. This being so, it could hardly be
              argued that the main function of chiefs and the alliances among chiefs was to
              generate regional symbiosis and to ensure equal access for everybody to all
              products, The assumptions Sahlins had made about Polynesia, it seemed, were
              not met at the factual level.
                 Of course, this did not deter archaeologists in the least and they quickly em-
              braced Sahlins’ model wholeheartedly.’ All over the world, there were identified
              prehistoric redistributive systems organized by central chiefly agents, nice people
              who passed out the goods and generally made life secure for their followers.
                 Meanwhile, a number of anthropologists noted that certain areas of the Pacific
              (notably Melanesia) offered some interesting ethnographic cases to which one
              could turn in testing the model. In New Guinea and Borneo, they pointed out,
              high status persons certainly exist, but not in association with redistributive
              economic systems. According to Sahlins, altruistic redistributive agents devoted
                                                                   Paths to Complexity

themselves to the greater good ofthe larger community, achieved status by virtue
of such selfless behavior, and by virtue of status gained power; so the presence of
redistributive systems in conjunction with high status positions is crucial to the
argument. Yet this did not seem to be the case in certain areas of Melanesia.
   Sahlins’ response to such challenges was to play a semantic game; in essence,
he defined the problem.away. In his ingeniously titled paper ‘Poor man, rich
man, big-man, chief. . .’,° he argued that these New Guinea societies are not
truly ranked or power-based redistributive systems and that their hierarchical
organization is more apparent than real. His conclusion, in fact, was that they
represent another very different sort of system altogether, something called a
big-man system. Nevertheless, the main interest of Sahlins and most archaeologists
has continued to focus on redistributive chiefdoms. Yet I feel that it is to societies
organized around big-men that we should look for the origins of social complexity.
  A big-man system, in brief, works as follows. As a man becomes mature, he
begins to compete with his peers to establish negotiable alliances outside his own
group with individuals in other social units distributed across the landscape.
What is involved is effectively a form of delayed reciprocal exchange. A would-be
big-man makes an alliance by giving his new alliance partner a token or symbol
of their agreement — a carved boar’s tusk, or a great shell from the coast, or some
such object that he has himself obtained via some other alliance. As long as the
partner wears or keeps that token, he has some call on the big-man for food or
hospitality for himself and members of his group. His followers get security and
the big-man gains prestige. Now if the big-man occupies a favored and productive
position in the environment and is successful in negotiating alliances with
individuals spread widely throughout the region, he may rarely need to use his
alliances and ‘cash in’ his tokens to get food for his group in return. He builds up
a great deal of security which he can offer to those who ally themselves with him
and live in his village. In big-man systems, the competition is for persons and the
result is the actual residential gravitation of people to the neighborhoods of
big-men. Status, however, accrues to those who can offer others security on
account of the number of alliances they have. When the crops do fail, the followers
of a big-man are protected in the short run because he can use his alliances to get
food to support them; but as soon as he begins to cancel alliances by calling them
in, he loses status (which really means the ability to offer security). His followers
drift away to other aspiring big-men who seem to offer greater security.
   The result of this effective and interesting system is an unending movement of
population through the habitat in almost perfect adjustment to changing patterns
of differential production. In contrast to Sahlins’ hypothetical chiefdom system,
where status results in the redistribution of consumer goods, in a big-man system
it is not goods that move, but people. Short-term fluctuations in production are
buffered by patterns of status differential, which have the effect of continuously
220   Paths to Complexity

      up-dating the distribution of population across the environment in relation to its
      actual production.
         Stable environments, of course, with more or less permanent, ecologically
      determined production differentials, ought to favor the emergence ofhigh-status
      individuals who never need to call in their alliances. That, one might suppose,
      could be the basis for getting some continuity in the differential distribution of
      status and population in a region — the beginnings, that is, of acomplex society
      with institutionalized power and wealth disparities. This seems not to be so,
      however. A big-man’s alliances, negotiated at the individual level, cannot be
      passed on to someone else ; they are not transferable to his sons, who must negotiate
      their own. Consequently, when a successful big-man dies, his alliances die with
      him and his competitors gain in status as a result of his death. So there is an
      inevitable outflow of population associated with the death of high-status persons.
      If there exists marked environmental variability in a region, it will probably take
      little time for a big-man’s offspring to negotiate favorable new alliances and
      attract followers back again. Over time one would see a recurrent pattern of
      inflow and outflow around centers of secure production and the continuous
      presence there from one generation to another of high-status individuals. This, I
      suppose, is a sort of monopoly, but one of a very different kind from monopolies
      based on point-specific access to critical resources.
          How, then, could a system of this kind evolve into a classic complex society
      based on true power? I have always thought that power really starts when one
      can renege on a social relationship with impunity. You and I may have an agree-
      ment: what’s mine is yours and what’s yours, mine. If, when life gets rough, I can
      simply ignore that agreement and not suffer the consequences, then I have taken
      my first step towards power. This is a rather negative notion of power, which has
      normally been thought of as making rules to suit oneself; in practice, at least from
      an evolutionary point of view, it seems to me thatit has to do with breaking rules
      to suit oneself and getting away with it. Perhaps we should focus our attention
      rather more on the conditions under which that might occur in the context of
      big-man types of organization.
          It is important, at any rate, to have some idea of the differences between a
      so-called redistributive system and a big-man system. The former is not something
      we can readily detect when we look at the world of primitive culture: perhaps it
      never existed, except in Sahlins’ imagination. The institutionalized movement
      of goods in bulk is, after all, a characteristic of industrial state societies, not
      primitive ones.” On the other hand, systems involving the continuous adjustment
      of the distribution of consumers (rather than goods) to productive differentials
      seem from the ethnographic record to be very widespread indeed and we do in
      fact know quite a lot about them. Might they not have been equally common in
      the prehistoric past?
                                                                  Paths to Complexity   ie) ie)



Intensification and Specialization

Let us turn to consider another currently popular idea about the origins of com-
plex societies, The argument is a simple one. In certain systems of subsistence
production it is possible to increase the input of labor in order to increase the
marginal output, ortochange and enhance the technology of production in order
to improve the effectiveness of the labor input, or in other ways to modify the
character of production itself.'° The effect of such changes is to facilitate produc-
tion beyond the simple demands ofthe producers themselves. Once that becomes
possible, the way is open to support persons who are not themselves directly
engaged in subsistence production— metallurgists, ceramicists, political specialists,
etc.'* Role specialization of this kind, it is claimed, provides the natural basis for 138-40
the growth of further complexity. In this model, then, understanding complex
systems involves focusing on two crucial questions: (1) what kinds of incentives
exist for production beyond immediate subsistence needs, and (2) how are such
surpluses actually used in the formation of complex societies?
   I find it extremely difficult to deal with this kind of reasoning. I am essentially
a Darwinist. I believe that cultural systems change under conditions of natural
selection, that they are pushed and pulled in different directions, and that the
way in which change occurs is a function of how people actually solve problems.
The ‘adaptationists’ — no matter whether they operate in an idealist paradigm
like Bennett,!* or the materialist mode as does Harris, 13 or are fascinated with the
principles of ‘least effort "14 or ‘risk reduction’!> or ‘optimal foraging theory i
all attempt to build a teleological explanation for trends seen or imagined in the
history of evolution. Yet I think that the most practical principle for us to adopt
in theory building is an analog to the principle of inertia.’’ A system will remain
stable until acted upon by forces external to its organization as a system. When I
am faced with a question such as why complex systems come into being, my first
reaction is to ask what problem people were attempting to solve by a new means.
Experimenting with novel ways of doing things is surely worthwhile only if some
fresh problem has emerged for which no previous solution appears satisfactory.
   Thus, the idea that increased production is fundamental to the origins of social
complexity leads me to ask what problem is solved’ by increasing production.
What difficulties that a group of people might face give a direct pay-off, in terms
of security, to technological change, labor intensification and growth in produc-
tion? What is driving them to develop these and other new strategies? I don’t
think the motivation is simply psychological, a sort of prehistoric attempt to keep
up with the Jones. Nor are vitalistic explanations acceptable — that a society just
‘wants to grow’ or is ‘ready to become civilized’.
   Even the less objectionable forms of vitalism are none the less orthogenetic in
that they assume an inner driving principle or ‘prime mover’. In the case of
Paths to Complexity

approaches such as optimal foraging theory, it is argued that minimizing energy
expenditures relative to energy returns will automatically increase ‘fitness’ and
hence be favored selectively. Such assumptions amount to vital principles of
internal dynamics which are cited as moulding evolutionary trajectories.'* The
system, I would maintain, must be under stress in some way, must face some
problem, The proponents ofintensification-specialization arguments have yet to
come up with any adequate suggestions about what these stresses and problems
might have been. The assumption seems to be that any ‘rational’ man will seek a
profit!
    This is just another way ofpointing to the fact that almost all our theories about
why complex sociopolitical systems emerged are overblown arguments taken
largely from differing brands of economic philosophy. We are committing the
methodological      faux pas of offering functional arguments of how modern systems
work internally as explanations of how systems change or have changed in the
past. While this is a fundamental problem, there exist additional problems, even
if one takes a gradualist position and adopts various forms of economic function-
alism as a theory. For instance, the appearance ofcraft specialization is frequently
cited as a major step forward on the path to complex systems; yet it is not at all
clear to me why craft specialization need necessarily play any significant role. In
Africa,-for example, metal-working (about which we have much interesting
information) is principally practiced by outcasts. Those involved in the special-
ized production of pottery, such as the technical ceramicists of the Tarascan area
of Mexico, are often the disenfranchised and disadvantaged members in society,
people who have no land and are cut off from food production. In fact, most
instances of specialization with which I am familiar from the ethnographic record
of the New World, Asia and Africa suggest that these specialists are individuals


                                            138 (Left) Young woman of Miyako,
                                            Ryukyu islands, making items of adamba
                                            grass for exchange. (Photo taken in June
                                            1953 by E. Santry, on assignment with the
                                            author.)

                                            139 (Right, above) Navajo woman weaving
                                            at Ah Tso lige, near Red Lake in Arizona,
                                            c. November 1935. (Photo courtesy of the
                                            Maxwell Museum of Anthropology, Uni-
                                            versity of New Mexico.)

                                            140 (Right, below) Potter at work, Naha
                                            Okinawa, Ryukyu islands, 1952.
                                                                 Paths to Complexity

scrambling to gain a foothold in society in any manner they can, Thisis a situation
quite different from the one envisaged by many archaeologists, who see the
organization of society itself changing in such a way as to make possible and
encourage the support ofspecialists, almost in a renaissance fashion, These sorts
of observations from the developing Third World may, or may not, be relevant
to the problem; but I have yet to be convinced that archaeologists understand
how to set about modelling the conditions under which craft and other specialists
became causally important in the development of cultural complexity.
   I have always thought that a major shift in social forms, suchas those repre-
sented by the appearance of ranking and stratification, must represent some kind
of major break with earlier patterns of growth.'? For instance, among hunter-
gatherer groups the growth pattern involves duplication of the basic unit of co-
operative production — the band or the family, depending on how the group was          1a
xe} No aS   Paths to Complexity

            organized, Population growth produces an increase in the size of the local unit,
            until such a group splits into two or more similar units, with the daughter units
            taking up independent activities in independent locations. Even among horti-
   144      culturalists, where the basic units of production are frequently family or extended
            family units, growth appears to consist of the duplication of these basic units.
            More families are formed and more ‘spaces’ are sought for these families to act as
            units of production. It is this general structure of growth which results in packing
            problems (as indicated in Chapter 8); and the consequences of this pattern of
            growth are the selective contexts favoring various tactics of intensification. It
            seems to me that at some point in the trajectory ofintensification a major struc-
            tural break with earlier forms of growth appears. These basic units of production
            and generalized reciprocity (in Sahlins’ terms), instead of duplicating themselves,
            begin to develop conventions for excluding individuals: that is, persons are ex-
            cluded from them so that the unit remains basically the same in size and also
            remains located in space in a stable manner. Population growth under such
            conditions results in an increasing class of disenfranchised persons which changes
            appreciably the arena of competition and the units of competition.*°


            141 A peddler in the market at Naha Okinawa (Ryukyu islands). By hawking his wares
            for a small cash profit, this man ekes out a marginal and very uncertain existence.


                                                                                 iii
                                                                           Paths to Complexity     no No
                                                                                                           or




 142 A market street in Hong Kong, 1952. ‘Our course lay through the long street, which was a
 fair specimen of Chinese streets . . . Here were to be seen the artisans ofthe various branches
 of native industry pursuing their busy work, and vending the products of their labor, in one
 and the same room which served the triple object of workshop, warehouse and counter.
 Here were crowded together, in their narrow dwellings, amid the din of forges and hammer,
 little groups of wire-drawers, braziers, button-makers, and smiths, with four men alter-
 nating their rapid blows on the sounding anvil. Here again were to be seen image-makers,
 carpenters, shoe-makers, tailors, gold and silver leaf-beaters, umbrella-makers, cotton-
 beaters, grocers, druggists, jade-stone cutters, seal-engravers, and decorators, with the
 professors of the numerous arts which supply the necessities or luxuries of Chinese life.
 Further on were to be seen picture-shops hung out with the tawdry performances of
 native artists. ... At every corner were to be seen portable kitchens, steaming away, and
 supplying to hungry expectants the savory materials ofa hasty meal. For the more wealthy
 a succession of cook-shops, wine-shops, and tea-shops lined the way. A little farther on, a
crowd of gamblers disputed a few square feet of ground with the holders of orange-stands
 or venders of sweetmeats. Near to these were the well stored shops of pawn-brokers . . .”
 (Smith 1847, p. 289).
226   Paths to Complexity




         Some of my colleagues and students have worked in recent years with hunter-
      gatherer groups in Botswana, who, for various reasons, are becoming sedentary
      and self-sufficient as agriculturalists or herders. There is a spectrum from hunting
      and gathering to fully sedentary adaptations, but it is the people in the middle —
      those who are neither one thing nor the other — who are the most interesting in the
      present context. They are in a quandary. In hunter-gatherer societies, generalized
      reciprocity is the guiding ethic of behavior: that is, people share freely with their
      relatives without expecting an exact or immediate return from them. Yet, if a
      man is to maintain a herd of goats and build up his property as he becomes in-
      creasingly sedentary, he must refuse his relatives when they come to him to ask


                                                               143 (Above) A complete band
                                                               of hunter-gatherers: the Nharo
                                                               Bushmen       living   between
                                                               Sanfontein and /Gam, Nam-
                                                               ibia. Such a group can be
                                                               considered the unit of pro-
                                                               duction; growth results in
                                                               the multiplication of roughly
                                                               identical units. (Photo taken
                                                               c. 1927 by L. Fourie, courtesy
                                                               of the Africana Museum,
                                                               Johannesburg.)

                                                               144 (Left) The extended
                                                               family of Tanahara Gensho
                                                               in the village of Fatima,
                                                               Okinawa (Ryukyu islands),
                                                               1952.
145 A scene in the squatter
community of El Porvenir,
Panama City, Panama in
1967. Individuals migrate to
such communities from more
stable social units elsewhere;
growth results in increased
numbers of persons cut off
from the social units into
which they were born. (Photo
courtesy of W. Salvador.)


for a goat for supper. Anthropologists find that the only successful individuals are
the ones who sever their social ties, the ones who can stand up to the social
pressures for them to share their wealth and not be stingy. In order to capitalize
on their own production, they must be mavericks in their own society. But once
isolated in this way, they have a kind of freedom to manoeuver which is impossible
for those still playing by society’s rules; once they have turned their backs on
generalized reciprocity, their security comes from their wits, not from the relatives
they have now rejected. In fact, they quickly become entrepreneurs and begin to
negotiate in a variety of ways with people outside the system. They are always the
first ones who want to make deals with the anthropologists when they arrive, or
with the government agents who want to drill wells. In other words, their security
is something that must now be organized by means external to the system of which
they were originally a part.



Gew-Gaws       and Trade-Goods


Does trade and exchange really cause social and political development, as
archaeologists have so often suggested 2?! Perhaps returning the discussion briefly
to the big-man systems described earlier might help put this question in some
perspective.                                             J
   Nearly everyone must have seen photographs in the pages of magazines like
National Geographic of big-men in the New Guinea Highlands. They are weighed
down with shell beads, pendants, paint, feathers and every conceivable sort of
228   Paths to Complexity




                                                              146 New Guinea Big Men
                                                              displaying the gew-gaws for
                                                              which they have exchanged
                                                              and which represent their
                                                              high status in the local group.
                                                              (Photo     courtesy     of M.
                                                              Strathern.)


      gew-gaw: they look rather like some garishly decorated Christmas tree. The
      material items they wear are tokens of social relationships and they circulate
      exclusively in terms of those negotiated alliances between individuals to which I
      have already referred. They are not trade-goods, but symbols. They are not
      exchanged for their intrinsic value, but are worn because they carry information
      about the number and variety of alliances an individual has made. Objects and
      raw materials that are easily obtained and occur widely throughout a region
      obviously do not convey much information. So in all big-man systems there is a
      real push to gain access to exotic items — shells from the coast, different kinds of
      colorful feathers, various kinds of raw materials that are available only at very
      particular places. The more rare and specific they are, the more information they
      can carry,
         We seem to see something similar in the archaeological record of eastern North
  147 America. A developmental sequence beginning c. 6000 Bc culminated during the
                                                                       Paths to Complexity        229




147 Goods included in two separate burials (top, burial 79; bottom, burial 57) from the
Rankin Site, Cocke County, Tennessee (see Smith and Hodges 1968) ; over half the items
illustrated are exotic to the site’s region. (Photo courtesy of the Department of Anthropology,
University of ennessee.)
2 30   =Paths to Complexity

   period c, 250 BC-AD 250 in a system of exchange involving the circulation of an
   astonishing variety of goods on a truly continental scale. Busycon shells from the
   Gulf Coast are commonly found 1,500 kilometers from their source and in large
   numbers in burials throughout the Great Lakes region. There is native copper
   from the north side of Lake Superior in the village sites and burials throughout
   the Midwest.2* Mica from mines in Virginia found its way all the way up and
   down the Mississippi valley. Galena from lead mines in northern Illinois occurs
   in burials in the Southeast, North and South Carolina to Florida.’* Little buttons
   and other trinkets made of meteoric iron from the margins of the Plains turn up
   at sites all over the Midwest.?* Obsidian from Yellowstone National Park in the
   Rocky Mountains is found from Wisconsin to Ohio.”° This is an enormous and
   complex system for the circulation of material goods, a system whose geographical
   scale is commensurate with all of western and central Europe put together.
      If trade does indeed stimulate political complexity, then — to judge from the
   scale and volume of the documented circulation network — we should expect the
   development of something akin to Rome in areas such as Ohio already by 100 Bc!
   Yet exchange systems as extensive as this are quite unknown in those areas ofthe
   world in which the so-called ‘great civilizations’ developed: there is nothing
   comparable in the Near East, in the Aegean, in the Valley of Mexico or in
   Highland Peru, before the emergence of what are generally accepted as complex
   societies.”° So any model that attempts to explain the rise of complex society by
   appealing to the importance of trade and monopolistic exchange modes must also
   be capable of accounting for the evidence from eastern North America. None can
   so far do so, yet exchange models are currently being applied to the archaeological
   record in many areas of the world.
       Consider, for example, the American Southwest where some remarkable, large
   sites developed during the period c. AD goo—1200, They are not just residential
   locations: there is a great variety of complex architecture (kivas, great rooms,
   etc.) associated with social and religious ritual. The most prevalent explanation
   for these pueblo systems attributes their complexity to the important functions
   they must have served as nodal points in wide-ranging exchange networks.”’ But
   the hard evidence on which this view is based proves to be remarkably slight — a
   little turquoise from the Southwest trickles down into Mexico; a few shells from
   the Baja coast eventually work their way up into northern New Mexico; Mexican
   motifs on Southwestern pots indirectly reflect connections of some sort. This
   hardly amounts to a great trade network, yet network-node models of this kind
   are currently rife in the Southwest and beyond. Ultimately, they rest on Sahlins’
   original argument that redistribution is the route to power. Such complex
   achievements as these big pueblo sites could only have originated and been
   organized — or so the argument goes — under the guidance of some central
   authority.7* A central authority could only come into being by virtue of the
                                                                    Paths to Complexity   31
redistributive roles it played. And what was being redistributed? Not much more
than a few lumps of turquoise per century ... in total probably fewer exotic
materials than occur in a single Middle Woodland burial a millennium earlier!



Paths to Complexity

What I am saying, in effect, is that archaeologists still do not know what causes
complex societies, what brings them into being. The argument for redistribution
has no obvious factual basis: at least, I know of no redistributive agents who are
not operating in what are already societies based on political power and I doubt
that power comes from being nice. Arguments involving economic incentives for
the intensification of production required to support a complex system have a
certain chicken-and-egg flavor. It is far from clear, in any case, why anyone
should ‘want’ a complex system to the extent of investing effort in over-produc-
tion ; there must exist some pressures for change in the Darwinian sense. However,
we have yet to identify what they are and how they operate. Arguments in which
trade is claimed as the necessary basis for power generally founder, because most
of the instances cited as evidence relate to the exchange of social tokens rather than
economically valued consumer goods: they tell us about social alliances between
individuals, not about the economic articulation of social groups.
   The problem here is the very limited number of models that archaeologists
have considered. If all we have is the ideas I have touched on, when in fact there
might well be many different stages and characteristic patterns of change
associated with different paths to complexity, then archaeology is in great trouble.
Until archaeologists have some idea of the range of variability that can exist in
complex systems and in their developmental trajectories, they are at an enormous
disadvantage.
   Another major limitation is that almost all the approaches to modelling change
were developed from varying perceptions of functional dynamics (that is, the
operation of living systems as seen by an observer or participant). As suggested
earlier, functional insights have been used to model transformational changes
when (1) the nature of the transformation was not accurately known, and (2)
there was nothing but the criterion of plausibility used to justify the use of a
functional argument as relevant to evolutionary processes. Perhaps the most
obvious and probably the most misleading instance is the use of various “profit-
seeking’, vitalistic economic arguments in modelling evolutionary processes. All
ecological processes are non-rational in that there is no guiding intellect or sentient
being controlling the dynamics, as all economic arguments generally assume.
   As in the cases discussed in previous chapters, I am appealing for the develop-
ment of reliable methods of inferring past conditions from the archaeological
232   Paths to Complexity

      record, If we can develop such methods, then we may gain a secure knowledge of
      at least some of the characteristics answering the question ‘What was it like?’ At
      the same time, we must be alert to recognize patterning for which we may seek to
      understand ‘What does it mean?’ Both these approaches need and are dependent
      upon the development of middle-range research.
         The reader may well enquire about the numerous philosophical positions in
      archaeology for which there are skilled advocates all about us.”? I have suggested
      that most such positions involve giving meaning to the archaeological record by
      the use of‘post hoc accommodative arguments’.*° No objectivity is achievable with
      such approaches nor is real learning possible, but merely the fascination of endless
      debate.*’ Only when we can evaluate such views by appeal to the properties of
      the external world can we obtain some idea of the utility of differing intellectual
      positions. Those appeals must be through a scientifically built observational
      language, whereby meaning is given to observations andjustified independently
      of the intellectual positions said to be under evaluation.
         No matter how we approach the problem, the conclusion is the same: we
      require stronger methods for inference. We cannot just follow the Muse of Curiosity
      and speculate about how things happened. We must develop methods for
      evaluating ideas we have generated and also face the real possibility that some-
      times we may be asking a bad question. We need simultaneously to investigate the
      questions ‘What does it mean?’ and ‘What was it like?’, if we ever hope to make
      progress with the really big question: ‘Why did it happen?’
                           Notes on the Text

Preface (pp. 13-18)                                     irrationalist position has been further elabor-
                                                        ated and argued by many: e.g. Feyerabend
1 This trip was both initiated and made                 1978. The present book and essentially everything
possible through the efforts of Colin Renfrew.          I have ever written represent a quite different view
Colin invited me to come and was unfailing              of what science is and how it works,
during the period of our joint search for funds            I have always been strongly committed to
which would make the trip possible. In the              the position that the development of robust
long run it was Colin who found the money               methods for inference are basic to the devel-
and extended to me unending challenge,                  opment of modern science. It should there-
courtesy and warmth. I am most grateful to              fore be no surprise to anyone that I should
him.                                                    not be upset by the recent claims of Meltzer
2    Binford 1977Aa.                                    1979 that no Kuhnian paradigm shift has
3 Fritz and Plog 1970.                                  occurred in archaeology and that my own
4 Watson et al. 1971.                                   contributions have been mainly methodo-
5 This is well illustrated by the contents of           logical rather than theoretical. The call for
Brothwell and Higgs 1969.                               revolutionary changes in paradigms is all
6 Binford 1978a.                                        right, I suppose, but the field is already rich
7 Binford rg81a.                                        in diverse points of view and yet no progress
8 E.g. attempts to reconstruct the age and              occurs. On the contrary, these intellectual
sex structure of the parent herd on the basis           fads rise and fall much like the hemlines of
of bones found in residential sites, or to              women’s fashions. Only with the develop-
reconstruct the number of living animals                ment of scientific epistemologies and the
represented by bones on sites whose function            accompanying methods for achieving relative
is unknown.                                             objectivity when evaluating novel ideas will
g See Binford 1981a, pp. 69-72, 478-9 for               knowledge begin to be accumulated as
criticisms of the use of MNI (i.e. minimum              the product of scientific endeavour.
number of individuals) estimates.                       15 Binford 1981a.
10 E.g. the development of radiocarbon                  16 Hodder 1982, pp. 191-2.
dating.                                                  17 Binford in press.
tr Hawkes 1954.
12   See O’Kelly    1968, 1982; Van      Wijn-
                                                        Chapter 1 (pp. 19-30)
gaarden-Bakker 1974.
13. A good example of the type of argument              1 E.g. Hawkes 1980.
used by the ‘social philosophers’ can be found          2 See Binford 1968c.
in Adams 1981. Particular attention should              3 For a description of radiocarbon dating
be given to the comments and author’s                   techniques see Michels 1973; Fleming 1976.
rebuttal.                                               4 E.g. Gould 1980; Hayden 1979.
14 There is a considerable amount of con- -             5 E.g. Yellen 1977.
fusion among archaeologists as to both how              6 Rathje 1974, 1978; Rathje and McCarthy
a science grows and what constitutes ‘pro-              1977.
gress’, Many basically accept the thesis of             7 Binford 1976, 1978a, 1978b, 1979, 1980,
Kuhn 1962, 1970 that progress is largely the            1981c, 1982.°
result of the operation of irrational forces            8 Binford and Bertram 1977.
which tend to condition the world views of              g For additional examples of ‘ethnoarchae-
scientists. (Trigger 1981 represents an                 ological’ research, see Gould (ed.) 1978;
attempt to use this belief to interpret the             Kramer (ed.) 1979.
history of archaeological thought.) This                10 Coles 1973, 1979.

                                                  250
Notes on the Text

11    Winter and Bankhoff 1979.                  g Washburn 1957.
12 E.g. Witthoft 1957; results of recent         10 Hughes 1954.
replication experiments for stone tools can be   11 Dart 1956 includes a discussion of
found in the newsletter Flintknapper’s Ex-       classical descriptions of hyena behavior.
change.                                          12 Dart 1958.
13 See South 1977a, 1977b for an explicit        13 Vincent 1978.
use of historic site archaeology as a form of    14 Leakey 1979.
control over archaeological methodology.         15 This interpretation was widely reported
14 Isaac 1978.                                   in the press at the time but I have failed to
15 Leakey and Hay 1979.                          uncover the actual statement made at the
                                                 press conference,
                                                 16 Washburn and Howell 1960, p. 40.
Part I (Introduction) (pp. 31-2)
                                                 17 Leakey 1959a, 1959b, 1960.
1~ Taylor 1948.                                  18 Leakey 1971, particularly pp. 49-58 and
2 ‘Taylor 1972.                                  fig. 24.
3 Taylor 1948, p. 131.                           19 Isaac 1971, 1975, 1976b, 1976c, 1978.
4 Ibid., p. 193.                                 A more focused statement on meat eating
5 Binford 1981b; Dunnell 1g8ob.                  can be found in Isaac and Crader 1981.
6 Taylor 1948, p. 193.                           20    Isaac 1976a, pp. 483-5.
7 I have recently discussed methods for          21 Brain 1981 is the major summary of his
inference in Binford   1981a, particularly       work and should be consulted by anyone
PPP 20534:                                       interested in the issues discussed here.
                                                 22 See Washburn 1957; Bartholomew and
                                                 Birdsell 1953. The early interpretations by
Chapter 2 (pp. 33-59)                            Dart and others were influenced by the fauna
1 See Dart 1959; LeGros Clark 1967, pp.          associated at the Taung site where only small
I-40,                                            animals such as rock rabbit, birds’ eggs, small
2 Dart 1925, 1948. Dart’s reasoning was          rodents, baboons and hominids were pre-
based on the best evidence available to him      sent. These data were not thought to be
at the time; it seemed to indicate that bones    indicative of the actions of hyenas or other
from Makapan Limeworks had been burned.          large carnivores. For instance Robert Broom
When fossils of Australopithecus were found at   (1933, P. 137) wrote:
Makapansgat, Dart put the observations
                                                 ‘From the study of the bone breccia associ-
together and concluded that Auwstralopithecus
                                                 ated with the Taung skull we get some idea
was a fire-user and hence a true man. For a
                                                 of the habits of Australopithecus .. . 1 agree
good review of subsequent research see
                                                 with Dart in regarding it as the kitchen
Oakley 1954, 1961.
                                                 midden of Australopithecus . . The breccia is
3 Dart 1926. From the earliest days of the
                                                 mainly composed of bones of an extinct
discoveries at Taung, Dart argued that
                                                 dassie or rock rabbit. All the skulls are
Australopithecus was a hunter and thus the
                                                 broken, often into small fragments. It could
agent responsible for the accumulation of
                                                 be no large carnivore like a leopard or jackal
associated bones which he viewed as middens.
                                                 that fed on these dassies. Such would have
Central to these early ideas were depressed
fractures noted on the skulls of baboons, The    chewed up the skulls and swallowed them...
                                                 Then we have many baboon skulls all broken
initial statement that animal bones recovered
                                                 as if by some creature that wanted to get at
from the deposits yielding fossils of Austra-
lopithecus were tools is found in Dart 1949.     the brain...”
Dart 1957, 1960 further developed his argu-         This view of early man was gradually
ment for the tool-making and using habits of     accepted and dominated the literature until
Australopithecus. For a more recent view see     the early 1950s. Sites were thought to be
Wolberg 1970; Binford 1981a.                     middens from Australopithecus who was a
     Dart 1953.                                  minor predator taking small game, birds’
   Dart 1957, p. 85.           ;                 eggs, etc, See for instance Oakley 1953. Once
  Dart 1926, 1949, 1957, 1960.                   Dart began finding a very different fauna,
  Ardrey 1961.                                   one dominated by antelope, at Makapansgat,
  Lorenz 1966.
Conran                                           he began to argue for a much more active
                                                                               Notes on the Text

hunting way oflife for early man, Those who       value of studying the relationships between
had accepted the arguments based on the           raw material sources, the forms in which
Taung data saw the new data as inconsistent       materials   are introduced   to a site, and   the
and Dart’s interpretations as extreme. Simi-      disposition of both lithic waste and _ tools
larly, those who were simply repulsed by the      produced from raw materials, In the case of
notion of our ancestors as bloodthirsty killers   the Mousterian sites located by springs in the
reacted against the interpretations of the        Negev, Israel, it was shown that the size of
Makapansgat material; since more robust           the cores and flakes were smaller when the
fauna was present, arguments favoring large       lithic raw materials did not outcrop in the
carnivores as the agents of accumulation now      vicinity. The investigators interpreted this as
seemed realistic.                                 a reflection of economizing behavior on the
23 ~Brain 1968.                                   part of the makers of the Mousterian tools, It
24 Dart 1959, p. 121.                             is my guess, however, that instead we are
25 Brain 1981, figs. 50, 221.                     seeing the consequences of the behavior of
26 Brain 1967.                                    occupants who arrived at a site unequipped
27 Binford and Bertram 1977.                      with an adequate tool kit (an essentially
28 Binford 1978a.                                 ‘non-curated’     technology).    They    then
29 ©Binford 1981a.                                searched around the site for raw materials
go Hill 1972.                                     and finding artifacts which had been intro-
31 Klein 1975.                                    duced by previous occupants, they reduced
                                                  them into tools. Such a condition would
                                                  account for the observed patterning and
Chapter 3 (pp. 60-76)
                                                  would not require the unlikely proposed
1 Brain 1981, pp. 271-3. This remark              inference that the Mousterian population
applies particularly to the robust forms of       lived in sedentary settlements at which raw
Australopithecus.                                 materials, introduced to the site from else-
2 See Bunn é¢ al. 1980.                           where, were utilized in an economical
3 In Binford 1981a, pp. 83-9, 181-90,             manner,
244—6 and 283-99, I have discussed the role          Regardless of this controversial point,
of ‘post hoc arguments’ in some detail.           tools and introduced debris rarely survive as
4 Isaac 1971, p. 278.                             pristine items on sites which have been
5 Isaac and Crader 1981.                          occupied over substantial periods of time. In
6 Ibid., p. 83.                                   marked contrast, the mean length of cores on
7 During the months of July and August            Acheulian sites tends to increase as a function
1981, I was given the opportunity to visit        of the degree to which the assemblage is
many sites and areas in South Africa and          dominated by bifaces. (This observation
neighboring regions by virtue of a grant from     applies, for instance, to the materials from
the University of Cape Town, where I also         Olorgesailie.) These items had to be trans-
lectured to a dedicated group of students.        ported and disposed of in their context of use,
8 For a good example of what I have in            which had to be one in which they were not
mind see Schaller 1972, pls. 1 and 2.             reduced to flakes and flake tools but were
9 Dating of the site is based on an estimate      used as bifaces, It is hard to imagine a base
by Vrba 1975.                                     camp being an end point of tool use or
10 For discussion of the site of Elandsfon-       occupants of such base camps ignoring
tein see the following: Singer and Wymer          immediately available raw materials in the
1968; Klein 1978; Deacon 1975.                    form of previously introduced bifaces.
11 Although all Acheulian sites are not           13 lam fully aware that there are sites with
densely covered by artifacts, there are enough    different assemblage composition than that
to render this impression interesting; for        depicted in my imaginary scenario; I am
instance a classic example is Horizon B and       simply using this ‘reconstruction’ to illustrate
the main site (DE/8g) at Olorgesailie. See        that we do not understand the formation
Isaac 1977.                                       processes. It is not unlikely that some of the
12 While I would argue with the specific          assemblage variability in the Acheulian may
interpretations presented in a recent paper       well reflect distinctly different kinds of
by Munday 1976 and discussion by Marks            locations used by the early hominids; home
and Freidel 1977, their work illustrates the      bases might even have been present.
236   Notes on the Text

      14 I have been conducting some investiga-          abrasions are interpreted as deriving from
      tions into the characteristics of faunal assem-    use of these fragments as crayons for drawing,
      blages viewed from the perspective both of         thus far no colored artifacts have been re-
      anatomical part frequencies and of patterns        covered from Mousterian deposits.
      of cutting and chop marks and combinations         2 Evidence for the burial of the dead in the
      of such marks with the tooth scoring and           Mousterian period has been summarized by
      pitting produced by gnawing carnivores.            S. Binford 1968 and Harrold 1980.
      While this research is incomplete, it seems        3 For a critical discussion of Neanderthal
      quite likely that scavenging was the major         cave bear ritual see Binford 1981a; Kurten
      source of parts from relatively large-bodied       1976.
      animals found at Middle Stone Age sites of         4 Klindt-Jensen 1975.
      Klasies River in South Africa. Similar             5 Myres, 1906, p. 29.
      behavior may be represented by the remains         6 Jbid., pl. II.
      of aurochs and horses in the Mousterian sites      7 Quennell and Quennell 1922, pp. 102-5.
      of western Europe. I. will report on this          8 Weiner 1980.
      research in the near future.                       g Osborn 1927, p. 73.
      15 When questioned on the direct evidence          10 Bordes 1969, pp. 2-3.
      for hunting in the Lower Pleistocene, most         11   (Clarke 1979, p. 17.
      researchers mention a number of sites where        12   Mason 1883, p. 403.
      stone tools are associated with a single carcass   13. Nelson 1938, p. 148.
      of a large animal (elephant at Olduvai FLK         14 Fora good example ofviews in the early
      N6, hippopotamus at Koobi Fora, and                years of the 20th century see Osborn 1916.
      Deinotherium at Olduvai FLK NII) or                15 For discussions of the ‘artifact and
      where tools are associated with a large            assemblage period’ from slightly different
      number of carcasses of animals of a single         perspectives see Binford 1981a, 1982.
      species. While the former situation is fre-        16 Childe 1929, p. vi.
      quently acknowledged as possibly represent-        17 For another discussion of the situation
      ing the scavenging of food from the death          in archaeology  just prior to 1930 see Trigger
      site of a large animal, the latter is often pre-   1980, particularly Chapter II.
      sented as evidence of early man’s hunting          18 E.g. Breuil 1931, 1932a, 1932b.
      skills, suggesting that he drove the animals to    1g Garrod 1938, p. 1.
      their death or that he was at least instru-        20 Breuil and Lantier 1965, p. 115.
      mental in obtaining large quantities of a          21 Burkitt 1963, pp. 129-30.
      single species. See e.g. Isaac 1977; Shipman       22 Forexamples ofa relatively recent treat-
      et al. 1981. For contrary views, see Binford       ment of these views see Hoebel 1949; Movius
      1977b; Binford and Todd 1982.                      1956; Herskovits 1955; there are, of course,
      16 For a description of the research situa-        many additional examples.
      tion see Leakey 1981, pp. 76—88.                   23 Peyrony 1930, 1933, 1936.
      17_ See Binford 1981a, pp. 83—6 and 246-7          24 Movius 1953. For a more recent dis-
      for a discussion of such methods of inference.     cussion see Laville et al. 1980.
      18 Keeley and Toth 1981.                           25 See Bordes 1950, 1953b, 1961a. Also
      19 Binford 19772, p. 7.                            compare Sonneville-Bordes 1975b.
                                                         26 Bordes 1953a.
                                                         27 Bordes 1972.
      Part II (Introduction) (pp. 77-8)
                                                         28 For a description see Sonneville-Bordes
      1 Popper 1972, p. 198.                             1975b.
      2 Sonneville-Bordes 1975a, p. 35 (transla-         29 =Lbid.
      tion from the original French).                    30 Peyrony 1930.
      3 Popper 1972, p. 30.                              31 Bordes 1972.
      4 Black, in Popper 1959, p. 82.                    32 The early formulations of parallel phyla
                                                         were beginning to be questioned by the late
      Chapter 4 (pp. 79-94)                              1940s and early 1950s: e.g. Braidwood 1946;
                                                         Movius 1948.
      1 The evidence for the use of pigments is          33 Modified versions of Breuil’s views con-
      the presence of worked or abraded fragments        tinue to dominate some research even today.
      of red ochre and of manganese. Although the        See Collins 1969; Ohel 1979.
                                                                             Notes on the Text     s2   37
34 Sackett 1981, p. go.                          tion for Anthropological Research and by
35 Wissler 1914, 1923; Klimek 1955; Kroe-        the National Science Foundation. Works
ber 1939; Milke 1949; Hodder 1977.               stemming directly from the Nunamiut re-
36 Bordes 1972, pp. 148-9.                       search include the following: Binford 1976,
37 Wissler 1914, pp. 468-9.                      1978a, 1978b, 1979, 1980, 1981a, 1981b,
38 For the basic literature on the debate        1981c, 1982.
regarding the ‘functional argument’ see          15 Both travel to and fieldwork in Australia
Binford and Binford 1966, 1969; Binford          was supported by the Institute of Aboriginal
1972a, 1973. The opposing point of view is       Studies, Canberra.
represented by Bordes 1961b; Sonneville-         16 E.g. Binford 1981b.
Bordes 1966; Collins 1969, 1970; Bordes and      17 Binford 1967; see-also Binford 1968b.
Sonneville-Bordes 1970; Mellars 1970; Bor-       18 A similar point was made in Binford
des et al. 1972.                                 1969.


Chapter 5 (pp. 95-108)                           Chapter 6 (pp. 109-43)

1 A major breakthrough with regard to the        1 Silberbauer 1972.
search for stratigraphy was made by Coe          2 The approach was developed for more
1964.                                            sedentary systems by Flannery, 1972.
2 Taylor 1948.                                   3 See MacNeish 1958, p. 137 or for a more
3 See particularly Willey 1953.                  expanded version MacNeish,      Peterson, and
4 See Brown (ed.) 1971.                          Neely 1972, especially p. 355.
5 At the time that I began searching the         4 For a more complete description of this
literature, the two most important publica-      argument see Binford 1981c.
tions known to me treating the manufacture       5 Binford 1978a, pp. 306-12.
of stone tools were Pond 1930 and Witthoft       6 See Downs 1966.
1957; in addition, a provocative study had       7 For a further description of the Anavik
appeared in Witthoft 1952.                       Springs site see Binford, 1978a, pp. 171-8.
6 Some of my early investigations into           8 Ibid., pp. 235-45.
lithic analysis include Binford 1963; Binford    g I refer here to features interpreted by
and Papworth 1963; Binford and Quimby            P. P. Yefimenko as zemlyanka or ‘sleeping
 1963.                                           pits’. Examples include ‘dwelling number 1’
7 Binford and Papworth 1963.                     in the upper level of Kostienki I and ‘pit U’
8 Binford 1964b.                                 at Avdejevo, an unpublished site. For de-
9g See Binford 1968a.                            scriptions of Kostienki and other major
10 See Binford and Binford 1966.                 Russian Palaeolithic sites, see Klein 1973.
11     For a short history of the early work     My information about these specific features
with multivariate statistical techniques see     is based on personal communication with
Binford and Binford 1966, p. 293, fn. 1.         Professor Grigoryev at the University of
 12 My former wife, Sally Binford, and I         Leningrad,
received a research grant from the National      10 Klein 1973, p. 70, fig. 8.
Science Foundation. We were assisted in          11 Similar features have been described
France by Georges Bordes, Gerald Eck,            among the Kalahari San Bushmen by
Nicholas     Gessler,   Cathy   Read-Martin,     Crowell and Hitchcock 1978, pp. 37-51.
Dwight Read, Michele Lenoir, and Polly           12 Binford 1978b, pp. 330-61.
Wiessner. The team was also continuously         13 Yellen 1977, pp. 113-30.
aided and encouraged by Francois Bordes,         14 Ibid., particularly pp. 125-31.
Jean Phillippe Rigaud and the staff of Bordes’   15 Williams 1968, 1969.
laboratory.                                      16 Patricia Draper, personal communica-
13 At the time I assumed, as did most            tion.        ,
researchers, that these were ‘living floors’     17 Binford 1982.
with near-perfect integrity and with high        18 It should be pointed out that the basis
resolution, Today such assumptions seem          of the Mousterian debate was the nature of
very naive.                                      stone tool assemblages. I have not mentioned
14 Research among the Nunamiut Eskimo            stone tools in discussing land use, because the
was supported by the Wenner-Gren Founda-         Nunamiut Eskimo I observed were no longer
38   Notes on the Text

     using stone artifacts; however, there is little    system, They should therefore be perfectly
     chance that the kinds of lithic artifacts used     susceptible of explanation by the prehistorian
     by the Eskimo would have been comparable           within the proper frame of reference.’ (/bid.:
     to those of the Mousterian. Once again I           PaULgs)
     must stress that I do not consider the             Whallon followed these basic statements
     Nunamiut as providing an analogy for               with a discussion of the techniques known to
     Palaeolithic groups.                               him for recognizing patterning in spatial dis-
     19 Binford 1978a.                                  tributions. He has continued to refine old
                                                        techniques for detecting patterning and to
                                                        develop new ones. See Whallon 1973b, 1974
     Chapter   7 (pp. 144-92)
                                                        and the additional work along these lines by
     1 Binford 1978b.                                   Newell and Dekin 1978.
     2 Binford 1978a, particularly pp. 265-320.            Against this background, it is difficult to
     3 Ibid., pp. 321-7.                                comprehend how the kind of criticism which
     4 Whitehead 1953, pp. 158-9.                       Schiffer (1974) levelled against Whallon
     5 Wagner 1960, p. 91.                              could bejustified. Perhaps the strangest mis-
     6 Leroi-Gourhan and Brézillon 1966, pp.            statement of Whallon’s work has been made
     361-4.                                             by Yellen (1977, especially p. 134), who
     7 Van Noten 1978.                                  suggests that we assumed that every activity
     8 Schiffer 1972; Schiffer and Rathje 1973.         must occur in independent spatial locations
     g Binford and Binford 1966.                        and that tools found in association therefore
     1o A major confusion exists in the recent          refer to a single activity. These kinds of
     archaeological literature with regard to some      arguments simply betray a total misunder-
     of these ideas. From the days at the Univer-       standing of the issues and the history of the
     sity-of Chicago when I and my students             development of archaeological methods.
     explored the concepts of activity areas and        11    My work in Australia was conducted as
     tool kits, we clearly recognized the dual          a guest of James O’Connell while he worked
     problem of developing techniques for identi-       with the Alyawara. Financial support was
     fying patterning in the archaeological record      extended by the Australian Aboriginal Insti-
     and for interpreting the results of such           ture, Canberra.
     pattern recognition studies. Robert Whallon        12 Leroi-Gourhan and Brézillon 1966,
     took up the challenge and investigated tech-       1972.
     niques and approaches which might be               13 Leroi-Gourhan and Brézillon 1966, fig.
     useful in this respect ;he demonstrated clearly    58.
     that he appreciated the difference between         14 Gould 1977, fig. 22.
     an archaeological pattern and the meanings         15 Velder 1963, fig. 2.
     which might be attached to it:                     16 Movius 1975, 1977.
     (1) *. .. at least some human activities will be   17 Pat Draper, personal communication.
     spatially separated within most places of          18 Binford 1978a, pp. 142-5.
     occupation and .. . the areal differentiation      19   Ibid., pp. 435-57.
     of activities will result in the differential      20 The pattern of alternating beds and
     distribution of tool types over an occupation      hearths noted earlier applies only to un-
     area as a consequence of their different uses      sheltered sleeping areas or for structures and
     in the various activities carried out at the       rock shelters, whose primary function is to
     site.’ (Whallon 1973a, p. 116.)                    provide protection from rain and sun. When
     (2) *... our arguments do not necessitate the      structures are used to retain heat, group
     constant spatial separation of all activities      sleeping arrangements are more common.
     into mutually exclusive areas, only that some      Furthermore, the alternating beds and
     activities must, at least some of the time, be     hearths are not employed because the fuel,
     spatially distinct.’ (/bzd.: p. 117.)              which is used to heat the entire shelter rather
     (3) ‘Spatial clusters of tools do not neces-       than just the areas directly adjacent to the
     sarily have to represent items left in a place     fire, is conserved.
     of use... but are the results, nonetheless, of     21    Inan Eskimo context, the manufacture
     regular human behavior associated with the         of boats, sleds, or house frames and the sewing
     embeddedness of the technology in, or its          of tents are examples of large-scale manufac-
     articulation with, the rest of a total cultural    turing tasks which are generally done in
                                                                               Notes on the Text      239
areas specially set aside for the purpose. See    ology had denied that such variability ex-
Binford 1978a, p. 348, fig. 7.5 for a photo-      isted, Because of this denial it is therefore not
graph ofa kayak which was manufactured in         surprising that investigations of the type dis-
its own activity area outside, but next to, the   cussed here have not previously been con-
house,                                            ducted. Many modern investigators have
22) Yellen 1977, p. 92.                           misinterpreted my point completely: they
23 Among the Eskimo it was observed that          have assumed I was arguing that there was a
older men tended to be more regularly             necessary relationship between particular
engaged in craft activities than other people.    tool designs and the anticipated use of the
They would frequently congregate in the           tool (i.e. that considerations of tool use
house of an elderly couple with no children       determined the design.of the tool). I certainly
or with married offspring living elsewhere.       never made such a statement, nor did I imply
Such childless houses sometimes functioned        one. I did, however, suggest that tools with
in the same way, in terms of craft activities,    different designs could be expected to play
as men’s houses. There the men could lay out      different roles within the technology. Thus
their work and leave it in areas peripheral to    the study of variation in frequency from place
the domestic space of the woman ofthe house,      to place among identical morphological
where it would be unmolested.                     classes with differing sets of designs should
24 See Binford 1978a, p. 462, fig. 9.1 for a      tell us something about organizational vari-
photograph of debris being burned on a            ability within a cultural system. Just as there
butchering/processing site.                       is no necessary determinant relationship
 25 Schiffer (1972, 1976) has proposed the        between use and design, similarly, there is no
 conceptual distinction between primary and       such relationship between use and organiza-
 secondary refuse and has stressed the need for   tion (although there are certainly mutual
 archaeologists to distinguish between these      interactions in both cases), Knowing the use
 two types of deposit. While I accept that        of an item will not allow one to infer the
 Schiffer’s intention was based on a valid        organized patterns for the maintenance ofthe
 premise and was constructive, the distinction    technology through time (i.e. curation), nor
is not adequate, at least given my under-         the patterned modes of disposal, including
standing of formation processes.                  the investment of effort in maintaining places
 26 Schiffer 1972.                                where the technology was used. The latter
 27 Binford 1978a, pp. 145-7 gives a de-          must be considered in conjunction with the
 scription of an Eskimo meal in a winter house.   reconstruction of the particular actions con-
 28 Schiffer 1976, p. 57 provides some formal     ducted by tool-using actors, before any
 criteria for the recognition of secondary        realistic understanding of patterned associa-
 refuse: ‘Secondary refuse consists of worn-out   tions actually observed in the archaeological
 and broken materials and usually occurs in       record can be understood in accurate and
deposits of high material density and diver-      historically meaningful ways. In short, there
 sity. Compare this statement with the de-        is much more to the functional argument
scriptions by Yellen 1977, p. 109 of primary      than merely questions of tool use.
 refuse seen in his nuclear areas!
 29 Yellen 1977, pp. 81-3. It should be           Part III (Introduction) (pp. 193-4)
 pointed out that, while Yellen has made
valuable observations, his attribution of         1 This weakness has been recognized by
 ‘rigid’ site typologies to Whallon and myself    others (e.g. Lamberg-Karlovsky 1975 — with
is completely erroneous. Cf. note 10 above.       whose suggested solutions to the problem,
go Binford 1980, pp. 4-20.                        however, I do not agree). For the bizarre idea
31 The dispute about functional variation         that one can deduce ‘test implications’ for a
linked to the Mousterian controversy does         procedure which seeks to give meaning to
not concern tool use, as many have tried to       archaeological observations by referring to
argue: e.g. Collins 1969; Tringham 1978,          archaeological observations, see Binford
p. 174; Cahen et al. 1979. I reasoned that        19774.
forms of variability in the organization of       2 Binford 1981a, especially pp. 21-30.
human-hominid systems of adaptation, as           3 Idonot mean toimply that this approach
well as the factors which conditioned them,       is restricted to the study of complex societies:
were important, whereas traditional archae-       there are many examples from the literature
240   Notes on the Text

      dealing with much    earlier time ranges   (e.g.   later in this chapter, I should point out that
      Isaac and Isaac 1975). Leakey and Lewin            one major flaw in these early ideas was the
       1978, for instance, argued (by analogy with       concept of little “Gardens of Eden’ which
      the !Kung San) that gathering was very             served to concentrate population and offer
      important for early man and that the carry-        the potential for more secure population
      ing bag was therefore one of the most im-          growth. I was operating with some of the
      portant early tools; shortly after reading that,   assumptions of my predecessors and adding
      I saw a television interview with Pat Shipman      arguments for selective stress arising through
       (John Hopkins University), in which she           the structure of population dynamics,
      explained that the reason there were so many        14 Dumond 1965; Boserup 1965.
      cut marks found on ungulate metapodials             15 Smith and Young 1972.
      from early African sites was that the hominids     16 Flannery 1969.
      sought tendons for making... carrying bags!         17 Bender 1975; Bronson 1975; Cowgill
       (cf. Potts and Shipman 1981; Bunn 1981;            1975; Hassan 1974, 1979; Hayden 1981.
      Science News 1981). This is a classic example       18 Cf. the attitude of Flannery 1973.
      of observations from the archaeological            19 Beardsley 1956, p. 134.
      record being accommodated to one’s beliefs         20 Rick 1980.
      and then cited as proof that those original        21     Madsen 1979.
      ideas were correct: mere tautology.                22 Perlman 1980.
      4 Radcliffe-Brown recognized the weak-             23 Binford 1968a.
      ness of ‘conjectural history’. He pointed out      24 Harlan 1967.
       (1958, p. 41): “The hypothetical reconstruc-      25 Flannery 1969.
      tion of the past inevitably assumes certain        26 Hassan 1977; also discussion in Hassan
      general principles but does not prove them;         1981, especially pp. 213-14.
      on the contrary its results depend upon their      27 It makes no sense to regard reliability and
      validity.’ Although he was objecting to the        predictability as environmental characteristics
      reconstruction of history from ethnographic        which came to be increasingly recognized
      observations, the methodological point is           (cf. Hassan 1977; Hayden 1981): both are
      just as sound for archaeologically generated       properties of tactical procedures, not charac-
      observations. His criticism of historically-       teristics of the environment itself. Given
      oriented ethnology is equally applicable to        enough information about an environment,
      those who adopt theories guiding the inter-        almost any resource is rendered predictable
      pretation of archaeological observations and        (and hence reliable). What Hayden de-
      somehow suppose that these same facts can          scribes as reliable ‘r-selected’ resources are
      confirm or refute the theories (for a good         precisely those which can be exploited with
      example, see Mellen 1981).                         minimal information about the environ-
      5 Wittfogel 1957.                                  ment, since they tend to be stationary and
      6 Discussed in Chapter 9.                          aggregated in clumps; so it is curious that
                                                         these are the very resources which Hayden
      Chapter 8 (pp. 195-213)                            thinks man exploits as he becomes more
                                                         ‘knowledgeable’ about his environments.
          Darwin 1875.                                   28 Niederberger 1979.
          Roth 1887.                                     29 MacNeish 1964, 1971, 1972. This im-
          Peake and Fleure 1927.                         portant observation was acknowledged by
          Childe 1928.                                   Flannery 1973 and Bender 1978, yet ignored
          Tbid., p. 2.                                   in a work as recent as Hassan 1981. Hassan
          Hempel 1965.                                   no doubt would claim that his models for
          Braidwood 1963.                                food production apply only to Palestine and
      ND
      OD
      Snr
      AoR Braidwood and Howe 1960.                       that other areas each require their own
      =)  Braidwood and Willey (eds.) 1962, pp.          particularistic explanations,
      132-46,                                            30 E.g. Hayden 1981, p. 544: ‘It seems
      10 Braidwood and Reed 1957.                        self-evident to me that all else being equal,
      11 Braidwood 1963, p. r1o.                         hunter-gatherers will adopt strategies involy-
      12 Higgs and Jarman 1969; Higgs (ed.)              ing the least amount of movement.’
      1972, 1975.                                        31 Bender 1978, p. 207.
      13 Binford 1968a. Anticipating arguments           32 Bennett 1976b, p. 848.
                                                                              Notes on the Text      41


33 Cohen 1977.                                    6 See Finney 1966; Earle 1977.
34 Cf. notes 19 and 28 above.                     7 Flannery and Coe 1968; also Sanders and
35 Bailey 1960.                                   Price 1968.
36 Perkins 1964; cf. Reed 1960.                   8 Sahlins 1963, 1965.
37 Binford and Chasko 1976; additional            g See Sanders et al. 1979, especially pp.
information on this point may be found in         400—1, for a discussion of this point.
Lee 1972.                                         10 Boserup 1965.
38 Osborn 1977 has sought to demonstrate          11   This model, like so many others, assumes
that aquatic resources do not constitute          a teleological explanation: that is, the exist-
‘Gardens of Eden’. Yesner 1980 realizes that      ence of some form of principle that man, if
there is an historical problem: if aquatic        given the chance, will seek to raise his
resources are to be considered ‘Gardens of        standard of living, will invest in culture
Eden’, why did early populations apparently       building, will explore new ways of investing
not realize this fact? Nevertheless, he tends     his time. These views are all forms of what
to cite coastal hunter-gatherers as examples      Trigger (1981, p. 150) has characterized as
of adaptations to exceptionally productive        the ‘Enlightenment belief that technological
settings, which he believes were more com-        innovation is an autonomous process of
mon in the past. His suggestion that increased    rational self-improvement and the driving
sedentism in such settings is tied to greater     force behind cultural evolution.’
resource diversity relates to the notion of the   12 Bennett 1976a.
‘broad spectrum revolution’.                      13 Harris 1979. After laying out many
39 «Flannery 1965.                                principles with which I can find little to
40 ‘The references are given in notes 17, 26,     disagree, Harris’ actual illustrations of cul-
33 and 39.                                        tural materialism take the form of various
41 This was the topic of another lecture          cost-benefit arguments which assume a vital
delivered during my stay in Great Britain,        evolutionary ‘good’ for increasing the ‘stan-
but not included in the present volume            dard of living’, or at least decreasing the cost
(Binford 1981c).                                  of maintaining it (see particularly Harris
42 Binford 19778, p. 7.                           1979, pp. 85-114). This, once again, is a
                                                  gradualist view.
                                                  14 The Principle of Least Effort has been
Chapter 9 (pp. 214-32)
                                                  most explicitly stated by Zipf 1949.
1 Binford 1g164a                                  15 ‘The law of minimal risk means that
2 Sahlins 1958.                                   when faced by choices the decision will be to
3 The pattern of small power-based ‘chief-        adopt that solution which produces the
doms’ referred to here has a coastal distribu-    minimal risk’ (Sanders et al. 1979, p. 360).
tion in North America,         beginning at       16 Pyke et al. 1977; Charnov 1976.
Chesapeake Bay, continuing south along the        17 I do not wish to imply that I have not
Atlantic coast (including such groups as the      operated from time to time with propositions
Guale) and around the Florida area into the       from economics as if they were principles of
Gulf of Mexico. Similar systems extended up       evolution, for I think almost all of us who
the Mississippi valley, but became much           have ever addressed the issue of process have
rarer along the Gulf coast west of the mouth      thought in economic terms about ecological
of the Mississippi.                               processes. What I am suggesting here is that
4 E.g. Gearing 1962.                              we should become increasingly aware of this
5 Sahlins never dealt adequately with the         ‘functionalist’ approach. Economics, even if
latter point (differential productivity). His     the principles are valid, refers to the be-
concept of ‘imbalanced’ reciprocity, for ex-      haviour of participants within a system,
ample, related only to short term conditions      rather than the patterns of interaction be-
of exchange. Popular discussions of a re-         tween a system and its environmental field,
distributive mode of organization have not        which is in my opinion the most profitable
yet satisfactorily addressed the more likely      way of thinking about the locus of evolution-
situation in which there exist much more          ary processes. Those who would see the
permanent imbalances within a region which        dynamics of a system as simply a generaliza-
would serve to ensure a fairly permanent          tion about the normative behaviour of
imbalance in the flow of goods.                   participants within it have, I fear, largely
242   Notes on the Text

      missed the point regarding the organization        (as culture certainly is), then I think it might
      of ecological articulations among systems.        be well to investigate some of the properties
      18 The assumption of an inner dynamic             of that domain of phenomena, rather than
      has been a basic and fundamental part of          attempting to reduce it to a simple analog of
      most philosophical positions associated with      genes with fitness guiding reproductive
      the word ‘evolution’ in the social sciences.      success at the species level in the literal sense
      See Dunnell 1980a. For my own much earlier        of the word species. Dunnell’s argument
      argument in favour of a selectionist position     entirely misses the point of interest about
      see Binford 1972b.                                human adaptations: they are truly extra-
      1g I am suggesting here that there are            somatic and must be understood in terms of
      major organizational characteristics in the       extra-somatic processes, Culture refers to
      evolutionary history of culturally integrated     that organizational domain.
      systems, This means that there are apt to be      21 See Renfrew 1969; Parsons and Price
      dramatic kinds of changes or ‘punctuations’,       1971; Rathje 1971.
      with seeming lack of continuity of the type to    22 Fogel 1963.
      be expected if one adopted a gradualist view      23 Walthall et al. 1979.
      of evolutionary process,                          24 Prufer 1961.
      20 Dunnell’s (1980a) recent survey of             25 Griffin et al. 1969.
      evolutionary ideas in anthropology makes an       26 See Struever and Houart 1972.
      argument against vitalism and in favour ofa       27 E.g. Judge 1979; also Cordell and Plog
      selectionist view, as advocated here. On the      1979, particularly pp. 419-24.
      other hand, he rejects some paradigmatic          28 It is not infrequent to see claims made
      distinctions which he does not admit may be       for complex societies in areas such as the
      well founded.   For instance, he states critic-   American Southwest phrased as a step to-
      ally :‘The view that the subject is culture has   ward achieving intellectual ‘freedom’ from
      led to isolation of cultural evolution from       the ‘oppression’ of the ethnohistoric past
      evolution in general. Culture is to be ex-        where only ‘egalitarian’ societies were de-
      plained, not by evolutionary principles and       scribed. It is of course possible, indeed almost
      mechanisms demonstrated to be operative in        a certainty, that there were forms of society
      the world at large, but by processes unique to    in the past which are not represented in the
      culture itself.’ (p. 48) These statements,        relatively recent descriptions from the colon-
      which Dunnell takes to be a devastating pro-      ial era. Nevertheless, I fear that the criteria
      nouncement, to me seem silly posturings           being cited in favour of centralized authori-
      which would lead, if taken seriously, to that     ties and major redistributive functions are
      masquerade for productive thought currently       largely the size and architectural sophistica-
      parading under the rubric of sociobiology. In     tion of the ruins, Are we really to believe that
      the example I have just given the situation is    mankind can only accomplish substantial
      analogous to a species previously interacting     acts of coordinated labour if ‘organized’ by a
      competitively with its conspecifics suddenly      powerful central government authority?
      being able to shift the dynamics of selection     29 See Gould and Lewontin 1979. For a
      to an ‘unwanted’ organ — a little finger, for     review of currently active philosophical
      instance — and by doing so ensure not only        positions, see Wenke 1981.
      the future security of the original species but   30 Binford 1981a, especially pp. 83-5 and
      also a real competitive scrap between the new     184-97.
      ‘disembodied’ little fingers! If an organiza-     31 _ Binford in press.
      tion is capable of that type of restructuring
                                  Bibliography

Apams,    R.   N.   1981   ‘Natural   selection,               research design’, American Antiquity 29 (4),
  energetics, and “cultural materialism’’’         b           425-41.
  Current Anthropology 22 (6), 603-24.                       1967 ‘Smudge pits and hide smoking: the use
ALMEIDA, A, DE 1965 Bushmen and other Non-                      of analogy in archaeological reasoning’,
  Bantu Peoples of Angola, Johannesburg.                        American Antiquity 32 (1), 1-12.
AMSDEN, C. W. 1977 A Quantitative Analysis of                1968a ‘Post-pleistocene adaptations’, in S. R.
  Nunamiut Eskimo Settlement Dynamics: 1898                     Binford and L. R. Binford (eds.), New
  to 1969 (Ph.D. Dissertation, Department                       Perspectives in Archaeology, Chicago, 313~41.
  of Anthropology, University of New Mex-                    1968b ‘Some comments on historical versus
  ico), Ann Arbor.                                              processual       archaeology’,     Southwestern
ARDREY, R. 1961 African Genesis, London and                    Journal of Anthropology 24 (3), 267-75.
  New York.                                                  1968c ‘Archaeological perspectives’, in S. R.
AscHER, R. 1962 ‘Ethnography for archae-                        Binford and L. R. Binford (eds.). New
  ology: a case from the Seri Indians’,                         Perspectives in Archaeology, Chicago, 5-32.
  Ethnology 1, 360-9.                                        1969 ‘Comment on D. Collins’ “culture
BatLey, H. P. 1960 ‘A method of determining                     traditions and environment ofearly man”’’,
  the warmth and temperateness ofclimate’,                      Current Anthropology 10 (4), 297-9.
  Geografiska Annaler 43 (1), 1-16.                          1972a ‘Contemporary model building: para-
BaRTHOLOMEW, G. A. AND BiIRDSsELL, J. B.                        digms and the current state of paleolithic
   1953 ‘Ecology and the protohominids’,                        research’, in D. L. Clarke (ed.), Models in
  American Anthropologist 55, 481-98.                           Archaeology, London, 109-66,
BEARDSLEY, R. K. eé¢ al. 1955 ‘Functional and                1972b ‘Comments on evolution’, in L. R.
  evolutionary implications of community                       Binford, An Archaeological Perspective, New
  patterning’, in R. Wauchope et al. (eds.),                   York and London, 105-13.
  Seminars in Archaeology (Memoirs of the                    1973 ‘Interassemblage variability — the
  Society for American Archaeology, 11),                       Mousterian and the ‘functional’ argu-
  Salt Lake City, 129-55.                                      ment’, in C. Renfrew (ed.), The Explana-
BENDER, B. 1975 Farming in Prehistory, Lon-                    tion of Culture Change, London, 227-54.
  don.                                                       1976 ‘Forty-seven trips: a case study in the
1978 ‘Gatherer-hunter to farmer: a social                      character of some formation processes of
  perspective’, World Archaeology 10 (2),                      the archaeological record, in E. Hall (ed.),
  204-22.                                                      Contributions to Anthropology: The Interior
BenneTT, J. W. 1976a The Ecological Transi-                    Peoples of Northern Alaska (National Mus-
  tion: Cultural Anthropology and Human Adap-                  eum of Man Mercury Series, 49), Ottawa,
  tation, New York.                                            299-351.
1976b ‘Anticipation, adaptation and the                      1977a ‘General introduction’, in L. R. Bin-
  concept of culture in anthropology’, Science                 ford (ed.), For Theory Building in Archae-
  192, 847-53.                                                 ology, New York, 1-10.
Brinrorp, L. R. 1963 ‘The Pomranky site. A                   1977b ‘Olorgesailie deserves more than the
   late archaic burial station’, Anthropological               usual book review’, Journal of Anthropo-
  Papers, Museum of Anthropology, University of                logical Research 33 (4), 493-502.
  Michigan 19, 149-92.                                       1978a Nunamiut Ethnoarchaeology, New York.
1964a An Archaeological and Ethnohistorical                  1978b ‘Dimensional analysis of behavior and
  Investigation of Cultural Diversity (Ph.D.                   site structure: learning from an Eskimo
  Dissertation, Department ofAnthropology,                     hunting stand’, American Antiquity 43 (3),
  University of Michigan), Ann Arbor.                          330-61.
1964b ‘A consideration of archaeological                     1979 ‘Organization       and   formation     pro-

                                                       243
244   Bibliography

        cesses:   looking at curated   technologies’,      Journal of Anthropology 24 (2), 139-54.
        Journal of Anthropological Research   35 (3),    Bornes, F, 1950 ‘Principes d’une méthode
        255—73-                                            d’ étude des techniques de débitage et de la
      1980 ‘Willow smoke and dogs’ tails: hunter-           typologie du Paléolithique ancien et moy-
        gatherer settlement systems and archaco-           en’, L’ Anthropologie 54 (1-2), 19-34.
        logical site formation’, American Antiquity      1953a ‘Levalloisien et Moustérien’, Bulletin
        45 (1), 4-20.                                      de la Société Préhistorique Frangaise 50 (4),
      1981a Bones: Ancient Men and Modern Myths,           226-35.
        New York.                                        1953b ‘Essai de classification des industries
      1981b ‘Behavioral archaeology and the                 ““moustériennes”’, Bulletin de la Société
        ‘“‘Pompeii premise”’, Journal of Anthropo-         Préhistorique Frangaise 50 (7-8), 457-66.
        logical Research 37 (3), 195-208.                1961a Typologie de Paléolithique Ancien et
      1981c ‘Long term land use patterns: some              Moyen, Bordeaux.
        implications for archaeology’, Paper pre-        1961b   ‘Mousterian     cultures   in   France’,
        sented at the 46th Annual Meeting of the           Science 134 (3482), 803-10.
        Society for American Archaeology, San            1969 ‘Reflections on typology and techniques
        Diego.                                             in the Paleolithic’, Arctic Anthropology 6 (1),
      1982 ‘The archaeology of place’, Journal of           I-29.
        Anthropological Archaeology 1 (1), 5-31.         1972 A Tale of Two Caves, New York.
      in press ‘Objectivity-explanation-archaeol-        Borpss, F., Ricaup, J. P. AND SONNEVILLE-
        ogy 1980’, in C. Renfrew, M. Rowlands,             Borpes, D. DE 1972 “Des buts, problémes
        B. Abbot-Seagraves (eds.), Theory and              et limites de l’archéologie paléolithique’,
        Explanation in Archaeology: the Southampton        Quaternaria 16 (1), 15-34.
        Conference, New York and London.                 Borpes, F. AND SONNEVILLE-BorRDEs, D. DE
      Brnrorp, L- R. AND BERTRAM, J. B. 1977                1970 ‘The significance of variability in
         ‘Bone frequencies — and attritional pro-          Paleolithic assemblages’, World Archae-
        cesses’, in L. R. Binford (ed.), For Theory        ology 2 (1), 61-73.
        Building in Archaeology, New York, 77-153.       BosErup, E. 1965 The Conditions of Agricul-
      Brnrorp, L. R. AND BrnFrorD, S. R. 1966 ‘A           tural Growth, London.
         preliminary analysis of functional vari-        Braibwoop, R. J. 1946 “The interrelations,
        ability in the Mousterian of Levallois             core and flake tool traditions in Europe’,
        facies’, American Anthropologist 68 (2), Pt 2,     in R, Braidwood (ed.), Origins: An Intro-
         238-95.                                           ductory Course in General Anthropology, Chi-
      1969 ‘Stone tools and human behavior’,               cago, 145-52.
        Scientific American 220 (4), 70-84.              1963 Prehistoric Man (6th edn), Chicago.
      Brnrorp, L. R. anp Cuasxo, W. J. 1976              Braibwoop, R. J. anp Howe, B. 1960
         ‘Nunamiut demographic history: a pro-             Prehistoric Investigations in Iraqi Kurdistan
        vocative case’, in E. B. W. Zubrow (ed.),           (Oriental Institute Studies in Ancient
        Demographic Anthropology, Albuquerque,             Oriental Civilization, 31), Chicago,
         63-143.                                         Braipwoop, R. J. anD REED, C. A. 1957
      Brnrorp, L. R. anp PApwortu, M. L. 1963              ‘The achievement and early consequences
         “The Eastport site, Antrim County, Mich-          of food production: a consideration of the
         igan’, Anthropological Papers, Museum of          archaeological and natural-historical evi-
         Anthropology, University of Michigan 19,          dence’, Cold Springs Harbor Symposia on
         71-123.                                           Quantitative Biology 22, 19-31.
      Brnrorp, L. R. AND Quimsy, G. I. 1963              Braipwoon, R. J. AnD WILLEy, G. R. (eds.)
         ‘Indian sites and chipped stone materials          1962 Courses Toward Urban Life (Viking
         in the northern Lake Michigan area’,              Fund Publications in Anthropology, 32),
         Fieldiana, Anthropology 36, 277-307.              Chicago.
      BinrorbD, L. R. anv Topp, L. C. 1982 ‘On           Brain, C. K. 1967 ‘Hottentot food remains
         arguments for the “butchering’’ of giant          and their meaning in the interpretation of
         Geladas’, Current Anthropology 23 (1), 108—       fossil bone assemblages’, Scientific Papers of
         10.                                               the Namib Desert Research Station 32, 1-11.
      Binrorp, S. R. 1968 ‘A structural comparison       1968 ‘Who killed the Swartkrans ape-man?”’,
         of disposal of the dead in the Mousterian         South African Museum Association Bulletin
         and the Upper Paleolithic’, Southwestern.         9 (4), 127-39.
                                                                                        Bibliography

 1981 The Hunters or the Hunted? An Introduction     1979 Experimental Archaeology, London.
   to African Cave Taphonomy, Chicago.               Co.uins, D. M. 1969 ‘Cultural traditions and
 BreviL, H. 1931 ‘Pleistocene sequence in the          environment of early man’, Current Anthro-
   Thames Valley’, South-Eastern Naturalist            pology 10, 267-316.
   and Antiquary 36, 95-8.                           1970 ‘Stone artefact analysis and the recogni-
 1932a ‘Les industries 4 éclats du Paléo-              tion of culture   traditions’,   World Archae-
   lithique ancien, I. Le Clactonien’, Préhis-         ology 2 (1), 17-27.
    totre 1 (2), 125-go.                             CorvgE LL, L. S. anv Pog, F. 1979 ‘Escaping
 1932b ‘Le Paléolithique ancien en Europe              the confines of normative thought: a re-
    Occidentale et sa chronologie’, Bulletin de la     evaluation of Puebloan prehistory’, Ameri-
    Société Préhistorique Frangaise 29 (3), 570-8.     can Antiquity 44 (3),-405—29.
 BreuiL, H. anp Lantier, R. 1965 The Men             Cow iLL, G, L. 1975 ‘Population pressure as
   of the Old Stone Age, London.                       a non-explanation’, in A. Swedlund (ed.),
 Bronson, B. 1975 “The earliest farming:               Population Studies in Archaeology and Bio-
   demography as cause and consequence’,               logical Anthropology (Society for American
    in S. Polgar (ed.), Population, Ecology and        Archaeology, Memoir 30), Washington,
   Social Evolution, The Hague, 53-71.                 D.C.), 127-31.
 Broo, R. 1933 The Coming of Man, London.            CroweELL, A. L. anp Hircucook, R. K. 1978
 BROTHWELL, D. anv Hicos, E. (eds.) 1969               ‘Basarwa ambush hunting in Botswana’,
   Science in Archaeology (2nd edn), London            Botswana Notes and Records 10, 37-51.
    and New York.                                    Dart, R. A. 1925 ‘A note on Makapansgat:
 Brown, J. A. (ed.) 1971 Approaches to the              a site of early human occupation’, South
   Social Dimensions of Mortuary Practices             African Journal of Science 22, 371-81.
    (Society     for American        Archaeology,    1926 “Taung and its significance’, Natural
    Memoir 25), Washington D.C.                        History 26, 315-27.
 Bunn, H. T. 1981 ‘Archaeological evidence           1948 ‘The Makapansgat proto-human Aus-
   from meat-eating by Plio-Pleistocene Ho-             tralopithecus prometheus’, American Fournal of
    minids from Koobi Fora and Olduvai                 Physical Anthropology 6, 259-83.
    Gorge’, Nature 291, 577.                         1949 ‘The predatory implemental technique
 Bunn, H. T. e¢ al. 1980 ‘FxJj50: an early             of Australopithecus’, American Journal of
    Pleistocene site in northern Kenya’, World         Physical Anthropology 7 (1), 1-38.
    Archaeology 12 (2), 109-36.                      1953 “The predatory transition from ape to
 Burkitt, M. 1963 The Old Stone Age (4th               man’, International Anthropological and Lin-
    edn), London.                                      guistic Review 1.
 CauHEN, D., KEEtey, L. H. AnD vAN NoTEN,            1956 ‘The myth of the bone-accumulating
    F. L. 1979 ‘Stone tools, toolkits, and             hyena’, American Anthropologist 58, 40-62.
    human behavior in prehistory’, Current           1957 Lhe Osteodontokeratic Culture of Australo-
    Anthropology 20 (4), 661-83.                       pithecus Prometheus (Memoir of the Trans-
 Cuarnov, E. L. 1976 ‘Optimal foraging: the            vaal Museum, 10), Pretoria.
    marginal value theorem’, Theoretical Popu-       1958 ‘The minimal bone-breccia content of
    lation Biology 9, 129-36.                           Makapansgat and the Australopithecine
 CuiLpE, V..G. 1928 The Most Ancient East :            predatory habit’, American Anthropologist
    The Oriental Prelude to European Prehistory,       60, 923-31.
    London.                                          1959 Adventures with the Missing Link, New
 1929 The Danube in Prehistory, Oxford.                York.
 Crark, J. G. D. 1979 ‘Archaeology and               1960 ‘The bone tool-manufacturing ability
   human diversity’, Annual Review of Anthro-           of Australopithecus prometheus’, American An-
   pology 8, 1-20.                                      thropologist 62, 134-43.
 Cog, J. L. 1964 The Formative Cultures of the       Darwin, C. R. 1875 The Variation of Animals
    Carolina Piedmont (Transactions of the             and Plants under Domestication, Volume 1
   American Philosophical Society n.s., Vol-            (2nd edn), London.
    ume 54, Number 5), Philadelphia.                 Deacon, H. J. 1975 ‘Demography, subsist-
 Coven, M. N. 1977 The Food Crisis in                  ence, and culture during the Acheulian in
   Prehistory, New Haven.                              southern Africa’, in K. Butzer and G.
 Cotgs, J. M. 1973 Archaeology by Experiment,           Isaac (eds.), After the Australopithecines, The
   London.                                             Hague, 543-69.



Oooo
Bibliography

Downs, J. F. 1966 The Two Worlds of the             lithic in the light of recent discovery’,
   Washo, New York.                                 Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 4, 1-26.
Dumonp, D. E. 1965 ‘Population growth and         GEARING, F, 1962 Priests and warriors (Ameri-
  cultural change’, Southwestern Journal of         can Anthropologist 64 (5), Pt 2).
  Anthropology 21 (4), 302-24.                    GouLp, R. A. 1977 Puntutjarpa Rockshelter and
DunneLL, R. C. 1980a ‘Evolutionary theory           the Australian Desert Culture (Anthropo-
  and archaeology’, in M. B. Schiffer (ed.),        logical Papers, American Museum of
  Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory,     Natural History, 54, Pt I), New York.
   Volume 3, New York, 35-99.                     1980 Living Archaeology, Cambridge and New
1980b ‘Americanist archaeology: the 1979            York.
  contribution’, American Journal of Archae-      Goutp, R. A. (ed.) 1978 Explorations in
  ology, 84, 463-78.                                Ethnoarchaeology, Albuquerque.
EARLE, T. K. 1977-‘A reappraisal of re-           GouLp, S. J. AND Lewontin, R. C. 1979 “The
  distribution: complex Hawaiian chief-             spandrels of San Marco and the Panglos-
  doms’, in T, K. Earle and J. E. Ericson           sian paradigm: a critique of the adapta-
   (eds.), Exchange Systems in Prehistory, New      tionist program’, Proceedings of the Royal
  York, 213-29.                                     Society of London, Series B, 205, 581-98.
FEYERABEND, P, 1978 Against Method : Outline      GriFFIN,J. B., Gorpus, A. A. AND WRIGHT,
  of an Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge (2nd        G. A. 1969 ‘Identification ofthe sources of
  edn), New York.                                   Hopewellian obsidian in the Middle West’,
Finney, B. 1966 ‘Resource distribution and          American Antiquity 34 (1), 1-14.
  social structure in Tahiti’, Ethnology 5 (1),   Har.an,J. R. 1967 ‘A wild wheat harvest in
  80-6.                                             Turkey’, Archaeology 20 (3), 197-201.
FLANNERY, K. V. 1965 ‘The ecology of early        Harris, M. 1979 Cultural Materialism: The
  food production in Mesopotamia’, Science          Strugglefor a Science of Culture, New York.
   147, 1247-56.                                  Harrop, F. B. 1980 ‘A comparative analysis
1969 ‘Origins and ecological effects of early       of Eurasian     Paleolithic   burials’,   World
  domestication in Iran and the Near East’,         Archaeology 12 (2), 195-211.
  in P. J. Ucko and G. W. Dimbleby (eds.),        Hassan, F. 1974 ‘Population growth and
   The Domestication and Exploitation of Plants     cultural evolution’, Reviews in Anthropology
  and Animals, London and Chicago, 73-100.           I, 205-12,
1972 ‘The origins of the village as a settle-     1977 ‘The dynamics of agricultural origins in
  ment type in Mesoamerica and the Near             Palestine: a theoretical model’, in C, Reed
  East: a comparative study’, in P. J. Ucko,         (ed.), Agricultural Origins, The Hague,
  R. Tringham, and G, W. Dimbleby (eds.),           589-609.
  Man,   Settlement   and   Urbanism,   London,   1979 ‘Demography and archaeology’, Annual
  23-93:                                            Review of Anthropology 8, 137-60.
1973 “The origins of agriculture’, Annual         1981 Demographic Archaeology, New York.
  Review of Anthropology 2, 271-310.              Hawkes, C, 1954 ‘Archaeological theory and
FLANNERY, K. V. (ed.) 1976 The Early                method: some suggestions from the Old
  Mesoamerican Village, New York.                   World’, American Anthropologist 56 (1),
FLANNERY,      K. V. anp Coz, M. D. 1968             155-68.
   ‘Social and economic systems in formative      Hawkes, J. 1980 A Quest of Love, London.
   Mesoamerica’, in S. R. Binford and L. R.       Haypven, B. 1979 Palaeolithic Reflections :
  Binford (eds.), New Perspectives in Archae-       Lithic Technology and Ethnographic Excava-
   ology, Chicago, 267-83.                          tions among the Australian Aborigines, Can-
FLEMING, J. 1976 Dating in Archaeology: A           berra.
   Guide to Scientific Techniques, New York.      1981 ‘Research and development in the stone
Focet, I. L. 1963 “The dispersal of copper          technological transitions among hunter-
   artifacts in the late archaic period of pre-     gatherers’, Current Anthropology 22 (5),
   historic North America’, The Wisconsin           519-48.
  Archaeologist 44 (3), 129-80.                   Hemmine, J. E. 1971 The Distribution Move-
Fritz, J. M. and Ptioc, F. T. 1970 ‘The             ment Patterns of Caribou in Alaska (Alaska
   nature of archaeological explanation’,           Department of Fish and Game, Wildlife
  American Antiquity 35 (4), 405-12.                Technical Bulletin, 1), Fairbanks,
Garrop, D. A. E, 1938 “The Upper Palaeo-          Hemper, C. G. 1965 Aspects of Scientific
                                                                                         Bibliography      247
   Explanation, New York.                            1978 “The food-sharing behavior of proto-
Herskovits, M. J. 1955 Cultural Anthropology,          human hominids’, Scientific American 238
   New York.                                            (4), go—108.
Hices, E. S. (ed.) 1972 Papers in Economic          Isaac, G, anD Craper, D. C, 1981 ‘To what
   Prehistory, Cambridge.                              extent were early hominids carnivorous?
(ed.) 1975 Palaeoeconomy, Cambridge.                   An archaeological perspective’, in R.
Hices, E. S, anp JARMAN, M. R. 1969 ‘The               Harding and G. Teleki (eds.), Omnivorous
   origins of agriculture: a reconsideration’,         Primates, New York, 37-103.
   Antiquity 43, 31-41.                             Isaac, G, anv Isaac, B. 1975 ‘Africa’, in R.
Hix, A. P. 1972 Taphonomy of Contemporary              Stigler (ed.), Varieties of Culture in the Old
   and Late Cenozoic East African Vertebrates           World, New York, 8-48.
   (Unpubl. Ph.D. Dissertation, University          Jupcr, W. J. 1979 ‘The development of a
   of London), London.                                 complex cultural ecosystem in the Chaco
Hopper, I. 1977 ‘Some new directions in the            Basin, New Mexico’, in R. Luin (ed.),
   spatial analysis of archaeological data at          Proceedings of the First Conference of Scientific
   the regional scale (macro)’,in D, L. Clarke         Research in the National Parks 3 (National
   (ed.), Spatial Archaeology, London, 223-351.        Park Service Transactions and Proceed-
1982 Symbols in Action, New York and                   ings, 5), QOI—5.
   Cambridge.                                       KEELEY, L. anp Toru, N. 1981 ‘Microwear
Hoeser, E. A. 1949 Man in the Primitive                polishes on early stone tools from Koobi
   World, New York.                                    Fora, Kenya’, Nature 293, 464-5.
Hucues, A. R. 1954 ‘Hyaenas versus Austra-          Kuein, R. G. 1973 Ice Age Hunters of the
   lopithecines as agents of bone accumula-             Ukraine, Chicago.
   tion’, American Journal of Physical Anthro-       1975 ‘Paleoanthropological implications of
  pology 12, 467-86.                                   the nonarchaeological bone assemblage
Isaac, G. 1971 ‘The diet of early man: aspects         from Swartklip I, Southwestern Cape
   of archaeological evidence from Lower and           Province, South Africa’, Quaternary Re-
   Middle Pleistocene sites in Africa’, World          search 5, 275-88.
   Archaeology 2 (3), 278-99.                        1978 ‘The fauna and overall interpretation
1975 ‘Early hominids in action: a commen-              of the “‘cutting 10” Acheulean site at
   tary on the contribution of archaeology to          Elandsfontein (Hopefield), Southwestern
   understanding the fossil record in East             Cape Province, South Africa’, Quaternary
   Africa’, Yearbook of Physical Anthropology 19,     Research 10, 69-83.
  BS ee                                             K.LInpDT-JENSEN, O. 1975 A History of Scan-
1976a ‘The activities of early African homin-         dinavian Archaeology, London.
  ids: a review of archaeological evidence          Kumex, S. 1955 ‘Thestructure of Californian
  from the time span two and a half to one             Indian culture’, University of California
  million years ago’, in G. Isaac and E.              Publications in American Archaeology and
  McCown      (eds.), Human Origins: Louis            Ethnology 37, 1-70.
  Leakey and the East African Evidence, Menlo       Kramer, C. (ed.) 1979 Ethnoarchaeology :
  Park, 483-514.                                      Implications of Ethnography for Archaeology,
1976b ‘Early stone tools — an adaptive                New York.
  threshold ?’, in G. Sieveking, I. Longworth       Kroeser, A. L. 1939 Cultural and Natural
  and K. Wilson (eds.), Problems in Economic          Areas of Native North America (University of
  and Social Archaeology, London, 39-47.              California     Publications     in American
1976c ‘Stages of cultural elaboration in the          Archaeology and Ethnology, 38), Berkeley.
  Pleistocene: possible archaeological indi-        1948 Anthropology, New York.
  cations of the development of language            Kuun, T. 1962 ‘The historical structure of
  capabilities’, in S. Harnard, H. Steklis and        scientific discovery’, Science 136, 760-4.
  J. Lancaster (eds.), Origins and Evolution of     1970 The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (2nd
  Language and Speech (Annals of the New              edn), Chicago.
  York Academy of Sciences, 280), New               KurTen, B. 1976 The Cave Bear Story. Life and
  York, 275-88.                                       Death of a Vanished Animal, New York.
1977 Olorgesailie: Archaeological Studies of a      LamBerc-Karvovsky, C. C. 1975 ‘Third
  Middle Pleistocene Lake Basin in Kenya,             millennium modes of exchange and modes
  Chicago.                                            of production’, in J. A. Sabloff and C. CG.
248   Bibliography

        Lamberg-Karlovsky (eds.), Ancient Civiliz-          Dimbleby (eds.), Man, Settlement
                                                                                          and Urban-
        ation and Trade, Albuquerque, 341—68.               ism, London, 67-93.
      LaviL_e, H., Ricaup,J. P. AND SACKETT,J.            MacNeisu,     R.   S., PETERSON,       F. A.   AND
        Rock Shelters of the Perigord, New York.            Neexy, J. A. 1972 “The archaeological
      Leakey, L. S. B. 1959a “The first men: recent         reconnaissance’, in R. 8. MacNeish (ed.),
        discovery in East Africa’, Antiquity 33,            The Prehistory of the Tehuacdn Valley, Volume
        285-7.                                              5, Excavation    and    Reconnaissance,   Austin,
      1959b ‘A new fossil skull from Olduvai’,              341—495-
        Nature 184, 491-3.                                Mapsen, D. B. 1979 ‘The Fremont and the
      1960 ‘Finding the world’s earliest man’,              Sevier: defining prehistoric agricultural-
        National Geographic Magazine 118, 420-35.           ists north of the Anasazi’, American Anti-
      Leakey, M. D. 1971 Olduvat Gorge, Volume 3,           quity 44 (4), 711-22.
        Excavations in Beds I and II, 1960-1963,          Marks, A. E. AnD FrempeL, D. A. 1977
        Cambridge.                                          ‘Prehistoric settlement patterns in the
      1979 Olduvai Gorge: My Search for Early Man,          Avdat/Aqev area’, in A. Marks (ed.),
        London.                                             Prehistory and Paleoenvironments in the Central
      Leakey, M. D. ann Hay, R. L. 1979                     Negev, Israel, Volume II, Dallas, 131-58.
        ‘Pliocene footprints in the Laetolil, north-      Mason, O. 1883 ‘The birth of invention’,
        ern Tanzania’, Nature 278, 317-23.                  Annual Report of the National Museum 1882,
      Leakey, R. E, 1981 The Making of Mankind,             Washington, D.C.
        London and New York.                              ME trars, P. 1970 ‘Some comments on the
      Leakey, R. E. anp Lewin, R. 1978 Origins,             notion of “functional variability’ in stone
        London and New York.                                tool assemblages’, World Archaeology 2 (1),
      Leg, R. B. 1972 ‘Population growth and the            74-89.
         beginnings of sedentary life among the           MELLEN, S. L. W. 1981 The Evolution of Love,
         'Kung Bushmen’, in B. Spooner (ed.),               San Francisco.
        Population Growth: Anthropological Implica-       MetTzerR, D. J. 1979 ‘Paradigms and the
        tions, Cambridge, 329—42.                           nature of change in American archae-
      LreGros Cxiark, W. E. 1967 Man-apes or Ape            ology’, American Antiquity 44 (4), 644-57.
       Men?, New York.                                    Micuets, J. N. 1973 Dating Methods in
      Leror-GourHAN,      A.   AND   BrREZzILLoN,   M.      Archaeology, New York.
         1966 ‘“L’habitation Magdalénienne No. 1          Miike, W. 1949 ‘The quantitative distribu-
        de Pincevent prés Montereau (Seine-et-              tion of cultural similarities and their
         Marne)’, Gallia Préhistotre, Fouilles et Monu-     cartographic     representation’,   American
        ments Archéologiques en France Métropolitain,       Anthropologist 51, 237-52.
         Tome 9, Fascicule 2, Paris, 263-385.             Movius, H. I. 1948 ‘Old World prehistoric
      Lrero1-GourHAN, A. AND BreziLton, M.                  archaeology, 1948’ (Preliminary report to
         1972 Fouilles de Pincevent Essai d’ Analyse        the Committee on Interrelations of Pleisto-
        Ethnographique dun Habitat Magdalénien              cene Research, National Research Coun-
         (Supplément a Gallia Préhistoire, 7),              cil, Peabody Museum, Harvard Univer-
        Paris.                                              sity), Cambridge, Mass.
      Lorenz, K. 1966 On Agression, New York.             1953 ‘Old world prehistory: paleolithic’, in
      MacNeisy, R. S. 1958 Preliminary Archaeologi-         A. L. Kroeber (ed.), Anthropology Today :
        cal Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,     An Encyclopedic Inventory, Chicago, 163-92.
         Mexico (American Philosophical Society,          1956 ‘The old stone age’, in H. Shapiro (ed.),
         Proceedings, 48, Part 6), Philadelphia.            Man, Culture and Society, Oxford, 49-64.
      1964 ‘Ancient Mesoamerican civilization’,           1975 Excavation of the Abri Pataud, Les Eyzies
        Science 143, 531-7.                                  (Dordogne) (American School of Pre-
      1971 ‘Speculation about how and why food              historic Research, Peabody Museum, Har-
        production and village life developed in            vard University Bulletin, 30), Cambridge,
        the Tehuacan Valley, Mexico’, Archae-               Mass.
        ology 24, 307-15.                                 1977 Excavation of the Abri Pataud, Les Eyzies
      1972 “The evolution of community patterns              (Dordogne) ,Stratigraphy (American School
        in the Tehuacan Valley of Mexico and                of Prehistoric Research, Peabody Museum,
        speculations about the cultural processes’,         Harvard University, Bulletin 31), Cam-
        in P. J. Ucko, R. Tringham and G. W.                bridge, Mass.
                                                                                     Bibliography     249
Munpay, F. 1976 ‘Intersite variability in the       Peake, H. J. AND Fieure, H. J. 1927 Peasants
  Mousterian occupation of    the Avdat/Aqev          and Potters (The Corridors of Time, 3) 5)
  area’, in A. Marks (ed.), Prehistory and            Oxford.
  Paleoenvironments in the Central Negev, Israel,   PERLMAN, S. M. 1980 ‘An optimum diet
  Volume I, The Avdat/Agev Area Part I, Dallas,       model, coastal variability, and hunter-
  113-40,                                             gatherer behavior’, in M. B. Schiffer
Myres, J. L. (ed.) 1906 The Evolution of               (ed.), Advances in Archaeological Theory and
  Culture and Other Essays by the Late Lt.-Gen.       Method, Volume 3, New York, 257-310.
  A, Lane-Pitt-Rivers, Oxford,                      Perkins, D, 1964 ‘Prehistoric fauna from
NeEtson, N. C. 1938 ‘Prehistoric archaeology’,        Shanidar, Iraq’, Science 144, 1565-6.
   in F, Boas (ed.), General Anthropology, New      Peyrony, D. 1930 ‘Le Moustier, ses gise-
  York, 146-237.                                      ments, ses industries, ses couches geolo-
NEweELL, R. R. anp Dextn, A. A. 1978 ‘An              giques’, Revue Anthropologique 40, 48-76;
   integrative strategy for the definition of         155570.
   behaviorally meaningful archaeological           1933 ‘Les industries aurignaciennes dans le
   units’, Palaeohistoria 20 (1), 7-38.               bassin de la Vezere. Aurignacien et
NIEDERBERGER, C. 1979 Zohapilco (Instituto             Périgordien’, Bulletin de la Société Préhis-
   Nacional de Antropologia e Historia,                torique Frangaise 30, 543-59.
   Coleccion Cientifica, 30), Mexico City.          1936 ‘Le Périgordien et L’Aurignacien (nou-
Oakey, K. P. 1953 ‘Culture and the                    velles observations)’, Bulletin de la Société
   Australopithecines’, in 8. Tax, L. Eisely,         Préhistorique Frangaise 43, 616-19.
   I. Rouse, C. Voegelin (eds.), An Appraisal       Ponp, A. W. 1930 ‘Primitive Methods of
  of Anthropology Today, Chicago, 28-31.               Working Stone, Based on Experiments of H. L.
1954 ‘Evidence of fire in South African cave           Skavlem’ (Logan Museum Bulletin 2, Num-
   deposits’, Nature 174, 261-2.                      ber 1), Beloit.
1961 ‘On man’s use offire, with comments on         Popper, K. R. 1959 The Logic af Scientific
   tool-making and hunting’, in S. L. Wash-           Discovery (Torchbook edn), New York.
   burn (ed.), Soczal Life ofEarly Man (Viking      1972 Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary
   Fund Publications in Anthropology, 31),            Approach, Oxford.
   New York, 176—93.                                Potts, R. P. anp SurpMan, P. 1981 ‘Cut-
Ouet, M. Y. 1979 ‘The Clactonian: an                   marks made by stone tools on bone from
   independent complex or an integral part             Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania’, Nature 291,
   of the Acheulean?’, Current Anthropology 20        577:
   (4), 685-726.                                    PruFer, O. H. 1961 ‘Prehistoric Hopewell
O’Ke tty, M. J. 1968 ‘Excavations at New              meteorite collecting :context and implica-
  Grange, Co. Meath’, Antiquity 42 (1), 40-2.         tions’, The Ohio Fournal of Science 61 (6),
1982 Newgrange: Archaeology, Art and Legend,          341-52.
  London (New York 1983).                           Pyxe, H. G., Puttiam, H. R. anp CHarnov,
Ossporn, A. J. 1977 ‘Strandloopers, mer-              E. L. 1977 ‘Optimal foraging theory: a
  maids and other fairy tales: ecological             selective review of theory and tests’,
  determinants of marine resource utiliza-            Quarterly Review of Biology 52, 137-54.
  tion — the Peruvian case’, in L. R. Binford       QUENNELL, M, AND QUENNELL, C. H. B. 1922
   (ed.), For Theory Building in Archaeology,         Everyday Life in the Old Stone Age, New York.
  New York, 157-205.                                RapcuFFE-Brown, A. R. 1958 ‘Historical
Osporn, H. F. 1916 Men of the Old Stone Age,          and functional interpretations of culture in
  New York.                                           relation to the practical application of
1927 Man Rises to Parnassus : Critical Epochs in      anthropology to the control of native
  the Prehistory of Man, Princeton.                   people’, in M. N. Srinivas (ed.), Method in
Parsons, L. A. AND Price, B. J. 1971 ‘Meso-           Social Anthropology, Chicago, 39-41.
  american trade and its role in the emerg-         Ratuye, W. L. 1971 ‘The origin and develop-
  ence of civilization’, in R. F. Heizer and          ment of Lowland Classic Maya civiliza-
  J. A. Graham (eds.), Observations on the            tion’, American Antiquity 36 (3), 275-85.
  Emergence of Civilization in Mesoamerica          1974 ‘The Garbage Project: a new way of
  (Contributions of the University of Cali-           looking at the problems of archaeology’,
  fornia Archaeological Research Facility,            Archaeology 27 (4), 236-41.
  11), Berkeley, 169-95.                            1978 ‘Archaeological ethnography . . . be-
250   Bibliography

        cause sometimes it is better to give than               ‘Efficient exploitation of the archaeological
        receive’, in R, A. Gould (ed.), Explorations            record: penetrating problems’, in C. L.
        in Ethnoarchaeology, Albuquerque, 49-75.                Redman (ed.), Research and Theory in
      Ratyye, W. L. anp McCarruy, M. 1977                       Current Archaeology, New York, 169-79.
        ‘Recycling and variability in contem-                 SuipMan, P., BosLer, W. AND Davis, K. L.
        porary garbage’, in S. South (ed.), Re-                  1981 ‘Butchering of giant Geladas at an
        search    Strategies   in Historical   Archaeology,     Acheulian site’, Current Anthropology 22 (3),
        London and New York, 261—86.                             257-68.
      Reep, C. A. 1969 ‘The pattern of animal                 SILBERBAUER, G. B. 1972 ‘The G/wi Bush-
        domestication in the prehistoric Near                   men’, in M. G. Bicchieri (ed.), Hunters and
        East’, in P. Ucko and G, W. Dimbleby                    Gatherers Today, New York, 271-326.
        (eds.), The Domestication and Exploitation of         Sincer, R. anD Wyner, J. 1968 ‘Archaeo-
        Plants and Animals; London         and Chicago,         logical investigations at the Saldanha Skull
        361-80.                                                 site in South Africa’, South African Archaeo-
      RENFREW, C. 1969 “Trade and culture pro-                  logical Bulletin 23 (91), 63-74.
        cess in European prehistory’, Current An-             Smitu, D. C. anv Hopess, F. M., Jr. 1968
        thropology 10 (2), 151-69.                              ‘The Rankin site, Cocke County, Ten-
      Rick,J.W. 1980 Prehistoric Hunters of the High            nessee’, Tennessee Archaeologist 24 (2), 37—
        Andes, New York and London.                             gl.
      Rotu, H. L. 1887 ‘On the origin of agricul-             SmitH, G. 1847 A Narrative of an Exploratory
         ture’, Fournal of the Royal Anthropological             Visit to each of the Consular Cities of China, and
         Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 16 (2),         to the Islands ofHong Kong and Chusan, New
          102-36.                                               York.
      SACKETT, J. R. 1981 ‘From de Mortillet to               Situ, P. E. L. anp Younc, T. C. 1972 “The
         Bordes: a century of French Paleolithic                evolution of early agriculture and culture
         research’, in G. Daniel (ed.), Towards a               in greater Mesopotamia: a trial model’, in
         History of Archaeology, London, 85-99.                 B. Spooner (ed.), Population Growth: An-
      Sauuins, M. D. 1958 Social Stratification in              thropological Implications, Cambridge, 1-59.
         Polynesia, Seattle.                                  SONNEVILLE-BorDEs, D. DE 1966 ‘L’évolution
      1963 ‘Poor man, rich man, big-man, chief:                 du Paléolithique superieur en Europe
         political types in Melanesia and Poly-                 Occidentale et sa signification’, Bulletin de
         nesia’, Comparative Studies in Society and             la Soctété Préhistorique Francaise 63 (1), 3-34.
         Mstory 5 (3), 285-303.                               1975a “Discours de Mm. Denise de Sonne-
      1965 ‘On the sociology of primitive ex-                   ville-Bordes, président entrant’, Bulletin de
         change’, in M. Banton (ed.), The Relevance             la Société Préhistorique Francaise 72 (2), 35-9.
         of Models for Social Anthropology (Association       1975b ‘Les listes types observations de
         for Social Anthropology, Monograph 1),                 methode’, Quaternaria 18 (1), 9-43.
         London, 139-236.                                     Sout, S. 1977a Research Strategies in Historical
      SANDERS, W. T., PARsons,J. R. ANDSANTLEY,                 Archaeology, London and New York.
         R. S. 1979 The Basin of Mexico: Ecological           SoutH, S. (ed.) 1977b Method and Theory in
         Processes in the Evolution of a Civilization,          Historical Archaeology, London and New
         New York.                                              York.
      Sanpers, W. T. anv Price, B. J. 1968                    STRUEVER, S. AND Hovarr, G. L. 1972 ‘An
         Mesoamerica: The Evolution ofa Civilization,            analysis of the Hopewell interaction
         New York.                                              sphere’, in E. N. Wilmsen (ed.), Social
      SCHALLER, G. B. 1972 The Serengeti Lion,                  Exchange and Interaction (Anthropological
         Chicago.                                                Papers, Museum of Anthropology, Uni-
      Science News 1981 120, 2.                                 versity of Michigan, 46), Ann Arbor,
      ScuiFFER, M. B. 1972 ‘Archaeological con-                 47-19:
         text and systemic context’, American An-             TayLor, W. W. 1948 A Study of Archaeology
        tiquity 37 (2), 156-65.                                  (Memoirs of the American Anthropo-
      1974 ‘On Whallon’s use of dimensional                      logical Association, 69), Menasha,
        analysis of variance at Guila Naquitz’,               1972 ‘Old wine and new skins: a contem-
        American Antiquity 39 (3), 490-2.                        porary parable’, in M. Leone (ed.),
      1976 Behavioral Archeology, New York.                      Contemporary Archaeology, Carbondale, 28—
      ScurrFeR, M.B. anp Ratuye, W. L. 1973                      33-
                                                                                           Bibliography
TRIGGER, B. G. 1980 Gordon Childe: Revolu-             palaeolithic occupation areas’, in C, Ren-
  tions in Archaeology, New York.                      frew   (ed.),   The   Explanation     of Culture
1981 ‘Anglo-American archaeology’, World               Change, London, 115-30.
  Archaeology 13 (2), 138-55.                        1973b ‘Spatial analysis of occupation floors
TRINGHAM, R. 1978 ‘Experimentation, eth-               I: application of dimensional analysis of
  noarchaeology, and the leapfrogs in ar-              variance’, American Antiquity 38 (3), 266—
  chaeological methodology’, in R. A. Gould            78.
   (ed.), Explorations in Ethnoarchaeology, Al-      1974 ‘Spatial analysis of occupation floors II:
  buquerque, 169—99.                                   the application of nearest neighbor analy-
vAN Noten, F. 1978 Les Chasseurs de Meer               sis’, American Antiquity 39 (1), 16-34.
   (Dissertationes Archaeologicae Granden-           WuiTEHEAD, A, N.1953 Science and the
  sis, 18), Brugge.                                    Modern World: Lowell Lectures 1925, New
VAN WIJNGAARDEN-BakKeER, L. H. 1974 ‘The               York.
  animal remains from the Beaker settlement          Wittey, G. R. 1953 Prehistoric Settlement
  at Newgrange, Co. Meath: first report’,              Patterns in the Viru Valley, Peru (Bureau of
  Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy 74C,          American Ethnology, Bulletin 155), Wash-
  313-83.                                              ington, D.C.
VELDER, C. 1963 ‘A description of the Mrabri         Wicuiams, B. J. 1968 ‘Establishing cultural
  camp’, Journal of the Stam Society 51 (2),           heterogeneities in settlement patterns: an
   185-8.                                              ethnographic example’, in S. R. Binford
VincenT, A. S. 1978 East Meets West: an                and L. R. Binford (eds.), New Perspectives
  Analysis of the Development of Early Man             in Archaeology, Chicago, 161-70.
  Studies in East Africa 1919-1978 (Under-           1969 ‘The Birhor of Hazaribagh’, in D.
  graduate Honours Thesis, Australian Na-              Damas (ed.), Contributions to Anthropology :
   tional University), Canberra.                       Band Societies (National Museums of Can-
Vrsa, E. S. 1975 ‘Some evidence of chron-              ada, Bulletin 228), Ottawa, 142-52.
   ology and palaeoecology of Sterkfontein,          WINTER, F, AND BANKHOorr, H. A. 1979 ‘A
   Swartkrans and Kromdraai from the fossil            house burning in Serbia’, Archaeology 32,
  Bovidae’, Nature 254, 301-4.                         8-14.
Wacner, P. L. 1960 The Human Use of the              WIssLER, C. 1914 ‘Material cultures of the
  Earth, Glencoe.                                      North American Indians’, American Anthro-
WALTHALL, J. A., Stow, S. H. anp Karson,               pologist 16 (3), 447-505.
  M. J. 1979 ‘Ohio Hopewell trade: Galena            1923 Man and Culture, New York.
  procurement and exchange’, in D. S.                WitTrFocEL, K. A. 1957 Oriental Despotism :
  Brose and N. Greber (eds.), Hopewell                 A Comparative Study of Total Power, New
  Archaeology, Kent, 247—50.                           Haven.
WasHBurn, S. L. 1957 ‘Australopithecines:            Wirtuort,J.A. 1952 ‘A Paleo-Indian site in
  the hunters or the hunted?’, American                eastern Pennsylvania: an early hunting
   Anthropologist 59, 612-14.                          culture’, Proceedings of the American Philo-
WasHBuRN,    S. L. anpD HowELt,      F. C. 1960        sophical Society 96 (4), 464-95.
  ‘Human evolution and culture’, in S. Tax           1957 ‘The art of flint chipping’, O/zo
  (ed.), Evolution After Darwin, Volume II, The        Archaeologist 6 (4), 138-42; 7 (1), 17-20;
  Evolution of Man, Chicago, 33-56.                    7 (2), 42-6; 7.(3), 80-7; 7 (4), 122-7.
Warson, P. J.,LEBLANc, S. A. AND REDMAN,             WotserG, D. L. 1970 ‘The hypothesized
  C. L. 1971 Explanation in Archaeology: an            osteodontokeratic culture of the Australo-
  Explicitly Scientific Approach, New York.            pithecinae: a look at the evidence and the
Werner, J. A. 1980 The Piltdown Forgery,               opinions’, Current Anthropology 11, 23-37.
  New York.                                          YELLEN, J. E. 1977 Archaeological Approaches
Wenkg, R. J. 1981 ‘Explaining the evolution             to the Present, New York.
  of cultural complexity: a review’, in M. B.        YesneR, D. R. 1980 ‘Maritime hunter-
  Schiffer (ed.), Advances in Archaeological            gatherers: ecology and prehistory’, Current
  Method and Theory, Volume 4, New York,                Anthropology 21 (6), 727-50.
                                                     Zier, G. K. 1949 Human Behavior and the
  79-22 7-                      :           :           Principle of Least Effort, Cambridge.
Wua ton, R.       1973a   ‘Spatial   analysis   of
                                                  Index

                              Numerals in italics refer to illustration numbers

ABRI PaTaAuD 163, 98                                             Alyawara 165-9, 1, 83, 87, 101-8; Ngatat-
Acheulean 74-5, 235, 34-5                                        jara 160, 173, 1, 96, 115, 130; Pintupi 165,
activity areas 146-7, 238, gz; definition of                     99
   148; location of 14.7; men’s house 180, 239;                Australopithecus 31-59, 234; A. prometheus 34;
   modules 138, 147, 172; butchery areas                          see also Kinjanthropus
   169-170, 172, 59-61, 108-9
actualistic studies 62, 194; see also ethno-                   BABOON 60, 234, 17
   archaeology                                                 bear 55
agriculture, origins of 29, 105-6, 108,                        Bennett,J. 221
   193-213; broad spectrum revolution 212—                     big-man systems 218-20, 227-8, 146
   13; Darwinian theory 195-6, 198, 203,                       Binford, L. 7-11, 47, and passim
   240; in Europe 212; Garden of Eden                          Binford, S. 94
   proposition 199-202, 205, 213, 240-1, 26,                   bird 40, 48, 234
   31; gradualism 198-9, 202-3; role of                        Birhor 139-40, 7, 79
   knowledge in 195-7; Mesoamerica 200,                        Blackfoot Indians 116
  202, 212; Near East 198, 200, 202, 211;                      bones, see faunal remains
  North America 200-1, 212; Oasis Theory                       Bordes, F. 83, 87-95, 96, 109, 112, 143, 36-7
  196; packing model 210-13; Peru 202,                         Braidwood, R. 108, 196, 198
  211-12; role of population growth 197-9,                     Brain, C. 43-5, 47-53, 55s 60, 75, 7, 9
  203, 210-13, 240; as prime mover 203;                        Breuil, A. 86, 92
  Propinquity Theory 196; Slug Principle                       Broom, R. 44, 234
  200-1, 203-4                                                 Bushmen 140, 172-3, 226, 26, 82, 111; G/wi
Amsden, C. 47                                                    111, 7; !Kung 23-4, 139, 149, 165, 173,
Anaktiqtauk site 53, go                                          186, 190, 204, 240, 1, 76, 86, 100, 115;
Anaktuvuk Pass (Alaska) 110, 117, 43-6, 53,                      Masarwa 158, 94; Nharo 139, 77, 88;
  69, 85, 90-1, 123                                              Sekele 173
Anaktuvuk Valley (Alaska) 46, 53, 72
Anavik Springs (Alaska) 53, 57, 62; butcher-                   Cacues 118, 135, 183-4, 206, 117-21, 123;
  ing site 137, 169, 188, 58-67; hunting                          meat caches 118, 124-7, 131, 133-5, 184,
  camps 55—6; hunting stand 62; site complex                      204, 56, 62, 64-6, 80
  117-127, 54                                                  Campbell, D. 47
animal bones, see faunal remains                               caribou 55, 117-20, 124, 127-31, 133-5, 137,
antelope 35-6, 54, 57, 234                                       157, 169-70, 188, 207, 211, 44-5, 58-61,
aquatic resources 40, 207, 211-12, 215, 131,                     64-6, 69, 71, 74-5, 108, 125, 131
   136                                                         cat-tails 201-2
archaeological record, nature of 14, 19-20,                    caves 45, 49-50, 60, 62, 74, 11-13; see also
  22,   26-7, 31-2,   76-7,   94,   100,   193,   213,            rock shelters
   230; decoding of 11, 19-20; diagnosing of                   Chellean 34-5
   49, 62, 143; science of 21; translation of 24               chiefdom 9, 194
Archaic period 14                                              Childe, V. 84, 195-8, 203
Ardrey, R. 36                                                  chimpanzee 33
‘artifact and assemblage’ period 84-7                           civilization 29, 214, 230; see also complex
assemblage variability 98, 145, 235; see also                     societies
   Mousterian assemblages                                      Clactonian 35
Aurignacian 83, 87, 163, 34-5, 98                              Clark, G. 83
Australian Aborigines: Central Desert 23,                      classification, see typology
   82, 105, 115, 150, 169-70, 172, 204, 112;                   Clean Lady site 85

                                                         252
                                                                                                     Index   A009
Cohen, M. 203, 213                                    FACILITIES 124, 127, 135-7, 145-8
Combe Grenal go, 38, 41-2, 51                         faunal remains   13, 16, 28, 36, 40, 51-6, 62-2,
complex societies 29-30, 193-4, 198, 239,               65, 68, 70-1, 73-5, 98, 105-6, 120-7, 143,
   242; role of exchange in 219-20, 227-31;             233, 24, 27-8, 30, 32, 59-61, 64-5, 74-5,
   role of monopoly in 215-17; origins of               90, 92; anatomical part frequencies 35,
   214-32; role of redistribution in 217-18,            51-7, 74, 98, 144, 233, 236; bonedensity 54;
   137; role of specialization in 221-4                 bone marrow 57-9, 70, 75, 153, 176, 90;
craft specialization 25, 29, 221-3, 138-43              bone splinters 146, 153, 155, 176, 180, go,
creationism 193                                         117; breakage patterns 55-6, 76, 98;
culture   18, 31, 85, 94; culture contexts      31;     butchery   168-70,    188,   ror,   108-9,     112
  culture traits 31                                      (see also butchery sites); butchery marks
                                                         75-6, 236; concentrations of 62, 70, 72, 18;
Dart, R. 33-8, 40, 44-5, 47, 49, 51-2, 62,               leopard kills 46; scavenging 37, 56-9, 236
   75> 234                                               (see also early man)
Darwin, C. 195                                        Flannery, K. 202, 212-13
Dawn Man 82                                           Fleure, H. 195
deductive reasoning 107                               formation models 11-12, 81, 93, 119, 121
dendrochronology 95                                   formation processes 16, 44-5, 47-50, 56, 60,
Dinotherium 41, 236                                      62, 94, 110, 147, 239
dogs 52-4                                             fox 136
domestication: of animals         193,   211;    of   Fritz,J. 15
   plants, see agriculture
Dunnell, R. 242                                       GARDEN OF EDEN 40, 128; see also agriculture,
dynamics    19-21,    23-6, 49, 55, 62, 78, 94,         origins of
   100—I, [0Q—10, 142-3, 213, 231, 241-2              Garrod, D. 86
                                                      Gausha pan (Namibia) 26, 82
EARLY MAN 7-9, 31—59, 60—76, 79-80, 94;               gazelle 59
  as prey 47, 10; as sociable altruists 5; diet       gemsbok 78, 24, 25
  of 40, 50, 240, 16; division of labor among         Gilgil (Kenya) 17
  42-3, 2, 16; food sharing among 27-8, 36,           giraffe 28, 40, 58
  61, 79, 144, 5, 16; footprints of 28; fossils of    goat 52-3, 211, 226-7
  27, 33-4, 38, 47, 58, 234; home base camps          gradualism 198-9, 202-3, 222, 241
   27, 36, 42, 53, 60-1, 63, 68, 72, 75, 79,          Great Man theory 83
   235, 2, 16; hunting by 27, 34, 42, 55s 79,         guineafowl 28
   234-6; ‘mighty hunter’ 36, 39, 43, 59, 235;
   2; physical characteristics of 27, 79;             HADAR 3
   scavenging by 44, 57-9, 75, 236; use offire        Hard, R. 170
  by 34, 234; use of space by 144 (see also site      Harlan, J. 202
   structure)                                         Harris, M. 221, 241
ecology 13                                            Hassan, F. 202, 213, 240
eland 24, 27                                          Hawkes, C. 16
Elandsfontein site 70, 73-4, 3, 29-32                 Hayden, B. 213, 240
elephant 28, 58-9, 236                                Hempel, C. 196
empiricism 32                                         hide working 13, 30, 134, 137, 172, 11, 247
epistemology 15, 18, 32, 233                          Hill, A. 56
Eskimo 101, 152, 165, 169, 172, 190, 238-9,           hippopotamus 58, 236
   112; see also Nunamiut Eskimo                      historic sites archaeology 104, 234
ethnoarchaeology 7-8, 25-6, 52-6, 104-5,              historical documents 20, 25-6
                                                      history 19-20, 25, 29-30, 194, 240
   109—44, 149-90
evolution: Darwinian theory 195-6, 198, 203,          Hodder, I. 17
   221-2,   231, 240-1; of culture 81-2, 194,         Hong Kong 142
  242, 33-4; of language 27-8; of man 28              horse 40
excavation 7, 22, 26                                  Hottentots 52-3, 3
exchange 29, 217, 227-31, 138, 141-2, 146-7;          Howell, C. 40
  see also reciprocity, redistribution                Hughes, A. 37
experimental archaeology 24, 26, 104                  Hugo, Z. 45
254   Index

      hunter-gatherers 14-15, 29, 68, 109, 105-6,        mental template 31
         109-43, 164, 173, 193, 200, 215, 223, 226,      methodology 21-2, 31, 33, 38, 56, 77-8, 90,
        96-7, 134, 143; importance of mobility             93-7, 104, 106, 108, 110, 131-2, 141-3,
        among 204-8, 130; spatial organization              IQ1, 213, 231, 240
         1og-g1;   see also Eskimo,      Australian      middle range theory 76, 194, 213, 232
        Aborigines, Bushmen, Birhor, Mrabri              Middle Stone Age 75, 236
      hyena 37, 46, 48, 56-7, 59, 63, 65, 68, 71, 234,   monopoly 29, 194, 215, 217, 220, 136
        A Ph,                                            Montelius, O. 9
                                                         morphogenesis 15
      IDEALISM 17, 32, 197-8                             Mousterian assemblages 89-90, 96, 98, 109,
      impala 41                                            37-8; Mousterian period 8, 14, 75, 83, 88,
      inference in archaeology 15-17, 22, 32, 49,          90, I00-I, I12, 235-6, 238, 34-5, 51;
         76-8, 100, 104, 106, 108, 142-3, 145, 147,        Mousterian problem 75, 79-93, 106, 108,
         WG keyaas S S 3)                                  143-4,    191, 237,   239
      inter-site variability, see spatial organization   Movius, H. 163
      intra-site variability, see spatial organization   Mrabri     161, 7, 96
      irrigation 194
      Isaac, G. 41-3, 61-2, 6, 18                        NASKAPI INDIANS 115
                                                         National Geographic Society 40, 227
      Jemez INp1aAns 187                                 natural sciences 20, 22; see also science
                                                         Navajo Indians 24, 53-5, 150, 172, 1, 14, 84,
      KANGAROO 168-9, 204-5, LOI, 103-5                     126, 139
      Keeley, L. 76                                      Neanderthal Man 79-80, 82, 136, 208
      Klasies 3                                          Negev (Israel) 235
      Klein, R. 56                                       Nelson, N. 83
      Kongumuvuk site (Alaska) 133-5, 137, 62,           New Archaeology 7—9, 15-16, 106-8
        64-5, 70-1, 85                                   Newgrange (Ireland) 16, 80
      Koobi Fora 61, 75, 236, 3, 6                       Niederberger, C. 202
      Kroeber, A. 92                                     Nossob River 3, 19, 27
      Kromdraai 3                                        Nunamiut Eskimo 8, 17, 24, 55, 169, 172,
      Kruger National Park 37                               204-8, 237-8, 1, 43, 108, 131; settlement
                                                            system 110-42, 49-52; site structure 146-7,
      LaBnd (Mexico) 135                                    153, 156-8, 174, 176-86, 188-9, 80, 8&5,
      ‘ladder of reliability’ 16                            89-91, 109, 115, 117-23, 125
      lake trout 127
      Leakey, L. 38-41, 44, 57                           Osjectivity 18, 213, 232-3
      Leakey, M. 38-9, 57                                O’Connell,J. 168-9
      Leakey, R. 41                                      okapi 40
      least effort principle 202, 221                    O’Kelly, M. 16-17
      LeBlanc, S. 15                                     Olduvai Gorge 27, 38, 40-1, 43, 57-8, 61,
      leopard 37, 45-7; 51, 53, 60, 65, 10, 12              236, 3, 4; site FLK 41; site FLK 22 40; site
      Leroi-Gourhan, A. 147, 158-9, 180, 87, 92,            FLKNN3 41; Oldowan material 41, 57
        95, 415                                          Olorgesailie 38, 235
      Levalloisian 35                                    optimal foraging theory 221-2
      lion 35, 37, 56-7, 59, 65, 70, 28                  Osborn, H. 82
      Little Contact Creek (Alaska) 53, 72               ostrich 63
      Lorenz, K. 36                                      owl 48

      MacNeisy, R. 113                                   PALAEOLITHIC PERIOD: Lower 14, 33, 74, 86;
      Magdalenian 84, 158, 34-5                            Middle 36, 79-80, 86 (see also Mousterian
      Marxism 15, 17, 193, 203, 217                         period) ;Upper 86-7, 163
      Makapansgat 34, 47, 51, 53-5, 234-5, 3             palaeontology 22, 37
      Mask site (Alaska) 135, 156, 158, 89, gr           Palangana site (Alaska) 184-5, 66, 80
      Mason, O. 83                                       Palangana’s house 176-88, 80, 117-22; craft
      materialism 17                                       area in 180-1, 183, 185, 119-21; daylight
      meat caches, see caches                              centered activities in 180, 185; distribution
                                                                                                 Index   i) i)
  of bone splinters 117, 121; distribution of     ‘relic and monument’ period 80-84
  flint chips 178, 121; formation models for      rhinoceros 58
  180-5, 179, 121; hearth centered activities     rock shelters 74, 162, 238, 17, 96
  in 180, 185; men’s side 180, 183; sleeping      Rosetta stone 24
  areas 183, 186, 179, 121; women’s side          Roth, H. 195
   180-1                                          Rulland, J. 108
Panama City 145                                   Russian palaeolithic sites 127-8, 237, 63
Panch Pera camp 79                                Ryukyu islands 726, 129, 132-3, 138, 140-1
pattern recognition techniques 97
Peake, H. 195                                     SAHLINS, M. 194, 215, 217-20, 230
Perlman, S. 201                                   scavenging 13, 56—9; see also early man, faunal
Perkins, D. 211                                      remains
Perthes, B.de 83                                  Schepers, G. 44
Peyrony, D. 87, go, 92                            Schiffer, M. 147, 189, 190, 238
philosophy of science 15, 106                     science 18-19; in archaeology 15, 21
photographs, use in archaeology 26, 150           sedentism 29, 200, 202-3, 205, 212, 217, 226,
pig 40                                               128-30
Piltdown (England) 82                             Seri Indians 139-40, 78
Pincevent (France) 158-9, 92-3, 95                settlement systems 109-43, 131; ‘becoming
Pithecanthropus 82                                   territory 114, 52; ‘courting territory’ 114,
Pitt-Rivers, General 9, 81-2, 33                     52; ‘birth territory’ 114-15, 52; inter-site
plausibility 74-6, 193, 231                          patterns 13; lifetime cycles 114-17, 131,
Pleistocene 54, 56, 69, 74, 236; see also early       205-6, 210, 52; residential core area 110,
   man, Palaeolithic period                           112, 142, 49-52
Plog, F. 15                                       site features 145; beds 160-5, 176, 238,
political philosophy 29-30                           96-100, 119; bone dumps 157, 164, 190,
political power 194, 215, 217, 220, 231, 242,        90, 99, 122; bone juice dumps 155, 90;
   136                                                bone splinter dumps 146, 155, 176, 180,
Popper, K. 77-8                                       184, 80, 85, 117; door dumps 164, 177, 85,
population growth 193, 208-10, 224, 130;              100, 117-18, 122; hearths 119-20, 124,
   Malthusian theory of 203; role in origins of      128, 130,   133-5,   142,   147,   149-64, 172-4,
   agriculture 197-9, 203, 210-13, 240; role          176, 178, 180-1, 183-4, 190, 238, 56, 59.
   in origins of complex society 224                  61, 68, 81-2, 84-5, 88-9, 91-9, 106, 113- 22:
porcupine 48                                          household middens 146, 85; roasting pits
positivism 15, 107                                    165-72, 187, 101-10, 112; shelters. 172-86,
post hoc accommodative arguments 17, 61,              191; skin drying weights 133-4, 70-1
    147, 193, 213, 232, 240, 81                   site function 110-43, 145, 18
pottery 24, 95, 222, 140                          site structure 144-92; distribution of ash
Powhatan Indians 136                                  157-8, 94, 107; effects of body mechanics
pre-Chellean 34, 35                                  on 145, 173; effects of bulk processing on
predators 45-7, 55, 57, 60, 63, 65, 68, 234-5,        187-8, 191, 124; effects of environmental
   12; see also under species name                   variables on 172, 174, 185-7, 190-1; effects
primates 27-8, 60-1, 65; see also early man          of site maintenance on 188-90, 125; effects
progress, concept of 81—3, 85, 233                   of turn-over rates on 187, 191; models of:
                                                      butterfly distribution 176, 75, 776; circular
RADIOCARBON DATING 22, 95, 104                       walk/work area 169, 59-61, 104, 108-9,
Rankin site, Tennessee 147                            112; drop zones 153, 155-6, 174, 176-7,
Rathje, W. 147                                        89-90; extensive standing-up work areas
reciprocity 219, 224, 226-7                           165-72; group seated workers 150, 152-3,
reconstructing the past 31-2, 78                      158, 163, 172, 174, 180, 87, €5—6, 32, 90,
redistribution 194, 217-20, 230—-I, 241, 137;         121; single seated worker 149-56, 163,
   role of environmental diversity in 217-18,         172, 82-4, 94; sleeping areas 160-3, 172-3,
                                                      180, 183-4, 81, 96-8, 119, 121; toss zones
   137
Red Lake, Arizona 126, 139                           153, 155-7, 174, 176-7, 190, 89-90, 93;
Redman, C. 15                                         10g, 116; site framework 145-7
refuse 189-90, 239                                site types: base camps 131, 145, 163, 235
256   Index

         (see also early man); butchery sites 62, 118,    Taung 33, 234-5, 3; Taung baby 33
         120, 133, 137, 188, 18, 58-9, 61, g0, 125;       taxonomy, see typology
         drive lines 127-8, 131, 135, 66-8; hunting       Taylor, W. 9, 31-2
         blinds 128-31, 68; hunting camps 118-20,         Thomsen, C. 80
         124, 144-5, 153, 156, 163-4, 55-6; hunting       Tiburon island (Mexico) 78
         stands 130-1, 133, 135, 188, 65, 69-72; kill     toolkit 147-8, 238
         sites 62, 118, 120, 124, 188, 57, 59, 62, 64,    tools 20, 28, 34, 36, 39-40, 44, 57, 68, 75, 109,
         90, 125; lovers’ camp 118-20, 56; pro-               112, 120, 129-30, 133, 135, 144, 168, 236,
         cessing sites 120-24, 133-4, 137-8, 58, 71,         239, 240; bone tools 36, 39, 41, 84, 234;
         74-5; soldier rocks 127-8, 66-7; special-           see also stone tools
         purpose 133-8; see also caches                   tortoise 40
      sheep 53-4, 207-11, 126                             trade, see exchange
      social organization 25, 28, 136-7, 143-5;           tree oflife 92, 39
         chiefs 217-19; ranking 217, 223; see also        Tulugak Lake (Alaska) 135, 143, 53, 117,
         big-man systems, complex societies                  122; site complexes at 127-31, 47, 53, 66-8
      ‘social philosophers’ 15, 17-18, 233                Tulukkana site (Alaska) 137-8, 74-5
      social sciences 21, 29                              turtle 40
      social stratification 194, 223, 145                 typology 77, 80-1, 84, 87-8, 90, 93-4
      Solutré (France) 80
      Solutrean 83, 34, 35                                VULTURE 63
      spatial analysis 13, 76, 98, 238; see also
                                                          Wacne_R, P. 145
         settlement systems, site structure
                                                          Washburn, S. 40
      Spaulding, A. 107
                                                          Washoe Indians 120
      springbok 63, 27
                                                          waterholes 60, 62—5, 68, 70, 74-5, 20, 22-3,
      statics 19-20, 23-4, 100-1
                                                             Lge bai
      Sterkfontein 44, 3, 8
                                                          Watson, P. 15
      stone tools 24-5, 27-8, 34, 40-2, 55, 57-8, 62,
                                                          Whallon, R. 97, 238
        68, 70, 74, 84, 87, 95, 96, 98, 105, 124, 129,    Whitehead, A. 145
        143, 150, 235-7, 18, 30-1, 34, 37, 42, 83;        wildebeest 63, 20-4
        alternating   industries   90, 94, 38; con-
                                                          Witter, D. 48
        centrations of 62, 72, 74-5, 18; hand ax
                                                          Wittfogel, K. 194
        70, 80, 86, 30; parallel phyla 90, 92, 35;
         spatial patterns of 153, 178, 180, 87, 18,       Witthoft, J. 96
         121; tenacious cultures g1, 943 see also tools   wolf 55-6, 135-6, 73
      storage 215, 12g                                    Woodland period 14
      structuralism 15, 17                                Workman, R. 47
      Swartkrans 47-8, 3, 8, 9, 12                        Wright, H. 97
      systems theory 203                                  YELLEN, J. 138-40, 186, 190, 238, 76, 78;
                                                            ring model of 139-40, 76-8
      TARAHUMARA INDIANS 170, 112
      Tasmanians 83                                       ZINJANTHROPUS 38-9, 44, 57
a
~1eae
   Peemnoaiey                 Mp
   esa ie                     AS
         Mylo error
       d)      is“
   Of ener
  Hee  Air

  i vile 4
               , anata




                                                                                                                                                                       +,
                                                                                                                                                                      . no Ge
                                                                                                                                                                        ieHe1G

                                                                                                              2) os                 le
                                                                                                                                          SG
                                                                                                                                          at!                    i,         SIG
                                                                                                                                                                                        of
                                                                                                                                                                                        M5Gs
                                                                                                           Aide       Mees           LA                                     ey
                                                                                                          ‘{tials iors eters die                                                   i Wie
                                                                                                        Aanatates         LARA                    VGA           aCe    POR        eee          eeu

                                                                                                                                                           PP
                                                                                                                                                            tg!Set ae


                                                                                        acgie RUN
                                                                             PI GNi “a ipie       DN
                               aA               ony           er     as                f           ‘
  hoe taraioe ie
   ie ees
                  th Be
              ie ee ee See                                                wee                 eae aioe Maat tates
           Mate                                               HG ORLC500
                                                        FW Ipens               eMC              ORT SeAtOKC a                 Tae        Ot                es
   cay Posie                           Parte?         sic a                      -              Cpe                                 BATH                Ais Dheat Ge
 i e
Lib     Otte
            aM saa
                SI settee enki
                           he
                                      eOtly &ped4yn9!RAGies: ree
                                     yHie
                                                                te
                                                                   eect ss 2 iy         rot
                                                                                WoW GMaTOC RH Sen PLheaihPet adahy
                                                                                                               ae alat OPUe Te    CFTC
   4             ties
                         15
                            “ fito : f eat
                                   a       i,
                                          Cp     oH
                                                   1     faiee-        4
                                                                        iy
                                                                           fl
                                                                             i
                                                                               ae
                                                                                   ii
                                                                                            dae               le
                                                                                                                   oa, eer
                                                                                                                          Mie “ECU
                                                                                                                               ee
                               ca        ; ines                    Mesa    7   aie                Lite i it              Popes           é Roa)             z
                                f           leOAR                  2°,

                                                                                                          Moines
                                                                                                           Yen
                                                                                                       hat             tCZf
       letters if                                                                               antfa
         oie:                                                                                     pon




                                                                               Ne ihg5 Hie me
                                                                               $2 ale yop
