       society is dependent on giving up hunting and gathering, when a member of the
       audience would point out that there were no pistachio nuts in Mesoamerica, yet
       agriculture was invented there; or, conversely, that there were all those complex
       societies in California and the Northwest coast of North America which were not
       agricultural! The speaker might confess that he had not considered those issues,
       but would point out that in Mesoamerica there was some other resource said to
       be diminishing, while in California and on the Northwest coast they had so many
       acorns or salmon that they had no need to invent agriculture. That is, people did
       not adopt agriculture if they lived in highly productive environments: little
       ‘Gardens of Eden’ where food was plentiful. In addition, it has been generally
       assumed that in such environments people will become sedentary; they will stop
       moving. For instance, the following summarizes what seems to be the consensus
       view of many archaeologists: ‘We have taken it for granted that, in general,
       sedentary life has more survival value than wandering life to the human race,
       and that, other things being equal, wherever there is an opportunity to make the
       transition, it will be made. . . .”!°
         This proposition is what I like to call the ‘Slug Principle’: a man doesn’t do
 129   anything to get a meal unless he has to. If he doesn’t have to walk, he will sit. If
                                                            On the Origins of Agriculture   201


there is a lot of food in one place, as for example on a shell bank, then he will sit
right there. Clearly, in a Garden of Eden man will not move about, These two
ideas, the ‘Garden of Eden Proposition’ and the gustatory ‘Slug Principle’ have
been woven together to make an interesting array of arguments,
   For instance, it has recently been suggested that there was a Garden of Eden
promoting sedentary life at the top of the Andes!?° Similarly, it has been proposed
that in the Great Basin of North America there existed a Garden of Eden along
various internal drainages, where big marshes produce vast numbers of edible
cat-tails. | don’t know how many tons of cat-tails there were supposed to be
within a two-hour radius of the site in question; but if you want to eat cat-tails
all your life, then perhaps there is a Garden of Eden there. At any rate, it was
argued — quite seriously — that this resource was the basis of sedentism and village
life in the region.*?
    Another suggestion, recently advanced by Perlman,” tries to identify aquatic
and estuarine resources as the ‘real’ Gardens of Eden. It is claimed that any
strategy which tends to optimize labor by minimizing effort and risk will be
selected. The Slug Principle dictates that there will be a gravitation towards
productive Gardens of Eden, which, in this version of the argument, are identified
as being coastal environments.      I admit that this was something I myself had


129 Rice drying for storage at Hoshino village, Yaeyama island in the southern Ryukyus.
Sedentism represents a major investment in facilities and the movement of goods and
products to consumers; it is also made possible by bulk storage of products over periods
much longer than they are available in nature. (Photo taken in June 1953 by E. Santry, on
assignment with the author.)
      On the Origins of Agriculture

      casually assumed at the time I built my own model of agricultural origins in
      marginal zones.” But I gave up such a position some time ago, since it seemed to
      me to lead one inevitably to the view that some peoples were ‘more perceptive’ or
      ‘smarter’ than others: why else would they have grasped so early the Great Truth
      of the Least Effort Principle, while others ignored its self-evident advantages ?
         Although it does not necessarily follow from these arguments that the idyllic
      sedentism made possible by a localized Garden of Eden led to agriculture, some
      archaeologists have made such claims, Kent Flannery found his Garden of Eden
      in Turkey. After Harlan?* published his well-known paper on the wild wheat
      fields there, Flannery”® suggested that these might indeed have been a sufficient
      basis for sustaining sedentism and he apparently thought the development of
      further arguments unnecessary. This suggestion was later linked by Hassan’° to
      environmental changes which brought into being in some places a Garden of
      Eden yielding resources said to be of increased seasonal and spatial predictability.””
      These resources were thought of previously only as starvation foods, but under
      changed environmental conditions their true value was realized and the use of
      these ‘environmentally stimulated’ high-yield resources promoted sedentism and
      led eventually to agriculture.
         Yet another example is provided in recent work by Niederberger.*® In her
      excavations at a site on the side of Lake Texcoco in Mexico, she found remains
      of ducks, deer, cat-tails — in fact, evidence for all the resources a man might need,
      all in one place. There was no reason to move from such a place. And so here is a
      whole set of arguments about the origins of agriculture. Man first became
      sedentary because he found a little Garden of Eden. Once he was accustomed to
      being sedentary, things began to go sour on him; for instance, perhaps the ducks
      didn’t come as much any more. Man began to foul his nest, so to speak, and was
      forced to move to supplementary production (i.e. agriculture). But if sedentism
      leads to agriculture in this way, then we are back where we were earlier. For why
      didn’t the Californians and the peoples of the Northwest coast develop agricul-
      ture? Such arguments overlook a very important bit of empirical evidence: while
      it appears that agriculture followed sedentism in the Near East, Mesopotamia,
      even in Peru, the data available from Mesoamerica and North America are clear
      in indicating that the adoption of domesticated plants preceded the appearance of
      sedentary ways of life in those areas.7?
         Although there are others, the arguments I have sketched above constitute the
      essence of the explanations so far offered for agriculture. In the gradualist argu-
      ment, man develops agriculture because he becomes more knowledgeable.
128   According to the Garden of Eden view, he does so faster in rich environments
      which encourage sedentism; sedentism, in turn, is seen as encouraging productive
      intensification, or experimentation with ways of producing sufficient food in the
      limited space around a permanent settlement (hence, agriculture), An alternative
                                                        On the Origins of Agriculture   203


to this view (and one which totally begs the question) is that the adoption of
agriculture requires increased sedentism; presumably, therefore, with agriculture
people settle down, because it offers that increased reliability which ensures that
the decision against mobility will be made according to the Slug Principle.*°
   All the views summarized so far incorporate various forms of gradualism into
the argument. In addition, all the ideas are teleological. The continuous but
gradual move towards the use of reliable resources, the adoption of techniques
which lead towards the assumed absolute goal of sedentism, or the move towards
the reduction of effort — all these notions assume that man’s evolution is goal-
oriented and that it is therefore progressing towards some inevitable end point.
It is worth noting that the approaches of structural-Marxists and general systems
theorists who consider processes of morphogenesis are not so different from the
earlier gradualist views, because change is seen as inevitable. In both of these
newer styles of discourse, it is assumed that ‘the cultural system has self-trans-
forming properties.... Rather than societies being in equilibrium they are
always in a state of becoming. . . .*' Here transformations ofsociety, we are told,
are to be plotted largely as a product of human choices, choices as to how to invest
one’s time or how to use the fruits of productive investments: ‘. . . how can one
speak of material causation of human actions when the unpredictable and
creative powers of the human mind are at work in nearly every situation ?”**
    There is a further form of gradualism which does not see the vital property
causing the change to agriculture as coming from within the system, but imagines
an external ‘prime mover’. This force is thought to be a continuous push from
 the environment. One might cite as an example the demographic argument of
 Cohen,*? who employs a nearly pure form of Malthusian theory about population
growth — namely, that since populations continue to grow unabated, there is a
 continuous and unrelenting pressure operating on a group to favor new methods
of increasing the food supply.
    It is my opinion that we need to give much more serious thought to Darwinian
 arguments, where the driving forces of change lie in the interaction between the
 environment and the adaptive system being considered. Given such a view, the
system of adaptation may enjoy relatively stable periods of varying duration,
representing times when it is able to cope successfully with the perturbations of
 the environment. Selection for change occurs when the system is unable to
continue previously successful tactics in the face of changed conditions in its
environment. The source of such changes may be the accumulated effects of the
system’s history, but such effects are build-ups of changed ecological relationships
rather than the continuous operation either of some inner vital principles or of
unrelenting external pressures. Childe made a probe in the direction of a selec-
 tionist approach of this sort, but he was knocked down on strictly historical
grounds, I feel it might be useful to try to move in that same direction once again.
204

      Mobility as a Security Option among Hunters and Gatherers

      Most of the arguments given above share one common assumption: that move-
      ment is something man tries to avoid and that sedentism is a desired condition.**
      Is that assumption justified and, ifso, why? From the standpoint ofa species such
      as our own, trying to gain a secure living, why should mobility be bad and sitting
      in one place good?
         The first thing that struck me was simply an empirical observation. Over the
      past decade or more, I and my students have had a variety of experiences living
      and working with mobile peoples — with Eskimos in north-central Alaska, with
  130 Central Desert Australian Aborigines, with !Kung Bushmen in Botswana, with
      mobile horticulturalists in northern Mexico. None of these peoples believed that
      mobility was bad ; indeed, in the case of‘pure’ hunters and gatherers, the idea was
      quite insane, for a simple reason, As one old Eskimo man expressed it, ‘When
      I’m here in one place, I don’t know what’s going on over there.’ He went on to
      explain that living a secure life was totally dependent on his making good judg-
      ments about where to move next, judgments that were possible only if he knew
      what was happening throughout an enormous area in which he was not actually
      living. It was necessary, that is, to monitor a huge amount of territory, in order
      to have sufficient knowledge to make prudent decisions regarding the resources
      pulsing through and across that space.
         When contemporary Eskimo men are forced by various bureaucratic means
      to stay in one place, they find it a very traumatic experience. In practice, they
      sneak away and make long circuitous trips over the territory. They come back
      with long narrations: how many moose tracks they saw, where the ducks are,
      how good the firewood resources are in a certain area, whether there have been
      forest fires, whether the snow drifts are up and over the lakes, how deep the ice
      is on ice-fishing lakes, and so forth. All this is crucial information, in order to be
      able to know what to do ifsomething transforms what had appeared to be a secure
      state — for instance, if grizzly bears get into meat caches and the stores are lost.
      Unless one can make good judgments about what to do next, based on informa-
      tion gathered from a vast area, one may not survive. So it turns out that most of
      the moves these Eskimo made were made not because they did not have food, but
      because they did have food. If there is plenty of food in one place, it is always
      possible to return there. It is a low-risk, secure strategy to take a long walkabout
      in such circumstances, to take chances on the availability of risky foods. In fact,
      much mobility occurs when there is also the most food. That hardly suggests the
      operation of the Slug Principle.
         I found exactly the same thing in the Central Desert of Australia. I was working
      with a group in an area of very high density of game: on one four-hour walking
      trip, for example, we counted as many as eighty-five kangaroos, You might
                                                           On the Origins of Agriculture   205




 130 Ngatatjara Aborigines moving camp in the Warburton Ranges in Western Australia,
¢. 1935. In contrast to the sedentary way of life associated with agriculture and other
intensive food-getting strategies, hunters and gatherers must continuously reposition
themselves within their environment. (Photo taken by N. B. Tindale, courtesy of the
Department of Anthropology, University of California at Los Angeles.)


suppose, if the Garden of Eden view were correct, that the group would just sit
there and work their way through the kangaroos. On the contrary, however, they
realized that the abundance of game gave them the total security they needed to
make a trip to see the other end of the territory, which they had not visited for a
long time; ifanything went wrong, they could always return to the known, secure
situation. I think that all hunter and gatherer systems work this way. They do
not stay in one place where food resources are nucleated and get nutritionally
drunk, but rather they use such circumstances as an opportunity to travel to other
areas, most often for purposes of information-gathering. So it seems to me that,
ifa system is to become a sedentary one, a set of circumstances must arise in which
information of this kind is no longer a help and the option of moving around in
unoccupied territory is no longer a realistic one.
   At this point, I must stress again the scale of hunting and gathering systems:
they are not all big, but none of them is really small, We saw in Chapter 6 that the
caribou hunters I worked with (admittedly, an extreme case) think of their
territory in terms of a life cycle. A group of three dozen people will use an area 53
                                                                                                  =
                                                                  AREA VSED
                                                                  DURING THE
                                                                  LOW     JN) CAR/BO0U
                                                                  NUMBERS
                                                                  24,500 SF MILES




                                                                      eer
        AREA USED
        BEFORE AND
        AFTER    THE
        LOW /N CARIBOU
         NUMBERS
            8,000s¢.      4
                 MILES
             a




                     NuNAMIUT    TERRITORIES
     BEFORE      é AFTER THE CRASH OF THE CARIBOU                         POPULATION
        Note:                                     SCALE          IN      MILES
       INFORMATION   TAKEN                       a               a                      |
       FROM  C.W.  AMSOEN  ,        IS77        (e)   20   40   60 380    100   «$320   «(180   «6160

                                                                            BINF ORD




131 Nunamiut territories before and after the 1910 crash of the caribou population. This
hunter-gatherer group’s response to food stress was to triple the effective territory they
covered for extracting food. (Based on Amsden 1977.) Coastal aquatic resources — what
some would see as a “Garden of Eden’ — were used as a back-up food supply during the low
in caribou numbers, but with the recovery of the herds, the Eskimo returned to mobile
hunting in the interior.


of about 22,000 square kilometers during their lifetime. That is a big area, but
the men know that much space — where the caches are, where the stream crossings
are, where the game trails are, and so on. During my fieldwork, for example, I
took an inventory of cached tools and subsequently interviewed the hunters of
two overlapping bands about their locations: almost every man could provide
me with an accurate list of cached tools dispersed over an area of nearly a quarter
of a million square kilometers. Such information was not gained by being seden-
tary! Their entire educational system, in fact, was designed to teach them about
that much space, to give them a series of alternative options.
                                                       On the Origins of Agriculture   207


   It is easy to see that in such a huge space there exist plenty of alternative
possibilities, if the resources in one particular micro-environment fail. For in-
stance, in north-central Alaska in 1910 the caribou population crashed, Outsiders
involved in the Yukon gold mining operations started forest fires which burned
off the winter range (an area the Eskimos never saw themselves), contributing to
a catastrophic decline in the population density of caribou. But the caribou
hunters were not at all at a loss when they found that their primary source offood
was gone: they had several other options, all involving mobility, and they knew
exactly what they were. Some moved to the Upper Colville River and began
putting up stores of fish; others began the seasonal hunting of mountain sheep in
the Dietrich Valley, a part of their range in which they had not actually been
living; others began to compete with Athapaskan Indians for access to another
caribou herd with a different breeding territory and winter range; yet others
moved to the coast and started hunting seals. None of these alternative strategies
had to be learned. The men already knew and had experienced all the funda-
mental subsistence strategies of their neighbors and could execute them very well


132 Okinawan man and his           ee   Sages.
wife preparing the soil for
planting   sweet  potatoes,
Yanbabu, 1952.




133     Transplanting    rice
seedlings     into    ground
paddies,    Nago   Okinawa,
1Q5I.
208     On the Origins ofAgriculture

        But the means to their knowledge of these other options was through mobility —
        mobility which led to the accumulation of an information bank, on the basis of
        which alternatives could be selected.
           We may turn back to our initial question about agricultural origins, but from
        a rather different angle. What would force a group of people to shift from a
        system based on an information bank (hunting and gathering) to one based on a
        labour bank (agriculture) ? Staying in one place to tend plants is a totally different
        way of gaining a livelihood from the mobile strategies I have just outlined. In my
        opinion, the critical constraint must have been something that prevented
        mobility asa security option, This leads me back to a set of arguments I advanced
        some years ago, Although the idea seems to be out of favour in certain quarters,
        I still think that population growth must somehow be relevant to the problem.



        Population Growth and Hunter-Gatherer Subsistence Options

        The archaeological record indicates that the widespread shift from hunting and
        gathering to agricultural strategies is largely a phenomenon of the post-Pleisto-
        cene period. If the arguments advanced to account for this involve the loss of
        mobility options as a consequence of demographic packing, then we must face
        the problem of why population growth only had some effect so recently in human
        evolution. This is a subject that is far from being well understood, but I feel that
        we may have been misled by assuming that explanations we give for events after
        the emergence of fully sapiens man about 30,000 years ago should also be relevant
        before that time. Pre-modern man may have been very different from ourselves,
        both biologically and behaviorally, as Ihave already suggested (Chapters 2 and 3).
           Now it is known that every species has zones in which its reproduction is
        optimal: corn grows better in Iowa, for instance, than almost anywhere else.
        Why should this not also be true for human hunters and gatherers? I therefore
 eyes   examined how population densities achieved among hunters and gatherers vary
        in relation to environment throughout the world. Summarizing considerably, the
        result was that the maximum densities occurred roughly at a mean earth bio-
        temperature (Mean Effective Temperature)** of 14.4°C — that is, right in the
        temperate zone, not in the tropical rainforest or in the desert. It seems, then, that
        fully sapiens man is reproductively most effective in the temperate zone, something
        I seriously doubt for pre-sapeens man; early man did not exist in the temperate
  52    zone and Neanderthal man was not very successful there. So modern man may
        have very much more reproductive potential in parts of the warm temperate zone
        than in any other place.
           Once man with this potential existed in the temperate zone there would have
        been a build-up of population. The process, of course, must have been compli-
                                                                                                                     On the Origins ofAgriculture      209


                        APPROXIMATE             MEAN      Famers
                        BPFECTIVE        TEMPERATURE
     ;   3
                                                             (ge
                                                            TEMPERATE
                                                                                         =                          Cees
                                                                                                                    SE ET)   AAI

     3                                                       ZONE                                    pear
             Qo
     =Q                                                           BOOS                                         TEMPERATURE
         .                        Coa                             ;                     Ss                      ZONE      SUPPORTING
         o 8                      TEMPBRATE                       \                                             MAXIMUM        HuUNTeER—
             9                    ZONE                            NN                                            GATHERER       DENSITIES
                                                                      h
         >                                                        NI
         be                                                           \"
     "i                                                            '
         z8                                                       NN
     O§      9                                                                  ‘              |               y=
                                                                                                                    Ceesgerse Zove,
                                                                                                                              ZW,

                                                                                                                          SEASON        pea
                                                e                                   \
         Z                                                8) e                      '                °.
         E 8      “TUNDRA
                  ZOon=E




     ee                                         ©7/6,                                         St’ ™                             iy               aie
                  Sem       lOM          mize       ISN   lees)           16s           17)    18.        [9        20 ZI 22. 23-2425
                   Baitreys              Errecrive                    TEMPERATURE

                  HUNTER—GseTHERER   POPULATION  DENSITIES
                  AcHIEVED IN DIFFERENT   ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                      ZONES                                                         -
 L                                                                                                                              LL.     BINF   ORD




134 Hunter-gatherer population densities achieved in different environmental zones. Ethnographic
hunter-gatherer societies have been grouped into five ordinal categories (curves A to E) of a
‘rainfall index’, derived by dividing the potential evapotranspiration at a locality (i.e. the
amount of water which would be evaporated and transpired if unlimited water was
available, given the amount of solar radiation recorded annually at the locality) by the
actual rainfall. By plotting mean hunter-gatherer densities for each effective temperature
and rainfall interval, it can be seen clearly that the maximum population densities are
achieved within a zone of warm temperate environments (shaded area). The actual
maximum density value in each rainfall category shifts with effective temperature (thick
checkered bar).



cated by climatic fluctuations during the Ice Age, which resulted in many local
extinctions of population. Nevertheless, in some places the build-up would have
occurred to the point where density-dependent effects came into operation. This
makes some sense in terms of biology: the main regulatory mechanism seems to
be mortality in the tropics and fertility in the Arctic, the two coming together in
the temperate zone. It is interesting to note that the rate of population growth in
comparable equatorial settings was enormously faster in the New World than in
the Old World, because in the New World there were no native disease organisms.
     On the Origins of Agriculture

     By the time man entered the New World he had evolved with these organisms in
     the Old World; he had gone through a ‘disease filter’ which allowed a population
     boom when he entered the equatorial zones of the New World. This accounts for
     the greatly truncated chronology of cultural development from hunters and
     gatherers to state societies there, something related both to nutrition and to
     intrinsically different rates of population growth in different environments
     (although the mechanisms are not yet known). At any rate, my main point is that
     we cannot think in terms of a constant reproductive potential for man in all
     environments,
         If we accept that discernible population growth would occur among hunters
     and gatherers in certain environments, we may ask what effects that growth would
     have on their normal strategy of subsistence. Let us take a typical situation in
     which we have a group of about thirty people in an annual range A which they
52   occupy for about ten years, making a lifetime range of approximately five such
     units. As the number ofpersons in the group increases, arguments about meeting
     kinship obligations sooner or later break out. Perhaps there are simply too many
     mouths to be fed with the available stored fish and, despite an ethic of generalized
     reciprocity, someone begins to go back on his obligation to feed a kinsman, One
     or two angry families decide to move away into the next annual range unit B. It
     is their territory and they certainly have a right to do so, but at this point nobody
     is yet living there; under normal conditions the whole group would not have
     moved there for another five years or more, so this segmentary move is, in a sense,
     premature. When the resources in territory A begin to give out, the remaining
     people there, since they are still angry with their kinsmen, move into territory C,
     rather than B. Ina very short space of time, in place of one kinship group there
     come to be two, both quite legitimately using different parts of the same lifetime
     range simultaneously. Instead of the territory being used serially, as it would be
     without population pressure, competition within the system tends to separate and
     segment people, resulting in the utilization of territory in leap-frog fashion. With
     further population growth, fights continue to occur (and I have some good
     examples documented ethnographically). The group in territory B may move on
     to D, while that in C might split into two mutually avoiding groups in E and F.
     When the group in D comes full circle and moves back into A, many of the
     resources necessary for living there will not yet have recovered: in the Arctic, for
     instance, willows used for firewood need about forty-five years before they are
     ready for use again, This presents no problem under normal conditions, since a
     group would not expect to return to the same territory for well over forty years.
     When they return in twelve, difficulties will obviously occur.
        As the region fills up, then, a band comes to have little or no option about where
     it can move next. By packing the region with people, mobility is restricted and
     resource exploitation becomes concentrated. Packing, in fact, thwarts the normal
                                                        On the Origins of Agriculture

strategy of hunters and gatherers to use mobility as a source of security, Among
the interesting set of responses to this problem is an increase in interregional
visiting by individuals (since whole groups cannot move between regions as they
once did). This may represent an attempt both to get through difficult times and
to educate the children about the territory as a whole, but the attempt is totally
unrealistic, given that the children will have no opportunity to move away into
other parts of the territory. A far more significant response, however, occurs in
terms of the kinds of food resources utilized.
   There exists a simple relationship between the body size of an animal and the
amount of space it requires to feed itself. The space needed to feed an animal in
the 120 to 300 pound body size range is fairly extensive (and in the Arctic is very
large indeed). Ifa hunter has an area of about 20,000 to 25,000 square kilometers,
he will probably be able to kill moose and caribou on a regular basis. If, however,
he is restricted to an area with sides of only 80 kilometers, he may still be able to
get caribou, assuming his territory lies on a migration route; but he will certainly
no longer get moose, because their range is bigger than his bya substantial margin.
The hunter who formerly killed moose and put up the meat for storage now finds
he must make do with animals of smaller body size — ducks, or fish, or in coastal
areas even shellfish. In short, he is progressively forced to move down the chain
of animal body sizes, as he is constrained spatially. Eventually, inevitably, he is
drawn away from animals and towards plants, because plants are aggregated in
small amounts ofspace. A very different set of strategies now comes into play. In
the first place, there is a switch to alternative animal species, often aquatic ones
(and, indeed, the first response to packing in the temperate zone seems to have
been the move to aquatic resources). Secondly, dependence on plants increases.
Thirdly, as population continues to grow in an environment which offers no
budding-off options, consumer demand increases within a space that is now
constrained: some form of intensive production system (i.e. agriculture) now
becomes mandatory.
   This packing model is not necessarily an easy one to work with from the methodo-
logical point of view. How can archaeologists measure population growth or
packing? Ina sense, the situation is rather like that of a medical doctor observing
the symptoms and trying to determine what the disease is. One of the interesting
‘symptoms’ that the packing model would lead us to expect is that hunters’
attempts at herd management and animal domestication should precede plant
domestication. In the archaeological sequences from Peru, where domesticated
camelids and guinea pigs appear some 2,000 years before any domesticated plants,
that certainly seems to be true. Similarly, the work of Dexter Perkins and others
in the Near East suggests that domesticated sheep and goats precede plants in
that region also.°*° A few facts of this kind, which could not be adequately dealt
with before, begin to make a little more sense.
On the Origins of Agriculture

   The beginning of a sedentary lifestyle constitutes another interesting symptom.
I have already noted that one major contrast between the Old World and Peru
on the one hand, versus Mesoamerica and North America on the other, is the
difference between the historical appearance of sedentism relative to evidence for
the use of domesticated plants; in the latter areas, domesticated plants precede by
some considerable time the appearance of sedentary settlements, while in the
former the reverse is the case. If it is accepted as likely that animal protein is
important both nutritionally and in terms of human reproduction,*’ then plant
agriculture itself never solves the packing problem. Alternative non-plant foods
such as aquatic resources*® and the actual domestication of animals help intensify
production for human use of non-plant foods. Under such conditions, moves
toward sedentism may precede the adoption of agriculture, which — while it may
increase in importance as a ‘calorie-seeking’ strategy — never solves the nutritional
imbalance between animal and plant foods. In Mesoamerica and North America,
as well as in some regions of temperate Europe, increased sedentism facilitated by
aquatic exploitation seems to have anticipated the adoption of agriculture. On
the other hand, where aquatic alternatives were not present and where domestica-
tion of animals did not occur, agriculture continued to be a calorie-seeking
strategy and mobility remained the only means of ensuring the acquisition of
animal foods largely from terrestrial sources, In these circumstances, sedentism is
only forced into being long after the adoption of agriculture as a ‘back-up’
strategy and at a much greater packing threshold.
   Yet another symptom is what Flannery®” called the ‘broad spectrum revolu-
tion’. But in fact this was a broad spectrum depression, not a revolution. As hunters
and gatherers were packed in a region, they were forced to move down the animal
body-size chain, to exploit a wider variety of species, to make use of increasing
numbers of smaller and smaller food packages, to compensate for the more
specialized (and no longer viable) strategies they employed as spatially unfettered
hunters. This change is itself perhaps one of our best clues to the processes involved
in the origins of agriculture. Using the ratio of species diversity against body size
as an index, I think it will not be long before we can predict with some precision
at what point in the archaeological sequences we should see the first signs of labor-
intensive strategies. For eastern North America, certainly, such procedures show
signs of working well. It can be shown, for example, that any group of hunters
which was forced to subsist on shellfish as early in the year as February was only
a short step away from adopting agriculture. In other words, where pressure on
resources resulted in such limited stores in the fall and such poor winter hunting
that shellfish were the only available foodstuff from so early in the spring, it
regularly seems to be the case that the growing of corn begins within a short time.
   The development of the ideas suggested above may be profitable. But there
is an important additional point to be made: all such theories or models for why
                                                         On the Origins of Agriculture   3
something happens cannot be tested in any direct sense against the archaeological
record. Almost all the different theories touched upon earlier in this discussion
assigned different meanings to the archaeologically demonstrable fact that smaller
and more stationary food sources were increasingly used through time. I have
already noted that Flannery termed this pattern the ‘broad spectrum revolution’,
a response by game hunters living outside their Garden of Eden. Hassan saw it
arising from a realization of the advantages of reliable resources triggered by
environmental changes. Cohen regarded these same facts as good evidence for a
linkage between subsistence strategies and population pressure in general; that is,
a decreasing ratio between available food and consumer demand resulted in an
increased use of less ‘desirable’ foods. Hayden considered that the greater use of
‘r-selected’ resources — those that reproduce themselves rapidly and in great
abundance — stemmed from the accumulated wisdom of populations who have
suffered continuous and unrelenting stress.*° I myself have argued here that these
facts reflect an intensification tactic. The operation of the homeostatic mechan-
isms which tend to maintain hunter-gatherer local groups at optimally small sizes
results in decreased effective territory for any given local group. As more groups
are generated, the locational options of all of them are reduced, thus forcing the
intensified use of smaller and smaller segments of habitat.
   All these archaeologists’ theories are ways of giving different meanings to the
same empirical pattern demonstrable in the archaeological record; and I am sure
that many other interpretations could be offered besides. I am equally sure that
there could be developed additional arguments about quite different causes for
agriculture, citing other empirical patterns (equally subject to ambiguous inter-
pretation). How do we choose among these alternative interpretations of the same
facts? How do we decide between theories and between their different biases?
   In the cases illustrated here, the rules for cognition generally derive from the
theories being advocated. That is, the meaning given to archaeological observa-
tions are consistent with the assumed mechanisms of causation built into the
theories. This means that any appeal to the empirical materials of the archaeo-
logical record will represent merely a ‘post hoc accommodative argument’, where-
by the theory is necessarily supported. In order to move away from this wholly
unsatisfactory situation, we must develop an appropriate language and instru-
ments for measuring variables which we observe in the archaeological record ; but
we must achieve some operational objectivity when evaluating theories.*? This
means that in order to make inferences archaeology needs to develop middle-
range theory*” which has been devised and tested in intellectual contexts divorced
from the theories about past behavior which we seek to evaluate. Archaeology, in
general, has failed to realize that in order to refute or support theories it requires
a strong body of inferential techniques, warranted independently of its theories
about past dynamics.
                               9
                     Paths to Complexity

Complex societies and civilizations arose at different times in different parts of
the world nearly always after the development of agriculture. How they came
into being is an-area of research in which I have long had an interest. My own
doctoral thesis, in fact, written over twenty years ago, was concerned with the
appearance of complex social systems in eastern North America,’ but since then
I have not worked directly on the problem. I have tried, however, to keep up
with the fast-growing literature, for my interest continues to be strong from a
methodological and procedural standpoint — that is, what strategies have
archaeologists followed in trying to explain such phenomena? I have to say that
I cannot concur with much of what I have read on the subject. So it will perhaps

135 A corner of the ‘palace’ at Labnd, Yucatan, Mexico. The impressive investment of
labor and craftsmen’s skills, as well as the elaborate symbolism underlying a structure such
as this, challenge our explanatory powers: why did it happen? (From the files of the late
Professor Fay-Cooper Cole, now in author’s possession.)




                                           214
                                                                 Paths to Complexity   Oo



be not without interest to consider briefly some of what seem to me to be limita-
tions in the patterns of thought that are currently prevalent.
   We should first dismiss entirely some ideas about the origins of complex systems
which were very influential in their day (and are still to be found in the contem-
porary literature). Earlier generations of anthropologists, for instance, used to
argue that knowledge — as with the origins of agriculture — must somehow have
been a critical limiting factor: explaining the emergence of civilization simply
involved trying to imagine what would lead man to invent art, philosophy, com-
plicated legal systems, and the like. Even in comparatively recent times some
historians and archaeologists have tried to claim that such wonderful achieve-
ments are possible only when leisure time becomes available to free man for
‘thoughtful’ activities. That too is quite wrong. If anything it is the other way
around, for hunter-gatherer groups seem typically to have more free time than do
complex societies. Then there are arguments of the orthogenetic variety, which
claim that certain human cultures had a sort of built-in dynamic, an inherent
tendency for progressive growth. People who started out in the right direction,
so to speak, had a much better chance of becoming civilized than those who
squandered their lives doing something not on the direct path to western civiliza-
tion! The total inadequacy of such arguments is not hard to see and they need
not detain us further.



Monopolists, Altruists and Big-Men

When I first began to learn about the origin of complex systems — and I did so
from a strongly American perspective which has no doubt colored my views —
two main lines of argument were current. In our respective doctoral theses, as it
turned out, I followed one line and Marshall Sahlins” followed the opposite one.
   I believed that power derived from productive monopolies and that monopolies
were toa large extent a functional response of societies which were very dependent
on storage and whose food resources were patchy or highly aggregated in space.
On the basis of ethnohistoric and archaeological data from eastern North
America, it seemed clear that anadromous fish (i.e. fish, such as salmon, that live
in saltwater but run up river to spawn in fresh water) constituted a critical
resource for some human groups dependent onstorage. Access to such a foodstuff,
however, was virtually ‘point-specific’: the fish cannot be caught readily in deep
waters, yet by the time they reach really shallow waters they are in such a poor
nutritional state they are not worth taking. So they are available only at certain
points in the environment. And the people who lived near ‘access windows’ of
this kind had an effective monopoly over a critical resource which they were able
to manipulate for their own political advantage throughout the region.
216   Paths to Complexity




                                                                                        <Q
                                                                                        W
                                                                                        x
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        0
                                                                                        W
                            9
                            La
                                                 e
                                                 y)                                     I
                                                                                        Ny)
                                FieesH   WaTER        F
                                  Zonk




                        DISTRIBUTION  OF
                     POWHATAN  SETTLEMENTS
                                               1JoOT
                                         SYMBOLS
                                         e@=   HAMLET
                                         @s= Viitace




      136 Distribution of Powhatan settlements in Chesapeake Bay, Virginia, 1607. Note the
      clusters of hamlets and villages in the fresh- to salt-water transitional zone, that which
      yielded most anadromous fish taken in impounding weirs; these fish provided critical
      foods during the least productive periods of the year (e.g. the month of April). Most power
      rested with the chiefs of the villages of the transitional zone.
                                                                  Paths to Complexity   217
   This simple model, I still believe, works very nicely for nearly all known North
American societies with high levels of sociopolitical ranking and a clear despotic
base. qe accunely, most of them were small political units, rarely exceeding 3,000
people.* Those that were much largerwere integrated quite differently, by
confederacies or other more ‘democratic’ political forms. The truly dictatorial
powers of life and death exercised by the chiefly individuals of the small systems
based on resource monopolies were not found in other types of native North
American society. Decisions about warfare or the adjudication of disputes in the
large political alliances usually depended on the unanimous consent of councils
made up of representatives from various social segments and kin groups.* Some
of the systems organized in this way could be very large indeed, with political
hegemonies covering over three-quarters of a million square kilometers and
integrating up to 200,000 people. Big contrasts, then, exist in the ethnographic
record of North America, One sees, on the one hand, the politically extensive
confederacies, with power vested in council organizations rather than individually
filled status positions ; on the other are the small, classic, internally ranked systems
based on productive monopolies over critical subsistence resources,
   Now Sahlins adopted a different viewpoint. With rather simplistic Marxist
notions in mind, he supposed initially that in emergent complex societies all chiefs
must be despotic entrepreneurs exploiting the masses; his now famous fieldwork
in Polynesia was designed to prove the point. What he actually found there was
something quite different. The chiefs seemed not to be nasty entrepreneurs, but
nice guys acting altruistically — in fact, they were somewhat harried individuals
forever trying to serve the constituency they represented by making alliances in
terms of external trade links. This necessitated the development by Sahlins of a
very different notion about the growth of power. He had to argue that chieftain-
ships and potentially powerful statuses came into being largely as a result of
altruistic behavior, whereby chiefly individuals redistributed goods (or served to
organize their distribution) so that all members of the population would have
equal access to products that were differentially produced in different parts of
the landscape. The model, of course, presupposes the existence of sedentary 137
populations. Sedentism, in turn, combined with environmental diversity was seen
as the mechanical basis for productive diversity at the regional level (since
individuals in different places will be unable to produce the same things). In the
short term, this diversity may put some people at an advantage over others; but
if the system is to maintain itself without competition there must be a ‘benign
altruist’ at the top, someone with overriding powers to take the excess production
of one area and disperse it in other areas which either produce something else or
are naturally less productive.°
   This classic redistributive model, then, came into being, in part, because Sahlins
discovered he liked the Polynesian chiefs instead of hating them! After his ideas
    218        Paths to Complexity



                             MYTHICAL. ANCESTOR                      137 Model of redistribution of
45 = =     Accumulation               !                              goods among kinsmen occupy-
<—        =Redistribution            ty                              ing      different   environmental
                                PAST CHIEF                           zones;               results in
                                                                               redistribution
                                                                     symbiotic linkage among pro-
                                                                     ductively diverse areas. (Re-
                                                                     produced with permission from
                                                                     Flannery and Coe 1968, fig. 4,
                                                                     p. 280.)

Deceased

Living




              had been submitted as a doctoral thesis to Columbia University, critical articles
              began to appear,° in which it was argued that the model was nonsensical in terms
              of the data Sahlins had himself used. These critics pointed out that on the high
              islands of the Pacific where environmental diversity is great (an implicit element
              in the argument) political territories ran from coast to interior rather than parallel
              to the coast, so that each polity included within its domain the full range of
              ecological variability present in the region. This being so, it could hardly be
              argued that the main function of chiefs and the alliances among chiefs was to
              generate regional symbiosis and to ensure equal access for everybody to all
              products, The assumptions Sahlins had made about Polynesia, it seemed, were
              not met at the factual level.
                 Of course, this did not deter archaeologists in the least and they quickly em-
              braced Sahlins’ model wholeheartedly.’ All over the world, there were identified
              prehistoric redistributive systems organized by central chiefly agents, nice people
              who passed out the goods and generally made life secure for their followers.
                 Meanwhile, a number of anthropologists noted that certain areas of the Pacific
              (notably Melanesia) offered some interesting ethnographic cases to which one
              could turn in testing the model. In New Guinea and Borneo, they pointed out,
              high status persons certainly exist, but not in association with redistributive
              economic systems. According to Sahlins, altruistic redistributive agents devoted
                                                                   Paths to Complexity

themselves to the greater good ofthe larger community, achieved status by virtue
of such selfless behavior, and by virtue of status gained power; so the presence of
redistributive systems in conjunction with high status positions is crucial to the
argument. Yet this did not seem to be the case in certain areas of Melanesia.
   Sahlins’ response to such challenges was to play a semantic game; in essence,
he defined the problem.away. In his ingeniously titled paper ‘Poor man, rich
man, big-man, chief. . .’,° he argued that these New Guinea societies are not
truly ranked or power-based redistributive systems and that their hierarchical
organization is more apparent than real. His conclusion, in fact, was that they
represent another very different sort of system altogether, something called a
big-man system. Nevertheless, the main interest of Sahlins and most archaeologists
has continued to focus on redistributive chiefdoms. Yet I feel that it is to societies
organized around big-men that we should look for the origins of social complexity.
  A big-man system, in brief, works as follows. As a man becomes mature, he
begins to compete with his peers to establish negotiable alliances outside his own
group with individuals in other social units distributed across the landscape.
What is involved is effectively a form of delayed reciprocal exchange. A would-be
big-man makes an alliance by giving his new alliance partner a token or symbol
of their agreement — a carved boar’s tusk, or a great shell from the coast, or some
such object that he has himself obtained via some other alliance. As long as the
partner wears or keeps that token, he has some call on the big-man for food or
hospitality for himself and members of his group. His followers get security and
the big-man gains prestige. Now if the big-man occupies a favored and productive
position in the environment and is successful in negotiating alliances with
individuals spread widely throughout the region, he may rarely need to use his
alliances and ‘cash in’ his tokens to get food for his group in return. He builds up
a great deal of security which he can offer to those who ally themselves with him
and live in his village. In big-man systems, the competition is for persons and the
result is the actual residential gravitation of people to the neighborhoods of
big-men. Status, however, accrues to those who can offer others security on
account of the number of alliances they have. When the crops do fail, the followers
of a big-man are protected in the short run because he can use his alliances to get
food to support them; but as soon as he begins to cancel alliances by calling them
in, he loses status (which really means the ability to offer security). His followers
drift away to other aspiring big-men who seem to offer greater security.
   The result of this effective and interesting system is an unending movement of
population through the habitat in almost perfect adjustment to changing patterns
of differential production. In contrast to Sahlins’ hypothetical chiefdom system,
where status results in the redistribution of consumer goods, in a big-man system
it is not goods that move, but people. Short-term fluctuations in production are
buffered by patterns of status differential, which have the effect of continuously
220   Paths to Complexity

      up-dating the distribution of population across the environment in relation to its
      actual production.
         Stable environments, of course, with more or less permanent, ecologically
      determined production differentials, ought to favor the emergence ofhigh-status
      individuals who never need to call in their alliances. That, one might suppose,
      could be the basis for getting some continuity in the differential distribution of
      status and population in a region — the beginnings, that is, of acomplex society
      with institutionalized power and wealth disparities. This seems not to be so,
      however. A big-man’s alliances, negotiated at the individual level, cannot be
      passed on to someone else ; they are not transferable to his sons, who must negotiate
      their own. Consequently, when a successful big-man dies, his alliances die with
      him and his competitors gain in status as a result of his death. So there is an
      inevitable outflow of population associated with the death of high-status persons.
      If there exists marked environmental variability in a region, it will probably take
      little time for a big-man’s offspring to negotiate favorable new alliances and
      attract followers back again. Over time one would see a recurrent pattern of
      inflow and outflow around centers of secure production and the continuous
      presence there from one generation to another of high-status individuals. This, I
      suppose, is a sort of monopoly, but one of a very different kind from monopolies
      based on point-specific access to critical resources.
          How, then, could a system of this kind evolve into a classic complex society
      based on true power? I have always thought that power really starts when one
      can renege on a social relationship with impunity. You and I may have an agree-
      ment: what’s mine is yours and what’s yours, mine. If, when life gets rough, I can
      simply ignore that agreement and not suffer the consequences, then I have taken
      my first step towards power. This is a rather negative notion of power, which has
      normally been thought of as making rules to suit oneself; in practice, at least from
      an evolutionary point of view, it seems to me thatit has to do with breaking rules
      to suit oneself and getting away with it. Perhaps we should focus our attention
      rather more on the conditions under which that might occur in the context of
      big-man types of organization.
          It is important, at any rate, to have some idea of the differences between a
      so-called redistributive system and a big-man system. The former is not something
      we can readily detect when we look at the world of primitive culture: perhaps it
      never existed, except in Sahlins’ imagination. The institutionalized movement
      of goods in bulk is, after all, a characteristic of industrial state societies, not
      primitive ones.” On the other hand, systems involving the continuous adjustment
      of the distribution of consumers (rather than goods) to productive differentials
      seem from the ethnographic record to be very widespread indeed and we do in
      fact know quite a lot about them. Might they not have been equally common in
      the prehistoric past?
                                                                  Paths to Complexity   ie) ie)



Intensification and Specialization

Let us turn to consider another currently popular idea about the origins of com-
plex societies, The argument is a simple one. In certain systems of subsistence
production it is possible to increase the input of labor in order to increase the
marginal output, ortochange and enhance the technology of production in order
to improve the effectiveness of the labor input, or in other ways to modify the
character of production itself.'° The effect of such changes is to facilitate produc-
tion beyond the simple demands ofthe producers themselves. Once that becomes
possible, the way is open to support persons who are not themselves directly
engaged in subsistence production— metallurgists, ceramicists, political specialists,
etc.'* Role specialization of this kind, it is claimed, provides the natural basis for 138-40
the growth of further complexity. In this model, then, understanding complex
systems involves focusing on two crucial questions: (1) what kinds of incentives
exist for production beyond immediate subsistence needs, and (2) how are such
surpluses actually used in the formation of complex societies?
   I find it extremely difficult to deal with this kind of reasoning. I am essentially
a Darwinist. I believe that cultural systems change under conditions of natural
selection, that they are pushed and pulled in different directions, and that the
way in which change occurs is a function of how people actually solve problems.
The ‘adaptationists’ — no matter whether they operate in an idealist paradigm
like Bennett,!* or the materialist mode as does Harris, 13 or are fascinated with the
principles of ‘least effort "14 or ‘risk reduction’!> or ‘optimal foraging theory i
all attempt to build a teleological explanation for trends seen or imagined in the
history of evolution. Yet I think that the most practical principle for us to adopt
in theory building is an analog to the principle of inertia.’’ A system will remain
stable until acted upon by forces external to its organization as a system. When I
am faced with a question such as why complex systems come into being, my first
reaction is to ask what problem people were attempting to solve by a new means.
Experimenting with novel ways of doing things is surely worthwhile only if some
fresh problem has emerged for which no previous solution appears satisfactory.
   Thus, the idea that increased production is fundamental to the origins of social
complexity leads me to ask what problem is solved’ by increasing production.
What difficulties that a group of people might face give a direct pay-off, in terms
of security, to technological change, labor intensification and growth in produc-
tion? What is driving them to develop these and other new strategies? I don’t
think the motivation is simply psychological, a sort of prehistoric attempt to keep
up with the Jones. Nor are vitalistic explanations acceptable — that a society just
‘wants to grow’ or is ‘ready to become civilized’.
   Even the less objectionable forms of vitalism are none the less orthogenetic in
that they assume an inner driving principle or ‘prime mover’. In the case of
Paths to Complexity

approaches such as optimal foraging theory, it is argued that minimizing energy
expenditures relative to energy returns will automatically increase ‘fitness’ and
hence be favored selectively. Such assumptions amount to vital principles of
internal dynamics which are cited as moulding evolutionary trajectories.'* The
system, I would maintain, must be under stress in some way, must face some
problem, The proponents ofintensification-specialization arguments have yet to
come up with any adequate suggestions about what these stresses and problems
might have been. The assumption seems to be that any ‘rational’ man will seek a
profit!
    This is just another way ofpointing to the fact that almost all our theories about
why complex sociopolitical systems emerged are overblown arguments taken
largely from differing brands of economic philosophy. We are committing the
methodological      faux pas of offering functional arguments of how modern systems
work internally as explanations of how systems change or have changed in the
past. While this is a fundamental problem, there exist additional problems, even
if one takes a gradualist position and adopts various forms of economic function-
alism as a theory. For instance, the appearance ofcraft specialization is frequently
cited as a major step forward on the path to complex systems; yet it is not at all
clear to me why craft specialization need necessarily play any significant role. In
Africa,-for example, metal-working (about which we have much interesting
information) is principally practiced by outcasts. Those involved in the special-
ized production of pottery, such as the technical ceramicists of the Tarascan area
of Mexico, are often the disenfranchised and disadvantaged members in society,
people who have no land and are cut off from food production. In fact, most
instances of specialization with which I am familiar from the ethnographic record
of the New World, Asia and Africa suggest that these specialists are individuals


                                            138 (Left) Young woman of Miyako,
                                            Ryukyu islands, making items of adamba
                                            grass for exchange. (Photo taken in June
                                            1953 by E. Santry, on assignment with the
                                            author.)

                                            139 (Right, above) Navajo woman weaving
                                            at Ah Tso lige, near Red Lake in Arizona,
                                            c. November 1935. (Photo courtesy of the
                                            Maxwell Museum of Anthropology, Uni-
                                            versity of New Mexico.)

                                            140 (Right, below) Potter at work, Naha
                                            Okinawa, Ryukyu islands, 1952.
                                                                 Paths to Complexity

scrambling to gain a foothold in society in any manner they can, Thisis a situation
quite different from the one envisaged by many archaeologists, who see the
organization of society itself changing in such a way as to make possible and
encourage the support ofspecialists, almost in a renaissance fashion, These sorts
of observations from the developing Third World may, or may not, be relevant
to the problem; but I have yet to be convinced that archaeologists understand
how to set about modelling the conditions under which craft and other specialists
became causally important in the development of cultural complexity.
   I have always thought that a major shift in social forms, suchas those repre-
sented by the appearance of ranking and stratification, must represent some kind
of major break with earlier patterns of growth.'? For instance, among hunter-
gatherer groups the growth pattern involves duplication of the basic unit of co-
operative production — the band or the family, depending on how the group was          1a
xe} No aS   Paths to Complexity

            organized, Population growth produces an increase in the size of the local unit,
            until such a group splits into two or more similar units, with the daughter units
            taking up independent activities in independent locations. Even among horti-
   144      culturalists, where the basic units of production are frequently family or extended
            family units, growth appears to consist of the duplication of these basic units.
            More families are formed and more ‘spaces’ are sought for these families to act as
            units of production. It is this general structure of growth which results in packing
            problems (as indicated in Chapter 8); and the consequences of this pattern of
            growth are the selective contexts favoring various tactics of intensification. It
            seems to me that at some point in the trajectory ofintensification a major struc-
            tural break with earlier forms of growth appears. These basic units of production
            and generalized reciprocity (in Sahlins’ terms), instead of duplicating themselves,
            begin to develop conventions for excluding individuals: that is, persons are ex-
            cluded from them so that the unit remains basically the same in size and also
            remains located in space in a stable manner. Population growth under such
            conditions results in an increasing class of disenfranchised persons which changes
            appreciably the arena of competition and the units of competition.*°


            141 A peddler in the market at Naha Okinawa (Ryukyu islands). By hawking his wares
            for a small cash profit, this man ekes out a marginal and very uncertain existence.


                                                                                 iii
                                                                           Paths to Complexity     no No
                                                                                                           or




 142 A market street in Hong Kong, 1952. ‘Our course lay through the long street, which was a
 fair specimen of Chinese streets . . . Here were to be seen the artisans ofthe various branches
 of native industry pursuing their busy work, and vending the products of their labor, in one
 and the same room which served the triple object of workshop, warehouse and counter.
 Here were crowded together, in their narrow dwellings, amid the din of forges and hammer,
 little groups of wire-drawers, braziers, button-makers, and smiths, with four men alter-
 nating their rapid blows on the sounding anvil. Here again were to be seen image-makers,
 carpenters, shoe-makers, tailors, gold and silver leaf-beaters, umbrella-makers, cotton-
 beaters, grocers, druggists, jade-stone cutters, seal-engravers, and decorators, with the
 professors of the numerous arts which supply the necessities or luxuries of Chinese life.
 Further on were to be seen picture-shops hung out with the tawdry performances of
 native artists. ... At every corner were to be seen portable kitchens, steaming away, and
 supplying to hungry expectants the savory materials ofa hasty meal. For the more wealthy
 a succession of cook-shops, wine-shops, and tea-shops lined the way. A little farther on, a
crowd of gamblers disputed a few square feet of ground with the holders of orange-stands
 or venders of sweetmeats. Near to these were the well stored shops of pawn-brokers . . .”
 (Smith 1847, p. 289).
226   Paths to Complexity




         Some of my colleagues and students have worked in recent years with hunter-
      gatherer groups in Botswana, who, for various reasons, are becoming sedentary
      and self-sufficient as agriculturalists or herders. There is a spectrum from hunting
      and gathering to fully sedentary adaptations, but it is the people in the middle —
      those who are neither one thing nor the other — who are the most interesting in the
      present context. They are in a quandary. In hunter-gatherer societies, generalized
      reciprocity is the guiding ethic of behavior: that is, people share freely with their
      relatives without expecting an exact or immediate return from them. Yet, if a
      man is to maintain a herd of goats and build up his property as he becomes in-
      creasingly sedentary, he must refuse his relatives when they come to him to ask


                                                               143 (Above) A complete band
                                                               of hunter-gatherers: the Nharo
                                                               Bushmen       living   between
                                                               Sanfontein and /Gam, Nam-
                                                               ibia. Such a group can be
                                                               considered the unit of pro-
                                                               duction; growth results in
                                                               the multiplication of roughly
                                                               identical units. (Photo taken
                                                               c. 1927 by L. Fourie, courtesy
                                                               of the Africana Museum,
                                                               Johannesburg.)

                                                               144 (Left) The extended
                                                               family of Tanahara Gensho
                                                               in the village of Fatima,
                                                               Okinawa (Ryukyu islands),
                                                               1952.
145 A scene in the squatter
community of El Porvenir,
Panama City, Panama in
1967. Individuals migrate to
such communities from more
stable social units elsewhere;
growth results in increased
numbers of persons cut off
from the social units into
which they were born. (Photo
courtesy of W. Salvador.)


for a goat for supper. Anthropologists find that the only successful individuals are
the ones who sever their social ties, the ones who can stand up to the social
pressures for them to share their wealth and not be stingy. In order to capitalize
on their own production, they must be mavericks in their own society. But once
isolated in this way, they have a kind of freedom to manoeuver which is impossible
for those still playing by society’s rules; once they have turned their backs on
generalized reciprocity, their security comes from their wits, not from the relatives
they have now rejected. In fact, they quickly become entrepreneurs and begin to
negotiate in a variety of ways with people outside the system. They are always the
first ones who want to make deals with the anthropologists when they arrive, or
with the government agents who want to drill wells. In other words, their security
is something that must now be organized by means external to the system of which
they were originally a part.



Gew-Gaws       and Trade-Goods


Does trade and exchange really cause social and political development, as
archaeologists have so often suggested 2?! Perhaps returning the discussion briefly
to the big-man systems described earlier might help put this question in some
perspective.                                             J
   Nearly everyone must have seen photographs in the pages of magazines like
National Geographic of big-men in the New Guinea Highlands. They are weighed
down with shell beads, pendants, paint, feathers and every conceivable sort of
228   Paths to Complexity




                                                              146 New Guinea Big Men
                                                              displaying the gew-gaws for
                                                              which they have exchanged
                                                              and which represent their
                                                              high status in the local group.
                                                              (Photo     courtesy     of M.
                                                              Strathern.)


      gew-gaw: they look rather like some garishly decorated Christmas tree. The
      material items they wear are tokens of social relationships and they circulate
      exclusively in terms of those negotiated alliances between individuals to which I
      have already referred. They are not trade-goods, but symbols. They are not
      exchanged for their intrinsic value, but are worn because they carry information
      about the number and variety of alliances an individual has made. Objects and
      raw materials that are easily obtained and occur widely throughout a region
      obviously do not convey much information. So in all big-man systems there is a
      real push to gain access to exotic items — shells from the coast, different kinds of
      colorful feathers, various kinds of raw materials that are available only at very
      particular places. The more rare and specific they are, the more information they
      can carry,
         We seem to see something similar in the archaeological record of eastern North
  147 America. A developmental sequence beginning c. 6000 Bc culminated during the
                                                                       Paths to Complexity        229




147 Goods included in two separate burials (top, burial 79; bottom, burial 57) from the
Rankin Site, Cocke County, Tennessee (see Smith and Hodges 1968) ; over half the items
illustrated are exotic to the site’s region. (Photo courtesy of the Department of Anthropology,
University of ennessee.)
2 30   =Paths to Complexity

   period c, 250 BC-AD 250 in a system of exchange involving the circulation of an
   astonishing variety of goods on a truly continental scale. Busycon shells from the
   Gulf Coast are commonly found 1,500 kilometers from their source and in large
   numbers in burials throughout the Great Lakes region. There is native copper
   from the north side of Lake Superior in the village sites and burials throughout
   the Midwest.2* Mica from mines in Virginia found its way all the way up and
   down the Mississippi valley. Galena from lead mines in northern Illinois occurs
   in burials in the Southeast, North and South Carolina to Florida.’* Little buttons
   and other trinkets made of meteoric iron from the margins of the Plains turn up
   at sites all over the Midwest.?* Obsidian from Yellowstone National Park in the
   Rocky Mountains is found from Wisconsin to Ohio.”° This is an enormous and
   complex system for the circulation of material goods, a system whose geographical
   scale is commensurate with all of western and central Europe put together.
      If trade does indeed stimulate political complexity, then — to judge from the
   scale and volume of the documented circulation network — we should expect the
   development of something akin to Rome in areas such as Ohio already by 100 Bc!
   Yet exchange systems as extensive as this are quite unknown in those areas ofthe
   world in which the so-called ‘great civilizations’ developed: there is nothing
   comparable in the Near East, in the Aegean, in the Valley of Mexico or in
   Highland Peru, before the emergence of what are generally accepted as complex
   societies.”° So any model that attempts to explain the rise of complex society by
   appealing to the importance of trade and monopolistic exchange modes must also
   be capable of accounting for the evidence from eastern North America. None can
   so far do so, yet exchange models are currently being applied to the archaeological
   record in many areas of the world.
       Consider, for example, the American Southwest where some remarkable, large
   sites developed during the period c. AD goo—1200, They are not just residential
   locations: there is a great variety of complex architecture (kivas, great rooms,
   etc.) associated with social and religious ritual. The most prevalent explanation
   for these pueblo systems attributes their complexity to the important functions
   they must have served as nodal points in wide-ranging exchange networks.”’ But
   the hard evidence on which this view is based proves to be remarkably slight — a
   little turquoise from the Southwest trickles down into Mexico; a few shells from
   the Baja coast eventually work their way up into northern New Mexico; Mexican
   motifs on Southwestern pots indirectly reflect connections of some sort. This
   hardly amounts to a great trade network, yet network-node models of this kind
   are currently rife in the Southwest and beyond. Ultimately, they rest on Sahlins’
   original argument that redistribution is the route to power. Such complex
   achievements as these big pueblo sites could only have originated and been
   organized — or so the argument goes — under the guidance of some central
   authority.7* A central authority could only come into being by virtue of the
                                                                    Paths to Complexity   31
redistributive roles it played. And what was being redistributed? Not much more
than a few lumps of turquoise per century ... in total probably fewer exotic
materials than occur in a single Middle Woodland burial a millennium earlier!



Paths to Complexity

What I am saying, in effect, is that archaeologists still do not know what causes
complex societies, what brings them into being. The argument for redistribution
has no obvious factual basis: at least, I know of no redistributive agents who are
not operating in what are already societies based on political power and I doubt
that power comes from being nice. Arguments involving economic incentives for
the intensification of production required to support a complex system have a
certain chicken-and-egg flavor. It is far from clear, in any case, why anyone
should ‘want’ a complex system to the extent of investing effort in over-produc-
tion ; there must exist some pressures for change in the Darwinian sense. However,
we have yet to identify what they are and how they operate. Arguments in which
trade is claimed as the necessary basis for power generally founder, because most
of the instances cited as evidence relate to the exchange of social tokens rather than
economically valued consumer goods: they tell us about social alliances between
individuals, not about the economic articulation of social groups.
   The problem here is the very limited number of models that archaeologists
have considered. If all we have is the ideas I have touched on, when in fact there
might well be many different stages and characteristic patterns of change
associated with different paths to complexity, then archaeology is in great trouble.
Until archaeologists have some idea of the range of variability that can exist in
complex systems and in their developmental trajectories, they are at an enormous
disadvantage.
   Another major limitation is that almost all the approaches to modelling change
were developed from varying perceptions of functional dynamics (that is, the
operation of living systems as seen by an observer or participant). As suggested
earlier, functional insights have been used to model transformational changes
when (1) the nature of the transformation was not accurately known, and (2)
there was nothing but the criterion of plausibility used to justify the use of a
functional argument as relevant to evolutionary processes. Perhaps the most
obvious and probably the most misleading instance is the use of various “profit-
seeking’, vitalistic economic arguments in modelling evolutionary processes. All
ecological processes are non-rational in that there is no guiding intellect or sentient
being controlling the dynamics, as all economic arguments generally assume.
   As in the cases discussed in previous chapters, I am appealing for the develop-
ment of reliable methods of inferring past conditions from the archaeological
232   Paths to Complexity

      record, If we can develop such methods, then we may gain a secure knowledge of
      at least some of the characteristics answering the question ‘What was it like?’ At
      the same time, we must be alert to recognize patterning for which we may seek to
      understand ‘What does it mean?’ Both these approaches need and are dependent
      upon the development of middle-range research.
         The reader may well enquire about the numerous philosophical positions in
      archaeology for which there are skilled advocates all about us.”? I have suggested
      that most such positions involve giving meaning to the archaeological record by
      the use of‘post hoc accommodative arguments’.*° No objectivity is achievable with
      such approaches nor is real learning possible, but merely the fascination of endless
      debate.*’ Only when we can evaluate such views by appeal to the properties of
      the external world can we obtain some idea of the utility of differing intellectual
      positions. Those appeals must be through a scientifically built observational
      language, whereby meaning is given to observations andjustified independently
      of the intellectual positions said to be under evaluation.
         No matter how we approach the problem, the conclusion is the same: we
      require stronger methods for inference. We cannot just follow the Muse of Curiosity
      and speculate about how things happened. We must develop methods for
      evaluating ideas we have generated and also face the real possibility that some-
      times we may be asking a bad question. We need simultaneously to investigate the
      questions ‘What does it mean?’ and ‘What was it like?’, if we ever hope to make
      progress with the really big question: ‘Why did it happen?’
                           Notes on the Text

Preface (pp. 13-18)                                     irrationalist position has been further elabor-
                                                        ated and argued by many: e.g. Feyerabend
1 This trip was both initiated and made                 1978. The present book and essentially everything
possible through the efforts of Colin Renfrew.          I have ever written represent a quite different view
Colin invited me to come and was unfailing              of what science is and how it works,
during the period of our joint search for funds            I have always been strongly committed to
which would make the trip possible. In the              the position that the development of robust
long run it was Colin who found the money               methods for inference are basic to the devel-
and extended to me unending challenge,                  opment of modern science. It should there-
courtesy and warmth. I am most grateful to              fore be no surprise to anyone that I should
him.                                                    not be upset by the recent claims of Meltzer
2    Binford 1977Aa.                                    1979 that no Kuhnian paradigm shift has
3 Fritz and Plog 1970.                                  occurred in archaeology and that my own
4 Watson et al. 1971.                                   contributions have been mainly methodo-
5 This is well illustrated by the contents of           logical rather than theoretical. The call for
Brothwell and Higgs 1969.                               revolutionary changes in paradigms is all
6 Binford 1978a.                                        right, I suppose, but the field is already rich
7 Binford rg81a.                                        in diverse points of view and yet no progress
8 E.g. attempts to reconstruct the age and              occurs. On the contrary, these intellectual
sex structure of the parent herd on the basis           fads rise and fall much like the hemlines of
of bones found in residential sites, or to              women’s fashions. Only with the develop-
reconstruct the number of living animals                ment of scientific epistemologies and the
represented by bones on sites whose function            accompanying methods for achieving relative
is unknown.                                             objectivity when evaluating novel ideas will
g See Binford 1981a, pp. 69-72, 478-9 for               knowledge begin to be accumulated as
criticisms of the use of MNI (i.e. minimum              the product of scientific endeavour.
number of individuals) estimates.                       15 Binford 1981a.
10 E.g. the development of radiocarbon                  16 Hodder 1982, pp. 191-2.
dating.                                                  17 Binford in press.
tr Hawkes 1954.
12   See O’Kelly    1968, 1982; Van      Wijn-
                                                        Chapter 1 (pp. 19-30)
gaarden-Bakker 1974.
13. A good example of the type of argument              1 E.g. Hawkes 1980.
used by the ‘social philosophers’ can be found          2 See Binford 1968c.
in Adams 1981. Particular attention should              3 For a description of radiocarbon dating
be given to the comments and author’s                   techniques see Michels 1973; Fleming 1976.
rebuttal.                                               4 E.g. Gould 1980; Hayden 1979.
14 There is a considerable amount of con- -             5 E.g. Yellen 1977.
fusion among archaeologists as to both how              6 Rathje 1974, 1978; Rathje and McCarthy
a science grows and what constitutes ‘pro-              1977.
gress’, Many basically accept the thesis of             7 Binford 1976, 1978a, 1978b, 1979, 1980,
Kuhn 1962, 1970 that progress is largely the            1981c, 1982.°
result of the operation of irrational forces            8 Binford and Bertram 1977.
which tend to condition the world views of              g For additional examples of ‘ethnoarchae-
scientists. (Trigger 1981 represents an                 ological’ research, see Gould (ed.) 1978;
attempt to use this belief to interpret the             Kramer (ed.) 1979.
history of archaeological thought.) This                10 Coles 1973, 1979.

                                                  250
Notes on the Text

11    Winter and Bankhoff 1979.                  g Washburn 1957.
12 E.g. Witthoft 1957; results of recent         10 Hughes 1954.
replication experiments for stone tools can be   11 Dart 1956 includes a discussion of
found in the newsletter Flintknapper’s Ex-       classical descriptions of hyena behavior.
change.                                          12 Dart 1958.
13 See South 1977a, 1977b for an explicit        13 Vincent 1978.
use of historic site archaeology as a form of    14 Leakey 1979.
control over archaeological methodology.         15 This interpretation was widely reported
14 Isaac 1978.                                   in the press at the time but I have failed to
15 Leakey and Hay 1979.                          uncover the actual statement made at the
                                                 press conference,
                                                 16 Washburn and Howell 1960, p. 40.
Part I (Introduction) (pp. 31-2)
                                                 17 Leakey 1959a, 1959b, 1960.
1~ Taylor 1948.                                  18 Leakey 1971, particularly pp. 49-58 and
2 ‘Taylor 1972.                                  fig. 24.
3 Taylor 1948, p. 131.                           19 Isaac 1971, 1975, 1976b, 1976c, 1978.
4 Ibid., p. 193.                                 A more focused statement on meat eating
5 Binford 1981b; Dunnell 1g8ob.                  can be found in Isaac and Crader 1981.
6 Taylor 1948, p. 193.                           20    Isaac 1976a, pp. 483-5.
7 I have recently discussed methods for          21 Brain 1981 is the major summary of his
inference in Binford   1981a, particularly       work and should be consulted by anyone
PPP 20534:                                       interested in the issues discussed here.
                                                 22 See Washburn 1957; Bartholomew and
                                                 Birdsell 1953. The early interpretations by
Chapter 2 (pp. 33-59)                            Dart and others were influenced by the fauna
1 See Dart 1959; LeGros Clark 1967, pp.          associated at the Taung site where only small
I-40,                                            animals such as rock rabbit, birds’ eggs, small
2 Dart 1925, 1948. Dart’s reasoning was          rodents, baboons and hominids were pre-
based on the best evidence available to him      sent. These data were not thought to be
at the time; it seemed to indicate that bones    indicative of the actions of hyenas or other
from Makapan Limeworks had been burned.          large carnivores. For instance Robert Broom
When fossils of Australopithecus were found at   (1933, P. 137) wrote:
Makapansgat, Dart put the observations
                                                 ‘From the study of the bone breccia associ-
together and concluded that Auwstralopithecus
                                                 ated with the Taung skull we get some idea
was a fire-user and hence a true man. For a
                                                 of the habits of Australopithecus .. . 1 agree
good review of subsequent research see
                                                 with Dart in regarding it as the kitchen
Oakley 1954, 1961.
                                                 midden of Australopithecus . . The breccia is
3 Dart 1926. From the earliest days of the
                                                 mainly composed of bones of an extinct
discoveries at Taung, Dart argued that
                                                 dassie or rock rabbit. All the skulls are
Australopithecus was a hunter and thus the
                                                 broken, often into small fragments. It could
agent responsible for the accumulation of
                                                 be no large carnivore like a leopard or jackal
associated bones which he viewed as middens.
                                                 that fed on these dassies. Such would have
Central to these early ideas were depressed
fractures noted on the skulls of baboons, The    chewed up the skulls and swallowed them...
                                                 Then we have many baboon skulls all broken
initial statement that animal bones recovered
                                                 as if by some creature that wanted to get at
from the deposits yielding fossils of Austra-
lopithecus were tools is found in Dart 1949.     the brain...”
Dart 1957, 1960 further developed his argu-         This view of early man was gradually
ment for the tool-making and using habits of     accepted and dominated the literature until
Australopithecus. For a more recent view see     the early 1950s. Sites were thought to be
Wolberg 1970; Binford 1981a.                     middens from Australopithecus who was a
     Dart 1953.                                  minor predator taking small game, birds’
   Dart 1957, p. 85.           ;                 eggs, etc, See for instance Oakley 1953. Once
  Dart 1926, 1949, 1957, 1960.                   Dart began finding a very different fauna,
  Ardrey 1961.                                   one dominated by antelope, at Makapansgat,
  Lorenz 1966.
Conran                                           he began to argue for a much more active
                                                                               Notes on the Text

hunting way oflife for early man, Those who       value of studying the relationships between
had accepted the arguments based on the           raw material sources, the forms in which
Taung data saw the new data as inconsistent       materials   are introduced   to a site, and   the
and Dart’s interpretations as extreme. Simi-      disposition of both lithic waste and _ tools
larly, those who were simply repulsed by the      produced from raw materials, In the case of
notion of our ancestors as bloodthirsty killers   the Mousterian sites located by springs in the
reacted against the interpretations of the        Negev, Israel, it was shown that the size of
Makapansgat material; since more robust           the cores and flakes were smaller when the
fauna was present, arguments favoring large       lithic raw materials did not outcrop in the
carnivores as the agents of accumulation now      vicinity. The investigators interpreted this as
seemed realistic.                                 a reflection of economizing behavior on the
23 ~Brain 1968.                                   part of the makers of the Mousterian tools, It
24 Dart 1959, p. 121.                             is my guess, however, that instead we are
25 Brain 1981, figs. 50, 221.                     seeing the consequences of the behavior of
26 Brain 1967.                                    occupants who arrived at a site unequipped
27 Binford and Bertram 1977.                      with an adequate tool kit (an essentially
28 Binford 1978a.                                 ‘non-curated’     technology).    They    then
29 ©Binford 1981a.                                searched around the site for raw materials
go Hill 1972.                                     and finding artifacts which had been intro-
31 Klein 1975.                                    duced by previous occupants, they reduced
                                                  them into tools. Such a condition would
                                                  account for the observed patterning and
Chapter 3 (pp. 60-76)
                                                  would not require the unlikely proposed
1 Brain 1981, pp. 271-3. This remark              inference that the Mousterian population
applies particularly to the robust forms of       lived in sedentary settlements at which raw
Australopithecus.                                 materials, introduced to the site from else-
2 See Bunn é¢ al. 1980.                           where, were utilized in an economical
3 In Binford 1981a, pp. 83-9, 181-90,             manner,
244—6 and 283-99, I have discussed the role          Regardless of this controversial point,
of ‘post hoc arguments’ in some detail.           tools and introduced debris rarely survive as
4 Isaac 1971, p. 278.                             pristine items on sites which have been
5 Isaac and Crader 1981.                          occupied over substantial periods of time. In
6 Ibid., p. 83.                                   marked contrast, the mean length of cores on
7 During the months of July and August            Acheulian sites tends to increase as a function
1981, I was given the opportunity to visit        of the degree to which the assemblage is
many sites and areas in South Africa and          dominated by bifaces. (This observation
neighboring regions by virtue of a grant from     applies, for instance, to the materials from
the University of Cape Town, where I also         Olorgesailie.) These items had to be trans-
lectured to a dedicated group of students.        ported and disposed of in their context of use,
8 For a good example of what I have in            which had to be one in which they were not
mind see Schaller 1972, pls. 1 and 2.             reduced to flakes and flake tools but were
9 Dating of the site is based on an estimate      used as bifaces, It is hard to imagine a base
by Vrba 1975.                                     camp being an end point of tool use or
10 For discussion of the site of Elandsfon-       occupants of such base camps ignoring
tein see the following: Singer and Wymer          immediately available raw materials in the
1968; Klein 1978; Deacon 1975.                    form of previously introduced bifaces.
11 Although all Acheulian sites are not           13 lam fully aware that there are sites with
densely covered by artifacts, there are enough    different assemblage composition than that
to render this impression interesting; for        depicted in my imaginary scenario; I am
instance a classic example is Horizon B and       simply using this ‘reconstruction’ to illustrate
the main site (DE/8g) at Olorgesailie. See        that we do not understand the formation
Isaac 1977.                                       processes. It is not unlikely that some of the
12 While I would argue with the specific          assemblage variability in the Acheulian may
interpretations presented in a recent paper       well reflect distinctly different kinds of
by Munday 1976 and discussion by Marks            locations used by the early hominids; home
and Freidel 1977, their work illustrates the      bases might even have been present.
236   Notes on the Text

      14 I have been conducting some investiga-          abrasions are interpreted as deriving from
      tions into the characteristics of faunal assem-    use of these fragments as crayons for drawing,
      blages viewed from the perspective both of         thus far no colored artifacts have been re-
      anatomical part frequencies and of patterns        covered from Mousterian deposits.
      of cutting and chop marks and combinations         2 Evidence for the burial of the dead in the
      of such marks with the tooth scoring and           Mousterian period has been summarized by
      pitting produced by gnawing carnivores.            S. Binford 1968 and Harrold 1980.
      While this research is incomplete, it seems        3 For a critical discussion of Neanderthal
      quite likely that scavenging was the major         cave bear ritual see Binford 1981a; Kurten
      source of parts from relatively large-bodied       1976.
      animals found at Middle Stone Age sites of         4 Klindt-Jensen 1975.
      Klasies River in South Africa. Similar             5 Myres, 1906, p. 29.
      behavior may be represented by the remains         6 Jbid., pl. II.
      of aurochs and horses in the Mousterian sites      7 Quennell and Quennell 1922, pp. 102-5.
      of western Europe. I. will report on this          8 Weiner 1980.
      research in the near future.                       g Osborn 1927, p. 73.
      15 When questioned on the direct evidence          10 Bordes 1969, pp. 2-3.
      for hunting in the Lower Pleistocene, most         11   (Clarke 1979, p. 17.
      researchers mention a number of sites where        12   Mason 1883, p. 403.
      stone tools are associated with a single carcass   13. Nelson 1938, p. 148.
      of a large animal (elephant at Olduvai FLK         14 Fora good example ofviews in the early
      N6, hippopotamus at Koobi Fora, and                years of the 20th century see Osborn 1916.
      Deinotherium at Olduvai FLK NII) or                15 For discussions of the ‘artifact and
      where tools are associated with a large            assemblage period’ from slightly different
      number of carcasses of animals of a single         perspectives see Binford 1981a, 1982.
      species. While the former situation is fre-        16 Childe 1929, p. vi.
      quently acknowledged as possibly represent-        17 For another discussion of the situation
      ing the scavenging of food from the death          in archaeology  just prior to 1930 see Trigger
      site of a large animal, the latter is often pre-   1980, particularly Chapter II.
      sented as evidence of early man’s hunting          18 E.g. Breuil 1931, 1932a, 1932b.
      skills, suggesting that he drove the animals to    1g Garrod 1938, p. 1.
      their death or that he was at least instru-        20 Breuil and Lantier 1965, p. 115.
      mental in obtaining large quantities of a          21 Burkitt 1963, pp. 129-30.
      single species. See e.g. Isaac 1977; Shipman       22 Forexamples ofa relatively recent treat-
      et al. 1981. For contrary views, see Binford       ment of these views see Hoebel 1949; Movius
      1977b; Binford and Todd 1982.                      1956; Herskovits 1955; there are, of course,
      16 For a description of the research situa-        many additional examples.
      tion see Leakey 1981, pp. 76—88.                   23 Peyrony 1930, 1933, 1936.
      17_ See Binford 1981a, pp. 83—6 and 246-7          24 Movius 1953. For a more recent dis-
      for a discussion of such methods of inference.     cussion see Laville et al. 1980.
      18 Keeley and Toth 1981.                           25 See Bordes 1950, 1953b, 1961a. Also
      19 Binford 19772, p. 7.                            compare Sonneville-Bordes 1975b.
                                                         26 Bordes 1953a.
                                                         27 Bordes 1972.
      Part II (Introduction) (pp. 77-8)
                                                         28 For a description see Sonneville-Bordes
      1 Popper 1972, p. 198.                             1975b.
      2 Sonneville-Bordes 1975a, p. 35 (transla-         29 =Lbid.
      tion from the original French).                    30 Peyrony 1930.
      3 Popper 1972, p. 30.                              31 Bordes 1972.
      4 Black, in Popper 1959, p. 82.                    32 The early formulations of parallel phyla
                                                         were beginning to be questioned by the late
      Chapter 4 (pp. 79-94)                              1940s and early 1950s: e.g. Braidwood 1946;
                                                         Movius 1948.
      1 The evidence for the use of pigments is          33 Modified versions of Breuil’s views con-
      the presence of worked or abraded fragments        tinue to dominate some research even today.
      of red ochre and of manganese. Although the        See Collins 1969; Ohel 1979.
                                                                             Notes on the Text     s2   37
34 Sackett 1981, p. go.                          tion for Anthropological Research and by
35 Wissler 1914, 1923; Klimek 1955; Kroe-        the National Science Foundation. Works
ber 1939; Milke 1949; Hodder 1977.               stemming directly from the Nunamiut re-
36 Bordes 1972, pp. 148-9.                       search include the following: Binford 1976,
37 Wissler 1914, pp. 468-9.                      1978a, 1978b, 1979, 1980, 1981a, 1981b,
38 For the basic literature on the debate        1981c, 1982.
regarding the ‘functional argument’ see          15 Both travel to and fieldwork in Australia
Binford and Binford 1966, 1969; Binford          was supported by the Institute of Aboriginal
1972a, 1973. The opposing point of view is       Studies, Canberra.
represented by Bordes 1961b; Sonneville-         16 E.g. Binford 1981b.
Bordes 1966; Collins 1969, 1970; Bordes and      17 Binford 1967; see-also Binford 1968b.
Sonneville-Bordes 1970; Mellars 1970; Bor-       18 A similar point was made in Binford
des et al. 1972.                                 1969.


Chapter 5 (pp. 95-108)                           Chapter 6 (pp. 109-43)

1 A major breakthrough with regard to the        1 Silberbauer 1972.
search for stratigraphy was made by Coe          2 The approach was developed for more
1964.                                            sedentary systems by Flannery, 1972.
2 Taylor 1948.                                   3 See MacNeish 1958, p. 137 or for a more
3 See particularly Willey 1953.                  expanded version MacNeish,      Peterson, and
4 See Brown (ed.) 1971.                          Neely 1972, especially p. 355.
5 At the time that I began searching the         4 For a more complete description of this
literature, the two most important publica-      argument see Binford 1981c.
tions known to me treating the manufacture       5 Binford 1978a, pp. 306-12.
of stone tools were Pond 1930 and Witthoft       6 See Downs 1966.
1957; in addition, a provocative study had       7 For a further description of the Anavik
appeared in Witthoft 1952.                       Springs site see Binford, 1978a, pp. 171-8.
6 Some of my early investigations into           8 Ibid., pp. 235-45.
lithic analysis include Binford 1963; Binford    g I refer here to features interpreted by
and Papworth 1963; Binford and Quimby            P. P. Yefimenko as zemlyanka or ‘sleeping
 1963.                                           pits’. Examples include ‘dwelling number 1’
7 Binford and Papworth 1963.                     in the upper level of Kostienki I and ‘pit U’
8 Binford 1964b.                                 at Avdejevo, an unpublished site. For de-
9g See Binford 1968a.                            scriptions of Kostienki and other major
10 See Binford and Binford 1966.                 Russian Palaeolithic sites, see Klein 1973.
11     For a short history of the early work     My information about these specific features
with multivariate statistical techniques see     is based on personal communication with
Binford and Binford 1966, p. 293, fn. 1.         Professor Grigoryev at the University of
 12 My former wife, Sally Binford, and I         Leningrad,
received a research grant from the National      10 Klein 1973, p. 70, fig. 8.
Science Foundation. We were assisted in          11 Similar features have been described
France by Georges Bordes, Gerald Eck,            among the Kalahari San Bushmen by
Nicholas     Gessler,   Cathy   Read-Martin,     Crowell and Hitchcock 1978, pp. 37-51.
Dwight Read, Michele Lenoir, and Polly           12 Binford 1978b, pp. 330-61.
Wiessner. The team was also continuously         13 Yellen 1977, pp. 113-30.
aided and encouraged by Francois Bordes,         14 Ibid., particularly pp. 125-31.
Jean Phillippe Rigaud and the staff of Bordes’   15 Williams 1968, 1969.
laboratory.                                      16 Patricia Draper, personal communica-
13 At the time I assumed, as did most            tion.        ,
researchers, that these were ‘living floors’     17 Binford 1982.
with near-perfect integrity and with high        18 It should be pointed out that the basis
resolution, Today such assumptions seem          of the Mousterian debate was the nature of
very naive.                                      stone tool assemblages. I have not mentioned
14 Research among the Nunamiut Eskimo            stone tools in discussing land use, because the
was supported by the Wenner-Gren Founda-         Nunamiut Eskimo I observed were no longer
38   Notes on the Text

     using stone artifacts; however, there is little    system, They should therefore be perfectly
     chance that the kinds of lithic artifacts used     susceptible of explanation by the prehistorian
     by the Eskimo would have been comparable           within the proper frame of reference.’ (/bid.:
     to those of the Mousterian. Once again I           PaULgs)
     must stress that I do not consider the             Whallon followed these basic statements
     Nunamiut as providing an analogy for               with a discussion of the techniques known to
     Palaeolithic groups.                               him for recognizing patterning in spatial dis-
     19 Binford 1978a.                                  tributions. He has continued to refine old
                                                        techniques for detecting patterning and to
                                                        develop new ones. See Whallon 1973b, 1974
     Chapter   7 (pp. 144-92)
                                                        and the additional work along these lines by
     1 Binford 1978b.                                   Newell and Dekin 1978.
     2 Binford 1978a, particularly pp. 265-320.            Against this background, it is difficult to
     3 Ibid., pp. 321-7.                                comprehend how the kind of criticism which
     4 Whitehead 1953, pp. 158-9.                       Schiffer (1974) levelled against Whallon
     5 Wagner 1960, p. 91.                              could bejustified. Perhaps the strangest mis-
     6 Leroi-Gourhan and Brézillon 1966, pp.            statement of Whallon’s work has been made
     361-4.                                             by Yellen (1977, especially p. 134), who
     7 Van Noten 1978.                                  suggests that we assumed that every activity
     8 Schiffer 1972; Schiffer and Rathje 1973.         must occur in independent spatial locations
     g Binford and Binford 1966.                        and that tools found in association therefore
     1o A major confusion exists in the recent          refer to a single activity. These kinds of
     archaeological literature with regard to some      arguments simply betray a total misunder-
     of these ideas. From the days at the Univer-       standing of the issues and the history of the
     sity-of Chicago when I and my students             development of archaeological methods.
     explored the concepts of activity areas and        11    My work in Australia was conducted as
     tool kits, we clearly recognized the dual          a guest of James O’Connell while he worked
     problem of developing techniques for identi-       with the Alyawara. Financial support was
     fying patterning in the archaeological record      extended by the Australian Aboriginal Insti-
     and for interpreting the results of such           ture, Canberra.
     pattern recognition studies. Robert Whallon        12 Leroi-Gourhan and Brézillon 1966,
     took up the challenge and investigated tech-       1972.
     niques and approaches which might be               13 Leroi-Gourhan and Brézillon 1966, fig.
     useful in this respect ;he demonstrated clearly    58.
     that he appreciated the difference between         14 Gould 1977, fig. 22.
     an archaeological pattern and the meanings         15 Velder 1963, fig. 2.
     which might be attached to it:                     16 Movius 1975, 1977.
     (1) *. .. at least some human activities will be   17 Pat Draper, personal communication.
     spatially separated within most places of          18 Binford 1978a, pp. 142-5.
     occupation and .. . the areal differentiation      19   Ibid., pp. 435-57.
     of activities will result in the differential      20 The pattern of alternating beds and
     distribution of tool types over an occupation      hearths noted earlier applies only to un-
     area as a consequence of their different uses      sheltered sleeping areas or for structures and
     in the various activities carried out at the       rock shelters, whose primary function is to
     site.’ (Whallon 1973a, p. 116.)                    provide protection from rain and sun. When
     (2) *... our arguments do not necessitate the      structures are used to retain heat, group
     constant spatial separation of all activities      sleeping arrangements are more common.
     into mutually exclusive areas, only that some      Furthermore, the alternating beds and
     activities must, at least some of the time, be     hearths are not employed because the fuel,
     spatially distinct.’ (/bzd.: p. 117.)              which is used to heat the entire shelter rather
     (3) ‘Spatial clusters of tools do not neces-       than just the areas directly adjacent to the
     sarily have to represent items left in a place     fire, is conserved.
     of use... but are the results, nonetheless, of     21    Inan Eskimo context, the manufacture
     regular human behavior associated with the         of boats, sleds, or house frames and the sewing
     embeddedness of the technology in, or its          of tents are examples of large-scale manufac-
     articulation with, the rest of a total cultural    turing tasks which are generally done in
                                                                               Notes on the Text      239
areas specially set aside for the purpose. See    ology had denied that such variability ex-
Binford 1978a, p. 348, fig. 7.5 for a photo-      isted, Because of this denial it is therefore not
graph ofa kayak which was manufactured in         surprising that investigations of the type dis-
its own activity area outside, but next to, the   cussed here have not previously been con-
house,                                            ducted. Many modern investigators have
22) Yellen 1977, p. 92.                           misinterpreted my point completely: they
23 Among the Eskimo it was observed that          have assumed I was arguing that there was a
older men tended to be more regularly             necessary relationship between particular
engaged in craft activities than other people.    tool designs and the anticipated use of the
They would frequently congregate in the           tool (i.e. that considerations of tool use
house of an elderly couple with no children       determined the design.of the tool). I certainly
or with married offspring living elsewhere.       never made such a statement, nor did I imply
Such childless houses sometimes functioned        one. I did, however, suggest that tools with
in the same way, in terms of craft activities,    different designs could be expected to play
as men’s houses. There the men could lay out      different roles within the technology. Thus
their work and leave it in areas peripheral to    the study of variation in frequency from place
the domestic space of the woman ofthe house,      to place among identical morphological
where it would be unmolested.                     classes with differing sets of designs should
24 See Binford 1978a, p. 462, fig. 9.1 for a      tell us something about organizational vari-
photograph of debris being burned on a            ability within a cultural system. Just as there
butchering/processing site.                       is no necessary determinant relationship
 25 Schiffer (1972, 1976) has proposed the        between use and design, similarly, there is no
 conceptual distinction between primary and       such relationship between use and organiza-
 secondary refuse and has stressed the need for   tion (although there are certainly mutual
 archaeologists to distinguish between these      interactions in both cases), Knowing the use
 two types of deposit. While I accept that        of an item will not allow one to infer the
 Schiffer’s intention was based on a valid        organized patterns for the maintenance ofthe
 premise and was constructive, the distinction    technology through time (i.e. curation), nor
is not adequate, at least given my under-         the patterned modes of disposal, including
standing of formation processes.                  the investment of effort in maintaining places
 26 Schiffer 1972.                                where the technology was used. The latter
 27 Binford 1978a, pp. 145-7 gives a de-          must be considered in conjunction with the
 scription of an Eskimo meal in a winter house.   reconstruction of the particular actions con-
 28 Schiffer 1976, p. 57 provides some formal     ducted by tool-using actors, before any
 criteria for the recognition of secondary        realistic understanding of patterned associa-
 refuse: ‘Secondary refuse consists of worn-out   tions actually observed in the archaeological
 and broken materials and usually occurs in       record can be understood in accurate and
deposits of high material density and diver-      historically meaningful ways. In short, there
 sity. Compare this statement with the de-        is much more to the functional argument
scriptions by Yellen 1977, p. 109 of primary      than merely questions of tool use.
 refuse seen in his nuclear areas!
 29 Yellen 1977, pp. 81-3. It should be           Part III (Introduction) (pp. 193-4)
 pointed out that, while Yellen has made
valuable observations, his attribution of         1 This weakness has been recognized by
 ‘rigid’ site typologies to Whallon and myself    others (e.g. Lamberg-Karlovsky 1975 — with
is completely erroneous. Cf. note 10 above.       whose suggested solutions to the problem,
go Binford 1980, pp. 4-20.                        however, I do not agree). For the bizarre idea
31 The dispute about functional variation         that one can deduce ‘test implications’ for a
linked to the Mousterian controversy does         procedure which seeks to give meaning to
not concern tool use, as many have tried to       archaeological observations by referring to
argue: e.g. Collins 1969; Tringham 1978,          archaeological observations, see Binford
p. 174; Cahen et al. 1979. I reasoned that        19774.
forms of variability in the organization of       2 Binford 1981a, especially pp. 21-30.
human-hominid systems of adaptation, as           3 Idonot mean toimply that this approach
well as the factors which conditioned them,       is restricted to the study of complex societies:
were important, whereas traditional archae-       there are many examples from the literature
240   Notes on the Text

      dealing with much    earlier time ranges   (e.g.   later in this chapter, I should point out that
      Isaac and Isaac 1975). Leakey and Lewin            one major flaw in these early ideas was the
       1978, for instance, argued (by analogy with       concept of little “Gardens of Eden’ which
      the !Kung San) that gathering was very             served to concentrate population and offer
      important for early man and that the carry-        the potential for more secure population
      ing bag was therefore one of the most im-          growth. I was operating with some of the
      portant early tools; shortly after reading that,   assumptions of my predecessors and adding
      I saw a television interview with Pat Shipman      arguments for selective stress arising through
       (John Hopkins University), in which she           the structure of population dynamics,
      explained that the reason there were so many        14 Dumond 1965; Boserup 1965.
      cut marks found on ungulate metapodials             15 Smith and Young 1972.
      from early African sites was that the hominids     16 Flannery 1969.
      sought tendons for making... carrying bags!         17 Bender 1975; Bronson 1975; Cowgill
       (cf. Potts and Shipman 1981; Bunn 1981;            1975; Hassan 1974, 1979; Hayden 1981.
      Science News 1981). This is a classic example       18 Cf. the attitude of Flannery 1973.
      of observations from the archaeological            19 Beardsley 1956, p. 134.
      record being accommodated to one’s beliefs         20 Rick 1980.
      and then cited as proof that those original        21     Madsen 1979.
      ideas were correct: mere tautology.                22 Perlman 1980.
      4 Radcliffe-Brown recognized the weak-             23 Binford 1968a.
      ness of ‘conjectural history’. He pointed out      24 Harlan 1967.
       (1958, p. 41): “The hypothetical reconstruc-      25 Flannery 1969.
      tion of the past inevitably assumes certain        26 Hassan 1977; also discussion in Hassan
      general principles but does not prove them;         1981, especially pp. 213-14.
      on the contrary its results depend upon their      27 It makes no sense to regard reliability and
      validity.’ Although he was objecting to the        predictability as environmental characteristics
      reconstruction of history from ethnographic        which came to be increasingly recognized
      observations, the methodological point is           (cf. Hassan 1977; Hayden 1981): both are
      just as sound for archaeologically generated       properties of tactical procedures, not charac-
      observations. His criticism of historically-       teristics of the environment itself. Given
      oriented ethnology is equally applicable to        enough information about an environment,
      those who adopt theories guiding the inter-        almost any resource is rendered predictable
      pretation of archaeological observations and        (and hence reliable). What Hayden de-
      somehow suppose that these same facts can          scribes as reliable ‘r-selected’ resources are
      confirm or refute the theories (for a good         precisely those which can be exploited with
      example, see Mellen 1981).                         minimal information about the environ-
      5 Wittfogel 1957.                                  ment, since they tend to be stationary and
      6 Discussed in Chapter 9.                          aggregated in clumps; so it is curious that
                                                         these are the very resources which Hayden
      Chapter 8 (pp. 195-213)                            thinks man exploits as he becomes more
                                                         ‘knowledgeable’ about his environments.
          Darwin 1875.                                   28 Niederberger 1979.
          Roth 1887.                                     29 MacNeish 1964, 1971, 1972. This im-
          Peake and Fleure 1927.                         portant observation was acknowledged by
          Childe 1928.                                   Flannery 1973 and Bender 1978, yet ignored
          Tbid., p. 2.                                   in a work as recent as Hassan 1981. Hassan
          Hempel 1965.                                   no doubt would claim that his models for
          Braidwood 1963.                                food production apply only to Palestine and
      ND
      OD
      Snr
      AoR Braidwood and Howe 1960.                       that other areas each require their own
      =)  Braidwood and Willey (eds.) 1962, pp.          particularistic explanations,
      132-46,                                            30 E.g. Hayden 1981, p. 544: ‘It seems
      10 Braidwood and Reed 1957.                        self-evident to me that all else being equal,
      11 Braidwood 1963, p. r1o.                         hunter-gatherers will adopt strategies involy-
      12 Higgs and Jarman 1969; Higgs (ed.)              ing the least amount of movement.’
      1972, 1975.                                        31 Bender 1978, p. 207.
      13 Binford 1968a. Anticipating arguments           32 Bennett 1976b, p. 848.
                                                                              Notes on the Text      41


33 Cohen 1977.                                    6 See Finney 1966; Earle 1977.
34 Cf. notes 19 and 28 above.                     7 Flannery and Coe 1968; also Sanders and
35 Bailey 1960.                                   Price 1968.
36 Perkins 1964; cf. Reed 1960.                   8 Sahlins 1963, 1965.
37 Binford and Chasko 1976; additional            g See Sanders et al. 1979, especially pp.
information on this point may be found in         400—1, for a discussion of this point.
Lee 1972.                                         10 Boserup 1965.
38 Osborn 1977 has sought to demonstrate          11   This model, like so many others, assumes
that aquatic resources do not constitute          a teleological explanation: that is, the exist-
‘Gardens of Eden’. Yesner 1980 realizes that      ence of some form of principle that man, if
there is an historical problem: if aquatic        given the chance, will seek to raise his
resources are to be considered ‘Gardens of        standard of living, will invest in culture
Eden’, why did early populations apparently       building, will explore new ways of investing
not realize this fact? Nevertheless, he tends     his time. These views are all forms of what
to cite coastal hunter-gatherers as examples      Trigger (1981, p. 150) has characterized as
of adaptations to exceptionally productive        the ‘Enlightenment belief that technological
settings, which he believes were more com-        innovation is an autonomous process of
mon in the past. His suggestion that increased    rational self-improvement and the driving
sedentism in such settings is tied to greater     force behind cultural evolution.’
resource diversity relates to the notion of the   12 Bennett 1976a.
‘broad spectrum revolution’.                      13 Harris 1979. After laying out many
39 «Flannery 1965.                                principles with which I can find little to
40 ‘The references are given in notes 17, 26,     disagree, Harris’ actual illustrations of cul-
33 and 39.                                        tural materialism take the form of various
41 This was the topic of another lecture          cost-benefit arguments which assume a vital
delivered during my stay in Great Britain,        evolutionary ‘good’ for increasing the ‘stan-
but not included in the present volume            dard of living’, or at least decreasing the cost
(Binford 1981c).                                  of maintaining it (see particularly Harris
42 Binford 19778, p. 7.                           1979, pp. 85-114). This, once again, is a
                                                  gradualist view.
                                                  14 The Principle of Least Effort has been
Chapter 9 (pp. 214-32)
                                                  most explicitly stated by Zipf 1949.
1 Binford 1g164a                                  15 ‘The law of minimal risk means that
2 Sahlins 1958.                                   when faced by choices the decision will be to
3 The pattern of small power-based ‘chief-        adopt that solution which produces the
doms’ referred to here has a coastal distribu-    minimal risk’ (Sanders et al. 1979, p. 360).
tion in North America,         beginning at       16 Pyke et al. 1977; Charnov 1976.
Chesapeake Bay, continuing south along the        17 I do not wish to imply that I have not
Atlantic coast (including such groups as the      operated from time to time with propositions
Guale) and around the Florida area into the       from economics as if they were principles of
Gulf of Mexico. Similar systems extended up       evolution, for I think almost all of us who
the Mississippi valley, but became much           have ever addressed the issue of process have
rarer along the Gulf coast west of the mouth      thought in economic terms about ecological
of the Mississippi.                               processes. What I am suggesting here is that
4 E.g. Gearing 1962.                              we should become increasingly aware of this
5 Sahlins never dealt adequately with the         ‘functionalist’ approach. Economics, even if
latter point (differential productivity). His     the principles are valid, refers to the be-
concept of ‘imbalanced’ reciprocity, for ex-      haviour of participants within a system,
ample, related only to short term conditions      rather than the patterns of interaction be-
of exchange. Popular discussions of a re-         tween a system and its environmental field,
distributive mode of organization have not        which is in my opinion the most profitable
yet satisfactorily addressed the more likely      way of thinking about the locus of evolution-
situation in which there exist much more          ary processes. Those who would see the
permanent imbalances within a region which        dynamics of a system as simply a generaliza-
would serve to ensure a fairly permanent          tion about the normative behaviour of
imbalance in the flow of goods.                   participants within it have, I fear, largely
242   Notes on the Text

      missed the point regarding the organization        (as culture certainly is), then I think it might
      of ecological articulations among systems.        be well to investigate some of the properties
      18 The assumption of an inner dynamic             of that domain of phenomena, rather than
      has been a basic and fundamental part of          attempting to reduce it to a simple analog of
      most philosophical positions associated with      genes with fitness guiding reproductive
      the word ‘evolution’ in the social sciences.      success at the species level in the literal sense
      See Dunnell 1980a. For my own much earlier        of the word species. Dunnell’s argument
      argument in favour of a selectionist position     entirely misses the point of interest about
      see Binford 1972b.                                human adaptations: they are truly extra-
      1g I am suggesting here that there are            somatic and must be understood in terms of
      major organizational characteristics in the       extra-somatic processes, Culture refers to
      evolutionary history of culturally integrated     that organizational domain.
      systems, This means that there are apt to be      21 See Renfrew 1969; Parsons and Price
      dramatic kinds of changes or ‘punctuations’,       1971; Rathje 1971.
      with seeming lack of continuity of the type to    22 Fogel 1963.
      be expected if one adopted a gradualist view      23 Walthall et al. 1979.
      of evolutionary process,                          24 Prufer 1961.
      20 Dunnell’s (1980a) recent survey of             25 Griffin et al. 1969.
      evolutionary ideas in anthropology makes an       26 See Struever and Houart 1972.
      argument against vitalism and in favour ofa       27 E.g. Judge 1979; also Cordell and Plog
      selectionist view, as advocated here. On the      1979, particularly pp. 419-24.
      other hand, he rejects some paradigmatic          28 It is not infrequent to see claims made
      distinctions which he does not admit may be       for complex societies in areas such as the
      well founded.   For instance, he states critic-   American Southwest phrased as a step to-
      ally :‘The view that the subject is culture has   ward achieving intellectual ‘freedom’ from
      led to isolation of cultural evolution from       the ‘oppression’ of the ethnohistoric past
      evolution in general. Culture is to be ex-        where only ‘egalitarian’ societies were de-
      plained, not by evolutionary principles and       scribed. It is of course possible, indeed almost
      mechanisms demonstrated to be operative in        a certainty, that there were forms of society
      the world at large, but by processes unique to    in the past which are not represented in the
      culture itself.’ (p. 48) These statements,        relatively recent descriptions from the colon-
      which Dunnell takes to be a devastating pro-      ial era. Nevertheless, I fear that the criteria
      nouncement, to me seem silly posturings           being cited in favour of centralized authori-
      which would lead, if taken seriously, to that     ties and major redistributive functions are
      masquerade for productive thought currently       largely the size and architectural sophistica-
      parading under the rubric of sociobiology. In     tion of the ruins, Are we really to believe that
      the example I have just given the situation is    mankind can only accomplish substantial
      analogous to a species previously interacting     acts of coordinated labour if ‘organized’ by a
      competitively with its conspecifics suddenly      powerful central government authority?
      being able to shift the dynamics of selection     29 See Gould and Lewontin 1979. For a
      to an ‘unwanted’ organ — a little finger, for     review of currently active philosophical
      instance — and by doing so ensure not only        positions, see Wenke 1981.
      the future security of the original species but   30 Binford 1981a, especially pp. 83-5 and
      also a real competitive scrap between the new     184-97.
      ‘disembodied’ little fingers! If an organiza-     31 _ Binford in press.
      tion is capable of that type of restructuring
                                  Bibliography

Apams,    R.   N.   1981   ‘Natural   selection,               research design’, American Antiquity 29 (4),
  energetics, and “cultural materialism’’’         b           425-41.
  Current Anthropology 22 (6), 603-24.                       1967 ‘Smudge pits and hide smoking: the use
ALMEIDA, A, DE 1965 Bushmen and other Non-                      of analogy in archaeological reasoning’,
  Bantu Peoples of Angola, Johannesburg.                        American Antiquity 32 (1), 1-12.
AMSDEN, C. W. 1977 A Quantitative Analysis of                1968a ‘Post-pleistocene adaptations’, in S. R.
  Nunamiut Eskimo Settlement Dynamics: 1898                     Binford and L. R. Binford (eds.), New
  to 1969 (Ph.D. Dissertation, Department                       Perspectives in Archaeology, Chicago, 313~41.
  of Anthropology, University of New Mex-                    1968b ‘Some comments on historical versus
  ico), Ann Arbor.                                              processual       archaeology’,     Southwestern
ARDREY, R. 1961 African Genesis, London and                    Journal of Anthropology 24 (3), 267-75.
  New York.                                                  1968c ‘Archaeological perspectives’, in S. R.
AscHER, R. 1962 ‘Ethnography for archae-                        Binford and L. R. Binford (eds.). New
  ology: a case from the Seri Indians’,                         Perspectives in Archaeology, Chicago, 5-32.
  Ethnology 1, 360-9.                                        1969 ‘Comment on D. Collins’ “culture
BatLey, H. P. 1960 ‘A method of determining                     traditions and environment ofearly man”’’,
  the warmth and temperateness ofclimate’,                      Current Anthropology 10 (4), 297-9.
  Geografiska Annaler 43 (1), 1-16.                          1972a ‘Contemporary model building: para-
BaRTHOLOMEW, G. A. AND BiIRDSsELL, J. B.                        digms and the current state of paleolithic
   1953 ‘Ecology and the protohominids’,                        research’, in D. L. Clarke (ed.), Models in
  American Anthropologist 55, 481-98.                           Archaeology, London, 109-66,
BEARDSLEY, R. K. eé¢ al. 1955 ‘Functional and                1972b ‘Comments on evolution’, in L. R.
  evolutionary implications of community                       Binford, An Archaeological Perspective, New
  patterning’, in R. Wauchope et al. (eds.),                   York and London, 105-13.
  Seminars in Archaeology (Memoirs of the                    1973 ‘Interassemblage variability — the
  Society for American Archaeology, 11),                       Mousterian and the ‘functional’ argu-
  Salt Lake City, 129-55.                                      ment’, in C. Renfrew (ed.), The Explana-
BENDER, B. 1975 Farming in Prehistory, Lon-                    tion of Culture Change, London, 227-54.
  don.                                                       1976 ‘Forty-seven trips: a case study in the
1978 ‘Gatherer-hunter to farmer: a social                      character of some formation processes of
  perspective’, World Archaeology 10 (2),                      the archaeological record, in E. Hall (ed.),
  204-22.                                                      Contributions to Anthropology: The Interior
BenneTT, J. W. 1976a The Ecological Transi-                    Peoples of Northern Alaska (National Mus-
  tion: Cultural Anthropology and Human Adap-                  eum of Man Mercury Series, 49), Ottawa,
  tation, New York.                                            299-351.
1976b ‘Anticipation, adaptation and the                      1977a ‘General introduction’, in L. R. Bin-
  concept of culture in anthropology’, Science                 ford (ed.), For Theory Building in Archae-
  192, 847-53.                                                 ology, New York, 1-10.
Brinrorp, L. R. 1963 ‘The Pomranky site. A                   1977b ‘Olorgesailie deserves more than the
   late archaic burial station’, Anthropological               usual book review’, Journal of Anthropo-
  Papers, Museum of Anthropology, University of                logical Research 33 (4), 493-502.
  Michigan 19, 149-92.                                       1978a Nunamiut Ethnoarchaeology, New York.
1964a An Archaeological and Ethnohistorical                  1978b ‘Dimensional analysis of behavior and
  Investigation of Cultural Diversity (Ph.D.                   site structure: learning from an Eskimo
  Dissertation, Department ofAnthropology,                     hunting stand’, American Antiquity 43 (3),
  University of Michigan), Ann Arbor.                          330-61.
1964b ‘A consideration of archaeological                     1979 ‘Organization       and   formation     pro-

                                                       243
244   Bibliography

        cesses:   looking at curated   technologies’,      Journal of Anthropology 24 (2), 139-54.
        Journal of Anthropological Research   35 (3),    Bornes, F, 1950 ‘Principes d’une méthode
        255—73-                                            d’ étude des techniques de débitage et de la
      1980 ‘Willow smoke and dogs’ tails: hunter-           typologie du Paléolithique ancien et moy-
        gatherer settlement systems and archaco-           en’, L’ Anthropologie 54 (1-2), 19-34.
        logical site formation’, American Antiquity      1953a ‘Levalloisien et Moustérien’, Bulletin
        45 (1), 4-20.                                      de la Société Préhistorique Frangaise 50 (4),
      1981a Bones: Ancient Men and Modern Myths,           226-35.
        New York.                                        1953b ‘Essai de classification des industries
      1981b ‘Behavioral archaeology and the                 ““moustériennes”’, Bulletin de la Société
        ‘“‘Pompeii premise”’, Journal of Anthropo-         Préhistorique Frangaise 50 (7-8), 457-66.
        logical Research 37 (3), 195-208.                1961a Typologie de Paléolithique Ancien et
      1981c ‘Long term land use patterns: some              Moyen, Bordeaux.
        implications for archaeology’, Paper pre-        1961b   ‘Mousterian     cultures   in   France’,
        sented at the 46th Annual Meeting of the           Science 134 (3482), 803-10.
        Society for American Archaeology, San            1969 ‘Reflections on typology and techniques
        Diego.                                             in the Paleolithic’, Arctic Anthropology 6 (1),
      1982 ‘The archaeology of place’, Journal of           I-29.
        Anthropological Archaeology 1 (1), 5-31.         1972 A Tale of Two Caves, New York.
      in press ‘Objectivity-explanation-archaeol-        Borpss, F., Ricaup, J. P. AND SONNEVILLE-
        ogy 1980’, in C. Renfrew, M. Rowlands,             Borpes, D. DE 1972 “Des buts, problémes
        B. Abbot-Seagraves (eds.), Theory and              et limites de l’archéologie paléolithique’,
        Explanation in Archaeology: the Southampton        Quaternaria 16 (1), 15-34.
        Conference, New York and London.                 Borpes, F. AND SONNEVILLE-BorRDEs, D. DE
      Brnrorp, L- R. AND BERTRAM, J. B. 1977                1970 ‘The significance of variability in
         ‘Bone frequencies — and attritional pro-          Paleolithic assemblages’, World Archae-
        cesses’, in L. R. Binford (ed.), For Theory        ology 2 (1), 61-73.
        Building in Archaeology, New York, 77-153.       BosErup, E. 1965 The Conditions of Agricul-
      Brnrorp, L. R. AND BrnFrorD, S. R. 1966 ‘A           tural Growth, London.
         preliminary analysis of functional vari-        Braibwoop, R. J. 1946 “The interrelations,
        ability in the Mousterian of Levallois             core and flake tool traditions in Europe’,
        facies’, American Anthropologist 68 (2), Pt 2,     in R, Braidwood (ed.), Origins: An Intro-
         238-95.                                           ductory Course in General Anthropology, Chi-
      1969 ‘Stone tools and human behavior’,               cago, 145-52.
        Scientific American 220 (4), 70-84.              1963 Prehistoric Man (6th edn), Chicago.
      Brnrorp, L. R. anp Cuasxo, W. J. 1976              Braibwoop, R. J. anp Howe, B. 1960
         ‘Nunamiut demographic history: a pro-             Prehistoric Investigations in Iraqi Kurdistan
        vocative case’, in E. B. W. Zubrow (ed.),           (Oriental Institute Studies in Ancient
        Demographic Anthropology, Albuquerque,             Oriental Civilization, 31), Chicago,
         63-143.                                         Braipwoop, R. J. anD REED, C. A. 1957
      Brnrorp, L. R. anp PApwortu, M. L. 1963              ‘The achievement and early consequences
         “The Eastport site, Antrim County, Mich-          of food production: a consideration of the
         igan’, Anthropological Papers, Museum of          archaeological and natural-historical evi-
         Anthropology, University of Michigan 19,          dence’, Cold Springs Harbor Symposia on
         71-123.                                           Quantitative Biology 22, 19-31.
      Brnrorp, L. R. AND Quimsy, G. I. 1963              Braipwoon, R. J. AnD WILLEy, G. R. (eds.)
         ‘Indian sites and chipped stone materials          1962 Courses Toward Urban Life (Viking
         in the northern Lake Michigan area’,              Fund Publications in Anthropology, 32),
         Fieldiana, Anthropology 36, 277-307.              Chicago.
      BinrorbD, L. R. anv Topp, L. C. 1982 ‘On           Brain, C. K. 1967 ‘Hottentot food remains
         arguments for the “butchering’’ of giant          and their meaning in the interpretation of
         Geladas’, Current Anthropology 23 (1), 108—       fossil bone assemblages’, Scientific Papers of
         10.                                               the Namib Desert Research Station 32, 1-11.
      Binrorp, S. R. 1968 ‘A structural comparison       1968 ‘Who killed the Swartkrans ape-man?”’,
         of disposal of the dead in the Mousterian         South African Museum Association Bulletin
         and the Upper Paleolithic’, Southwestern.         9 (4), 127-39.
                                                                                        Bibliography

 1981 The Hunters or the Hunted? An Introduction     1979 Experimental Archaeology, London.
   to African Cave Taphonomy, Chicago.               Co.uins, D. M. 1969 ‘Cultural traditions and
 BreviL, H. 1931 ‘Pleistocene sequence in the          environment of early man’, Current Anthro-
   Thames Valley’, South-Eastern Naturalist            pology 10, 267-316.
   and Antiquary 36, 95-8.                           1970 ‘Stone artefact analysis and the recogni-
 1932a ‘Les industries 4 éclats du Paléo-              tion of culture   traditions’,   World Archae-
   lithique ancien, I. Le Clactonien’, Préhis-         ology 2 (1), 17-27.
    totre 1 (2), 125-go.                             CorvgE LL, L. S. anv Pog, F. 1979 ‘Escaping
 1932b ‘Le Paléolithique ancien en Europe              the confines of normative thought: a re-
    Occidentale et sa chronologie’, Bulletin de la     evaluation of Puebloan prehistory’, Ameri-
    Société Préhistorique Frangaise 29 (3), 570-8.     can Antiquity 44 (3),-405—29.
 BreuiL, H. anp Lantier, R. 1965 The Men             Cow iLL, G, L. 1975 ‘Population pressure as
   of the Old Stone Age, London.                       a non-explanation’, in A. Swedlund (ed.),
 Bronson, B. 1975 “The earliest farming:               Population Studies in Archaeology and Bio-
   demography as cause and consequence’,               logical Anthropology (Society for American
    in S. Polgar (ed.), Population, Ecology and        Archaeology, Memoir 30), Washington,
   Social Evolution, The Hague, 53-71.                 D.C.), 127-31.
 Broo, R. 1933 The Coming of Man, London.            CroweELL, A. L. anp Hircucook, R. K. 1978
 BROTHWELL, D. anv Hicos, E. (eds.) 1969               ‘Basarwa ambush hunting in Botswana’,
   Science in Archaeology (2nd edn), London            Botswana Notes and Records 10, 37-51.
    and New York.                                    Dart, R. A. 1925 ‘A note on Makapansgat:
 Brown, J. A. (ed.) 1971 Approaches to the              a site of early human occupation’, South
   Social Dimensions of Mortuary Practices             African Journal of Science 22, 371-81.
    (Society     for American        Archaeology,    1926 “Taung and its significance’, Natural
    Memoir 25), Washington D.C.                        History 26, 315-27.
 Bunn, H. T. 1981 ‘Archaeological evidence           1948 ‘The Makapansgat proto-human Aus-
   from meat-eating by Plio-Pleistocene Ho-             tralopithecus prometheus’, American Fournal of
    minids from Koobi Fora and Olduvai                 Physical Anthropology 6, 259-83.
    Gorge’, Nature 291, 577.                         1949 ‘The predatory implemental technique
 Bunn, H. T. e¢ al. 1980 ‘FxJj50: an early             of Australopithecus’, American Journal of
    Pleistocene site in northern Kenya’, World         Physical Anthropology 7 (1), 1-38.
    Archaeology 12 (2), 109-36.                      1953 “The predatory transition from ape to
 Burkitt, M. 1963 The Old Stone Age (4th               man’, International Anthropological and Lin-
    edn), London.                                      guistic Review 1.
 CauHEN, D., KEEtey, L. H. AnD vAN NoTEN,            1956 ‘The myth of the bone-accumulating
    F. L. 1979 ‘Stone tools, toolkits, and             hyena’, American Anthropologist 58, 40-62.
    human behavior in prehistory’, Current           1957 Lhe Osteodontokeratic Culture of Australo-
    Anthropology 20 (4), 661-83.                       pithecus Prometheus (Memoir of the Trans-
 Cuarnov, E. L. 1976 ‘Optimal foraging: the            vaal Museum, 10), Pretoria.
    marginal value theorem’, Theoretical Popu-       1958 ‘The minimal bone-breccia content of
    lation Biology 9, 129-36.                           Makapansgat and the Australopithecine
 CuiLpE, V..G. 1928 The Most Ancient East :            predatory habit’, American Anthropologist
    The Oriental Prelude to European Prehistory,       60, 923-31.
    London.                                          1959 Adventures with the Missing Link, New
 1929 The Danube in Prehistory, Oxford.                York.
 Crark, J. G. D. 1979 ‘Archaeology and               1960 ‘The bone tool-manufacturing ability
   human diversity’, Annual Review of Anthro-           of Australopithecus prometheus’, American An-
   pology 8, 1-20.                                      thropologist 62, 134-43.
 Cog, J. L. 1964 The Formative Cultures of the       Darwin, C. R. 1875 The Variation of Animals
    Carolina Piedmont (Transactions of the             and Plants under Domestication, Volume 1
   American Philosophical Society n.s., Vol-            (2nd edn), London.
    ume 54, Number 5), Philadelphia.                 Deacon, H. J. 1975 ‘Demography, subsist-
 Coven, M. N. 1977 The Food Crisis in                  ence, and culture during the Acheulian in
   Prehistory, New Haven.                              southern Africa’, in K. Butzer and G.
 Cotgs, J. M. 1973 Archaeology by Experiment,           Isaac (eds.), After the Australopithecines, The
   London.                                             Hague, 543-69.



Oooo
Bibliography

Downs, J. F. 1966 The Two Worlds of the             lithic in the light of recent discovery’,
   Washo, New York.                                 Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 4, 1-26.
Dumonp, D. E. 1965 ‘Population growth and         GEARING, F, 1962 Priests and warriors (Ameri-
  cultural change’, Southwestern Journal of         can Anthropologist 64 (5), Pt 2).
  Anthropology 21 (4), 302-24.                    GouLp, R. A. 1977 Puntutjarpa Rockshelter and
DunneLL, R. C. 1980a ‘Evolutionary theory           the Australian Desert Culture (Anthropo-
  and archaeology’, in M. B. Schiffer (ed.),        logical Papers, American Museum of
  Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory,     Natural History, 54, Pt I), New York.
   Volume 3, New York, 35-99.                     1980 Living Archaeology, Cambridge and New
1980b ‘Americanist archaeology: the 1979            York.
  contribution’, American Journal of Archae-      Goutp, R. A. (ed.) 1978 Explorations in
  ology, 84, 463-78.                                Ethnoarchaeology, Albuquerque.
EARLE, T. K. 1977-‘A reappraisal of re-           GouLp, S. J. AND Lewontin, R. C. 1979 “The
  distribution: complex Hawaiian chief-             spandrels of San Marco and the Panglos-
  doms’, in T, K. Earle and J. E. Ericson           sian paradigm: a critique of the adapta-
   (eds.), Exchange Systems in Prehistory, New      tionist program’, Proceedings of the Royal
  York, 213-29.                                     Society of London, Series B, 205, 581-98.
FEYERABEND, P, 1978 Against Method : Outline      GriFFIN,J. B., Gorpus, A. A. AND WRIGHT,
  of an Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge (2nd        G. A. 1969 ‘Identification ofthe sources of
  edn), New York.                                   Hopewellian obsidian in the Middle West’,
Finney, B. 1966 ‘Resource distribution and          American Antiquity 34 (1), 1-14.
  social structure in Tahiti’, Ethnology 5 (1),   Har.an,J. R. 1967 ‘A wild wheat harvest in
  80-6.                                             Turkey’, Archaeology 20 (3), 197-201.
FLANNERY, K. V. 1965 ‘The ecology of early        Harris, M. 1979 Cultural Materialism: The
  food production in Mesopotamia’, Science          Strugglefor a Science of Culture, New York.
   147, 1247-56.                                  Harrop, F. B. 1980 ‘A comparative analysis
1969 ‘Origins and ecological effects of early       of Eurasian     Paleolithic   burials’,   World
  domestication in Iran and the Near East’,         Archaeology 12 (2), 195-211.
  in P. J. Ucko and G. W. Dimbleby (eds.),        Hassan, F. 1974 ‘Population growth and
   The Domestication and Exploitation of Plants     cultural evolution’, Reviews in Anthropology
  and Animals, London and Chicago, 73-100.           I, 205-12,
1972 ‘The origins of the village as a settle-     1977 ‘The dynamics of agricultural origins in
  ment type in Mesoamerica and the Near             Palestine: a theoretical model’, in C, Reed
  East: a comparative study’, in P. J. Ucko,         (ed.), Agricultural Origins, The Hague,
  R. Tringham, and G, W. Dimbleby (eds.),           589-609.
  Man,   Settlement   and   Urbanism,   London,   1979 ‘Demography and archaeology’, Annual
  23-93:                                            Review of Anthropology 8, 137-60.
1973 “The origins of agriculture’, Annual         1981 Demographic Archaeology, New York.
  Review of Anthropology 2, 271-310.              Hawkes, C, 1954 ‘Archaeological theory and
FLANNERY, K. V. (ed.) 1976 The Early                method: some suggestions from the Old
  Mesoamerican Village, New York.                   World’, American Anthropologist 56 (1),
FLANNERY,      K. V. anp Coz, M. D. 1968             155-68.
   ‘Social and economic systems in formative      Hawkes, J. 1980 A Quest of Love, London.
   Mesoamerica’, in S. R. Binford and L. R.       Haypven, B. 1979 Palaeolithic Reflections :
  Binford (eds.), New Perspectives in Archae-       Lithic Technology and Ethnographic Excava-
   ology, Chicago, 267-83.                          tions among the Australian Aborigines, Can-
FLEMING, J. 1976 Dating in Archaeology: A           berra.
   Guide to Scientific Techniques, New York.      1981 ‘Research and development in the stone
Focet, I. L. 1963 “The dispersal of copper          technological transitions among hunter-
   artifacts in the late archaic period of pre-     gatherers’, Current Anthropology 22 (5),
   historic North America’, The Wisconsin           519-48.
  Archaeologist 44 (3), 129-80.                   Hemmine, J. E. 1971 The Distribution Move-
Fritz, J. M. and Ptioc, F. T. 1970 ‘The             ment Patterns of Caribou in Alaska (Alaska
   nature of archaeological explanation’,           Department of Fish and Game, Wildlife
  American Antiquity 35 (4), 405-12.                Technical Bulletin, 1), Fairbanks,
Garrop, D. A. E, 1938 “The Upper Palaeo-          Hemper, C. G. 1965 Aspects of Scientific
                                                                                         Bibliography      247
   Explanation, New York.                            1978 “The food-sharing behavior of proto-
Herskovits, M. J. 1955 Cultural Anthropology,          human hominids’, Scientific American 238
   New York.                                            (4), go—108.
Hices, E. S. (ed.) 1972 Papers in Economic          Isaac, G, anD Craper, D. C, 1981 ‘To what
   Prehistory, Cambridge.                              extent were early hominids carnivorous?
(ed.) 1975 Palaeoeconomy, Cambridge.                   An archaeological perspective’, in R.
Hices, E. S, anp JARMAN, M. R. 1969 ‘The               Harding and G. Teleki (eds.), Omnivorous
   origins of agriculture: a reconsideration’,         Primates, New York, 37-103.
   Antiquity 43, 31-41.                             Isaac, G, anv Isaac, B. 1975 ‘Africa’, in R.
Hix, A. P. 1972 Taphonomy of Contemporary              Stigler (ed.), Varieties of Culture in the Old
   and Late Cenozoic East African Vertebrates           World, New York, 8-48.
   (Unpubl. Ph.D. Dissertation, University          Jupcr, W. J. 1979 ‘The development of a
   of London), London.                                 complex cultural ecosystem in the Chaco
Hopper, I. 1977 ‘Some new directions in the            Basin, New Mexico’, in R. Luin (ed.),
   spatial analysis of archaeological data at          Proceedings of the First Conference of Scientific
   the regional scale (macro)’,in D, L. Clarke         Research in the National Parks 3 (National
   (ed.), Spatial Archaeology, London, 223-351.        Park Service Transactions and Proceed-
1982 Symbols in Action, New York and                   ings, 5), QOI—5.
   Cambridge.                                       KEELEY, L. anp Toru, N. 1981 ‘Microwear
Hoeser, E. A. 1949 Man in the Primitive                polishes on early stone tools from Koobi
   World, New York.                                    Fora, Kenya’, Nature 293, 464-5.
Hucues, A. R. 1954 ‘Hyaenas versus Austra-          Kuein, R. G. 1973 Ice Age Hunters of the
   lopithecines as agents of bone accumula-             Ukraine, Chicago.
   tion’, American Journal of Physical Anthro-       1975 ‘Paleoanthropological implications of
  pology 12, 467-86.                                   the nonarchaeological bone assemblage
Isaac, G. 1971 ‘The diet of early man: aspects         from Swartklip I, Southwestern Cape
   of archaeological evidence from Lower and           Province, South Africa’, Quaternary Re-
   Middle Pleistocene sites in Africa’, World          search 5, 275-88.
   Archaeology 2 (3), 278-99.                        1978 ‘The fauna and overall interpretation
1975 ‘Early hominids in action: a commen-              of the “‘cutting 10” Acheulean site at
   tary on the contribution of archaeology to          Elandsfontein (Hopefield), Southwestern
   understanding the fossil record in East             Cape Province, South Africa’, Quaternary
   Africa’, Yearbook of Physical Anthropology 19,     Research 10, 69-83.
  BS ee                                             K.LInpDT-JENSEN, O. 1975 A History of Scan-
1976a ‘The activities of early African homin-         dinavian Archaeology, London.
  ids: a review of archaeological evidence          Kumex, S. 1955 ‘Thestructure of Californian
  from the time span two and a half to one             Indian culture’, University of California
  million years ago’, in G. Isaac and E.              Publications in American Archaeology and
  McCown      (eds.), Human Origins: Louis            Ethnology 37, 1-70.
  Leakey and the East African Evidence, Menlo       Kramer, C. (ed.) 1979 Ethnoarchaeology :
  Park, 483-514.                                      Implications of Ethnography for Archaeology,
1976b ‘Early stone tools — an adaptive                New York.
  threshold ?’, in G. Sieveking, I. Longworth       Kroeser, A. L. 1939 Cultural and Natural
  and K. Wilson (eds.), Problems in Economic          Areas of Native North America (University of
  and Social Archaeology, London, 39-47.              California     Publications     in American
1976c ‘Stages of cultural elaboration in the          Archaeology and Ethnology, 38), Berkeley.
  Pleistocene: possible archaeological indi-        1948 Anthropology, New York.
  cations of the development of language            Kuun, T. 1962 ‘The historical structure of
  capabilities’, in S. Harnard, H. Steklis and        scientific discovery’, Science 136, 760-4.
  J. Lancaster (eds.), Origins and Evolution of     1970 The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (2nd
  Language and Speech (Annals of the New              edn), Chicago.
  York Academy of Sciences, 280), New               KurTen, B. 1976 The Cave Bear Story. Life and
  York, 275-88.                                       Death of a Vanished Animal, New York.
1977 Olorgesailie: Archaeological Studies of a      LamBerc-Karvovsky, C. C. 1975 ‘Third
  Middle Pleistocene Lake Basin in Kenya,             millennium modes of exchange and modes
  Chicago.                                            of production’, in J. A. Sabloff and C. CG.
248   Bibliography

        Lamberg-Karlovsky (eds.), Ancient Civiliz-          Dimbleby (eds.), Man, Settlement
                                                                                          and Urban-
        ation and Trade, Albuquerque, 341—68.               ism, London, 67-93.
      LaviL_e, H., Ricaup,J. P. AND SACKETT,J.            MacNeisu,     R.   S., PETERSON,       F. A.   AND
        Rock Shelters of the Perigord, New York.            Neexy, J. A. 1972 “The archaeological
      Leakey, L. S. B. 1959a “The first men: recent         reconnaissance’, in R. 8. MacNeish (ed.),
        discovery in East Africa’, Antiquity 33,            The Prehistory of the Tehuacdn Valley, Volume
        285-7.                                              5, Excavation    and    Reconnaissance,   Austin,
      1959b ‘A new fossil skull from Olduvai’,              341—495-
        Nature 184, 491-3.                                Mapsen, D. B. 1979 ‘The Fremont and the
      1960 ‘Finding the world’s earliest man’,              Sevier: defining prehistoric agricultural-
        National Geographic Magazine 118, 420-35.           ists north of the Anasazi’, American Anti-
      Leakey, M. D. 1971 Olduvat Gorge, Volume 3,           quity 44 (4), 711-22.
        Excavations in Beds I and II, 1960-1963,          Marks, A. E. AnD FrempeL, D. A. 1977
        Cambridge.                                          ‘Prehistoric settlement patterns in the
      1979 Olduvai Gorge: My Search for Early Man,          Avdat/Aqev area’, in A. Marks (ed.),
        London.                                             Prehistory and Paleoenvironments in the Central
      Leakey, M. D. ann Hay, R. L. 1979                     Negev, Israel, Volume II, Dallas, 131-58.
        ‘Pliocene footprints in the Laetolil, north-      Mason, O. 1883 ‘The birth of invention’,
        ern Tanzania’, Nature 278, 317-23.                  Annual Report of the National Museum 1882,
      Leakey, R. E, 1981 The Making of Mankind,             Washington, D.C.
        London and New York.                              ME trars, P. 1970 ‘Some comments on the
      Leakey, R. E. anp Lewin, R. 1978 Origins,             notion of “functional variability’ in stone
        London and New York.                                tool assemblages’, World Archaeology 2 (1),
      Leg, R. B. 1972 ‘Population growth and the            74-89.
         beginnings of sedentary life among the           MELLEN, S. L. W. 1981 The Evolution of Love,
         'Kung Bushmen’, in B. Spooner (ed.),               San Francisco.
        Population Growth: Anthropological Implica-       MetTzerR, D. J. 1979 ‘Paradigms and the
        tions, Cambridge, 329—42.                           nature of change in American archae-
      LreGros Cxiark, W. E. 1967 Man-apes or Ape            ology’, American Antiquity 44 (4), 644-57.
       Men?, New York.                                    Micuets, J. N. 1973 Dating Methods in
      Leror-GourHAN,      A.   AND   BrREZzILLoN,   M.      Archaeology, New York.
         1966 ‘“L’habitation Magdalénienne No. 1          Miike, W. 1949 ‘The quantitative distribu-
        de Pincevent prés Montereau (Seine-et-              tion of cultural similarities and their
         Marne)’, Gallia Préhistotre, Fouilles et Monu-     cartographic     representation’,   American
        ments Archéologiques en France Métropolitain,       Anthropologist 51, 237-52.
         Tome 9, Fascicule 2, Paris, 263-385.             Movius, H. I. 1948 ‘Old World prehistoric
      Lrero1-GourHAN, A. AND BreziLton, M.                  archaeology, 1948’ (Preliminary report to
         1972 Fouilles de Pincevent Essai d’ Analyse        the Committee on Interrelations of Pleisto-
        Ethnographique dun Habitat Magdalénien              cene Research, National Research Coun-
         (Supplément a Gallia Préhistoire, 7),              cil, Peabody Museum, Harvard Univer-
        Paris.                                              sity), Cambridge, Mass.
      Lorenz, K. 1966 On Agression, New York.             1953 ‘Old world prehistory: paleolithic’, in
      MacNeisy, R. S. 1958 Preliminary Archaeologi-         A. L. Kroeber (ed.), Anthropology Today :
        cal Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,     An Encyclopedic Inventory, Chicago, 163-92.
         Mexico (American Philosophical Society,          1956 ‘The old stone age’, in H. Shapiro (ed.),
         Proceedings, 48, Part 6), Philadelphia.            Man, Culture and Society, Oxford, 49-64.
      1964 ‘Ancient Mesoamerican civilization’,           1975 Excavation of the Abri Pataud, Les Eyzies
        Science 143, 531-7.                                  (Dordogne) (American School of Pre-
      1971 ‘Speculation about how and why food              historic Research, Peabody Museum, Har-
        production and village life developed in            vard University Bulletin, 30), Cambridge,
        the Tehuacan Valley, Mexico’, Archae-               Mass.
        ology 24, 307-15.                                 1977 Excavation of the Abri Pataud, Les Eyzies
      1972 “The evolution of community patterns              (Dordogne) ,Stratigraphy (American School
        in the Tehuacan Valley of Mexico and                of Prehistoric Research, Peabody Museum,
        speculations about the cultural processes’,         Harvard University, Bulletin 31), Cam-
        in P. J. Ucko, R. Tringham and G. W.                bridge, Mass.
                                                                                     Bibliography     249
Munpay, F. 1976 ‘Intersite variability in the       Peake, H. J. AND Fieure, H. J. 1927 Peasants
  Mousterian occupation of    the Avdat/Aqev          and Potters (The Corridors of Time, 3) 5)
  area’, in A. Marks (ed.), Prehistory and            Oxford.
  Paleoenvironments in the Central Negev, Israel,   PERLMAN, S. M. 1980 ‘An optimum diet
  Volume I, The Avdat/Agev Area Part I, Dallas,       model, coastal variability, and hunter-
  113-40,                                             gatherer behavior’, in M. B. Schiffer
Myres, J. L. (ed.) 1906 The Evolution of               (ed.), Advances in Archaeological Theory and
  Culture and Other Essays by the Late Lt.-Gen.       Method, Volume 3, New York, 257-310.
  A, Lane-Pitt-Rivers, Oxford,                      Perkins, D, 1964 ‘Prehistoric fauna from
NeEtson, N. C. 1938 ‘Prehistoric archaeology’,        Shanidar, Iraq’, Science 144, 1565-6.
   in F, Boas (ed.), General Anthropology, New      Peyrony, D. 1930 ‘Le Moustier, ses gise-
  York, 146-237.                                      ments, ses industries, ses couches geolo-
NEweELL, R. R. anp Dextn, A. A. 1978 ‘An              giques’, Revue Anthropologique 40, 48-76;
   integrative strategy for the definition of         155570.
   behaviorally meaningful archaeological           1933 ‘Les industries aurignaciennes dans le
   units’, Palaeohistoria 20 (1), 7-38.               bassin de la Vezere. Aurignacien et
NIEDERBERGER, C. 1979 Zohapilco (Instituto             Périgordien’, Bulletin de la Société Préhis-
   Nacional de Antropologia e Historia,                torique Frangaise 30, 543-59.
   Coleccion Cientifica, 30), Mexico City.          1936 ‘Le Périgordien et L’Aurignacien (nou-
Oakey, K. P. 1953 ‘Culture and the                    velles observations)’, Bulletin de la Société
   Australopithecines’, in 8. Tax, L. Eisely,         Préhistorique Frangaise 43, 616-19.
   I. Rouse, C. Voegelin (eds.), An Appraisal       Ponp, A. W. 1930 ‘Primitive Methods of
  of Anthropology Today, Chicago, 28-31.               Working Stone, Based on Experiments of H. L.
1954 ‘Evidence of fire in South African cave           Skavlem’ (Logan Museum Bulletin 2, Num-
   deposits’, Nature 174, 261-2.                      ber 1), Beloit.
1961 ‘On man’s use offire, with comments on         Popper, K. R. 1959 The Logic af Scientific
   tool-making and hunting’, in S. L. Wash-           Discovery (Torchbook edn), New York.
   burn (ed.), Soczal Life ofEarly Man (Viking      1972 Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary
   Fund Publications in Anthropology, 31),            Approach, Oxford.
   New York, 176—93.                                Potts, R. P. anp SurpMan, P. 1981 ‘Cut-
Ouet, M. Y. 1979 ‘The Clactonian: an                   marks made by stone tools on bone from
   independent complex or an integral part             Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania’, Nature 291,
   of the Acheulean?’, Current Anthropology 20        577:
   (4), 685-726.                                    PruFer, O. H. 1961 ‘Prehistoric Hopewell
O’Ke tty, M. J. 1968 ‘Excavations at New              meteorite collecting :context and implica-
  Grange, Co. Meath’, Antiquity 42 (1), 40-2.         tions’, The Ohio Fournal of Science 61 (6),
1982 Newgrange: Archaeology, Art and Legend,          341-52.
  London (New York 1983).                           Pyxe, H. G., Puttiam, H. R. anp CHarnov,
Ossporn, A. J. 1977 ‘Strandloopers, mer-              E. L. 1977 ‘Optimal foraging theory: a
  maids and other fairy tales: ecological             selective review of theory and tests’,
  determinants of marine resource utiliza-            Quarterly Review of Biology 52, 137-54.
  tion — the Peruvian case’, in L. R. Binford       QUENNELL, M, AND QUENNELL, C. H. B. 1922
   (ed.), For Theory Building in Archaeology,         Everyday Life in the Old Stone Age, New York.
  New York, 157-205.                                RapcuFFE-Brown, A. R. 1958 ‘Historical
Osporn, H. F. 1916 Men of the Old Stone Age,          and functional interpretations of culture in
  New York.                                           relation to the practical application of
1927 Man Rises to Parnassus : Critical Epochs in      anthropology to the control of native
  the Prehistory of Man, Princeton.                   people’, in M. N. Srinivas (ed.), Method in
Parsons, L. A. AND Price, B. J. 1971 ‘Meso-           Social Anthropology, Chicago, 39-41.
  american trade and its role in the emerg-         Ratuye, W. L. 1971 ‘The origin and develop-
  ence of civilization’, in R. F. Heizer and          ment of Lowland Classic Maya civiliza-
  J. A. Graham (eds.), Observations on the            tion’, American Antiquity 36 (3), 275-85.
  Emergence of Civilization in Mesoamerica          1974 ‘The Garbage Project: a new way of
  (Contributions of the University of Cali-           looking at the problems of archaeology’,
  fornia Archaeological Research Facility,            Archaeology 27 (4), 236-41.
  11), Berkeley, 169-95.                            1978 ‘Archaeological ethnography . . . be-
250   Bibliography

        cause sometimes it is better to give than               ‘Efficient exploitation of the archaeological
        receive’, in R, A. Gould (ed.), Explorations            record: penetrating problems’, in C. L.
        in Ethnoarchaeology, Albuquerque, 49-75.                Redman (ed.), Research and Theory in
      Ratyye, W. L. anp McCarruy, M. 1977                       Current Archaeology, New York, 169-79.
        ‘Recycling and variability in contem-                 SuipMan, P., BosLer, W. AND Davis, K. L.
        porary garbage’, in S. South (ed.), Re-                  1981 ‘Butchering of giant Geladas at an
        search    Strategies   in Historical   Archaeology,     Acheulian site’, Current Anthropology 22 (3),
        London and New York, 261—86.                             257-68.
      Reep, C. A. 1969 ‘The pattern of animal                 SILBERBAUER, G. B. 1972 ‘The G/wi Bush-
        domestication in the prehistoric Near                   men’, in M. G. Bicchieri (ed.), Hunters and
        East’, in P. Ucko and G, W. Dimbleby                    Gatherers Today, New York, 271-326.
        (eds.), The Domestication and Exploitation of         Sincer, R. anD Wyner, J. 1968 ‘Archaeo-
        Plants and Animals; London         and Chicago,         logical investigations at the Saldanha Skull
        361-80.                                                 site in South Africa’, South African Archaeo-
      RENFREW, C. 1969 “Trade and culture pro-                  logical Bulletin 23 (91), 63-74.
        cess in European prehistory’, Current An-             Smitu, D. C. anv Hopess, F. M., Jr. 1968
        thropology 10 (2), 151-69.                              ‘The Rankin site, Cocke County, Ten-
      Rick,J.W. 1980 Prehistoric Hunters of the High            nessee’, Tennessee Archaeologist 24 (2), 37—
        Andes, New York and London.                             gl.
      Rotu, H. L. 1887 ‘On the origin of agricul-             SmitH, G. 1847 A Narrative of an Exploratory
         ture’, Fournal of the Royal Anthropological             Visit to each of the Consular Cities of China, and
         Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 16 (2),         to the Islands ofHong Kong and Chusan, New
          102-36.                                               York.
      SACKETT, J. R. 1981 ‘From de Mortillet to               Situ, P. E. L. anp Younc, T. C. 1972 “The
         Bordes: a century of French Paleolithic                evolution of early agriculture and culture
         research’, in G. Daniel (ed.), Towards a               in greater Mesopotamia: a trial model’, in
         History of Archaeology, London, 85-99.                 B. Spooner (ed.), Population Growth: An-
      Sauuins, M. D. 1958 Social Stratification in              thropological Implications, Cambridge, 1-59.
         Polynesia, Seattle.                                  SONNEVILLE-BorDEs, D. DE 1966 ‘L’évolution
      1963 ‘Poor man, rich man, big-man, chief:                 du Paléolithique superieur en Europe
         political types in Melanesia and Poly-                 Occidentale et sa signification’, Bulletin de
         nesia’, Comparative Studies in Society and             la Soctété Préhistorique Francaise 63 (1), 3-34.
         Mstory 5 (3), 285-303.                               1975a “Discours de Mm. Denise de Sonne-
      1965 ‘On the sociology of primitive ex-                   ville-Bordes, président entrant’, Bulletin de
         change’, in M. Banton (ed.), The Relevance             la Société Préhistorique Francaise 72 (2), 35-9.
         of Models for Social Anthropology (Association       1975b ‘Les listes types observations de
         for Social Anthropology, Monograph 1),                 methode’, Quaternaria 18 (1), 9-43.
         London, 139-236.                                     Sout, S. 1977a Research Strategies in Historical
      SANDERS, W. T., PARsons,J. R. ANDSANTLEY,                 Archaeology, London and New York.
         R. S. 1979 The Basin of Mexico: Ecological           SoutH, S. (ed.) 1977b Method and Theory in
         Processes in the Evolution of a Civilization,          Historical Archaeology, London and New
         New York.                                              York.
      Sanpers, W. T. anv Price, B. J. 1968                    STRUEVER, S. AND Hovarr, G. L. 1972 ‘An
         Mesoamerica: The Evolution ofa Civilization,            analysis of the Hopewell interaction
         New York.                                              sphere’, in E. N. Wilmsen (ed.), Social
      SCHALLER, G. B. 1972 The Serengeti Lion,                  Exchange and Interaction (Anthropological
         Chicago.                                                Papers, Museum of Anthropology, Uni-
      Science News 1981 120, 2.                                 versity of Michigan, 46), Ann Arbor,
      ScuiFFER, M. B. 1972 ‘Archaeological con-                 47-19:
         text and systemic context’, American An-             TayLor, W. W. 1948 A Study of Archaeology
        tiquity 37 (2), 156-65.                                  (Memoirs of the American Anthropo-
      1974 ‘On Whallon’s use of dimensional                      logical Association, 69), Menasha,
        analysis of variance at Guila Naquitz’,               1972 ‘Old wine and new skins: a contem-
        American Antiquity 39 (3), 490-2.                        porary parable’, in M. Leone (ed.),
      1976 Behavioral Archeology, New York.                      Contemporary Archaeology, Carbondale, 28—
      ScurrFeR, M.B. anp Ratuye, W. L. 1973                      33-
                                                                                           Bibliography
TRIGGER, B. G. 1980 Gordon Childe: Revolu-             palaeolithic occupation areas’, in C, Ren-
  tions in Archaeology, New York.                      frew   (ed.),   The   Explanation     of Culture
1981 ‘Anglo-American archaeology’, World               Change, London, 115-30.
  Archaeology 13 (2), 138-55.                        1973b ‘Spatial analysis of occupation floors
TRINGHAM, R. 1978 ‘Experimentation, eth-               I: application of dimensional analysis of
  noarchaeology, and the leapfrogs in ar-              variance’, American Antiquity 38 (3), 266—
  chaeological methodology’, in R. A. Gould            78.
   (ed.), Explorations in Ethnoarchaeology, Al-      1974 ‘Spatial analysis of occupation floors II:
  buquerque, 169—99.                                   the application of nearest neighbor analy-
vAN Noten, F. 1978 Les Chasseurs de Meer               sis’, American Antiquity 39 (1), 16-34.
   (Dissertationes Archaeologicae Granden-           WuiTEHEAD, A, N.1953 Science and the
  sis, 18), Brugge.                                    Modern World: Lowell Lectures 1925, New
VAN WIJNGAARDEN-BakKeER, L. H. 1974 ‘The               York.
  animal remains from the Beaker settlement          Wittey, G. R. 1953 Prehistoric Settlement
  at Newgrange, Co. Meath: first report’,              Patterns in the Viru Valley, Peru (Bureau of
  Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy 74C,          American Ethnology, Bulletin 155), Wash-
  313-83.                                              ington, D.C.
VELDER, C. 1963 ‘A description of the Mrabri         Wicuiams, B. J. 1968 ‘Establishing cultural
  camp’, Journal of the Stam Society 51 (2),           heterogeneities in settlement patterns: an
   185-8.                                              ethnographic example’, in S. R. Binford
VincenT, A. S. 1978 East Meets West: an                and L. R. Binford (eds.), New Perspectives
  Analysis of the Development of Early Man             in Archaeology, Chicago, 161-70.
  Studies in East Africa 1919-1978 (Under-           1969 ‘The Birhor of Hazaribagh’, in D.
  graduate Honours Thesis, Australian Na-              Damas (ed.), Contributions to Anthropology :
   tional University), Canberra.                       Band Societies (National Museums of Can-
Vrsa, E. S. 1975 ‘Some evidence of chron-              ada, Bulletin 228), Ottawa, 142-52.
   ology and palaeoecology of Sterkfontein,          WINTER, F, AND BANKHOorr, H. A. 1979 ‘A
   Swartkrans and Kromdraai from the fossil            house burning in Serbia’, Archaeology 32,
  Bovidae’, Nature 254, 301-4.                         8-14.
Wacner, P. L. 1960 The Human Use of the              WIssLER, C. 1914 ‘Material cultures of the
  Earth, Glencoe.                                      North American Indians’, American Anthro-
WALTHALL, J. A., Stow, S. H. anp Karson,               pologist 16 (3), 447-505.
  M. J. 1979 ‘Ohio Hopewell trade: Galena            1923 Man and Culture, New York.
  procurement and exchange’, in D. S.                WitTrFocEL, K. A. 1957 Oriental Despotism :
  Brose and N. Greber (eds.), Hopewell                 A Comparative Study of Total Power, New
  Archaeology, Kent, 247—50.                           Haven.
WasHBurn, S. L. 1957 ‘Australopithecines:            Wirtuort,J.A. 1952 ‘A Paleo-Indian site in
  the hunters or the hunted?’, American                eastern Pennsylvania: an early hunting
   Anthropologist 59, 612-14.                          culture’, Proceedings of the American Philo-
WasHBuRN,    S. L. anpD HowELt,      F. C. 1960        sophical Society 96 (4), 464-95.
  ‘Human evolution and culture’, in S. Tax           1957 ‘The art of flint chipping’, O/zo
  (ed.), Evolution After Darwin, Volume II, The        Archaeologist 6 (4), 138-42; 7 (1), 17-20;
  Evolution of Man, Chicago, 33-56.                    7 (2), 42-6; 7.(3), 80-7; 7 (4), 122-7.
Warson, P. J.,LEBLANc, S. A. AND REDMAN,             WotserG, D. L. 1970 ‘The hypothesized
  C. L. 1971 Explanation in Archaeology: an            osteodontokeratic culture of the Australo-
  Explicitly Scientific Approach, New York.            pithecinae: a look at the evidence and the
Werner, J. A. 1980 The Piltdown Forgery,               opinions’, Current Anthropology 11, 23-37.
  New York.                                          YELLEN, J. E. 1977 Archaeological Approaches
Wenkg, R. J. 1981 ‘Explaining the evolution             to the Present, New York.
  of cultural complexity: a review’, in M. B.        YesneR, D. R. 1980 ‘Maritime hunter-
  Schiffer (ed.), Advances in Archaeological            gatherers: ecology and prehistory’, Current
  Method and Theory, Volume 4, New York,                Anthropology 21 (6), 727-50.
                                                     Zier, G. K. 1949 Human Behavior and the
  79-22 7-                      :           :           Principle of Least Effort, Cambridge.
Wua ton, R.       1973a   ‘Spatial   analysis   of
                                                  Index

                              Numerals in italics refer to illustration numbers

ABRI PaTaAuD 163, 98                                             Alyawara 165-9, 1, 83, 87, 101-8; Ngatat-
Acheulean 74-5, 235, 34-5                                        jara 160, 173, 1, 96, 115, 130; Pintupi 165,
activity areas 146-7, 238, gz; definition of                     99
   148; location of 14.7; men’s house 180, 239;                Australopithecus 31-59, 234; A. prometheus 34;
   modules 138, 147, 172; butchery areas                          see also Kinjanthropus
   169-170, 172, 59-61, 108-9
actualistic studies 62, 194; see also ethno-                   BABOON 60, 234, 17
   archaeology                                                 bear 55
agriculture, origins of 29, 105-6, 108,                        Bennett,J. 221
   193-213; broad spectrum revolution 212—                     big-man systems 218-20, 227-8, 146
   13; Darwinian theory 195-6, 198, 203,                       Binford, L. 7-11, 47, and passim
   240; in Europe 212; Garden of Eden                          Binford, S. 94
   proposition 199-202, 205, 213, 240-1, 26,                   bird 40, 48, 234
   31; gradualism 198-9, 202-3; role of                        Birhor 139-40, 7, 79
   knowledge in 195-7; Mesoamerica 200,                        Blackfoot Indians 116
  202, 212; Near East 198, 200, 202, 211;                      bones, see faunal remains
  North America 200-1, 212; Oasis Theory                       Bordes, F. 83, 87-95, 96, 109, 112, 143, 36-7
  196; packing model 210-13; Peru 202,                         Braidwood, R. 108, 196, 198
  211-12; role of population growth 197-9,                     Brain, C. 43-5, 47-53, 55s 60, 75, 7, 9
  203, 210-13, 240; as prime mover 203;                        Breuil, A. 86, 92
  Propinquity Theory 196; Slug Principle                       Broom, R. 44, 234
  200-1, 203-4                                                 Bushmen 140, 172-3, 226, 26, 82, 111; G/wi
Amsden, C. 47                                                    111, 7; !Kung 23-4, 139, 149, 165, 173,
Anaktiqtauk site 53, go                                          186, 190, 204, 240, 1, 76, 86, 100, 115;
Anaktuvuk Pass (Alaska) 110, 117, 43-6, 53,                      Masarwa 158, 94; Nharo 139, 77, 88;
  69, 85, 90-1, 123                                              Sekele 173
Anaktuvuk Valley (Alaska) 46, 53, 72
Anavik Springs (Alaska) 53, 57, 62; butcher-                   Cacues 118, 135, 183-4, 206, 117-21, 123;
  ing site 137, 169, 188, 58-67; hunting                          meat caches 118, 124-7, 131, 133-5, 184,
  camps 55—6; hunting stand 62; site complex                      204, 56, 62, 64-6, 80
  117-127, 54                                                  Campbell, D. 47
animal bones, see faunal remains                               caribou 55, 117-20, 124, 127-31, 133-5, 137,
antelope 35-6, 54, 57, 234                                       157, 169-70, 188, 207, 211, 44-5, 58-61,
aquatic resources 40, 207, 211-12, 215, 131,                     64-6, 69, 71, 74-5, 108, 125, 131
   136                                                         cat-tails 201-2
archaeological record, nature of 14, 19-20,                    caves 45, 49-50, 60, 62, 74, 11-13; see also
  22,   26-7, 31-2,   76-7,   94,   100,   193,   213,            rock shelters
   230; decoding of 11, 19-20; diagnosing of                   Chellean 34-5
   49, 62, 143; science of 21; translation of 24               chiefdom 9, 194
Archaic period 14                                              Childe, V. 84, 195-8, 203
Ardrey, R. 36                                                  chimpanzee 33
‘artifact and assemblage’ period 84-7                           civilization 29, 214, 230; see also complex
assemblage variability 98, 145, 235; see also                     societies
   Mousterian assemblages                                      Clactonian 35
Aurignacian 83, 87, 163, 34-5, 98                              Clark, G. 83
Australian Aborigines: Central Desert 23,                      classification, see typology
   82, 105, 115, 150, 169-70, 172, 204, 112;                   Clean Lady site 85

                                                         252
                                                                                                     Index   A009
Cohen, M. 203, 213                                    FACILITIES 124, 127, 135-7, 145-8
Combe Grenal go, 38, 41-2, 51                         faunal remains   13, 16, 28, 36, 40, 51-6, 62-2,
complex societies 29-30, 193-4, 198, 239,               65, 68, 70-1, 73-5, 98, 105-6, 120-7, 143,
   242; role of exchange in 219-20, 227-31;             233, 24, 27-8, 30, 32, 59-61, 64-5, 74-5,
   role of monopoly in 215-17; origins of               90, 92; anatomical part frequencies 35,
   214-32; role of redistribution in 217-18,            51-7, 74, 98, 144, 233, 236; bonedensity 54;
   137; role of specialization in 221-4                 bone marrow 57-9, 70, 75, 153, 176, 90;
craft specialization 25, 29, 221-3, 138-43              bone splinters 146, 153, 155, 176, 180, go,
creationism 193                                         117; breakage patterns 55-6, 76, 98;
culture   18, 31, 85, 94; culture contexts      31;     butchery   168-70,    188,   ror,   108-9,     112
  culture traits 31                                      (see also butchery sites); butchery marks
                                                         75-6, 236; concentrations of 62, 70, 72, 18;
Dart, R. 33-8, 40, 44-5, 47, 49, 51-2, 62,               leopard kills 46; scavenging 37, 56-9, 236
   75> 234                                               (see also early man)
Darwin, C. 195                                        Flannery, K. 202, 212-13
Dawn Man 82                                           Fleure, H. 195
deductive reasoning 107                               formation models 11-12, 81, 93, 119, 121
dendrochronology 95                                   formation processes 16, 44-5, 47-50, 56, 60,
Dinotherium 41, 236                                      62, 94, 110, 147, 239
dogs 52-4                                             fox 136
domestication: of animals         193,   211;    of   Fritz,J. 15
   plants, see agriculture
Dunnell, R. 242                                       GARDEN OF EDEN 40, 128; see also agriculture,
dynamics    19-21,    23-6, 49, 55, 62, 78, 94,         origins of
   100—I, [0Q—10, 142-3, 213, 231, 241-2              Garrod, D. 86
                                                      Gausha pan (Namibia) 26, 82
EARLY MAN 7-9, 31—59, 60—76, 79-80, 94;               gazelle 59
  as prey 47, 10; as sociable altruists 5; diet       gemsbok 78, 24, 25
  of 40, 50, 240, 16; division of labor among         Gilgil (Kenya) 17
  42-3, 2, 16; food sharing among 27-8, 36,           giraffe 28, 40, 58
  61, 79, 144, 5, 16; footprints of 28; fossils of    goat 52-3, 211, 226-7
  27, 33-4, 38, 47, 58, 234; home base camps          gradualism 198-9, 202-3, 222, 241
   27, 36, 42, 53, 60-1, 63, 68, 72, 75, 79,          Great Man theory 83
   235, 2, 16; hunting by 27, 34, 42, 55s 79,         guineafowl 28
   234-6; ‘mighty hunter’ 36, 39, 43, 59, 235;
   2; physical characteristics of 27, 79;             HADAR 3
   scavenging by 44, 57-9, 75, 236; use offire        Hard, R. 170
  by 34, 234; use of space by 144 (see also site      Harlan, J. 202
   structure)                                         Harris, M. 221, 241
ecology 13                                            Hassan, F. 202, 213, 240
eland 24, 27                                          Hawkes, C. 16
Elandsfontein site 70, 73-4, 3, 29-32                 Hayden, B. 213, 240
elephant 28, 58-9, 236                                Hempel, C. 196
empiricism 32                                         hide working 13, 30, 134, 137, 172, 11, 247
epistemology 15, 18, 32, 233                          Hill, A. 56
Eskimo 101, 152, 165, 169, 172, 190, 238-9,           hippopotamus 58, 236
   112; see also Nunamiut Eskimo                      historic sites archaeology 104, 234
ethnoarchaeology 7-8, 25-6, 52-6, 104-5,              historical documents 20, 25-6
                                                      history 19-20, 25, 29-30, 194, 240
   109—44, 149-90
evolution: Darwinian theory 195-6, 198, 203,          Hodder, I. 17
   221-2,   231, 240-1; of culture 81-2, 194,         Hong Kong 142
  242, 33-4; of language 27-8; of man 28              horse 40
excavation 7, 22, 26                                  Hottentots 52-3, 3
exchange 29, 217, 227-31, 138, 141-2, 146-7;          Howell, C. 40
  see also reciprocity, redistribution                Hughes, A. 37
experimental archaeology 24, 26, 104                  Hugo, Z. 45
254   Index

      hunter-gatherers 14-15, 29, 68, 109, 105-6,        mental template 31
         109-43, 164, 173, 193, 200, 215, 223, 226,      methodology 21-2, 31, 33, 38, 56, 77-8, 90,
        96-7, 134, 143; importance of mobility             93-7, 104, 106, 108, 110, 131-2, 141-3,
        among 204-8, 130; spatial organization              IQ1, 213, 231, 240
         1og-g1;   see also Eskimo,      Australian      middle range theory 76, 194, 213, 232
        Aborigines, Bushmen, Birhor, Mrabri              Middle Stone Age 75, 236
      hyena 37, 46, 48, 56-7, 59, 63, 65, 68, 71, 234,   monopoly 29, 194, 215, 217, 220, 136
        A Ph,                                            Montelius, O. 9
                                                         morphogenesis 15
      IDEALISM 17, 32, 197-8                             Mousterian assemblages 89-90, 96, 98, 109,
      impala 41                                            37-8; Mousterian period 8, 14, 75, 83, 88,
      inference in archaeology 15-17, 22, 32, 49,          90, I00-I, I12, 235-6, 238, 34-5, 51;
         76-8, 100, 104, 106, 108, 142-3, 145, 147,        Mousterian problem 75, 79-93, 106, 108,
         WG keyaas S S 3)                                  143-4,    191, 237,   239
      inter-site variability, see spatial organization   Movius, H. 163
      intra-site variability, see spatial organization   Mrabri     161, 7, 96
      irrigation 194
      Isaac, G. 41-3, 61-2, 6, 18                        NASKAPI INDIANS 115
                                                         National Geographic Society 40, 227
      Jemez INp1aAns 187                                 natural sciences 20, 22; see also science
                                                         Navajo Indians 24, 53-5, 150, 172, 1, 14, 84,
      KANGAROO 168-9, 204-5, LOI, 103-5                     126, 139
      Keeley, L. 76                                      Neanderthal Man 79-80, 82, 136, 208
      Klasies 3                                          Negev (Israel) 235
      Klein, R. 56                                       Nelson, N. 83
      Kongumuvuk site (Alaska) 133-5, 137, 62,           New Archaeology 7—9, 15-16, 106-8
        64-5, 70-1, 85                                   Newgrange (Ireland) 16, 80
      Koobi Fora 61, 75, 236, 3, 6                       Niederberger, C. 202
      Kroeber, A. 92                                     Nossob River 3, 19, 27
      Kromdraai 3                                        Nunamiut Eskimo 8, 17, 24, 55, 169, 172,
      Kruger National Park 37                               204-8, 237-8, 1, 43, 108, 131; settlement
                                                            system 110-42, 49-52; site structure 146-7,
      LaBnd (Mexico) 135                                    153, 156-8, 174, 176-86, 188-9, 80, 8&5,
      ‘ladder of reliability’ 16                            89-91, 109, 115, 117-23, 125
      lake trout 127
      Leakey, L. 38-41, 44, 57                           Osjectivity 18, 213, 232-3
      Leakey, M. 38-9, 57                                O’Connell,J. 168-9
      Leakey, R. 41                                      okapi 40
      least effort principle 202, 221                    O’Kelly, M. 16-17
      LeBlanc, S. 15                                     Olduvai Gorge 27, 38, 40-1, 43, 57-8, 61,
      leopard 37, 45-7; 51, 53, 60, 65, 10, 12              236, 3, 4; site FLK 41; site FLK 22 40; site
      Leroi-Gourhan, A. 147, 158-9, 180, 87, 92,            FLKNN3 41; Oldowan material 41, 57
        95, 415                                          Olorgesailie 38, 235
      Levalloisian 35                                    optimal foraging theory 221-2
      lion 35, 37, 56-7, 59, 65, 70, 28                  Osborn, H. 82
      Little Contact Creek (Alaska) 53, 72               ostrich 63
      Lorenz, K. 36                                      owl 48

      MacNeisy, R. 113                                   PALAEOLITHIC PERIOD: Lower 14, 33, 74, 86;
      Magdalenian 84, 158, 34-5                            Middle 36, 79-80, 86 (see also Mousterian
      Marxism 15, 17, 193, 203, 217                         period) ;Upper 86-7, 163
      Makapansgat 34, 47, 51, 53-5, 234-5, 3             palaeontology 22, 37
      Mask site (Alaska) 135, 156, 158, 89, gr           Palangana site (Alaska) 184-5, 66, 80
      Mason, O. 83                                       Palangana’s house 176-88, 80, 117-22; craft
      materialism 17                                       area in 180-1, 183, 185, 119-21; daylight
      meat caches, see caches                              centered activities in 180, 185; distribution
                                                                                                 Index   i) i)
  of bone splinters 117, 121; distribution of     ‘relic and monument’ period 80-84
  flint chips 178, 121; formation models for      rhinoceros 58
  180-5, 179, 121; hearth centered activities     rock shelters 74, 162, 238, 17, 96
  in 180, 185; men’s side 180, 183; sleeping      Rosetta stone 24
  areas 183, 186, 179, 121; women’s side          Roth, H. 195
   180-1                                          Rulland, J. 108
Panama City 145                                   Russian palaeolithic sites 127-8, 237, 63
Panch Pera camp 79                                Ryukyu islands 726, 129, 132-3, 138, 140-1
pattern recognition techniques 97
Peake, H. 195                                     SAHLINS, M. 194, 215, 217-20, 230
Perlman, S. 201                                   scavenging 13, 56—9; see also early man, faunal
Perkins, D. 211                                      remains
Perthes, B.de 83                                  Schepers, G. 44
Peyrony, D. 87, go, 92                            Schiffer, M. 147, 189, 190, 238
philosophy of science 15, 106                     science 18-19; in archaeology 15, 21
photographs, use in archaeology 26, 150           sedentism 29, 200, 202-3, 205, 212, 217, 226,
pig 40                                               128-30
Piltdown (England) 82                             Seri Indians 139-40, 78
Pincevent (France) 158-9, 92-3, 95                settlement systems 109-43, 131; ‘becoming
Pithecanthropus 82                                   territory 114, 52; ‘courting territory’ 114,
Pitt-Rivers, General 9, 81-2, 33                     52; ‘birth territory’ 114-15, 52; inter-site
plausibility 74-6, 193, 231                          patterns 13; lifetime cycles 114-17, 131,
Pleistocene 54, 56, 69, 74, 236; see also early       205-6, 210, 52; residential core area 110,
   man, Palaeolithic period                           112, 142, 49-52
Plog, F. 15                                       site features 145; beds 160-5, 176, 238,
political philosophy 29-30                           96-100, 119; bone dumps 157, 164, 190,
political power 194, 215, 217, 220, 231, 242,        90, 99, 122; bone juice dumps 155, 90;
   136                                                bone splinter dumps 146, 155, 176, 180,
Popper, K. 77-8                                       184, 80, 85, 117; door dumps 164, 177, 85,
population growth 193, 208-10, 224, 130;              100, 117-18, 122; hearths 119-20, 124,
   Malthusian theory of 203; role in origins of      128, 130,   133-5,   142,   147,   149-64, 172-4,
   agriculture 197-9, 203, 210-13, 240; role          176, 178, 180-1, 183-4, 190, 238, 56, 59.
   in origins of complex society 224                  61, 68, 81-2, 84-5, 88-9, 91-9, 106, 113- 22:
porcupine 48                                          household middens 146, 85; roasting pits
positivism 15, 107                                    165-72, 187, 101-10, 112; shelters. 172-86,
post hoc accommodative arguments 17, 61,              191; skin drying weights 133-4, 70-1
    147, 193, 213, 232, 240, 81                   site function 110-43, 145, 18
pottery 24, 95, 222, 140                          site structure 144-92; distribution of ash
Powhatan Indians 136                                  157-8, 94, 107; effects of body mechanics
pre-Chellean 34, 35                                  on 145, 173; effects of bulk processing on
predators 45-7, 55, 57, 60, 63, 65, 68, 234-5,        187-8, 191, 124; effects of environmental
   12; see also under species name                   variables on 172, 174, 185-7, 190-1; effects
primates 27-8, 60-1, 65; see also early man          of site maintenance on 188-90, 125; effects
progress, concept of 81—3, 85, 233                   of turn-over rates on 187, 191; models of:
                                                      butterfly distribution 176, 75, 776; circular
RADIOCARBON DATING 22, 95, 104                       walk/work area 169, 59-61, 104, 108-9,
Rankin site, Tennessee 147                            112; drop zones 153, 155-6, 174, 176-7,
Rathje, W. 147                                        89-90; extensive standing-up work areas
reciprocity 219, 224, 226-7                           165-72; group seated workers 150, 152-3,
reconstructing the past 31-2, 78                      158, 163, 172, 174, 180, 87, €5—6, 32, 90,
redistribution 194, 217-20, 230—-I, 241, 137;         121; single seated worker 149-56, 163,
   role of environmental diversity in 217-18,         172, 82-4, 94; sleeping areas 160-3, 172-3,
                                                      180, 183-4, 81, 96-8, 119, 121; toss zones
   137
Red Lake, Arizona 126, 139                           153, 155-7, 174, 176-7, 190, 89-90, 93;
Redman, C. 15                                         10g, 116; site framework 145-7
refuse 189-90, 239                                site types: base camps 131, 145, 163, 235
256   Index

         (see also early man); butchery sites 62, 118,    Taung 33, 234-5, 3; Taung baby 33
         120, 133, 137, 188, 18, 58-9, 61, g0, 125;       taxonomy, see typology
         drive lines 127-8, 131, 135, 66-8; hunting       Taylor, W. 9, 31-2
         blinds 128-31, 68; hunting camps 118-20,         Thomsen, C. 80
         124, 144-5, 153, 156, 163-4, 55-6; hunting       Tiburon island (Mexico) 78
         stands 130-1, 133, 135, 188, 65, 69-72; kill     toolkit 147-8, 238
         sites 62, 118, 120, 124, 188, 57, 59, 62, 64,    tools 20, 28, 34, 36, 39-40, 44, 57, 68, 75, 109,
         90, 125; lovers’ camp 118-20, 56; pro-               112, 120, 129-30, 133, 135, 144, 168, 236,
         cessing sites 120-24, 133-4, 137-8, 58, 71,         239, 240; bone tools 36, 39, 41, 84, 234;
         74-5; soldier rocks 127-8, 66-7; special-           see also stone tools
         purpose 133-8; see also caches                   tortoise 40
      sheep 53-4, 207-11, 126                             trade, see exchange
      social organization 25, 28, 136-7, 143-5;           tree oflife 92, 39
         chiefs 217-19; ranking 217, 223; see also        Tulugak Lake (Alaska) 135, 143, 53, 117,
         big-man systems, complex societies                  122; site complexes at 127-31, 47, 53, 66-8
      ‘social philosophers’ 15, 17-18, 233                Tulukkana site (Alaska) 137-8, 74-5
      social sciences 21, 29                              turtle 40
      social stratification 194, 223, 145                 typology 77, 80-1, 84, 87-8, 90, 93-4
      Solutré (France) 80
      Solutrean 83, 34, 35                                VULTURE 63
      spatial analysis 13, 76, 98, 238; see also
                                                          Wacne_R, P. 145
         settlement systems, site structure
                                                          Washburn, S. 40
      Spaulding, A. 107
                                                          Washoe Indians 120
      springbok 63, 27
                                                          waterholes 60, 62—5, 68, 70, 74-5, 20, 22-3,
      statics 19-20, 23-4, 100-1
                                                             Lge bai
      Sterkfontein 44, 3, 8
                                                          Watson, P. 15
      stone tools 24-5, 27-8, 34, 40-2, 55, 57-8, 62,
                                                          Whallon, R. 97, 238
        68, 70, 74, 84, 87, 95, 96, 98, 105, 124, 129,    Whitehead, A. 145
        143, 150, 235-7, 18, 30-1, 34, 37, 42, 83;        wildebeest 63, 20-4
        alternating   industries   90, 94, 38; con-
                                                          Witter, D. 48
        centrations of 62, 72, 74-5, 18; hand ax
                                                          Wittfogel, K. 194
        70, 80, 86, 30; parallel phyla 90, 92, 35;
         spatial patterns of 153, 178, 180, 87, 18,       Witthoft, J. 96
         121; tenacious cultures g1, 943 see also tools   wolf 55-6, 135-6, 73
      storage 215, 12g                                    Woodland period 14
      structuralism 15, 17                                Workman, R. 47
      Swartkrans 47-8, 3, 8, 9, 12                        Wright, H. 97
      systems theory 203                                  YELLEN, J. 138-40, 186, 190, 238, 76, 78;
                                                            ring model of 139-40, 76-8
      TARAHUMARA INDIANS 170, 112
      Tasmanians 83                                       ZINJANTHROPUS 38-9, 44, 57
a
~1eae
   Peemnoaiey                 Mp
   esa ie                     AS
         Mylo error
       d)      is“
   Of ener
  Hee  Air

  i vile 4
               , anata




                                                                                                                                                                       +,
                                                                                                                                                                      . no Ge
                                                                                                                                                                        ieHe1G

                                                                                                              2) os                 le
                                                                                                                                          SG
                                                                                                                                          at!                    i,         SIG
                                                                                                                                                                                        of
                                                                                                                                                                                        M5Gs
                                                                                                           Aide       Mees           LA                                     ey
                                                                                                          ‘{tials iors eters die                                                   i Wie
                                                                                                        Aanatates         LARA                    VGA           aCe    POR        eee          eeu

                                                                                                                                                           PP
                                                                                                                                                            tg!Set ae


                                                                                        acgie RUN
                                                                             PI GNi “a ipie       DN
                               aA               ony           er     as                f           ‘
  hoe taraioe ie
   ie ees
                  th Be
              ie ee ee See                                                wee                 eae aioe Maat tates
           Mate                                               HG ORLC500
                                                        FW Ipens               eMC              ORT SeAtOKC a                 Tae        Ot                es
   cay Posie                           Parte?         sic a                      -              Cpe                                 BATH                Ais Dheat Ge
 i e
Lib     Otte
            aM saa
                SI settee enki
                           he
                                      eOtly &ped4yn9!RAGies: ree
                                     yHie
                                                                te
                                                                   eect ss 2 iy         rot
                                                                                WoW GMaTOC RH Sen PLheaihPet adahy
                                                                                                               ae alat OPUe Te    CFTC
   4             ties
                         15
                            “ fito : f eat
                                   a       i,
                                          Cp     oH
                                                   1     faiee-        4
                                                                        iy
                                                                           fl
                                                                             i
                                                                               ae
                                                                                   ii
                                                                                            dae               le
                                                                                                                   oa, eer
                                                                                                                          Mie “ECU
                                                                                                                               ee
                               ca        ; ines                    Mesa    7   aie                Lite i it              Popes           é Roa)             z
                                f           leOAR                  2°,

                                                                                                          Moines
                                                                                                           Yen
                                                                                                       hat             tCZf
       letters if                                                                               antfa
         oie:                                                                                     pon




                                                                               Ne ihg5 Hie me
                                                                               $2 ale yop
