to view the past as a saga of man’s emergence from the realm of beasts into the
human domain, the Neanderthalers were usually depicted as the creatures which
exhibited the first gliimmerings of our modern interest in aesthetics (i.e. art and
religion), behaviors far removed from the dominant basic concerns characteristic
of our bestial ancestors. In the more recent literature, particularly that produced
by our biologically oriented colleagues, the Neanderthalers are considered to be
a racial variant of fully modern man; they are not uncommonly assumed to be
similar to us in behavioral terms, since the origins of such very human behaviors
as speech with true language are thought to have occurred prior to their appear-
ance. Given this last perspective, speculations regarding our evolutionary history
are therefore commonly focused on eras preceding the Middle Palaeolithic of the
Neanderthalers.                                                       -
   While it is true that there have been differing views regarding the behavior of
Neanderthalers (a ‘What was it like?’ question), it was not in fact this diversity
of opinion which stimulated the controversy and research which I will discuss in
this chapter. Here I want to consider the problem of the Mousterian (the archaeo-
logical name for the period associated with Neanderthal man, about 125,000 to
30,000 years ago), a problem which arose out of strictly archaeological, methodo-
logical concerns. It represents a different kind of discussion from that presented
in Part I, For instance, the controversies examined in Chapters 2 and 3, regarding
whether early man was a hunter and whether he lived in base camps and shared _
                                                                     7


                                       79
80   The Challenge of the Mousterian

     food, concerned the contents of the archaeological sites in question and whether
     they were exclusively attributable to the behavior of early hominids. Once this
     hurdle could be negotiated, there was little else of methodological concern
     relevant to these issues. The challenge for early man studies was quite simply:
     how do we know the past? The debate which centered around Neanderthal man
     had different historical roots, since it arose out of archaeological research per se.
     In addition, the discussion has been based on dissimilar units. With early man the
     focus was on the behavioral interpretation of the associations recorded among
     many kinds ofthings at individual sites; the Mousterian problem, however, arose
     in the context of controversy regarding the meaning of variability observed within
     a single class of items recovered at many sites, Furthermore, it arose because
     increasingly complex patterning among the formal taxonomic units used by
     archaeologists was recognized for the Middle Palaeolithic.



     The ‘Relic and Monument’          Period


     From the very beginning of archaeology, two basic questions have remained
     fundamental: (1) how do we describe in formal terms the variability in things
     remaining from the past and (2) how is the observed variability distributed
     chronologically and geographically? In the early days of archaeological work
     many things, relatively speaking, were collected, but the context of the finds was
     not well documented. Archaeologists could classify and recognize similarities and
     differences among artifacts and constructions — that is, organizations of matter
     which were clearly referable to the hand of man. These things were known as
     ‘relics and monuments’: a hand ax, a bronze spear, Stonehenge, the spectacular
     passage grave of Newgrange in Ireland, and so on. As archaeologists worked to
     discover the distributions of the various classes of finds, they found that certain
     properties of these materials yielded distributional results, while others, at any
     given stage of research, seemed to show less recognizable patterning. For instance,
     in the early, seminal work of C. J. Thomsen in Denmark it became clear that the
     type of raw material from which tools were manufactured exhibited significant
     chronological patterning; hence, the Ages of Stone, Bronze and Iron were born.*
     In Palaeolithic research it began to emerge that the design of tools within a single
     category ofraw material was meaningful both in a chronological and geographical
     sense. Hand axes seemed to occur only in certain types of geological deposits and
     in association with certain types of fauna. On the other hand, retouched pieces,
     such as those recovered from Solutré in France, occurred in very different
     geological and faunal contexts,
        The attributes which seemed to exhibit chronological and/or geographical
     patterns were isolated as indexes to ages and areas. The model for this type of
                                                              The Challenge of the Mousterian   81




                                                      he
                                         MUSHROOM   CLUB




                                                    i]
                                                    fel
                                                    i!|
                                       i
                                      a|
                                                                                         oo.




             BOOMERANG                                                                               aqu3iHs




        LEANGLE




                                                                                    ONIMOBHL
                                                                                    WOILS




     WAR
     OR
     MALGA
     PICK



he                                                    LANCE




33 General Pitt-Rivers’ proposed reconstruction of evolutionary lines of development
from the simple stick to more complex tool types: a characteristic 19th and early 20th
century view of the past. (Reproduced with permission from Myres 1906, pl. 111.)



approach was the obvious success achieved in geology and palaeontology, where
index fossils could be shown to be diagnostic of different ages and eras in the
earth’s history. Linked with the belief that taxonomic study involved the dis-
covery of natural order in archaeological data was the idea that man’s past was
characterized by progress. The idea of progress is perhaps most clearly stated in
the writings of General Pitt-Rivers, one of the ‘fathers’ of archaeology, at least in
the English-speaking countries:
     The task before us is to follow .. . the succession of ideas by which the mind of
     man has developed, from the simple to the complex, and from the homogeneous
     to the heterogeneous; to work out step by step... the law of contiguity by which
     the mind has passed from simple . . . states of consciousness to the association
     of ideas, and so on to broader generalizations.”
82   The Challenge of the Mousterian

         At first for most archaeologists the sequence of man’s development towards
     civilization was also a logical, progressive, evolutionary sequence from simple to
     complex. It was a playing out of a logical succession in which one piece of know-
     ledge conditioned the next, and so on, General Pitt-Rivers epitomizes this
     approach.° In ill. 33, for example, we see the origin of a variety of industrial
     ‘phyla’ in a simple unmodified stick. Under one set of initial modifications we
     can monitor a progression leading to the Australian shield, while under another
     set of initial conditions a second sequence leads to the war club and so forth. When
     viewed in this manner, mankind was seen as progressing through a series of
     interdependent stages of progress. Since the sequence was thought to be dependent
     on serial order, all mankind should have proceeded through the same series of
     stages. Variability in the modern world was seen as representing various degrees
     of arrested development, such that some contemporary peoples had become
     stabilized in stages which had been passed through by other peoples at a much
     earlier period, This view of cultural evolution justified the common practice of
     fleshing out prehistory by drawing heavily on descriptions of contemporary
     primitive societies. For example, in order to recreate Neanderthal man’s way of
     life, the Australian Aborigines were frequently used as a model. I quote from a
     wonderful little book written from a classical, cultural evolutionary perspective
      based on the assumption of progress (Everyday Life in the Old Stone Age, published
     in 1922):

       We must search for some primitive people living under similar conditions, and
       at about the same stage of civilization as the Mousterians, and see if we can
       draw some useful comparisons. The aborigines of Australia are such a people.’

        Within the intellectual climate in which the idea of progress dominated, there
     were several other important points of view which were sometimes maintained
     independently and at other times were merged in various ways into a kind of
     generalized vitalism. The concept of emergent process saw the evolution of man
     as resulting from the realization of his potential, assumed to be an essential quality
     or intrinsic ‘spark’ which grew and developed in slightly different ways under
     differing biological or physical environments. For instance, in accepting the
     (fake) jaw® found at Piltdown in England in 1908 as evidence that our very early
     ancestors possessed a larger brain than Pithecanthropus (which at that time was
     thought to have been younger in age), Henry Fairfield Osborn and others were
     lead to the following type of conclusion:

       If Pithecanthropus is truly of mid-stone age, as now appears, it must be regarded
       as a surviving primitive type of Dawn Man sequestered in the forests of Java.
       ... This survival of a primitive type of man shut off from competition with
       more vigorous types is by no means a unique occurrence, because we still find
                                                      The Challenge of the Mousterian

  many very primitive types of humanity living in remote and isolated parts of
  the earth, such as the Tasmanian     natives.”

In line with this view, the linkage of evolutionism with a kind of racism was also
not uncommon; and other elitist ideas besides were mustered to explain the
differential achievements of man. For instance, the ‘great man theory’ (which
sees progress occurring by virtue of the behaviors of especially gifted individuals)
was common in the past and is still very much a part of archaeology, as is well
illustrated in comments made by Francois Bordes as recently as 1969:

     . intelligence and creative intellect ought not to be confused. The latter is
  rare, even today, and it appears that one can deduce from the history ofdiverse
  civilizations that the proportion of creative intellects is, cultural conditions and
  the pressures of environment being constant, a function of the total number of
  individuals. Then it is possible that generations among Palaeolithic peoples
  which were not very numerous have come and gone, within the same group,
  between the appearance ofcreative intellects. Progress then has been slow even
  though the populations may have been intelligent and have put to good use
  the data already acquired.'°

This view is also accepted by Grahame Clark who wrote in 1979 that ‘the course
of history has been shaped less by popular heresies than by the original thinking
of outstanding men.”"
   In the early days of prehistoric archaeology, regardless of the exact theory
which one preferred for explaining how things came to be, few questioned the
progressive view of man’s past. Given such a perspective, the goal of archaeology
was, logically enough, the discovery of the actual sequence of progressive change.
In 1893 Otis Mason, addressing the founding fathers of American archaeology,
said: “The most profitable inquiry [of archaeology] is the search for the origin of
epoch-making ideas in order to comprehend the history of civilization.”!* Much
the same aim and understanding of archaeological goals was stated by N. C.
Nelson half a century later: ‘... our science is called upon to demonstrate the
time and place of origin of all the principal inventions and to trace their spread
over the world.’!°
   By the first quarter of the 2oth century Palaeolithic archaeologists considered
many of these goals to have been achieved. The Old Stone Age was conceived in
stages. The earliest period, that of the ‘Drift’, represented by open-air sites
located along river beds, was characterized by heavy core tools, the hand axes
which had been discovered by Boucher dePerthes to reveal man’s great antiquity,
The next state of cultural development was the Mousterian period or the era of
‘cave men’, typified by tools made on flakes and most commonly retouched on
only one side. The Mousterian was followed by the Aurignacian, Solutrean, and 34
84   The Challenge of the Mousterian




                                                         BLADE
                                                       CULTURES




                                                 4      Ea
                     MousTERIAN                      FLAKE     CuLTURE
                                                                               vA



                                                           Core            |
                     CHELLEAWNL
                                                       CULTURES
                                                                           |

                   "EVOLUTIONARY                         MopEel
                                                                               LoKedS:


     34 Model of cultural evolution as conceived by prehistorians during the late nineteenth
     and early 2oth centuries. The names of periods are listed on the left, the major tool types
     correlated with them on the right.




     Magdalenian periods during which men lived both in caves and in the open, made
     stone tools on blades but also used bone, antler and ivory, and practiced art and
     ritual, !*+


     The ‘Artifact and Assemblage’ Period"®

     If early Palaeolithic archaeology can be characterized by its concern with how
     relics and monuments       indicated    the relative achievements       of mankind,     the
     subsequent ‘artifact and assemblage’ period saw increased concern for the
     classification of artifacts and the description of assemblages, defined as aggregates
     of associated artifacts thought to be contemporary. The character of assemblages,
     in turn, was thought to be referable to identifiable ethnic peoples. The spirit of
     this view can perhaps best be summarized by this famous statement written by
     V. Gordon Childe in 1929 for the introduction to his book, The Danube in Pre-
     history:
                                                          The Challenge of the Mousterian     8 0)c


                 Flake        Peyuum           Core         PHYLUM




                   SOLUTR     EAN



                  AURIGNACIAN ~—


                  Mouse RIAN’ Em                      EXTINCTION


                 “Sete rerinl a                ACHEULEANL




               ANA                             sacl

                 PaRALLEL <asTE petil
                                                                       LR.              =


35 Model ofparallel phyla as popularized by prehistorians after c. 1930. Different cultural
groups, represented by particular types of stone tools, were thought in some cases to be
contemporary, rather than to follow each other in a strictly evolutionary sequence (as in
ill. 34).


   We find certain types of remains — pots, implements, ornaments, burial sites,
   house forms — constantly recurring together. Such a complex of regularly
   associated traits we shall term a ‘cultural group’ or just a ‘culture’. We assume
   that such a complex is the material expression of what would today be called
   a ‘people’.16

   The idea  of ethnic history, of course, was not new and had been debated since
at least the turn of the century in contexts younger than the Old Stone Age.'’ In
Europe there were several theoretical positions regarding the role of pure races,
versus what today we would call hybrid vigor, in stimulating progress. Similarly,
there were considerable differences of opinion regarding the inventiveness of
man. Some scholars thought that man was extremely conservative and innova-
tions were rare, while others considered that since man reacted to the same
stimuli in similar ways, one could expect many inventions to be made independ-
ently at different times and places. In general, those who believed in pure race as
the mediator of cultural progress saw man as uninventive and hence expected to
86    The Challenge of the Mousterian

      find cultural traditions to be highly stable and to have great time depth. On the
      other hand, those who took a more liberal view saw man as relatively creative and
      envisaged culture as being subject to change from within as well as from diffusion
      of ideas from outside ;hence they felt it was difficult to trace cultures back in terms
      of pure lines.
         These arguments, combined with the generalized growth of various historical
      schools of interpretation, had little significant impact on Palaeolithic research
      because the study of the Old Stone Age seemed to demonstrate progress according
      to stages of cultural growth. In other words, the empirical materials seemed to
      be in tune with the older evolutionary ideas: arguments against evolutionism
      seemed irrelevant for students of the Palaeolithic. This was all changed, however,
      when in the early 1930s the Abbé Breuil'® advanced his views that parallel phyla
      (or, in more modern terms, major cultural traditions) existed contemporaneously
      during the vast time spans of the Old Stone Age. The impact of Breuil’s ideas is
      well illustrated by a statement made in.1938 by Dorothy Garrod:

        In the old system, the Palaeolithic cultures appeared as a straightforward
        succession with clear-cut horizontal divisions as in a diagrammatic geological
        section. For the pioneers of prehistory these cultures developed logically one
        from the other in an orderly upward movement, and it was assumed that they
        represented world-wide stages in the history of human progress. Today pre-
        history has suffered the fate of so many of the component parts of the orderly
        universe of the nineteenth century. New knowledge has given a twist to the
        kaleidoscope, and the pieces are still falling about before our bewildered eyes.
        The main outline of the new pattern is, however, already beginning to appear.
        We can distinguish in the Old Stone Age three cultural elements of primary
        importance. These are manifested in the so-called hand-axe industries, flake
        industries, and blade industries, and we know that the first two, at any rate,
        run side by side as far back as we can see, and we are beginning to realize that
        the origins of the third may have to be sought much farther back than we had
        suspected, Only a moment of reflection is needed to see that we have here the
        old divisions of Lower, Middle and Upper Palaeolithic, but with a new axis;
        we must be careful, however, not to make these divisions too rigid. In fact, these
        culture streams do not run parallel and independent; such a view of human
        history would be absurdly artificial. They are perpetually meeting and in-
        fluencing each other, and sometimes they come together to produce a new
        facies.1°

         This statement by one of Britain’s most eminent prehistorians demonstrates
 35   nicely just how revolutionary Breuil’s ideas were. It is interesting that, while there
      was certainly opposition to this radical reinterpretation of our past, ‘parallel
      cultural phyla’ became the orthodox view rather rapidly. Furthermore Breuil
                                                      The Challenge of the Mousterian   87
elaborated his notion of the past by suggesting that the independent cultural
traditions exhibited somewhat contrasting distributions with respect to time and
environment:

   . . we find biface industries alternating with flake industries, The flakes come
  before and after the peaks of cold and the bifaces in the interglacial periods, It
  seems reasonable to deduce that this alternation was due to the movements of
  human groups which as the glacial conditions came on, followed the animals
  they hunted to the south and west.?°

It did not take long before an equation was made between these contrasting
traditions and the belief then current that different forms of ancient men were
contemporary:

  It will appear that during the earlier part of Pleistocene times. . . two different
  races occupied the area. At first industries belonging to a flake tool culture
  (Cromerian) appear, but later in the west the Chello-Acheulian culture,
  spreading up from Africa and belonging to the core-tool civilization swept the
  board ... with the coming of the last glacial maximum the coup-de-poing
  makers retired from the scene and cultures belonging to the flake-tool civiliza-
  tion occupied the whole area.*"

The view that there was a ‘flake-tool tradition’ manufactured by neoanthropic
forms (hominids ancestral to modern man) contemporary with a ‘core-tool
tradition’ produced by a palaeoanthropic form (which did not contribute to our
immediate ancestry) was popular in the 1930s and 1940s and was still widely
discussed during the 1950s.?”
   In 1936 D. Peyrony extended the reasoning about parallel phyla to the Upper
Palaeolithic. He argued that what had previously been designated Aurignacian
in the scheme of de Mortillet was more appropriately viewed as two different
cultural traditions, the Aurignacian proper and the Perigordian.”* His argument
was widely accepted and remains the basis for much of the classification of French
Upper Palaeolithic artifacts.”*



The Tree of Life


Following a reorientation in the way a science views its subject, there is usually a
change in the methods and approaches used in classifying or ordering observa-
tions. In the case of Palaeolithic studies, the work of Frangois Bordes has been        36

instrumental in this regard.?° Bordes developed both the most widely adopted
system for classifying stone tools, as well as the techniques used for describing
assemblages quantitatively. His quantitative summaries of the forms of stone
88    The Challenge of the Mousterian




                                                              36 Francois Bordes on a trip
                                                              to Australia, 1974.


      tools found together in excavated levels became the primary units of comparison,
      and from this work came assemblage-based systematics of the archaeological
      record, In addition, Bordes argued that the techniques used in the manufacture of
      stone tools should be treated independently of the actual forms of tool design. The
      latter attribute was manifested in such traits as relationships between the orienta-
      tion of the original flakes, the shapes of the working edges and the orientation of
      the working edges relative to the form of the flake on which the tools were pro-
      duced. In opposition to design traits, the techniques used in the production of
      flakes were argued by Bordes to be conditioned by the character of the raw
      materials available in different places and therefore of little utility for recon-
      structing culture histories, for detecting the emergence of distinct peoples, or for
      studying social interaction among separate cultural groups of distinct peoples.?°
         With these points in mind, Bordes energetically set about the study of previ-
      ously excavated materials and also began a series of long-term excavations”’
      which were to change considerably our views of the past. Using his standard list
      of types, he could classify all the tools recovered from a recognized archaeological
      level. The frequencies of the various tool types could then be summarized by
      means by a cumulative graph.”* When the shapes of these graphs for sites of the
      Middle Palaeolithic Mousterian period were compared, Bordes recognized what
 37   seemed to be a repetitive pattern: there appeared to be just four basic forms of
                                                                                                                 The Challenge of the Mousterian                                       89




           MOoOUSTERIAN
           ASSEMBLAGE                                                       TYPES




                                                                                     CHARENTIAN                  — >
                                                                                          GRoUP




                                                                    7YPICAL-
                      Fs                                 )          MOoUSTERIAN                          9-O
                                                                                                    oo


                                                                                     cy
                                                                                     V
                                                                                ef                                              |
                                                                           O°             MousTERIAN               oF     ||
                                                                           ta              ee               7RAD.
                                                                       1
                                                               0S




                                                               =           a


                               ae                   GRENAL                 LAaveR         /2 (Ez)



   12345678       9   iol!   i213   415   \617   16819   eee   wera          26 27 26 29   503)   32 35 34-35
                                                                                                            356 57 3639 404) 42 43 44 454647
                                                                                                                                          48 49 50 5) 52   535455 5657   SB SO G06!   62 63

  : Points        / Sipe            ScrRsaPERS               TRANS-                        |)UPPER  PaLeo,|                    |Nor|       UTM
                                                             \veese!                           Group        |                  |DEnt       IZEO

                                                             Wee            List             of      F.’ Borepes
                                                                                                                                                             4.2    Sinroro




37 Graphic definition of Bordes’ Mousterian assemblage types. The tool types are listed
along the horizontal axis. A plot of the cumulative percentages of each tool type within an
assemblage generally conforms to one of the four major shape categories. The controversy
that resulted from these data was about the meaning of the four distinctive curves.
              s



graph represented by many examples, with only a few judged to be ambiguous
or intermediate cases. The four types of Mousterian recognized by Bordes can be
summarized as follows:
  1 Mousterian of Acheulean Tradition
  This assemblage is generally recognized by the presence of hand axes, moderate
  numbers of side scrapers, many denticulates and notches, and a distinctively
  high frequency of backed knives. The distinctive shape of the graph is a low
  curve,
gO    The Challenge of the Mousterian

        2 Typical Mousterian
        This type generally forms a diagonal graph (because most of the tool types are
        present in roughly equal proportions). It differs from the Mousterian of
        Acheulean tradition primarily in the rarity of hand axes and the lower frequen-
        cies of backed knives and other tool types analogous to common Upper
        Palaeolithic types.
        3 Denticulate Mousterian
        The distribution ofthis type normally comprises a low, concave graph, because
        there are few scrapers but many notches and denticulates. Hand axes are rare
        to absent; scrapers are poorly made; and backed knives are rare.
        4 Charentian Group
        A final group of assemblages is recognizable by a high, convex graph dominated
        by scrapers, Denticulates and notches are infrequent, while hand axes and
        backed knives are rare to absent. Bordes recognizes two subtypes of the
        Charentian: (a) a Quina type in which the scrapers are typically transverse in
        form and the Levallois technique is rare to absent; and (b) the Ferrassie type
        characterized by scrapers produced on the sides of flakes and by the frequent
        presence of the Levallois technique.

      In current terminology I would label Bordes’ early studies as ‘pattern recognition
      work’, because he defined and refined in an ordered manner the properties of
      things which he could systematically observe. He then made many observations
      about the archaeological record and recognized structure in the data.
         What shocked some archaeologists at the time was the nature of the patterning
      which began to emerge from the application of La Méthode Bordes*?. An observa-
      tion made previously (and both verified and clarified by the application of Bordes’
      methods) was that the stratigraphic sequence of changes in the forms of stone tool
      assemblages was not necessarily directional, nor did it appear to represent either
      gradual or transformational patterns of change. This had been observed for the
      Mousterian by Peyrony,°° but was forcefully demonstrated by Bordes, particu-
      larly through his excavations at the now famous site of Combe Grenal.*! Using
      his techniques Bordes showed the existence of three characteristics of the data
 38   which were

        1 Alternating Industries. Throughout a long stratigraphic sequence with
        successive levels of beds, one type of Mousterian, for instance Typical, might
        be followed in time by Denticulate, but then a still later level would yield a
        Typical Mousterian assemblage again. In this pattern the types of Mousterian
        assemblage maintain their distinct identity through time, but alternate with
        one another in various ways through particular sequences.
        2 Parallel Phyla. Seen from the perspective of the region as a whole, however,
        the different types of Mousterian preserved their identity through long spans
                                                           The Challenge of the Mousterian        91



               ACHEULEAN     TRAD.
              ACHEULEAN      TRAD.
               ACHEVLEAN     TRAD.
              ACHEUL EAN     TRAD.
              ACHEULEAN      TRAD.
              ACHEULEAN      TRAD.
                   TYPICAL
                   TYPICAL
                   TYPICAL
                   TYPICAL
           DENTICULATE
           DENTICULATE
      -BvVOVoHNsuUn-
      UP DENTICULATE
      B DENTICULATE
      iS   DENTICULATE
      16   DENTICULATE
      \7
      18




                         FERRASSIE                                ComBeE        GQRENAL
                   TYPICAL                                   SECTION  ON       14 MereER     Line
                   TYPICAL
                  TYPICAL                                              SCALE   IN METERS

                   TYPICAL
                         FERRASS/E
                                                                                   LR   BINFORD




38 Archaeological section from the Mousterian site of Combe Grenal in France, illustrating
alternating assemblages.




  of time and they co-existed as recognizable cultures.** The implication was
  that when they were absent in the sequences of one site, they would be repre-
  sented in the patterns seen at some other contemporary site.
  3 Tenacious Cultures. The patterning uncovered by Bordes could be further
  described   as indicative     of tenacious   cultures:   that is, forms of behavioral
  organization represented relatively unchanged in the archaeological record
  over long periods of time. These different assemblage types were also unaffected
  by contact with other equally distinct cultures which were present in the same
  general area.
92   The Challenge of the Mousterian

        The general view ofthe past produced by the use of Bordes’ methods supported
     the picture proposed by Peyrony and argued by the Abbé Breuil, namely that
     there were different cultural lines which extended far back into antiquity.** These
     lines or phyla maintained their formal integrity much as biological species do and
     therefore were not capable of hybridizing readily with different ‘species’. The
     distribution of these cultural species ebbed and flowed back and forth across
     geographic space, resulting in archaeological deposits in the form of assemblages
     which might alternate with others and which might come and go in the same
     region through time. The concept of assemblages as representing cultural species
     has recently been.characterized as the organic view of the past:

       Culture history can be regarded and accounted for in essential organic terms.
       This notion more specifically entailed two unspoken assumptions. The first was
       that a direct parallelism exists between the cultural and organic worlds of such
       a kind that we can expect to find a one to one correlation between archaeo-
       logical and natural stratigraphy. The second was that any given cultural com-
       plex, like any given paleontological complex, should be more or less invariant
       in the manner in which it expresses itself. This last means that the cultural
       entities recognized in archaeological systematics are to be regarded as natural
       categories, which — in the manner, say of organic species — are inherently dis-
       continuous and do not modify their form from one context to the next. It
       follows that a specific tradition should give rise to but one characteristic type of
       industry in any specific block of time and space in the archaeological record.**

        So, in spite of his major refinements of method resulting in the demonstration
     of patterning in the archaeological record with a level of accuracy never before
     achieved, Bordes’ innovations were nevertheless integrated within an older view
     of culture and the past compatible with a biological model: the tree of life, as
     A. L. Kroeber aptly called it.



     The Present: A Conflict of Views


      It was the crisp patterning, developed and demonstrated with Bordes’ refined
      techniques of observation and description, that really forced myself and others to
      recognize that the view of the past to which the archaeological record was being
      accommodated by our French colleagues was in conflict with the general notion
    _ of culture developed by Americanist scholars through the study of modern, native
      peoples in the New World. This difference has been described by Americans as a
 3) contrast between the organic view, illustrated by the tree of life, and the cultural
      view, represented by the tree of culture. The cultural view had been derived by
      researchers studying the spatial distribution of traits and complexes among known
                  “               a“

                      ORGANIC                     FCoLCTOURAL.
                      MopEelw                       Move       LW


          39 Comparison of organic and cultural views of the past in terms of
                the ‘Tree of Life’. (Based on Kroeber 1948, fig. 18.)




ethnic and social groups across vast regions of North America. One result of this
work, for instance, was the finding ofa strong correlation between the distribution
of distinctive cultural forms and kinds of environment,’> but archaeologists
working with the materials studied according to Bordes’ methods have generally
denied that such correlations might have occurred in their data.*° In addition,
American anthropologists have found it difficult to distinguish regional boun-
daries between social or ethnic groups.°’ Variability among such socially defined
units tended to be graded across many groups, rendering the recognition of
ethnically distinct groups a nearly impossible task. In marked contrast, ethnic
distinctiveness was considered by those holding the organic view to be character-
istic of past peoples. In summary, there was a direct opposition between the views
of culture underlying Bordes’ techniques of archaeological analysis and those
based on observations of the distributions of things produced by ethnic groups in
the modern world.
   At this point a critical question had to be faced: was the past so different from
conditions documented in the modern world, or were there characteristics of the
way we look at the past which created an image in our minds different from what
we saw in the modern world? It was of vital importance to know what meaning
had been assigned to the observations made on the archaeological record when
using Bordes’ procedures for description. In short, what was Bordes’ taxonomy
The Challenge of the Mousterian

actually measuring and what was really indicated by the contrasts in assemblage
composition seen at different sites? In 1966, together with Sally Binford, I
suggested conditions which — if they had obtained in the past — might have led to
some of the forms of patterning observed by Bordes.** Our work at that time was
based on the realization that this inconsistency between views of the past de-
manded research designed to investigate the way the archaeological record was
formed and to identify the kinds of variability that are derived from different
forms of systems dynamics. These issues are pursued further in the next chapter.
   The history of research in the case of the Mousterian is very different from the
disputes about early man (Chapter 2), in which research quickly became orien-
tated towards understanding the archaeological record in terms of the conditions
which brought it into being. The Mousterian problem was less clearly about
method, since the techniques used by Bordes were accepted by most as being very
sophisticated and were therefore seen as the methodology. The patterns revealed
through the use of Bordes’ approach were considered to be empirical and hence
not subject to question. The conflict did not lead to a scramble for methods which
could be used in support of one’s interpretations of the past. The meaning to be
given to the patterning seemed to follow from the data in a self-evident fashion.
There were tenacious cultures and alternating industries: how could this be
disputed? As more and more archaeological patterning was demonstrated at a
higher and more rigorous level of documentation, it gradually became apparent
that the patterning illustrated over and over conflicted with one view of the
nature of cultural variability. Only when the archaeological record was made to
‘speak’ through the improved descriptive procedures of Bordes did the previously
hidden conflict between the views of culture guiding the methods of Bordes on
the one hand, and the concepts derived from descriptions of American Indian
material culture on the other, become apparent. The recognition of fundamental
differences in assumptions about the archaeological record, as well as about
culture itself, was therefore prompted by the emergence of the Mousterian
problem.
   While the discussion about early man has a certain theatricality involving
frequent argument and ‘playing to the wings’, research on the Mousterian
problem has been relatively quiet. Nevertheless, it too is likely to havea substantial
impact on archaeology in general: for with the Mousterian controversy we are
engaged in questioning our basic ideas, those related to the very nature of culture.
                         2)
            An Archaeological Odyssey

Discovering the Past

Those of us who began our careers in archaeology in the late 1950s and early
1960s were trained in rather traditional ways. Most of our teachers had spent
their careers trying to solve chronological problems by studying changes in artifact
forms and various types of sequential arrangements of material, largely without
the aid of stratigraphical information, So the minimal methodological training
that I and my age grade received involved learning how to compare assemblages
and arrange them in series, in the hope that such series somehow reflected time.
Seriation was emphasized over stratigraphy, because there was a myth abroad
at that time — at least in eastern North America — that there were few or ne
stratified deposits.‘ Archaeological methodology was almost exclusively con-
cerned with questions of chronology.
   What changed all that and led some of us to start making noises in the late
1950s was the invention and application of radiocarbon dating, Many of us
thought that C14 would solve, once and for all, most of the traditional problems
of chronology to which our teachers had devoted so much effort. And if those
problems were at least partially solved, then it would become possible to use
archaeological remains in a more economical fashion.” That is, if chipped stone
tools and pottery and the other artifacts archaeologists study had so far been used
only to solve a chronological problem which could now be solved simply by
analyzing lumps of charcoal, what was to be done with all the artifacts? There
must be other kinds of information to be extracted.? The breakthrough in radio-
carbon dating was not the only factor involved: other dating techniques (such as
dendrochronology), a renewed interest in geology, and the late recognition that
there did in fact exist good stratified sites in North America were also important.
But our response to all these changes was to begin to look for ways of getting new
information about the past and about subjects other than chronology itself.
   In retrospect, I think that much of the work in those early days followed a
strongly inductive strategy. We reasoned that if we wanted to know about the
past in new ways, we would have to work out new ways of looking : as the invention
of the microscope had shown, if a new way of looking is found, then lots of new

                                        9). =                          r
An Archaeological Odyssey

facts will be seen and, in principle, those new facts should refer to new kinds of
phenomena, That, at any rate, was our early idea. So I began to work, for
example, on mortuary practices.* Similarly, although it now sounds amazing,
there was little experimental work by Americans with chipped stone tools at that
time; John Witthoft was really the only American archaeologist in my prede-
cessor generation who had done any experimentation on the manufacture of
stone tools.* I started to try thinking of lithic assemblages in terms of reduction
sequences, examining the by-products all the way from raw material to the
production of finished tools.° Stimulated by Witthoft’s work I began to play
around with techniques for the analysis of   lithic waste.’ But all these approaches
were a search for new ways oflooking, for ways of isolating new kinds of facts from
the same old material. At that point we never thought to ask ‘How do we give
meaning to what we see?’; we looked only to see new things. We were optimistic
that we would somehow ‘know’ their meaning.
   It was in that context that I began to write about sampling in archaeology*
and about the potential applications of probability and statistics to the excavation
and analysis of archaeological materials. But far more important, as it turned out,
were two new kinds of problems that I became involved in. The first of these was
the question of the origins of agriculture,’ an old problem that archaeologists had
already discussed for years. This was essentially a question of explanation: how
and why did it happen? In Chapter 8 I will discuss this type of problem as well
as my current thinking about how it could be solved.
   The other problem was something rather different: it concerned the meaning
to be given to variability in the archaeological record and, specifically, to the
variability isolated in the European Mousterian industries by Francois Bordes
(Chapter 4). This was something I became very familiar with in the early 1960s
and argued about long and hard before anything was ever published, because it
seemed to me that this was an altogether new kind of problem. The argument was
not about the nature of the archaeological record. Most of us knew the archaeo-
logical facts, the sites themselves and what had been found in them; we trusted
Bordes and had no argument with his typology. What we were arguing about
was something quite different — the meaning of the patterning demonstrated to
exist in the archaeological record. Before the Mousterian problem arose, this kind
of difficulty had not been faced squarely (or certainly not in my own studies of
burials, chipped stone, and so on). As a student, I can now see, most of the
arguments I had learned were about the conventional interpretation of archaeo-
logical finds. Someone might say, for instance, ‘I’ve found a site at X and a site
at Y, both of the same date, so I think there ought to be another one somewhere
in the middle at <’; then someone else would say ‘No, I don’t think there’s one
at <°. Almost all the conversations and arguments in which I had participated
were of this kind, concerned with the character of the archaeological record. The
                                                          An Archaeological Odyssey   97

Mousterian argument, at least as I conceived of it, was something very different.
   Yet even though I recognized this distinction, I still tried to work towards a
solution of the problem through discovery techniques. As I knew that further
excavation could not solve the problem, I thought it might be possible to solve
it by analyzing in a different way the material that already existed. So I began to
explore what I now refer to as ‘pattern recognition techniques’, using multi-         40
variate techniques which help us to isolate and recognize patterns that in one
way or another are inherent in the data of the archaeological record.'° I was
pleased with the strategies for pattern recognition we began to apply early in the
1960s, not only to Mousterian finds but to many other areas besides : Bob Whallon,
Henry Wright and several others were all using and exploring these approaches
for a wide variety of archaeological material.'! But the basic argument, of course,
did not go away. It just got more intense.


40 Bordes’ initial response to
the functional argument for ex-
plaining assemblage variability
in the Mousterian. The pro-
cedure followed by the Binfords
is simple: pour stone tools into
one end of a computer and
Neanderthal man walks out at
the other end! (Cartoon drawn
by Pierre Laurent on the inside
cover of an offprint by de
Sonneville-Bordes 1966).           2




                                                                              or]
                                                                              youve
                                                                         oe ° 000

                                                                       DANA
                                                                       gn ee
                                                                        #00   See
  98

        The Facts do not Speak for Themselves

        In 1967 I received funds’? to go to Europe for a year to work more closely with
        Bordes in Bordeaux. My program for research was the following. If we could not
        study the chipped stone directly, perhaps we could study faunal remains and the
        horizontal distributions, on excavated archaeological floors,'* of both fauna and
        chipped stone. Then it might be possible to relate variability in the lithics to these
        other properties of the archaeological sites in question, properties that had not so
        far been studied systematically. Different kinds of activity, I reasoned, must have
        combined in different ways to produce these assemblages, so there should be some
        sort of correlation between at least some activities and some ofthe by-products of
        food consumption (e.g. animal bones); equally, there should exist some form of
        relationship between some, if not all, of the tools related to the procurement,
        processing and consumption of animals, I worked for a year in France, identifying
sy ee   and plotting all the stone tools and animal bones by anatomical part and by
        breakage pattern.
           Then began the first of awhole series of disillusionments. When the sites were
        excavated, it turned out, each stone tool had been plotted using three-dimensional
        spatial co-ordinates, so that they could be plotted horizontally and vertically in
        order to reconstruct their distribution on past ground surfaces; the bones, on the
        other hand, had been collected only by level. The quality of the data was high,
        but not high enough to allow me to analyze one type of information in the same
        units I was using to analyze another one. It was possible to run cross-correlations
        between whole faunal assemblages and whole lithic assemblages, but not to look
        for distributional correlations between bone and stone within levels. Nevertheless,
        I performed one correlation study after another — so many, in fact, that I needed
        a great steel trunk in order to carry all the papers back to the United States. I
        could tell you cross-correlations between any pair of Mousterian tool-types,
        between tools and bones, between bones and the drip-lines in cave sites, between
41, 42 Examples of work sheets from
the Combe Grenal research con-
ducted in France in 1968. Ill. 41
(above) is a plan of part oflevel m at
the site. Ill. 42 (left) is a graph
summarizing a factor analysis of
Combe Grenal tool assemblages, in
relation to independent measures of
environmental change.
100   An Archaeological Odyssey

      almost any type of data you care to name. What I found, of course, was many new
      facts that nobody had seen before. But none of these new facts spoke for them-
      selves, just as the initial facts had not. By generating more and more facts and by
      detecting more and more patterns, I had simply increased the scope of the
      problem without reaching any solutions. None ofthe correlations carried sufficient
      information to tell us why they were that way: they simply stood as increasingly
      complex patterns ofstatic association in the archaeological record.
          It is important to realize that it was with such a wealth — not a dearth — of in-
      formation that it gradually began to dawn on me that none of the approaches I
      had followed possessed any explanatory potential. None of them was likely to tell
      me what meaning should most appropriately be associated with any ofthose facts.
      My metal trunk was so big and heavy that I decided to return home by boat and
      that five-day trip from Le Havre to New York gave me an opportunity for some
      disconsolate self-reflection. The whole project was obviously a total failure. What
      had I done wrong? What had I not done that I should have done? Could it really
      be that archaeologists simply cannot learn anything about the past? Where was
      I missing the real problem?
          I still have at home a little notebook in which I made a logical outline of my
      thoughts, starting from some really fundamental concepts: a sort of Lecture to
      Myself. (Many of those thoughts have been incorporated into Chapter I.) The
      first heading says ‘What zs the archaeological record?’.Underneath I wrote “The
      archaeological record is static’, and there follows a long series of jottings to the
      effect that (excluding earthworms) there is nothing dynamic in the archaeological
      record itself. Now what we are interested in about the past is dynamics: what
      people did, how they lived, whether they competed or collaborated. Here, then,
      is the basic and fundamental problem, one not unique to the Mousterian period
      but endemic to archaeology — how can we make inferences from statics to
      dynamics? Lower down, my outline says “The archaeological record is contem-
      porary; it exists with me today and any observation I make about it is a con-
      temporary observation’. Yet of course it is the past that interests us as archaeolo-
      gists. Thinking about that, it seemed to me that archaeologists must be among the
      world’s biggest optimists. Unless we know the necessary and determinant linkages
      between dynamic causes and static consequences, how can we ever justify an
      inference from one to the other? The dynamic aspect of the past is long gone.



      The Contemporary World Offers a Solution?

      By the time we steamed into New York City, just before the New Year of 1969,
      some of the answers to these problems were suggested, at least in my thoughts.
      I prepared a research proposal to go to the Arctic in the spring of 1969 to live
                                                           An Archaeological Odyss ey      IO]




43 Young Nunamiut Eskimo girl wearing her parka with a wolverine ruff and a colorful
cloth over-cover; Anaktuvuk Pass, Alaska, 1971.




with a group of Eskimo hunters. My reasons for going there were little more
specific at that stage than that it could hardly fail to be a good educational
experience. If I was ever to be able to make accurate inferences from archaeo-
logical facts, I was convinced that I had to understand the dynamics of living
systems and study their static consequences.
  The Eskimos were my choice, however, for several good reasons. In the first
place, in Bordeaux I had studied reindeer bones from Mousterian sites to the            43, 44
point where I thought I never wanted to see another one, but here was an
opportunity to study a living group of people who were still hunting the very
same animal that I had studied archaeologically. Secondly, it was possible to           740)
study a group who were still almost entirely dependent on hunted foodstuffs,
something which is no longer very easy to observe in the modern world. Thirdly,
their environmental setting was Arctic and thus not dissimilar from that of the         46
French occupation sites I had studied (which contained little arboreal pollen
                                                                                                                                        NCOBMIavD ANIaNnsaAcy
                                                                                                                                         VWasay   PNINIVD               OABH
               DNIAtIWvD Vauy
           xI1Ld=aw   nogiavySG2ABH




                                                                                                                                                                           Ki          D[
                                                                                                                                                                                 WAT        ¥
                                                                                                            :f                                                                              =
                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                              i Al
                                                                                                                                       a             ,
:              ‘                                     aefee                                            \          afi                                                   =—
    a     D119     oan                                                                                           a.
                                                                                                                                                         eS
          SALNIM SONVS                                                                                           a
                                         )4 A>“pe                                                 ~   op      a                      ro) <<                            ee
                                                                                                                                                                      ——
                                            a             =              =                                    ne                                              =
                                                                                                              ae               b Nie?                                               vaay.
                                                                    Le                                 <==,                    _      oaiect arian                          ao      avy     AVLSd
                                                                                                                               =-aa3
                                                                                                                                      aSnva              .

                                                                   ADVW3209               HLAON                  VASWAy
                                                    HNIMOCHS AadNA¢g VAY
                                                                       7                                                 NOINaIaAsigQ                    .
        is 2             i                                           Jo                 NOSBIav\D FSAAAH                                                          e        X
                   NIA        va
        7                    ae                                                            amr-~wlS                                                      ae
         TO         SNIadS             NoLvabip                                                                                                                   Stwis
                                                                                                                                                                     340           vaewWy
        —s         rt              cat              f°)       cE      O9     O06   OZ    OG!    OBI   OIZ   Oe    OCLZ   COS   SBN
                   b>
                                                              :aL0opy wivgNo                     NoGiavD              LNSWNSAC=:
                                                                                                                             NANVL WoOad             DSNINWSH
                                                                                                                                                          \L61
                                                                                                                                                                               Y'T7         CHAOINID


                                  FF      deyJo     yys0u          vyseTy     Surmoys
                                                                                  ay)          UoTLd0]
                                                                                                  Jo             YNANIYyeuYy
                                                                                                                      sseqUT     UOHLIed
                                                                                                                                    0} ay}                  JO
                                                                                                                                                         UONNAINsIp HOGHe ‘Sproy
                             Ar = Archaeological Odyssey   103




45     Zacharias     Hugo
skinning a caribou in
Anaktuvuk Pass during
the   spring    migration.
(Photo courtesy of Robert
Rausch.)

46 (Below) View toward
the    southeast    across
Anaktuvuk Valley from
just north of the Eskimo
village of Anaktuvuk Pass,
Alaska, Spring 1971.
104   An Archaeological Odyssey

      indicative of a wooded landscape). In short, I was led to the inescapable con-
      clusion that there existed no way to develop archaeological methods ofinference,
      except via the study of contemporary living peoples, or by controlled experiments
      under laboratory conditions, or by doing archaeology in situations whose dynamic
      component is historically documented. ‘Ethnoarchaeology’, ‘experimental
      archaeology’, and ‘historic sites archaeology’ seemed to me to be the only chances
      we have for the development and perfection of methods of inference dealing with
      humanly-generated artifactual material. Work in experimental physics, after all,
      had resulted in the techniques of radiocarbon dating — techniques that are not
      strictly speaking archaeological, but which are of great value to archaeologists.
      So, too, these three approaches were not developed specifically for the purpose of
      developing an inferential framework for archaeology, but could certainly be
      useful in that way.




      47 Crew from the 1969 field season at Tulugak   Lake, Alaska.   Left to right: Richard
      Workman,   Charles Amsden, Don Campbell and Lewis Binford.
                                                             An Archaeological Odyssey   105




48 Dan Witter collecting bones from Eskimo meat caches during the 1972 field season.



    I spent several seasons, in the period from 1969 to 1973, doing ethnoarchaeology
in the Arctic (Chapters 6 and 7), many of the results of which are now published 47
in my book Nunamiut Ethnoarchaeology.'* Much_of this research was concerned
with animal exploitation and faunal analysis, but I also wanted to return more 48
directly to the problems of interpreting lithic assemblages; so in 1974 I| travelled
to Australia'> to work with some aboriginal people who were still manufacturing
stone tools for their own use (Chapter 7). One spin-off of this work was the re-
kindling of my earlier interest in the origins of agriculture (Chapter 8). That
fieldwork experience of living with hunters and gatherers had convinced me that,
if we wanted to get good models and explanations for agricultural origins, we had
to understand accurately the range of variability — ecological, economic, social —
in the organization of hunting and gathering peoples; it was on this range of
variability, after all, that some kinds of selective forces operated to bring into
being new kinds of production involving agriculture and domesticated animals.
This led me to begin in 1971 a long-term project to accumulate comparative
ethnohistorical and ethnological information on the world’s hunters and gatherers,
106   An Archaeological Odyssey

      concentrating in particular on how they vary in their organization with environ-
      mental factors.
         So there have been three main themes in my research throughout the 1970s:
      (1) methodological studies of animal bone assemblages (Chapter 2); (2) the
      spatial organization of activity debris and the structure of archaeological sites
      (Chapters 3, 6, and 7); and (3) comparative studies of hunters and gatherers on
      a worldwide basis. All three relate back directly to the two problems mentioned
      earlier — the origins of agriculture and the question of variability in the Mous-
      terian, Interest in the early time periods has developed out of my faunal studies.



      Nonsense and the New Archaeology

      Those who are familiar with the archaeological literature of the past fifteen years
      will perhaps have noticed something odd in the chronology of the research pro-
      gram I have just outlined. One of the landmarks in the development of the so-
      called ‘New Archaeology’ was the publication in 1968 of the volume of essays
      entitled New Perspectives in Archaeology. It made quite an impact and generated a
      lot of discussion in the early 1970s. Most of the ideas and work by my colleagues
      and students that appeared in it came into being earlier in the 1960s and certainly
      before I left for France to work on the Mousterian, The publication of the book
      was roughly coincident with the major switch in my own work towards
      methodologically oriented research: just as it appeared in print I took a right-
      angle turn and went off on another tack. All the time I was away doing fieldwork
      or analyzing the results, I tended to avoid many of the arguments that were
      common in the archaeological literature of the 1970s. I stood on the sidelines
      and watched some of the themes and arguments I or my colleagues had introduced
      picked up and sometimes taken in directions I really did not think they ought
      to go.’® So it is perhaps not inappropriate to consider briefly how I viewed the
      relationship between my own research program and some of the things that
      happened to the New Archaeology in the USA during the 1970s.
         It was in a paper published in 1967 that I began to discuss the logic of the
      philosophy of science in relation to archaeological research.'’ At that time, I was
      simply trying to make a negative point, an argument against particular viewpoints
      that were then current about the interpretation of the archaeological record. My
      claim was that when one looks at a body of archaeological data and says ‘This is
      what it means in historical terms’, an inference is already being made. The only
      appropriate strategy I could see for evaluating an idea which one already had
      was to deduce consequences of it for further empirical conditions that might exist
      in the world. It was assumed, however, that some set of ideas about the past was
      already in existence.
                                                            An Archaeological Odyssey    107

   What happened was that certain archaeologists followed this line of reasoning
by doing a little reading in the literature of logical positivism and then claimed
that we should all do research following deductive principles. I do not understand
this suggestion, and I never have! I think the way we do research is that we look
at data, we recognize patterns, and we have flashes ofinsight, or bright ideas, or
simply revive worn old notions that have been around for years; but wherever
ideas come from, we try to give meaning to what we see. We should do so by using
the form oflogic which concentrates on the implications of our ideas for the real
world. This is the important place for deductive reasoning, It has to be stressed,
however, that this is not to say that it is in this way that ideas are obtained in the
first place, nor that a deductive form of logic is to be used when talking about
observations per se, rather than the evaluation of ideas. As an example of the sort
of confusion that exists, I might cite a research proposal I evaluated for the
National Science Foundation in the early 1970s, The authors of the proposal
proclaimed that they followed the ‘logico-deductive method’ of doing archaeo-
logical research. They intended to survey the such-and-such river valley. Their
hypothesis was that camps existed along the levees and deduced from it that there
must therefore be artifacts to be found on the levees. The proposed field program
was intended to test this hypothesis. Obviously, this is complete nonsense; it is a
proposition about the character of the archaeological record which, if correct,
would tell us only about the author’s good judgment.’® Suppose (to give an
analogy) I hypothesize that this book is 6 inches wide and it does indeed turn out,
when we take a ruler and measure it, that it is 6 inches wide. The fact that I was
right has no intellectual implications whatsoever, except for my ability to judge
the width of books accurately. Deductive reasoning is only important if evaluating
some intellectual implications derived or deduced from a body of ideas, an
argument. Empirical propositions, such as the examples I have just given, never
have such implications.
   This, then, is one aspect of the New Archaeology that is somewhat confusing
and the way in which the question was presented and argued in much of the
American archaeological literature has, I feel, been counter-productive. I would
be the last to deny the importance of deductive reasoning. But while I probably
have to shoulder some of the blame for the poor arguments about deduction and
hypothesis testing that were so prevalent in the 1970s, I should like to think that
I’m not entirely responsible.
   Some comment is also called for on the confusing and slightly disagreeable
sociological aspects of American archaeology in the aftermath of the upheavals
of the 1960s. I suppose I must take some blame for these also, since — as Albert
Spaulding once commented — I’m the oldest new archaeologist in town. In the
early 1960s I scored some successes in arguing with my colleagues and fellow
archaeologists. It was our ‘opponents’, not we, who coined the term ‘New
108   An Archaeological Odyssey

      Archaeology’; Robert Braidwood went so far as to call it a religion. The result
      was that many other young archaeologists, modelling themselves on some of the
      successes of the 1960s, felt they had to define a still newer kind of archaeology:
      Behavioral Archaeology, Social Archaeology, Astroarchaeology, and so forth.
      Much time and energy has been spent in recent years arguing about these new
      ‘fields’. Personally, I have tried to avoid such debates, for they do not concern
      serious proposals within a scientific discipline, but rather a form of sociological
      posturing within the organization of American archaeology. They have confused
      the archaeological literature, especially for those who are not themselves involved
      in archaeology in America. So this is an aspect of the New Archaeology from
      which I should like to dissociate myself.



      Ultimate Concerns


      In a nutshell, then, this is the path my research has taken over the last two
      decades, a path often divergent from that of the New Archaeology itself. It reflects
      what I believe should be the priorities in the development of the field of archae-
      ology. I believe very strongly that we need a robust methodology for making
      inferences and that so far we do not generally have one. Archaeology has not been
      a science: it grew up with a rag-bag series of conventions which most archaeolo-
      gists, at one time or another, have used for ‘interpreting’ their finds. Most such
      conventions have never been tested and we simply do not know whether they are
      valid and useful. Just around the corner are other methods which I think will
      allow us to make much more accurate and interesting statements about the past.
      Such methodological research is obviously crucial, but we should not forget about
      the more substantive problems of archaeology — for instance, the origins of
      agriculture, or how cultural variability is to be explained, or what causes differ-
      ences in stylistic and ethnic phenomena. All these aspects must grow together,
      because methodological research cannot be done in isolation, but within the
      context of problems for which, in the long term, some solution is hoped. In my
      own Case those ultimate concerns have been to explain the origins of agriculture
      and variability in the Mousterian. So in a sense, while of course I have been
      involved in many different facets of archaeology over the last twenty years, I have
      really worked on no other problems in my entire career.
                           6
                Hunters in a Landscape

A Stationary View of a Dynamic Landscape

Excavated sites are the archaeologist’s bread and butter. His view of the past
is necessarily restricted to these discrete, isolated points in the landscape. It is a
stationary view, whereas past behavior — especially that of hunters and gatherers
— was highly mobile. Each site, therefore, presents a limited, biased picture ofa
whole range of activities, depending upon its unique position within a regional
system of behavior. One could imagine, for example, that the different Mous-
terian stone tool assemblages described by Bordes (Chapter 4) are simply tiny
segments of the way oflife of ahunting and gathering group. There is the further
complication that if the pattern of activities during the Mousterian was not
precisely the same at different times and in different places, then consecutive
levels at each site would represent slightly varying ‘snapshots’ of the past.
   These simple ideas, together with my conception of how people behaved during
the Palaeolithic, formed the basis of my challenge to Bordes’ interpretation of the
patterns to be seen in Mousterian assemblages. He thought that differences
between them reflected the ethnic identities of the various groups which had
made them. My own approach, on the other hand, revolved around the idea that
at each site Mousterian man’s use of both space and technology had been a
specific response to unique circumstances. In other words, I was envisaging a
cultural system in which different activities took place at separate locations.
Furthermore, I imagined that the tool technology was flexible enough to cope
with situational variations in demand placed upon it, so that if necessary, for
example, the same activities could be carried out at several sites with different
tools.
   At the time I was questioning existing notions of archaeological variability in
the Palaeolithic in this way, ethnographic accounts of how hunters and gatherers
use their landscape suggested that my view was at least plausible; but there were
no detailed investigations of the links between the way locations (i.e. sites) were
utilized and the adaptive organization of the system as a whole. Similarly, varia-
tions in the role of technology in response to site-specific circumstances had not
been studied. It was largely to pursue these issues that I went to Alaska to observe

                                         109                            y
     Hunters in a Landscape

     the Nunamiut Eskimo (see Chapter 5). During my ethnoarchaeological research
     there, I attempted to view the dynamics ofthe settlement pattern throughout the
     seasonal cycle of movement from an archaeological (i.e. a site-orientated)
     perspective. Although this research confirmed my most general assumptions
     about site formation, my observations clearly indicated that archaeologists
     currently lack appropriate methods for detecting in their data the immensely
     complicated patterns of landscape use exhibited by hunters and gatherers such
     as the Nunamiut.
        In order to illustrate the nature of such interpretive problems, I will describe
     some of the sites-which I recorded during my research among the Nunamiut
44   Eskimo in Anaktuvuk Pass, Alaska. I will begin with land use and settlement
     patterns at the regional scale and go on to describe how certain levels of behavior
     must be understood in terms of whole groups ofsites or in terms ofactivities within
     individual locations, The examples which follow should demonstrate some of the
     sources of variability which characterize the archaeology of mobile peoples.



     The Scale of Land Use


     The use of space by the Nunamiut on an enormous scale demonstrates that
     archaeologists need to recalibrate their perspective of hunters and gatherers from
     the 5 foot square excavation unit at a single site to an area of more than 300,000
     square kilometers. If we discount certain exceptional cases in the equatorial zones,
     such an enormous area represents the scale of the domain over which a typical
     hunter-gatherer group, composed of perhaps only thirty to forty people, monitors
     its environment. Rarely does the band exploit all this land at any one time, but it
     requires the entire region to be available in order to provide a secure set of options.
     In order to understand how a small band of people makes use of such a large
     amount of space, it might be helpful if I first examine the spatial unit utilized by a
     group during one season and then demonstrate how variation in this unit over a
     long period of time eventually leads to the exploitation of an immense region.
49      As a baseline we can take the area in which one group of Nunamiut Eskimo
     established settlements or base camps throughout the seasonal cycle of a single
     calendar year. This residential core area usually extends up to about 5,400 square
     kilometers, although the land which is exploited by means of trips out from the
     main camps may cover an area as great as 25,000 square kilometers, The Eskimo,
     it must be emphasized, are by no means atypical in terms of their use of space:
     the residential core area used by one G/wi Bushman family over a period of eleven
     months shows that other hunter-gatherer groups also exploit vast regions.’
        The archaeology created by a small band of people moving throughout their
     territory in this way must be immensely complex, if the Nunamiut case is repre-
                                                             Hunters in a Landscape                     111




                                                             \ June 21—-Avug.20, 47
                                                             z AvG@.2)1—~ Sept), 'A7
                                                             3 Sepr 3S—APRIL)O,/48
                                                             4a   Aprit_|ll-24,
                                                             5 APRIL 2Z9— 28,
                                                             6 APRIL 297 May 27
                                                             7 May 287 JUNE ©
                                                             8 JONE T— JONE 9
                                                             ©) JONE 9O—VUONEeE/S
                                                             JO JUNE    JQ—JUNE             16
                                                             \) JONEL   ITWHVUONE            24


                                                             Nore:  Tora  cimcuiT
                                                             DISTANCE  — I29OmMILES




 |          ANNUAL       RounNrP —OnceE           Nunamiutr   Fanmitr
                        June   21,1947 —          June 24, 1948
                                 Dele        IN   Miles


                                                                             a    AV   ha   OO   Kee.




49 Location of the sites occupied by one Nunamiut family during an annual round of
settlement in 1947-8.                        ;
Lr        Hunters in a Landscape




                                                                          BOUNDARY Of
                                                                          RESIPENTIAL
                                                                          MOVEMENT




                                                                   @     sNGLEeE   OccuPrPATION

                                                                   ©     MucTtiPLle     OCcCcVvrPaTIONns
                                                                   i
                                                                        _NUMAERS     OF OVERLAPPING
                                                                         OccuPaATIONsS

                                                                    )    Turuv@eaKk LAKE
                                                                   2      Kon@aumuvur—
                                                                   3S     ANAKTUVUK_
                                                                   4     Ov1rp Morry’s         cCAme
                                                                    S    PuseituK
                                                                   6G     CHANDLER        WIEN     Camp

               a            —


                    RESIPENTIAL        Core    —NounAamivut            RANGE,         I9S47T~ 1982
                                              Scale   IN   MILES




          sentative. The locations of the residential sites created by five Eskimo families
          during a period of five years are shown in ill. 50. The first point to note is the size
          of the residential core occupied by such a small group of people. Surprisingly
          enough, these five Nunamiut families covered about as much space as is repre-
     ey   sented by tue entire Dordogne area in France, where the classic Mousterian sites
          are located. Given the large scale on which hunting and gathering groups
          typically operate, Bordes’ argument (Chapter 4) that differences in the com-
          position of the toolkits deposited at various levels in these sites represent four
          distinct cultural groups is hard to sustain. The problem is that archaeologists have
          been approaching their research on Palaeolithic sites from a modern sedentary
                                                                          Hunters in a Landscape                       113




                                                                                                                 Sh.
50 (Opposite) Location                             wt                                                            Leese
of the residential sites        ena                Eva               MEM PESimEN MLL              OT TS           ye
  :   .        .   .    r             Z   IAL    MOVES    OF         VSEQ    BY     NINE
occupied by five Nuna-          SMG       Saw     FARTS              GA      ay     LR edyeas
                                                                                                   \
                                                                                                   meee
                                                                                                        :        eat

miut families over a            ES   tagged       lara               EK        Mag tte             af        .
                                                                     YEARP    PERIOD
period of five years. The
distribution ofthese sites
                                                                                  —LeE     MousTrieER
is equivalent to the res?-
dential core area of this            mage ee N                               Xfi
Eskimo    group        during        Sig
                                       = Saree,                                    \ya        —PECH         0f   LAZE

this period.

51 Comparisons of the
sizes of the residential
core areas among the
Nunamiut Eskimo and
the G/wi Bushmen with                     Ase;    VaUr REY     ‘             \ \—comae-Geenar
the area in which the                                    DorRbogNE          AREA
‘classic’   Mousterian                                             estan bee
archaeological sites of          COMPARATIVE                      REGIONAL                  SCALES
the Dordogne region of                                         SCALE IN MiLes                     i.

Chapter 4).                                                                                                 Leswroes         |


view of the world. Since the hunting and gathering peoples which we are trying
to study probably did not share that view, we must try to bring our perspective
closer to reality.
   A second important observation emerges from ill. 50. Not only is the number
of sites considerably greater than those used by one family over one year, but the
archaeology also becomes very complicated, chiefly because certain locations in
the territory were occupied repeatedly from year to year whereas others were not.
The pattern of re-use at these sites has to a large degree determined their size, in
terms of the distributions of artifacts and features; consequently, locations
occupied repeatedly are considerably larger than those used only a few times.
This means that variability in the amount of space occupied by a site, a property
normally recorded by archaeologists, would not be due to differences in the size
or social organization of the group who resided there, but would merely reflect
the degree of repetitiveness in the way the landscape was used by the same mobile
band.? The reasoning used by Richard MacNeish® and other archaeologists
whereby differences in the size of sites are equated with various scales of group
organization (such as ‘micro-bands’ and ‘macro-bands’) is therefore likely to be
faulty. Judging from my observations of the modern Nunamiut, it is obvious that
114    Hunters in a Landscape

       we can no longer make simple equations between variability in site size and nature
       of the group which resided there, until we know more about all the other factors
       which contribute to the spread of debris at a site. In other words, archaeologists
       have to know about the formation processes of the archaeological record — that is, the
       way sites come into being.



       Lifetime Cycles of Land Use

       The land-use pattern of the Nunamiut illustrates yet another factor which affects
       the archaeological record. Rather surprisingly, many hunters and gatherers do
       not reside exclusively in one territory, but — contrary to the assumptions of most
       archaeologists — exploit a series of discrete areas, occupying each one until the
       environment becomes degraded. Often after a period of years, the firewood or
       animal resources become depleted and, at the point of diminishing returns, the
       group simply moves to a completely different territory, where the resources have
       been allowed to regenerate. Among the Nunamiut, for example, the length of
       stay in any one residential core area is approximately ten years.
          On the basis of interviews with old Eskimo men, I have constructed an idealized
       model showing the way the Nunamiut expect to exploit a region during one
  52   person’s lifetime.* The basis of the model is a cyclical pattern of land use. The
       residential core area that the group occupies when a person is born is known as
       that person’s birth territory. If the band had recently moved there, he or she would
       expect to live in that area for about ten years before moving to another completely
       separate residential core area which had not been occupied for about fifty years.
       This second area would be known as the becoming territory, if you were male, and
       the courting territory, if female (because girls are married about the age of sixteen
       whereas males wait until they are around twenty-eight years old). As a male
       within this area, one would begin to learn to hunt and would travel extensively,
       becoming intimately acquainted with the environment. After another ten years,
       it would be time to move again; now a male would enter his courting territory,
       while his sisters would be having their first babies. When a male finally marries,
       he will generally go to live in the territory of his wife’s family for several years.
          Six to eight years later, when a male is likely to be at his peak and most effective
       as a hunter, he will enter a further completely different area. In his final territory,
       a successful man might contribute to the folklore or cultural tradition connected
       with the landscape. Some of the land might be remapped in the minds of the
       Nunamiut in terms of some of this hunter’s exploits; key points, such as the
       location of rocks marking points where streams can be crossed, might be renamed
       after him. After about the age of forty, a hunter’s skill declines rapidly, because
       most males begin to lose their eyesight, have difficulty climbing mountains, and
                                                                                                             Hunters in a Landscape            It5




             ANNUAL       RaNnaqe         X
             Time      Cty) 28-32         Yeaes
              1500   se: MiLeEs
                         Wire's      Country)
                           KANGIANIG MILT



                                                               ANNUAL         RANGE         C.
                                                               Time ,)        \I9-2T       Years
                                                               736     24; Miles
                                                                                          (Courting        Country)
                                                                                           Basy       Country)?




                                                                                                      ANNUAL         Range       B.
                                                                                                      Time C2) 10-18 Years
                                                                                                      e 23500 sq, Mi_eSs
                                                                                                      7 CBECOMING             Country)
                                                                                                      2 CCourting         CouonTtRyY)
          ANNUAL        Range   D.             ANNUAL            RAnGge A.                                  BOS WieeA
          Time Gs)      33-41 Years            Time (t,)        1-9 vears                 bed         Noire:
          << 2400sq.    Mites                  e< 2100 sq Mites                 ~~                    MAP 1S BASED ON A SKETCH
           (HoNTeR’Ss    Countrey)            42(irtTH          CoontRY)                              MADE     BY     Simon     FANEACK
               le Ores                                  KAN MAUINGMIUT
                            Sp
                         “TERRITORY                OF    ONE           Nounamiutr                 Bann
                                               oc       8500      sq. MILES
                                                        ScALE     IN   MILES

                            o        ir       24          36     48      60          Te          84   96       108      120
                                                                                                                                         BES


2 Idealized model of Nunamiut land use during one person’s lifetime, based on interviews
vith Eskimo informants.                                 -



o on. At this point in his career, a hunter will probably move back into his birth
erritory, completing the cycle of long-term land use; and with old age setting in
1e will gradually become dependent on others for his basic subsistence needs.
   In summary, the overall area in which a single male resides during his life
consists of around five different territories and can extend to as much as 22,000
quare kilometers. During his lifetime, however, a typical Nunamiut male will
1ave travelled over more than 300,000 square kilometers in the normal course of
1unting for game. Asa result, at any point in time, a group of Nunamiut Eskimos
1as available to it approximately four times as much land as it is currently using.
[he same pattern of land use can also be found among the Aborigines in the
Jentral Desert of Australia and the Naskapi in Newfoundland. Hunter-gatherer
     116        Hunters in a Landscape




                                                                                                                                                        LeEGEnod
                                                                                                                                                        DisePeERSED          HUNTING          \
                                                                                                                                                          STANDS
                                                                                                                                                       4     WeeseR*2
                                                                                                                                                       2     WenmerR*3
                                                                                                                                                       3.    Rigavuo*i
                                                                                                                                                       A     Rigauo*3
                                                                                                                                                       5.    Rigauo*4
                                                                                                                                                       6.    REB *6
                                                                                                                                                       Z     TULUGAK
                                                                                                                                                       Bitty Morry’s                 Site
                                                            \        '                              (                                              1   Complex
if                                                           \           &                           \          "                                      8.  OrRYING  Camp
                                                                          (                                      '                                     9   PRocessing   Site
                                             )                   \
                                             ))                              NY                          (          \                                  10. Kir sire
                                                                     v                              P                i Akvatutax        Cf             OTHER   SPRING   SiTEs
                                         -                               3                          =                |                                 1.    Site #64
                Notre:                                                   hf                         a                H                            am   12.   TULlugaK             Site   ZA
                Base     Map        TAKEN                                vA                                         i                  le              SumMMeER         SITES
           yr   From     U.S.    GeEoLOGg ICAL                           2€                                      H                     ‘               13.   HigH       KonqumovuKk
           3    SuRVEY,       CHANDLER                               3 =                                 ) Anavik                                            HonNTING             Came
       gf Lake, ALAsKaA-1956                                      5                                          Hi ‘                                \                       SS
          QUADRANGLE                                              z            i                              ae                   ait            Lt Wd
                Contour         INTERVAL »)                      5
                       100°     Fee,    ec




                                                                                                             Primary
                                                                                                             RveER CROSSING




                                                                “6                   /u
                                                                                                                    is        ANAKTIQTAUK—*—                                 ae
                                                                                   /Pe              a pearson “=: oo Peres                                      oa)     hs
                                                                               a               ie
                                                                              i           Smconvagy                      ON    SN      ss              ee
                                                                              fi          River          Crossing
                                                                              1           :
                                                                            1
                                                                           ee
                                                                           Loe
                                                                          ity
                                                                          if Sumer




                                                                             ANAKTUVUK                          oN
                                                                              Virtage                                    Re                    cad &

                                                                                                                                    InqsTreo
                                                                                                                                       Mr


                                                                                                                                     ee
                                                                                                             Giany        Cree


                                                                                                                                                               A)
                                                                                                                                                  \             D       L.2. Binrorp

                                        Map       oF       ANAKTUVUK                                         PASS,            ALASKA
                                                            Scace                             in         Mites
                                o            1         2         3                            4a                s              e             T         6            9




     53 Map of Anaktuvuk Valley, Alaska, showing the location of sites mentioned in the text.
                                                                           Hunters in a Landscape        17

groups such as these utilize an enormous range of space which is occupied over a
long period of time by means of a series of smaller discrete territories. Such is the
vast scale we must consider, if we are to understand variability in the archaeolog-
ical sites of mobile hunters and gatherers.



Anavik Springs Site Complex

Having looked at how hunting and gathering groups exploit a series of discrete
territories, we can now examine the way tasks are organized within the boun-
daries ofa single residential core area. One productive way to view the organiza-                    oe
tion of activities at this level is as a cluster of localities which I call the site complex.
When a series of events are linked together as part of an overall strategy, the
separate locations where the integrated set of activities takes place together com-
prise a site complex. Several examples of these major ‘building blocks’ of terri-
tories can be provided from my ethnoarchaeological study of Nunamiut Eskimo
settlements.
   The Anavik Springs site complex is composed of three distinct sites which are                         54
utilized in conjunction with each other during the hunting of caribou on their
spring migration northward through Anaktuvuk Pass along their route to the
flat, open tundra. The sites belonging together in this case include-(1) a hunting




                                                                      STONE CAIRN
                                                                    ROE BUTCHERING         |
                                                                                                              Se
                                                                                                          7s
                                              CaR/BOU                 ‘        SITE
                                               TRAILS Z     6




                                                                                                         i
                                                           ANAVIK. SPRINGS
                                                            CAMPS         ey,




54 Location of the
various    components
within    the Anavik
Springs site complex.


                                        SITE        ClLusTeERS                 AT     “ANAVIK
                                                       Decale    iN        KILOMETERS


                                                       e                  as          2         s
                                                                                                    LR    EINE ORD
118     Hunters in a Landscape




       TENT   RINGS                        ONE     KILOMETER
                       y                   TO     HUNTING
                                           SITE




                                                               55 Hunting camps located in a
                                                               stand of willow trees at Anavik
              HONTING  CAMPS  IN WiLLOWS                       Springs.
                   ANAVIK SPRINGS
                      Saati   Tian   cos                       56 (Opposite) Lovers’ Camp. Plan
                                                               of the late summer hunting campJ
                                                               at Anavik Springs.


        camp (including a specialized ‘lovers’ camp’), (2) a kill site with specialized areas
        for butchering, and (3) a series of stone caches where meat was stored. Completely
        different activities took place at each of the locations, which are separated by as
        much as one kilometer, but all three sites are components of the same major task
        (the exploitation of caribou) and commonly all have been used on a single day
        by the same group of people.

         Temporary Hunting Camp

  55    The first constituent of the site complex is a temporary camp used mainly during
        the caribou migration. From an archaeological point of view, this location at
        Anavik Springs appears to consist of one single site extending for halfa kilometer,
                                                                                                                                                                             Hunters in a Landscape             119


                                                       AugustTr                            /964                                        at                    os
                                                                                                                                   }                     ca
                                                                                                                       ire                              a.
                                                                                                                   )              sae                   SEZ

                                                                                                  2                                                                         ek 69),
                             2            S                                                       4.                                                                       fsx
                  aes                                                                                                                                        6          22-):
                  we    ce                                                                                                                                              tee             ©     Ku
                  o~                               x                                                                                                                         @-°,
              ae                                                                          ’                                                                            -               .@


        +         Se                          Ss
        L         ,                  ar
                  /              {    25           )
                                     nes
                                      vb                                                                                                                                <    =~
                                      ~            ;   a
                                                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                                                                      te Z   eo    1
                                      >                    :                                                                                                          da.@
            Dog   Yaron                                                                                o                                                                    Sa


       Note:                                                                                               5                                                           f(
        AREA     oF SITE                                       ‘
        CLEARING
               -
                      ew                                           =   >             Srove                     e
                                                                                                                        ae &
        504 ™M                                                             = \       Szveves                 ne            we                            ¢                       Moss       Coveren
                                                                       Tamas                                       A S             ac                        =                MEAT           STORAGE
                                                                       {     4         }                                ~    zs    =                                         STRUCTURE
                                                                             2
                                                               eae                    6           ois                         %                                                                            =
                                                                                                  ( 7 ‘\                                    TENT        WEIGHTS
                                                                                                  Nee‘




       SumMMER                            HUNTING                                                 Camp                            wpe
                                                                                                                                        —        ANAVIK                      SPRINGS
                                                                                          ScALE                        IN         METERS

                                 =             °           2                     a            6        i=)              10         12       1a     le            18     20         22

                                                                                                                                                                                        Lk    BINF   ORD




over which an uninterrupted distribution of debris can be monitored. In fact, the
continuous scatter is not the remains of one occupation by one group at one time,
but represents the re-use of the location over a period of at least 100 years. Since
the remains of the many separate occupations over this long period of time overlap
with each other, the result is an enormous palimpsest of archaeological materials,

The Lovers’ Camp
Fortunately, with the aid of informants who had camped at Anavik Springs, I                                                                                                                                    56
was able to separate out several discrete camps from among the continuous
distribution of archaeological materials. At one of these,° called site J, one can
observe that a pattern — a ring of stones for weighing down a tent and an outside
hearth — is repeated three times. This group of tent rings represents a single period
of occupation. Site J is not part of the spring caribou hunting complex; it is,
nevertheless, interesting in itself, because its history illustrates a division of labor
 120    Hunters in a Landscape

        which is common among hunter-gatherer groups, although not discussed in any
        detail in the ethnographic literature.
           By the late summer the stores of dried meat put up by the Eskimos after the
        caribou migration have become depleted and are unpalatable: the remaining
        meat is tough, the flavor has been leached out by the rain, and all the tasty fat will
        have been consumed, Furthermore, at this time of the year there is no game
        readily accessible in the local environment. The majority of the caribou, except
        for a few bulls which can only be found in the vicinity of glaciers located high in
        the mountains, are grazing far to the north, while mountain sheep are difficult to
        locate in this season. In order to encourage someone to go hunting despite the
        difficulty of achieving success, the Nunamiut have created a fascinating incentive.
        At the end of the summer young lovers are allowed to live together —not in the
        main residential camp, however, but only in hunting camps a long way away.
        The result is that in the long run everyone benefits: the old people subsist on the
        dwindling supplies of stored meat and the youngsters feed themselves out in the
        bush. If the young people are successful at hunting, they will bring fresh meat
        home to share with everyone; if they do not find game, they are hungry but
        nevertheless happy! The same type of strategy has been reported for the Washo
        Indians, hunters and gatherers who lived near Lake Tahoe in California.® During
        the hungry period in the early spring when food stores were low, young lovers
        there were also allowed to set up camps in distant areas where the chances of
        obtaining food were quite low. This strategy of hunters and gatherers is based on
        the ability of the young people with the greatest physical skills and endurance to
        take risks — given the right incentives.
           Since campJ is one of these lovers’ camps, the distribution of archaeological
        materials across the site does not conform to other types of hunting camps, such
        as the majority at Anavik Springs. Normally the choice cuts of meat would be
        shared at a corporate hearth. In this case, however, each group of young lovers
        consumed their meals separately in their own tent. The archaeological remains
        at site Jalso contain no debris from the manufacture or repair of tools. Although
        these differences are minor, they are exactly the type of data which archaeologists
        could use to identify this type of division of labor by age groups in the past.


        Processing the Kull

        The second component of the Anavik Springs site complex, the location where
        the killing and processing of caribou took place, is completely different from the
        small clusters of tent rings observed at the temporary hunting camp. When the
        caribou move through the valley, they are shot from hunting stands located on a
        knoll.” After the animals are killed, they are dragged to another location for
57,58   butchering. The scatter of bones recorded at this location after the spring hunt
uth of An
                                         aval
                                          HIE ART HIS




                                                         apo       J                                :                  BVYTCHERIN
                               fos,                      y,        =                   €           A                              Beak
                         Ay     y    or                   =        =         K                     Ke —                                                    }
                                           4                   ~         %                                    c
                    Ls                                         bs,                             .                  by                               f
                      Maw           ¢                         rt                  2oe                     ry |                    -            Pe              ,


                                                                                                                                               ‘               :              oy
     Note:                                                                       tee                                                           p ebea                                     \
     1 ONLY      UNWEATHERED             BONE                      A
      FROM THE       197) HUNT 16                              =       Dvn                                                                                                               cig
      SHOWN  IN      BUTCHERING                                                                    f                                  aS
      AREAS.                                      BU                                               My             Ss
-—   2 BoNe      6PLINTERS      SHOWN                f
      AROUND TWo  HEARTHS                WERE    .                                                                                    {
      RECORDED IN I972.                          &                                                                       ea                                                        f

     @-   HEARTHS        USED       IN   1971
                                                                         £|45                                          E|50                                    e|55                                 E
          HEARTHS        NoT    USED      IN

          Gal:                                                                                      ANAVvIK.                          Kitt  —”> Buren ere
                                                                                                                                       ANAKTUVUK.    PASS

                                                                                                                                                                        ScaALeE    IN    Mer


              LR    BIN FORD                                                               1            ie)        1     2    3       4a   5           6           We     8   9     10         Wt
              35




                    59 Plan of the Anavik Springs kill and butchering site after the spring caribou hunt,
                    showing the distribution of hearths and faunal remains.

                    60° Detailed plan of the hearth and conversation area at the Anavik Springs caribou
                    butchering site.

                    61 Close-up of the butchering area at the Anavik Springs site showing the circular areas
                    in which the caribou were dismembered and the location of the waste by-products.
                                                   REMAINS        oF
                                               PRE-GUN            HUNTING
                                               BLIno




                                                                                                                                                OF   HEARTH


                                                                                                               so
                                                                                                                    a      Cee   VSED   FOR
                                                                                                                    \         FILLETING

                                               i            :          SSR     cAAY

a
                                                                                      =.
                                                                                      id             ~       Aa
=         éd                                  PILED         For oe                    DE salah B/StT Fakes
A                                                                                     FILLETING
                                              TRANSPORT             —




                                                                                                                                        \
                                                                                                                     AREA  USED FOR     \
                                                                                                                     BUTCH ERING        We
                                                                                                                                            ‘
                                                                                                                                                           LRRBINF ORD

                                             HEARTH—              ConVERSATION                       é       ADJACENT           Activity                 AREAS

                                                                             Anavik     Kitt~— ButcHering                        Site
                                                                                           Scare          in        Merers




                    E    |es

=              Com           PLEX                                                          TILLETING              DEBRIS                         FARTS    PILED     FOR
                                                                                                \                                               TRANSPORT

a         KAY                                33         %                                      my
                                                            MAG

|   ist        ie       mw     is   1   20
                                                            Vas Se      BUTCHERIN       fs                              i
                                                                                                                                   a5,
                                              ANIMAL
                                             YURGED To
                                              Be Sick”




                                                                                                                                                     BUTCHERING


                                             oe                                 >
                                                       ee                    aes                                                                          AREA    {2
                                                                TOSSED                    Ss




                                                                                               BUT CHERING
                                                                                                    ArEeA "35



                                                                 ButcHERING   AREA    DETAILS
                                                                ANAvVIK KILL~BUTCHERING   SITE
                                                                                      CALE           in        METEES

                                                                                                                                                         LEBING   ORD
124    Hunters in a Landscape

       represented a minimum of fifty-four caribou, although in all we know that 111
       caribou had been butchered by the Nunamiut at this one site. On the plan ofthe
       site the hollow spaces within the distribution of bones represent discrete areas
       where one caribou was dismembered. In order to remove the skin from a caribou
  60   and prepare the joints of meat, the animal is laid down in a clear area and a man
       works around it. The result of this behavior is that a circle is created, with the
       waste products deposited on the periphery away from the area where the butchery
       took place. Similarly, the by-products from retouching and resharpening the
       stone tools used in butchering would also be deposited on the edge ofthe circular
       area used to process the animal.
           At the butchery area four hearths were used by the hunters. A windbreak was
       placed around them using bull antlers shed in the fall (on a site utilized in the
       spring!). While butchering, one’s hands get very cold and so occasionally the men
       sit out of the wind to warm their hands over a fire and perhaps eat some marrow
       removed from the fresh bones of the kills. Around the hearths one would find a
       completely different distribution of bones than in either the butchering area of
       this same site or at the associated hunting camp where the men would return after
       finishing the various tasks here.

       Storing the Meat

       The third member of the site complex is represented by the site where meat was
  62   stored in a large stone structure up to 4 meters in diameter. Stone meat caches®
       are permanent facilities which are usually located near kill sites. They act as
       central places to which individuals can return throughout the year to collect food
       for the group, thus avoiding the burden of carrying all the meat with them to each
       of the several residential sites they will occupy as part of the seasonal round of
       activities. Layers of meat, inter-bedded with stones or strips of wood to ensure air
       circulation, are placed in a radial pattern inside the cache and then are sealed off
       with additional stones. ‘The reason for the high investment of labor in the con-
       struction of stone meat caches is the critical importance of stored meat in the
       subsistence pattern of the Nunamiut.

                                                               62 Large stone meat cache
                                                               like those located in the talus
                                                               along the north side of the
                                                               valley above the Anavik
                                                               Springs kill site. The example
                                                               illustrated here is actually
                                                               part of a similar site complex
                                                               located at the mouth of
                                                               Kongumuvuk Valley. (See
                                                               ill. 53 for exact location.)
                                   63 Alleged house-pits excavated
                                   at a Russian Palaeolithic site.
                                   (Photo courtesy of Olga Soffer.)




64 Caribou meat drying
rack from a spring kill site at
Kongumuvuk Creek. (For
location see Site 8 on ill. 53.)


65 Caribou meat hung up to
dry on willow branches along
the north edge of the Kongu-
muvuk fall hunting stand,
Site 13 on ill. 53.
126          Hunters in a Landscape

                                                SCHOOLTEACHER
                                                                Sita


       Joe    Cerrar       1956-59                                                                                                                                         Big
                                                                                                                                                                        SURROUND

                                                        1956-59        Winter               SITE                                                                   So_viem Rocks
                                                                                                                                                                   In SPRING                              x
                                                                                                                                                                  Carinou                       ~~
                                                                                                                                                                  Drive     *4                rh     SA
                1962   WintTeR   site




                                                                                                                                                          Longe    Roepe    Caimn ——~



                 cs         J                  i            |                             -                         AMALGAMATION
                                    nit                         |      \             PP    ih NV             edie     Sire
                                       ;                                         '         Sire
                                     KN                                                                                                                                            >
                                                                                                                                                             a                   :                   per
                                                                                                                                                                  rk                         el,
                                                                                                                                                                  LESS >Ss SRG
         Soroserm      RocKs               ,            |                                                                                                               ie                                    ie
         Iw   Face     Carimou
         Drive       * 3




                                                   \h
              Carisov      TRAILS                   \|
                                                   WX
                                      y            AN

                                                    \                                                                                        \\                                               i!      7B
                                                                                                                                                  \          SorouerR      Rocks             Hii]
                                                                                                                                                  \          im SPRING                   :           “wh
                                                                                                                                                      \      Carisovu                ;                    4




                                                                                                                                        H
                                                                                                                                        |
                                                                                                                                       ilI



Notre:                                                                                                                                                            / \   mpi
                                                                                                                                                                                   Se as
                                                                                                                                                                   \
Oniy 41% oF THE
DocUMENTED                                                                                                                                                         \\     EAT                STORAGE
ARCHAEOLOGICA                                                                                                                                                     \                            Sad
SITES IN THIS
AREA ARE
SHOWN  HERE




                                                                                                        NK ie anens§
L.R.    Bin Fore

                           Map             of       TULUG@AK                                    Lake                Area,          ALasKna
                                                                                            Scarce
                                                                                                                                                  Mer
                                                                    100    200            300   400    60S   600     700   800   900                        ay
                                                                                                                                                                   Mites
                                                                                                0.50                       O78



              66 Map of Tulugak Lake area showing location of sites and site complexes.
                                                             Hunters in a Landscape   127
  To an archaeologist these impressive stone structures might resemble a house,
but they were never used as such by the Nunamiut. The use ofstone caches near
kill sites is reminiscent of some of the ‘pit-houses’ described for certain Palaeo-
lithic sites in Russia,” suggesting that these structures too were really not houses 63
but, as with the Eskimo stone structures, simply meat caches.
    Meat can be stored at kill sites in a variety of ways besides the stone cache,
When the temperature is below freezing, butchered meat or even whole animals
can simply be stacked on the ground. Antlers usually serve to mark the location
so that hunters can return even after it has snowed. At other times ofthe year meat 64
is placed on wooden racks to dry. Temporary meat caches used at hunting camps
often consist merely of joints of meat strung out ona line or placed on the branches
of trees along the edge ofa stand of willows. Archaeologically, the remains of these
caches would be indicated by a linear distribution of large bones. Meat caches of
all types provide important centralized, secure resources which the Nunamiut can
draw on as they move around the habitat in search of additional food.




Tulugak Lake Site Complexes

My study of groups of interrelated sites has revealed that a sequence of activities
in any one task did not necessarily take place all at one site. Furthermore, sites
which appear to be very different may in fact belong to the same general category
of behavior which was highly differentiated into various sets of activities. One of
the most fascinating group of site complexes used by the Nunamiut Eskimo is
located in the region around Tulugak Lake, an area very rich in resources. The 66
lake is deep enough to support a type of highly desirable, fatty fish called lake
trout; spring-fed streams which flow into the lake are surrounded by large stands
of willows, an important source of firewood; there are also a number of caribou
migration trails which pass by the lake.

Drive Lines

The complexity of archaeological remains resulting from the exploitation of
caribou in the vicinity of Tulugak Lake is tremendous. Caribou were driven
between linear barriers which take advantage of natural features in the landscape,
such as parallel rows of glacial hillocks (called eskers), but also incorporate man-
made features which would have been very difficult to detect without ethno-
graphic information, When not in use, the basic components of a drive line simply 67
look like piles of stones which I call soldier rocks. In contrast, during their use by
the Eskimo to help channel caribou up a hill or into partly natural enclosures
located at one end of the lake, the hunters placed moss around the rocks to form
128    Hunters in a Landscape




       67 ‘Soldier rocks’ forming a caribou drive line running up the mountainside   east of
       Tulugak Lake. (See ill. 66 for exact location.)



       the shape of a man; old clothes were added on top of the moss to scare the caribou,
       keep them moving, and restrict their movement to the path chosen by the hunters,

       Hunting Blinds

       Along one caribou drive which goes up the mountain adjacent to the lake (taking
       advantage of a caribou’s natural instincts to run uphill when threatened), we
       located seventy small hunting blinds from which two Nunamiut men could
  68   ambush game. Each of the blinds consists of a permanent structure made by
       excavating a hollow into the rock talus slope or by building a low wall. They have
       a dual function: not only can the hunters hide there, but the shelters also provide
       a measure of protection from the wind while the men wait for the game to appear
       —as long as eight or even twelve hours, if necessary. Obviously, they can get very
       cold in that time, but since lighting a fire is not conducive to attracting caribou,
       they have devised a different means for providing heat. Upon arrival at the blind,
       the men take down its walls and build a big hearth. After the fire is burning well,
       they pile the stones back on top of the fire and let it burn down. As the warmth
       of the fire heats the stones, the men can huddle up against the wall and keep warm
       while maintaining their vigil for the caribou. Again, the association of hearths in
       the walls of structures has also been noted for some Russian Palaeolithic sites.°
       One wonders why on earth anyone would build fires in the walls of houses,
       particularly if the proposed reconstruction with a skin tent atop the stone walls is
                                                                                                                       Hunters in a Landscape                           129



                                          _ 22)                                                   <           ;   4           )
                                                                                                                       Bee            &
        Nore:                             ce   ;                                              Cay                 My     i
                                                                                                                       ETE?
                                                                                                                                          \        OISTAL    METATARBAL
             THESE        BLINDS          ARE          REALLY
        SHOOTING          LOCATIONS                  FoO3e
        ARCHERS.              THEY        ARE         PL 4CZED
        ALONG       WELL   ESTABLISHED
        GAME        TRAILS   COVES CFEN
        TERRAIN.              THEY        AZE          mtosr
        OFTEN           YSBSED       IN        THe
       CONTEXT            OF     AN       ANIMAL
        DRIVE.
            THE     BL/NOS            SHOWN             HERE                            Sow    FRAGMENT
       ARE        CHA   RAC     TE   R/SDTIC            or     THOSE
       ON    MODERATE                 SL0ores.               B2In03                                                           PRESAURE             FLAKING      CHIPS
       ON    LEVEL  GEOUND  OC OW CeESTS
       OF    RIDGES  ARE COMPLETLY
       CLOSED           OVALS        OF   STONES.




                                                                                                                                  LIMITS      OF    7




                  feet     o-        Diary” fre
                                                                                  Bone    Wuice       Frags

       Bonk        SPLINTERS

                                                                                                                                                      ANTLER
                                                                                        FIRE   CRACKED
                                                                                               ROCKS


                                                                                                                                      °
                                                                                                                                  *.
                                                                                  Bowocce                                         pw
                                                                                  CONSTRUCTION
                                                                                                                                  o




       LIMITS  OF                                                        fxrro0s£o
       SHALLOW                                                           Se0orocx
       EXCAVATION




                                                     Mip-I9™          Cewrury     Nounamiot           Hunting          Bunos
                                                                       Torvgaxn        Lake       ,   AL asKra
                                                                             Scac_ce     iN    METERS

                                                                                                                                                             4.R. BinroRO




68 Plans of three 1gth-century ap hunting blinds located along a caribou drive on the slope
east of Tulugak Lake. (Exact position is marked on ill. 66.) Note the presence of waste by-
products from snacks and tool repair, as well as a cache of antler for use in the manufacture
of arrowheads. The hearths (represented by checkerboard shading) have been placed
within the walls of the blinds to warm the hunters while they wait for caribou.



correct. Could these sites actually be hunting blinds similar to those used by the
Nunamiut?
   In plan the Eskimo hunting blinds appear as small semi-circles about 2. 4 meters
across.!! The debris found in one of them, dating to an era before guns were used
by the Nunamiut, demonstrates the types of activities which took place at these
locations. Bone splinters from cracking bones for marrow, together with tiny bone
fragments from pounding up articular ends of bones to make broth, represent the
‘snacks’ that were consumed, Industrial debris from tool manufacture and repair
is represented here by a broken bow and some lithic flakes. The tools necessary
for hunting are not made at hunting blinds, but would have been prepared before-
130    Hunters in a Landscape




       69 Hunting stand R & Bat Anaktuvuk Pass showing a caribou skin bed where a man slept
       while his partner watched for game. (Exact location is noted on ill. 53.)




       hand so that the hunter would be constantly ready for any animals that might
       appear along the migration route. This means that debris from the primary stages
       of production are rarely represented at hunting blinds. Instead, to while away the
       time the men usually brought along a broken tool needing repair or performed
       some other partially completed task. The activities carried out at this type of site
       were thus not directly related to the task at hand (hunting caribou), but were
       directed simply to the reduction of boredom. Another type of artifact found at
       the hunting blind shown in ill. 68 was an antler arrowhead which has been cached
       for future use, but was never needed.
          Men occasionally will stay at a hunting stand overnight, rather than return to
  69   the base camp. Usually, one man stays up and watches for game, while another
       sleeps in his clothes on a caribou skin in a different area of the site ; after a while
       they change places. Since they remain there over a relatively long period of time,
       the hunters will generally make a separate hearth away from the wall of the blind,
       so that they can prepare a meal of broth or roast meat. Although similar to the
       hunting blinds described above, the site generated in this way will be more
       complex in archaeological terms and one would have to be careful not to confuse
       the hunting blind and hearth with a base camp occupied by a family group.
                                                              Hunters in a Landscape

Base Camps

Another component of the site complexes at Tulugak Lake are the residential
camps situated near the lake, where firewood and fresh water are in ample supply.
The Nunamiut select locations for base camps largely on the basis of the heaviest
resources that they exploit, rather than merely the presence offood. Food-getting
allows a flexible strategy because, as we have already seen, it can be cached and
then transported ;water and fuel are more difficult to move around. Residential
sites, then, are positioned with respect to these basic resources and people adjust
their trips out from the base camp in terms ofthe distributions of sources of food.
   At Tulugak Lake we find a continuous distribution of archaeological remains,
rather like the overlapping camp sites at Anavik Springs. There, however, the
site was repeatedly used for the same basic function: the lakeside at Tulugak, in
contrast, has been occupied at various times of the year for different reasons, For
example, settlements in the summer were located here to take advantage of the
lake trout, whereas winter villages were situated close to the abundant source of
firewood. If this site were excavated, one might expect to find a summer residen-
tial camp on top of a fall hunting stand, or a winter village overlying a spring
fishing camp.
    As archaeologists how would we distinguish all the overlapping components
ofa complicated site such as Tulugak Lake? Could we recognize all the specialized
types of site in the vicinity: the caribou drives, meat caches, and hunting blinds?
Would we be able to reconstruct the associations between various locations and
recreate site complexes? At present, archaeology lacks methods for coping with
the complicated archaeological residues typically created by hunting and gather-
ing peoples. We must begin to devise a means to untangle the palimpsests of
overlapping occupations and to discover ways to recognize associated activity
areas separated by as much as several kilometers.


Putting the System Together

One of the most important lessons to be learned from my ethnoarchaeological
research among the Nunamiut Eskimo is that one has to conceive of all their sites
as part of a larger system. Besides residential locations, an enormous variety of
areas were used for special-purpose tasks which are merely parts of the overall
pattern of making a living in the Arctic. We have seen how individual sites fit
together to form site complexes, how site complexes can be grouped together
within the territory exploited by one band of people and, finally, that several
territories can be utilized sequentially during the course of a single person’s life-
span. In order to reconstruct the entire pattern of land use, archaeologists have
to be able first to identify the specific function of each separate site and then to
           132    Hunters in a Landscape

                  fit all the individual parts together. The difficulty involved is rather like attempt-
                  ing to reconstruct an automobile engine on the basis of disconnected parts: one
                  needs to know how the engine operates, in order to identify       its relevant compo-
                  nents — the carburetor, battery, cylinder, and so on — and to put them together
                  correctly, In the same manner, archaeologists must identify each type of behavior
                  that took place at each site they find and then begin to fit the pieces into place to
                  make up a prehistoric system of land use. In other words, archaeology’s basic unit
                  is the individual site, but its goal is to employ these units to study past human
                  behavior; and in order to accomplish this task, we need to develop an appropriate
                  methodology for identifying the role of single sites within an overall system,




                 70 Plan of the fall hunting stand in Kongumuvuk Valley, Site 13 on ill. 53.


                                                              MEISEL Peers
                                                               Se


                                                              »)
                                                                     ae   Oy ita


                                                                          TA        nS PSA
                                                                                            c


                                                                                                             De
                                                                                                                      <


                                                                                                                          RNS
                                                                                                                                ae         23




                                                                                 ACN                     SKPe
                                                                               Poe                                    SS.
                                                                                i    eee,                         -                      DRYING
                                                                                                                                         AREAS




                                                                                    >)                        CaReiaou
                                                                                                              Lowze              LEGS
                                                                                                Vs       .                                        4

                                                                                                >
                                                                                                     7
                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                            J




                                                                                                                    Saw Dering
                                                                                                                  ai WEIGH rs



                                                                                                                                     ‘
et
 os +                                        o
                                      2                            DECAYING          SKIN
                                                                   § welignrs




  Micron                       KONQUMUVUK        —~VaLLEY           HUNTING              STAND
  AREA= 1520 mt                                  BeeEe a th   MERE
                      fi) Wo      3       wae:       9        12          1s                18           21           23
                                                                     Hunters in a Landscape       133




71 Circle of small stone weights used by the Nunamiut for holding down caribou skins
while they are drying. (See ill. 70 for exact location of this feature at the Kongumuvuk fall
hunting stand.)



Special-Purpose Sites                                                                      2

The value of archaeological studies of modern peoples is that, by observing the
different types of sites which they occupy, we can begin to appreciate the range
of variability which we are likely to encounter in the archaeological record. Asa
further attempt to make my point clear, it would be helpful to describe some
additional special-purpose sites which I documented among the Nunamiut.
   Some of these sites were surprisingly large. Typically, archaeologists expect
activity areas to take up small amounts of space and to be internally homogene-
ous; but in the case of one non-residential site which I documented, a wide range               790

of tasks took place over an area covering about 1500 square meters. At this site
at Kongumuvuk, utilized during the fall migration of caribou, men hid in a stand
of willows in order to camouflage themselves. While waiting for the game, some
consumed snacks (such as marrow from fresh bone) around a small hearth and
others repaired tools. The caribou were actually hunted and killed at quite some
distance from the site itself. So as not to interrupt the movement of herds of
caribou arriving subsequently, the Eskimo hurriedly butchered the animals in
the location where they were shot and then dragged the desired portions of the
animal back behind the willows to the Kongumuvuk site. Once out of the path of
the migration, the men finished butchering the caribou, some of the meat being
cached or placed on temporary drying racks. One major activity that took place
at this site was the preparation of skins. The hides were laid out to dry and were 71
134   Hunters in a Landscape

      weighted down with stones to keep them from blowing around, with the result
      that there are large numbers of small circles of stones, all of about the same size,
      distributed over the site. As archaeologists, would we recognize that the distinctly
      different areas at this large site — the eating area around the hearth, the location
      of craft activities, the meat caches and drying racks, and the places for preparing
      skins — all fit together, or would we divide them into separate sites?

      Tent Rings

      Small rings of stones also occur on other sites occupied by Nunamiut hunting
      parties, but they could have been created by one ofseveral activities besides dry-
      ing fresh hides. For instance, at a site high in the mountains, normally occupied
      by parties of hunters seeking caribou bulls in summer, one finds small stone rings,
      about the same size as the circles at Kongumuvuk, associated with a small hearth.
      In this case, however, the size of the stones in the rings is larger than in the previous
      site because they were used to weight down the sides of caribou skin tents. The site
      differs from the hunting stand at Kongumuvuk in another way too. Unlike the
      combination of highly differentiated areas seen there, this site is composed of a
      series of identical units — a tent ring and a hearth — repeated over and over across
      space. Special-purpose sites, then, may vary in the degree to which the modules
      of which they are composed are homogeneous or are highly variable.



      72 Hunting stand positioned in a natural swale near Little Contact Creek in Anaktuvuk
      Valley. (See ill. 53 for location.) This site is functionally identical to the site illustrated
      in ill. 69, but is located in different terrain. Note that some firewood and two old coffee
      cans used to boil water for tea have been cached at the site for future use. The sled was
      also cached here in the spring after the snow melted.
 73 Deadfall trap constructed for catching a wolf. These traps are always built in the fall
 before the first heavy snowstorms.



 Hunting Stands

Hunting stands are one of the most common types ofsite in the cultural landscape
of the Nunamiut. They may be very complex (such as the site at Kongumuvuk,
or the Mask site’* to be discussed in the next chapter), relatively simple (as with
the ambush locations at Tulugak Lake), or extremely ephemeral. As an instance
of this last category, one can find locations where a hunter merely hid behind a
large boulder and, perhaps, built a small fire. Natural features of the landscape,            TP?

such as boulders or swales, are commonly used for hunting stands, At such sites
one may find only a small hearth, some fire-cracked rock from stone boiling, anda
series of tools which have been cached for later use.

Facilities

 The soldier rocks along the caribou drives at Tulugak Lake can be classified as a
 particular type of tool called a facility (see further discussion in Chapter 7).
 Another member of the same class of artifacts are traps. The Nunamiut employ a
‘wide range of these, of which the deadfall is one of the most common, The location 73
 of each deadfall trap should be considered as a special-purpose site. Often they
 are constructed in association with meat caches, in order to keep competitors
     Hunters in a Landscape

     away from the stored food — although, in another sense, the meat cache is itselfa
     source of bait to lure foxes and wolves into the area of the deadfall. Small walls
     are constructed around the deadfall to ensure that the animal enters in exactly
     the desired manner. The trigger for the trap is positioned far enough inside (i.e.
     beyond the length of the animal’s neck), so that it has to place its front feet over
     one of the sills before the huge rock on top crashes down on top ofit. Even if the
     stone does not kill the prey, it should land on its shoulders and prevent it from
     getting away.
        Deadfall traps such as the ones constructed by the Nunamiut are probably very
     common in the archaeological record. I have observed similar constructions in
     sites associated with Neanderthal man and it is also clear that many sites described




     74 Plan of the Tulukkana site where fifty caribou were processed for storage during a
     period of only twelve days. The enormous accumulation of bone is due to the preparation
     of the meat: it is not a reflection of either the number of people who occupied the site or the
     length of its occupation.




                                                                                  FEATURE FP
                                                                           Sy    POTENT RING
                                                                                Oe.
                                                                                                                                                                    LIMITS        OF
                                                                                                                                                                        EXCAVATION
                                                     e@
                                                ¢
Ne   ae
     We
        ee                                                                                                   peGwar,
                                                                                                                  sawore)
       SEaTuRe #5                                                 -f             4 ss
      Gmace wore)                                                      ™. are
                                                                                INFERRED       TENT     POs/Tion
                                                                                                                                                     ‘

                                                                                                                                                             ,e
                                    (NF ERED    Dooceway-
      io                                                                                                                                                 \




                 Ns             \      a    &                          “          Feature *5                                                    g@                      e
                                                              K         ‘ke ———         Sone     Joke        Dume           a                                     sim       pics
                                                                                                                                                                              —


                                      £\3
                                                                                           FEATURE 6A (Cooxing HeaserH)
                                                                                          -o ~     68( KETTLE Surrcer)


      Leqeno
                                                                                                                                  FEaTuRe                *7
           Rock on
           SumrFace         oF
           Kame

                                                       is
                                                                                                                                     at
                                                                                                                                     athe
                                                                                                                                            y    d
                                                                                                                                                              4
           Rock       IN
           PLACE           IN                             ;                                                                      a     a        OE
           THe    Kamm

           Flar Rocrw
           ON Kame
           Sumrace

           Doq Turos

                                                                                                      Paka


                                                                                 TuLcukkANna                 Site
                                                          SumMir                Lake     Kame ~Anaxtuvuk                    Pass
                                                                                           Scarce
                                                                                                               +     s       o   Maerees
                                                                                       Hunters in a Landscape        137




  Notre:

  DENSITY   1s   SHOWN        b                                       DEAE:                  Sos, ,
                                                                                                  L>
  IN INCREASES OF                          :                  VY           Af,        SLES        ROK RK >
  FIVE BONES/M?                   ,            x                        ey          Neictclelstcts
                                                                        g/          RSS   2s               q
                                      xy                                                Se
  Excavatern  AREA
  16 256 9. METERS




                         Tutuxxana                    Sire        —     Bone     Density
                                                   Scarce    in       MetTers




75 Contour map of the density of caribou bones found on the Tulukkana site (cf. ill. 74).



in the archaeological literature of North America as children’s burials, ritual
cairns, or storage pits are really deadfall traps. Archaeologists need to be able to
identify accurately the very small and highly specialized sites of this kind used
in the past.

Processing Sites
Although a large number of Nunamiut sites relate to the hunting of caribou, there
are also many others where the processing of game took place. I have already
mentioned the butchering site at Anavik Springs and the hide drying location at
Kongumuvuk. Another example of this type of site documents an occasion when                                     74
   138      Hunters in a Landscape

            a family had killed about fifty caribou by driving them into a nearby lake. All the
            processing of meat for drying took place during a period of only twelve days or
     ~IOo
            so, yet the amount of debris deposited at the site was absolutely staggering. ‘wo
            huge dumps of marrow cracked bone were created ;the meat represented by this
            enormous quantity of bone, however, was not consumed there and the dumps,
            therefore, do not signify the remains of separate meals, For this reason, the
            quantity of debris provides an accurate measure neither of the number of people
            who occupied the site, nor of the length of time they resided there. This site, in
            fact, illustrates the danger of using a simple equation, such as that proposed by
            Yellen,'* for relating quantity of waste to duration of occupation. Before we can
            interpret the nature ofthe data found on archaeological sites, we must determine
            the types of behavior which generated them in the first place— we must reconstruct
            the function ofthe site. Certainly, my research among the Nunamiut has demon-
            strated that archaeological sites are formed by a wide variety of different activities,
            It has also demonstrated, however, that because these variable types of behavior
            leave different traces in the archaeological record, it will be possible to develop
            techniques that will allow us to recognize similar special-purpose locations used
            in prehistoric times.


                                                  OvTER       RING       (arg)


                                                       L     ACTIVir y
                                                 ole                         4h
                                                           R RING    (
                                                  nv                     ‘Nar,

                                                       ae
                                            >A
                                            ey
                                                                    NUCLEAR
                                                                      AREA




                                            a) oe
76 Model proposed by John
Yellen of an idealized !Kung
Bushmen camp. (Reproduced
with permission from Yellen
1977, fig. 12, p. 126.)




            The Layout of Residential Sites

            Ata still lower level of analysis, archaeologists need methods to study the patterns
            of use that take place within individual sites, Residential locations, as well as
            special-purpose sites, can be conceived of as being composed of small ‘modules’.
            One of the most basic building blocks of sites are the structures in which people
            live. Studies of hunting and gathering groups demonstrate that, since the nature
            of the residential modules and the way they are distributed in space can vary
                                                                    Hunters in a Landscape     139


                                                                                               SMe
                                                                                                   Pe




 77 Residential camp occupied by Nharo Bushmen living in the central desert of Namibia
c. 1927. The Ring Model described by Yellen (ill. 76) is clearly illustrated in this photo-
graph. Note the meat hanging in the tree to the right (cf. ill. 65). (Photo by L. Fourie,
courtesy of the Africana Museum, Johannesburg).



widely, archaeologists must be able to recognize_all the possible permutations in
their data.
   Yellen’* has proposed a general model for !Kung Bushmen residential camps 76
in which the huts housing individual families are tightly grouped in a circle. In
the middle of the ring ofhuts is an empty space used communally by all the people
in the group; scattered around on the periphery of the ring of huts is an area where
special-purpose tasks are carried out. The Bushmen camp pictured in ill. 77
provides a good example of the spatial structure summarized in Yellen’s model.
Similarly, a very tight cluster of huts with the hearths only about 3 meters apart
can be observed at dry season camps of the Birhor, a group of hunters and 1
gatherers in India.’
   Not all Bushmen camps, however, conform to this idealized pattern.'® And
other hunter-gatherer groups exhibit forms of internal site arrangement which
deviate from Yellen’s model: for example Seri Indian camps in Mexico are laid                 78
140    Hunters in a Landscape



        fj




       78-Seri Indian camp located on Tiburon island, Sonora, Mexico. The structures in the
       settlement are laid out in a linear fashion which contrasts strongly with Yellen’s Ring
       Model of settlements (ill. 76). The huts currently in use have been placed in and among
       the remains of previously used structures, some of whose remains are visible in the far
       right of the photograph. For an excellent description of Seri settlements, see Ascher (1962).
       (Photo by E. H. Davis, 1922, courtesy of the Museum of the American Indian, Heye
       Foundation.)



       out according to a linear pattern and considerable space is left between the
       shelters of different residential units. As with the Bushmen sites, the distribution
  19   of single dwellings varies among different Birhor settlements. For instance on one
       occasion when four bands were camped at the same location, each of the bands
       maintained its individual integrity by establishing a separate camp. In addition,
       the huts were not placed according to Yellen’s ring model, as on other occasions,
       but in a semi-circle. Although this is clearly a single settlement despite the spatial
       separation of the different groups, the archaeological remains of such a site could
       easily be misinterpreted as a series of discrete unintegrated settlements, for there
       would be clear gaps in the distribution of debris between the clusters of huts
       represented by the different bands.
          The use of physical space to represent social distance, as demonstrated in the
       Birhor case, may be a principle common to all hunter-gatherer sites. If true, this
       generalization could be useful for guiding the interpretation of archaeological
       sites. There is, however, a further complication that is well illustrated by Nun-
   EDGE   oF
   HicH   GROUND-




                                               ‘é
                                    Hur   Locations~        i SS




                (        /    Camp  oF Banc  A
                               > LOCATED  ON                 fe)
                                                            {>
                              Xx CENTRAL   ELEVATED
                              KNOL                     ag



                                                                                                                   4

                                                                                            Hut    Locarions
                                                                                                               3

                                                                                                                   @'
                                                                                                                   2




                                                      PancwH         Pera    Came    196!
                                                          Four         Birnor   Banos
                                                                    Binar, INDIA
                                                                        Scace   in Feer
                                                                   eo     8s    wo    120   40    %O   180




79 Map of the camp occupied simultaneously for four Birhor bands (see ill. 1). Note the
large distances between each band and the non-circular grouping of the huts in relation to
each other. (Cf. Williams 1968.)



amiut summer residential sites. At these locations, although the distinct social
groupings or bands set up camp in different areas of the same site, the various
houses within each band are often spaced out over large distances. At one site,
for which the documentation is particularly good, there was an average of go
meters between the residences of members of the same social unit. How would an
archaeologist interpret this spatial distribution represented by separate scatters
of debris: as different sites, as many separate social groups, or, as it actually was,
two bands composed of several families?
142   Hunters in a Landscape

         If we were to examine a large number of additional ethnographic cases, great
      variability would be apparent in the way residential modules are distributed
      through space. Both the arrangement of the structures (clustered or dispersed, in
      circles or semi-circles, etc.) and the distance between each unit varies from group
      to group and within the seasonal cycle of any particular ethnic group or band.
      Archaeologists have to recognize that this type of variability exists, to understand
      the factors that cause it, and to create methods for monitoring it in the archaeo-
      logical record.



      The Challenge to our Methodology

      As I have documented in this chapter, the settlement pattern of hunting and
      gathering groups may be seen as being organized on a series of levels ranging
      from the enormous area covered by a group in the lifetime of one of itsmembers,
      through the residential core area and site complex, down to the distribution of
      houses and hearths at a single site. (The analysis of features on individual sites is
      considered in greater detail in the next chapter.) In order to understand the
      archaeological record of hunter-gatherers, therefore, we have to conduct research
      on all these different levels. Not only do we need to develop methods which will
      allow us to recognize the kinds of organized dynamics which took place at each
      scale of landscape use, but we must also be able to detect variations through time
      between different groups of hunters and gatherers in the organization of behavior
