      at the regional level, the residential core level, the site complex level, the individual
      site level and the activity level.
          It will be clear that in this chapter I have not attempted to develop methods
      for inference in relation to patterns of prehistoric land use, although hopefully
      some of this material will indeed eventually be used to achieve that goal.’ For
      the present, I have merely tried to illustrate something of the nature of the
      problem which faces archaeologists. It is possible, however, on the basis of the
      examples presented here, to summarize several lessons to be learned by archaeolo-
      gists and to suggest some ways forward.
         In the light of the Nunamiut data presented here, the assumption that a single
      group of people generates sites which are internally homogeneous is not realistic.
      Similarly, the expectation that the closer sites are to one another, the more they
      should be alike, is also not sustained by the experiences reported above. The
      existence of site complexes, in which behavior related to a single activity is in fact
      carried out at three or more distinct places, is inconsistent with the way many
      archaeologists in the past have attempted to give meaning to similarities and
      differences in artifact assemblages, At least in some regions and with some hunter-
      gatherer societies, we may expect that the more intense the utilization of a par-
                                                                 Hunters in a Landscape     143
ticular locale, the more diverse will be the separate types of settlements and sites
placed in the locale — as for example at Tulugak Lake, which merits consideration
in more detail. For instance, it is generally true that within the environment
exploited by many hunting and gathering peoples there are certain places like
Tulugak Lake which provide both a greater nucleation of critical resources and
also better chances for success in obtaining mobile resources. Archaeologically,
such places will be extremely complicated.
   Each site thus reflects the unique sequence of uses to which that particular
place has been put in the past. Clearly, the internally differentiated nature of
activities and the spatial segregation of the places where different tactics are
executed is consistent with some of the problems in the Mousterian data reported
by Bordes (Chapter 4). But make no mistake: these ethnoarchaeological experi-
ences do not provide direct solutions to the ‘Mousterian problem’. The conclusion
we can draw from my work among the Nunamiut is not that my functional
arguments about Mousterian variability were correct, but rather that archaeo-
logical methods for inference are in general very inadequate. Clearly, the con-
ventions used by most Palaeolithic archaeologists have been shown to be incap-
able of coping with the variability and diversity of land use illustrated by the
Nunamiut case. The challenge provided by ethnoarchaeology of this sort is to
forge better methodologies,                                                             -
   How can we take the lessons derived from this research about the dynamics of
land use and apply them to studies of prehistoric stone tool assemblages       ?1* How
should we move from the overall ethnographic picture of one complete dynamic
system to the stationary, site-based perspective utilized in archaeology? What is
clear is that the individual sites which belong to the same hunter-gatherer system
of land use are in fact different. For this reason, a site classification scheme using
similarity in structure as its criteria is not likely to group correctly sites which
were produced in the context of one type of environmental exploitation or even
within the life of a single individual. This brings us back again to the methodo-
logical challenge: how do we recognize that different things found at different places
represent components of the same system?
   Much of my own work along these lines has previously focused on animal
bones,’? because they are elements common to the present and the past. It has
been possible to show that the skeletons of animals have been modified and
distributed on sites according to particular principles which were ultimately
determined by the basic activities which were also carried out at different places
in the landscape, in much the same way as I have illustrated in this chapter. In
the next chapter, I wish to turn to other avenues of research which might aid
archaeology in diagnosing in other forms of data (such as lithic assemblages)
variability caused by differences in the use of places, as illustrated in this chapter.
This new research concentrates on the study of site structure.
                           /
               People in their Lifespace

Site Structure: A Challenge to Archaeological Interpretation

As we saw in the first three chapters, one of the Big Questions archaeologists are
currently seeking ways to understand is how early man organized his life space —
the location and the spatial relationship of activities such as sleeping, eating,
food-getting, tool manufacture, etc. We want to find out to what extent early
man, like his modern counterpart, made consistent and specialized use of space.
For instance, once they began to utilize tools regularly, did our ancestors organize
their use of space so that tools were ready where needed, or did they simply
produce and discard them in the places of their use? Did they share food, as
modern man tends to do? In other words, the study of past use of space asks the
fundamental question: how were man’s activities organized at different places?
   We saw in the last chapter how certain modern hunter-gatherers move among
a number of localities, carrying out different types of activities at each one. As I
tried to emphasize there, if the archaeologist is to understand the dynamics of
similar systems in the past, he must be able to diagnose the nature and organiza-
tion of the tasks conducted at each site. Likewise, if the ‘Mousterian problem’ is
to be resolved, we must be able to reconstruct at least some of the activities that
took place at Mousterian sites, and to do so in terms of data which are independent
of the make-up of lithic assemblages, since we would like to find out if the com-
position of stone tool assemblages varies in regular ways with other facts which
might be understandable in terms of the past. More specifically, archaeologists
would like to be able to interpret in terms ofprehistoric living conditions facts such as
the various frequencies of tools, the differences in the distributions of tools and
animal remains, or the relationship of particular types of debris from stone tool
manufacture with respect to the tools themselves.
   The study of site structure — that is, the spatial distribution of artifacts, features,
and fauna on archaeological sites — was one of the challenges I took up when I
began ethnoarchaeological research. My ethnographic experiences impressed
on me the fact that there were generally clusters of variables which, depending
on the situation, to a large extent determined the way behavior at different
locations was organized. For instance, in hunting camps the relative success of

                                           144
                                                               People in their Lifespace   145
the hunting party affected very substantially the patterns of food consumption,”
the activities conducted, and in many instances the duration of the camp’s
occupation.   On the other hand, in residential camps such situation-dependent
conditions were rarely apparent and, where they were, they reflected drastic,
system-wide conditions of stress which triggered emergency strategies never seen
in hunting camps.*‘In short, I observed that different patterns of assemblage
variability were referable to functionally different types of sites. Nevertheless,
despite these functional differences there also appeared to be an underlying stable
set of traits characteristic of the internal spatial organization of life at a site.
Consequently, while researching the problem of assemblage variability in fauna,
I took every opportunity to document the spatial pattern of finds within sites
whose function, duration of occupation, season of use, and so on, were known; I
did so in the hope of building up, as it were, a ‘library’ of materials which could
perhaps serve as the basis for developing criteria for recognizing factors which
conditioned the spatial organization of activities on sites, regardless of function.
   One of the elements common to all sites, past and present, is the physical size
and structure of the humans who use them: perhaps this simple fact is the key to
interpreting site structure? If one could show from ethnographic cases that certain
types ofspatial patterns are the result of simple body mechanics, then one would
have a basis for making inferences about the past — or at least as far back as our
ancestors had basically the same type of body. The relationship between the
human body and the spatial patterns would act as an ‘eternal object’ (to use
Whitehead’s* term) for this research domain, because it could be assumed to be
uniform between the past and the present.
   Just as the bony skeleton provides the framework for the body around which
the muscles and organs operate, so the arrangement of facilitzes on a site provides
the skeleton around which activities are organized; the flow of persons and goods
is accommodated to the facilities within a site. Phillip Wagner has defined
facilities as follows:
  ... containers like baskets, and pottery, vessels, boxes, buildings, . . . bases like
  roads and platforms . . . and barriers like fences, dams, walls . . . Facilities
  representa rearrangement of features of the environment, or the addition of
  features to the environment. . . they control or prevent the movement of solid,
  liquid, or gaseous material and animate beings.”

The ‘skeletal morphology’ of a site — what I call the szte framework — is the arrange-
ment of such facilities. From an archaeological perspective, we see the facilities
as features and the use areas and circulation pathways as item patterning and/or the
spatial clustering of artifacts. |am convinced that fundamental clues to the character
of activities, the labor organization employed in their execution, and the antici-
pated use of a location in terms of the overall subsistence-settlement system, are
146    People in their Lifespace



                         Site   FRAMEWORk_




                                                                               BONE     SPLINTER
                                                                                DumPe
 CONSTRUCTION
  House   ——;
            /




            Bone    SPuNTeRs

            HeaerH
                                                     STONE
                                                     BOlLing        HEARTH
                STONES

                                                                                      WINTER   IOUS &
            Wood



                               PALANGANA     SITE;     House             *1   AREA
                                   TULUGAK     LAKE,           ALASKA
                                               aaa             ee




       80 Site framework for a Nunamiut Eskimo winter settlement, the Palangana site. (Location
       ofsite is marked on ills. 53 and 66.) There was almost certainly also a meat rack here, but
       it was not discovered. The small structure noted as a ‘construction house’ was erected for
       the men to stay in while they built the winter house and was not in use during the occupation
       of the house. For a description of this site, see Binford (1978a, pp. 431-49).



       coded into the organization of the site structure. We need to learn about the
       factors which affect how people establish, lay out and use a location; equally
       important is the way a group maintains a site.
  80      The best way to illustrate these general points is by example. At a typical
       Eskimo winter house site, there is a characteristic site framework composed of
       several basic facilities, including a house, a meat rack, dog tethers, and outside
       hearths. Distributed around and among these features are a variety of specialized
       activity areas. These might include a household midden, a dump of bone
       splinters, a dog yard, work space, a wood pile and associated chopping area, a
       children’s play area and, finally, areas for human waste disposal. Such areas are
       not facilities per se, but are places where particular functions relevant to the life of
                                                                People in their Lifespace    147
the social unit present are carried out. The land surfaces upon which certain
activities are regularly conducted may not involve their actual modification in
any intentional manner, although they may be cleaned or maintained, Archaeo-
logically, they would not appear as soil disturbances or an arrangement of natural
or manufactured materials (as in the case of ahouse or hearth), but we would see
the archaeological clues to their functions in the form ofthe spatial arrangements
of items, both tools and debris, which had been incidentally produced at the area
or placed there intentionally. Woven into the structure of facilities and use areas
are paths and avenues of access for both people and materials.
   From an archaeological perspective, given the outline above, what seems most
appropriate is a descriptive and analytical procedure which attempts to define
the site framework in terms of features and which is followed by a study of the
relationships between this skeletal framework and the dispersion of items. Un-
fortunately, the real world of archaeological remains rarely provides such an ideal
situation, It is a simple fact that in many, if not most, archaeological sites facilities
are not equally preserved and identifiable, thus complicating the proposed pro-
cedure. For instance, a hearth may be recognizable, but the former presence of
a house around the hearth may not be indicated by post molds or other such
structural clues.
   Our methods at present are inadequate for this task. For example, Leroi-
Gourhan® has advanced a model of site structure which attempts to infer the                 81
presence of a house from patterning in the dispersion of items. Not only is his
inference suspect because he chooses the cluster of items after assuming the
existence of a house in the first place,’ but I also find his suggestions less than
convincing given my own ethnographic experiences. Archaeologists need criteria
for distinguishing patterns that may appear in the absence of a house, or on sites
where residential types of facilities were not present.
   Adopting the viewpoint of formation processes, we see that sites are organized
by components or modules of the kind already described in Chapter 6. In the
example of the Eskimo site, I could speak quite meaningfully of the outside cook-
ing hearths, the dumps, the dog yard, the play area, etc. Long ago I referred to
such modules as activity areas. There has been considerable confusion in the
literature about this and related concepts, due at least in part to a failure to
distinguish between the properties of a living cultural system and patterning in
the archaeological remains (a confusion rightly anticipated by Schiffer and
Rathje® a number of years ago). Before continuing further, I must clarify exactly
what I mean by such concepts as ‘activity’, ‘toolkit’ and ‘activity area’. A toolkit
is a set of tools used in the execution of a task. An activity is an integrated set of
tasks, generally performed in a temporal sequence and in an uninterrupted
fashion. It is recognized that identical tasks may be integrated into different
activities: for example, the task of cutting meat may be integrated in the activity
148   People in their Lifespace




      81 Leroi-Gourhan’s model for a residential site. The hearth (Zone A), located in the doorway of
      the house or structure, is conceived as the focus of organized activities on the site; it marks
      the transition between space inside and outside a structure. The inside is conceived as the
      area of domestic usage and can be internally differentiated into two zones. In Zone B*
      persons sit around the fire and conduct various activities and social acts; it is likely to have
      been kept fairly clean as a place where the more delicate activities are conducted. Leroi-
      Gourhan describes Zone B! as the area where archaeologists will find small tools and ochre.
      The second area within the structure is Zone C, the sleeping area, where little in the way of
      artifacts or debris is to be expected. Around the hearth outside the structure is a further
      domestic space, Zone B*, which is considered to be the place where more crude activities,
      producing larger quantities of debris, are thought to have been localized. Such things as
      the waste from primary flint work, antler and bone processing, and stones used in cooking
      could be expected outside in Zone B*. Beyond are a series of concentric circles, Zones
      D, E, F, and G, which are conceived as follows: (D) zone of concentrated dumping and
      repeated disposal ; (E) zone of dispersed dumping; (F) space ofrare dumping, and (G) space
      of isolated finds. Given this model one can expect high and low density sides of a hearth
      with the high density side consisting of the area outside a house and the low density side on
      the inside. This is a good example of how a formation model can be used tojustify a series
      of conventions for interpreting archaeological remains. (Reproduced with permission
      from Leroi-Gourhan and Brézillon 1972, fig. 174, p. 254.)




      of butchering, preparation of meat for cooking or eating, etc. Activity areas are
      places, facilities, or surfaces where technological, social, or ritual activities occur.
      We can readily imagine individual activities which made use of a number of
      toolkits and, conversely, different activities which integrated one or more identical
      toolkits. It was because I expected this kind of mixing of components to be
      present in the archaeological record that a number of years ago I advocated the
      use of multivariate statistical techniques for the analysis of interassemblage
      variability.”
         Returning to a spatial viewpoint, it is consistent to anticipate that areas within
      sites could be equally complex: some might be multi-purpose locations, others
      places where individual activities or individual tasks were conducted. This line
      of thought leads to the conclusion that there is not necessarily an exact cor-
      respondence between a location and a toolkit, or even a single activity. It does
                                                                                                          wi




                                                                                                         ph
                                                                                                          —a
                                                               People in their Lifespace    149
not follow, however, that the location of artifacts has no structure and therefore
carries no information about the character of the past cultural system, Quite the
reverse: the challenge of interpreting site structure is no different from the
challenge of archaeology in general. How do we give accurate meaning to the
patterns we observe?!°
   We can begin the search for appropriate methods by studying how patterns in
site structure are formed in the present. In the remainder of the chapter, therefore,
I will illustrate some of the thought-provoking observations that I have made
among living peoples. I will focus on the spatial modules which underlie the
structure of the position and layout ofactivities (activity areas) and the associations
of items (toolkits), both of which archaeologists could detect through pattern-
recognition studies of site structure.



Working Around a Hearth

When people are working at a job which requires the use of a hearth, they tend
to carry out the task according to a spatial pattern which appears to be universal.
For example, a !Kung Bushman woman living in Botswana cracks mongongo                      82
nuts on an anvil located within an arm’s distance of the fire where the nuts are
roasted. For this chore she does not face the fire directly, but sits obliquely to it.
If she were actually facing the fire, there would not be adequate workspace in
front of her and she could not, of course, work in the embers of the fire. This same


82 Young Bushman male using
a bowdrill in a camp located at
Gautsha Pan. Note that he does
not face the fire directly but sits
sideways to it. The hearth is
located only a short distance
from a shelter within which
bedding is visible. A second
anvilislocated close to the hearth
on the opposite side from the .
seated worker. (Photo taken in
1975 by J. Kramer, courtesy of
the   South   African   Museum,
Cape Town.)
150    People in their Lifespace

       pattern is typical of work carried out by one person at or around a hearth: the
       worker sits with his or her body at right-angles to the hearth and within arm’s
       length of it. Similarly, an Aborigine from the Central Desert of Australia will sit
       with his side to the fire when he is warming resin in the embers for hafting a stone
       tool to its wooden handle, The same positioning can be observed when a Navajo
       woman prepares bread at an outside hearth. The pattern has been recorded by
       anthropologists for a wide variety of ethnographic settings; I have also observed
       it frequently in the course of analyzing a substantial number ofold ethnographic
       photographs.
          Having noted-a basic pattern of activity around a hearth, additional features
       associated with it or important differences from it become significant. Inside
       substantially built houses, stones are typically placed next to the hearth to be used
       as small tables for cutting meat, laying out food, or placing containers. When a
       whole group of people are working around a hearth, the pattern differs from the
       solitary seated worker model. In order for all the people to have adequate work-
       space, everyone moves out away from the fire; consequently, one observes a
  86   circular arrangement of debris around the hearth rather than the perpendicular
       distribution associated with one worker.

                                                                83 Alyawara Aborigine man
                                                                from central Australia at a
                                                                small processing site pre-
                                                                paring spinifex resin for haft-
                                                                ing stone      tools.   While
                                                                working he sits with his side
                                                                to the hearth.




                         ‘           :   nie   oe We    “z      84 Navajo woman from the
                  ie             ;             Se,      “       southwestern   United States
              “      :       3           x     eos     hee      preparing bread at an outside
                                                                hearth. Note the position of
                                                                the hearth in relation to the
                                                                woman     and her artifacts.
                                                                (Photo courtesy of Susan
                                                                Kent.)
                                                                                                                      People in their Lifespace                            151


                                                                                >     INFERRED
                                                                                                   OUTER         ENGE       OF       Tveunin
                                                                                                   (M036        wouse)




          EDGE   of
          EROSION        —__,




    CH.    HIEARTH       A                    eas     E,          oe SO                            oe       Z         ae.                      ?

                     g           }       i,      ia        Sol        ot        :          fe     fp                             :     aE = Sone    Meal   -eom
                                 y   4           4    Mea        sy.                   J               .              ,                     BONE   JUICE PRODUCTION
          Limits  oF Bone                                                                                                              We   FiRE   CRACKED  ROCK
          DISTRIBUTION               Sige       Rs    CLL        ae                             DENSITY          OF       BONE
                                                                                                                                       @ = R0cKs     Nor        iwsiru
                                                                                                SHOWN      BY     CONTOURS




                         CLEAN   Lappy         Site        —          KOENQUMUVUK                           CREEK                    , ALASKA
                                                      ScALeE               IN       MetrTeERs


                                                                                                                                                           LR    Binrord




     85 Map of the Clean Lady site at Kongumuvuk Creek, Anaktuvuk Pass, Alaska showing
     the arc-shaped arrangement of rocks forming a-table adjacent to the hearth (D) inside the
     moss house. This pattern is typical when a single cook habitually uses a particular place
     around a hearth. Note how clean the area inside the rock table is. An outside hearth (A) is
     present on this site as are a small door dump to the right of the house entrance and a very large
     bone midden to the left of the door.



86 Family group of !Kung
Bushmen processing mon-
gongo nuts. Note the circular
arrangement of the group
seated some distance back
from the hearth located in
the    foreground.     (Photo
courtesy of Patricia Draper.)
152    People in their Lifespace




                                                              87 Debris from stone tool
                                                              production as it lay just after
                                                              a worker had finished re-
                                                              moving flakes from a core.
                                                              The activity took place in
                                                              the men’s camp         at the
                                                              Bendaijerum     site occupied
                                                              by Alyawara       in   central
                                                              Australia.


          Another important observation about site structure can be illustrated by stone
       tool manufacture among the Alyawara Aborigines in Australia.'' In one case I
  87   watched a seated worker knocking flakes off acore. The tiny impact chips created
       as a result of this flaking would later provide a clue to where the man had been
       seated, because they fell between his legs and were left in place. The flakes, how-
       ever, were arranged carefully in an arc in front of him. The shape and size of this
       arc were determined by the length of the man’s arm. A similar pattern was also
       created in a very different part of the world (northern Alaska), where I have
       observed some very old Eskimo men working stone.
          Spatial models of seated workers are often complicated by the presence of more
       than one individual. Similar but parallel actions by different individuals, as well
       as their different actions, generate overlapping distributions. Ill. 88 illustrates
       nicely a classic hearth-centered seating arrangement involving a number of
       individuals, I think the reader can appreciate the complex nature of the spatial
       patterns generated by the items dropped by such a group of seated persons. This
       type of distribution has been converted into an idealized model (ill. 89) based on
       actual observations made at an Eskimo site where a group was frequently observed


                                                              88 Classic circular arrange-
                                                              ment around a hearth as
                                                              demonstrated     by Nharo
                                                              Bushmen at Ganzi, Bots-
                                                              wana, c. 1969. (Photo by H.
                                                              Steyn, courtesy of the South
                                                              African    Museum,      Cape
                                                              Town.)
                                                                     People in their Lifespace   153


                                            FORWARD
                                                       ae
                                           Joss Area
                                                                 EN?      bab
                                                                          (
                                                               Cin                   Fe
                                                        ae           v          oN




                                                               BACKWARD
                                                             TOSS  AREA


89   Model   of drop and     toss
zones as developed from ob-          "MEN’S"       Outsip=                HEARTH           MopeEL
servations at the Mask site in                         2S            Mane
Anaktuvuk    Pass, Alaska.   (Cf.    Cee          Se                     ————

Binford 1978b.)


sitting in a circle around a fire. The debris which was dropped produced a ring of
small items centered around the hearth; the disposal of large items, however, was
different, these objects being tossed behind the people away from the sitting area.
    Let me illustrate this general seating model by reference to a specific case
recorded among the Nunamiut, in which men in a hunting camp were pro-
cessing caribou bone for marrow. If we look at the spatial distribution of the tiny
bone chips created by breaking open the bone to get the marrow, we see that there
is a concéntration around the hearth — the drop zone. These small fragments of
bone are analogous to the small impact chips formed during the reduction of
stone cores (ill. 87). As in the case of the lithic waste, the tiny pieces of bone were
left in situ by the Eskimo at the location where the marrow cracking actually took
place. On the other hand, the spatial distribution of the large pieces of bone — the
toss zone —is different, because the ends of the bones were tossed or placed behind
the men in an open area after the marrow had been removed. This tossing aside
of larger items is described by the Eskimo as a kind of ‘preventive maintenance’ of
the seating area. When I asked the men about these different modes of disposal,
they would say ‘Who wants to sit down on a large bone?”
   The presence of several individuals engaged in different actions around a hearth
can contribute to variability in both content and form of the debris distributions,
154   People in ther Lifespace



                               KOASTING       AND
                               WARNING        HEARTH




            HIEARTH      FOR
           BOING       WATER                                      SMALL     Bone
              ;                                                   SWick   Qumr


                       BeHnaviorar. OBSERVATIONS
                   HearrHs   A& B AnaxktieTtrauK KILL SITE
                                      ScALE         IN    METERS

                                     °        1       2       3      4        5
                                                                                  L.R.   BINFORD




      go Behavioral observations made at Hearths A and B on the Anaktigtauk kill and butchering site at
      Anaktuvuk Pass, Alaska, (Location given in ill. 53.) Two men (nos. 2 and 3) were seated at
      Hearth B cracking caribou bones and eating the marrow. Bone splinters discarded around
      them as the bones were broken entered the drop zone. Larger articular ends of the bones were
      placed to one side or thrown slightly behind them in the éoss zone. Person no. 1 arrived and
      suggested that they prepare some warm broth from the boiled fragments of caribou ribs
      which he had with him, as well as from some ofthe broken articular ends of the long bones
      left over after marrow eating. For this purpose a quick flaming fire was kindled at a second
      hearth (A) and a coffee can was suspended over the fire for boiling the broth (cf. ill. 72).
      Individual no. 1 attended the fire and kept the pot boiling until the broth was considered
      ready. It was then poured into cups and the bone fragments remaining in the can were
      dumped across to the other side of Hearth A. Preparation of the broth was carried out by
      no. I in a standing position. After the broth was consumed, no. 1 collected many of the
      fragments from the extraction of marrow and prepared a second pot. After it was served,
       the scraps of bone were dumped behind the sitting position of no. 1.
                                                                                            People in their Lifespace               199

In the situation illustrated in ill. go, individual no, 1 is engaged in boiling up bone
fragments to produce a kind of broth, an activity for which a separate hearth is
being used (although this is not always felt to be necessary). The important point
here is that, after pouring off the broth into cups for himself and the others to
drink, he dumped the contents of the boiling can across the fire or threw them
directly to his left as he stood and faced the hearth: these areas are labeled ‘small
dumps’ in ill. go. This action — the disposal of an aggregated mass of refuse, as
opposed to the discrete items we have been discussing so far — obviously produces
homogeneous concentrations of items, Such localized distributions break up and
punctuate the pattern of dropped and tossed items accumulating simultaneously.
On subsequent days at the site, when more men were present, a third hearth was
built in a position towards the bottom of ill. go. The prior existence of the small
bone juice dump located behind individual no. 1 acted as a sort of ‘magnet’
attracting further disposal, so that most of the items tossed away by men seated
at the later hearth were added to the earlier dump, still visible from the previous
day.




gi Activities observed at the Mask site, Anaktuvuk Pass, Alaska, on a spring afternoon. _

                                                                                      Loe
                                                                    |    MASK      SITE          |
                                                                OBSERVED LOCALIZATION OF ACTIVITIES
                                                                                   AFTERNOON JUNE 5


                                                      CARIBOU   SKIN- SLEEPING




                                                                                                     We                    ——
                                                                                                    NE =o
                                                                                                      CJ         eATING/ TALKING


                                                                                                        Sy ‘@
                             a       ie                     :                 Bi      4                 ie       CRAFT ACTIVITIES

                                                                                                             A
                                 :                         a                  Slee                               WATCHING FOR
                                     O We         /         ss                                                   GAME
                                          WP Ro                   5
            ACTIVE HEARTH.                '                               ;



                                           :,


                                                                                       eS   IN METERS
                            Note:  Bone  DisTRISUTION
                            FROM  LEROI~ QOURHAN    e
                            BREZILLON                   19603   Fiqg.59
                                      \¢                    -    Se
                        .
                        See

                      frm ts,                      NS
                 an          aa       an       0   FORWARD           JOSS
                                           x            ZONE     -




                                                                               92 Toss zone model for men
                                                                               seated around an_ outside
                                                                               hearth superimposed on the
            Bone                  DisTRIBUTION
                                                                               actual distribution of bone
RELATIVE   TO "MEN'S"             ouTsiDe  FlEARTH                   MovoeEL
                                                                               artifacts on    the site of
           Py NCEVENT       No.                            1                   Pincevent    One.   (Archae-
               SCALE IN METERS                                                 ological data based on Leroi-
                                                                               Gourhan and Brézillon 1966,
                                                                               fig. 59, Pp. 335-)


          So far, these examples have illustrated three different modes of disposal: (1)
       dropping discrete items 7m situ, (2) tossing away discrete items, and (3) tossing
       away aggregated items en masse. In the case of dropping, the items tend to come
       to rest in the immediate area where they were processed or worked; larger items
       or aggregates of smaller items, in contrast, are tossed to the periphery of the work
       areas where they were used.



       Hearths, Inside and Outside

       The distribution of debris around a hearth gives us clues as to whether the activity
       in question took place inside or outside a house, For instance, I was able to
       document the way the Nunamiut Eskimo used space in a hunting camp (the
       Mask site) over a long period of time. On my plan of the site (ill. 91), one can see
       the patterns of activity which were taking place at one moment in time: one man
                                        WALK         our   Toss              1
                                                ZOnNe=     bobs soe   Nor


                                   PERSON             IN




                                                                                          AREA     Not
                                                                                          "EXPLAINED"


                                                                                                   ae
                                                                                          BY   ROTATION




93 Formation model for the              y        :
                                    -       RotateEnp         HEARTH
hearths at Pincevent One. In                >        DIsTRIBUTION
response to a change in wind
direction (symbolized by the
broken arrows), the occu-
pants rotated their position                                                 Poss)BLE
from one hearth to another
adjacent hearth. Such an
                                    FoRMATION                     MopEL    DEVELOPMENT
extensive use of space would
                                       RotareD                    Toot. DisteiBuUTION
not be characteristic within
the limited shelter ofa house.                       PINCEVENT                      No.   1
(Archaeological data based                                   SCALE          IN   METERS
on      Leroi-Gourhan      and
Brézillon   1966,   fig. 56, p.                                                                o     ry


331.)
                                                                                          LR BINFORD




was sleeping on a caribou skin; another was seated to one side, making tools; a
third was watching for caribou; as in the previous example, most of them were
arranged around the fire chatting. Predictably, the men seated in a semi-circle
around the fire had tossed their unwanted food debris either into that area around
the hearth where the smoke was most dense due to the wind direction, or else over
their shoulder, thus creating a distinctive ‘toss-zone’ spatial pattern,
   These distinctive dumps and toss zones would not occur inside a house, because
people rarely throw waste materials against the walls of their home. Put another
way, maintenance tactics in intensively used spaces inside a house tend to be quite
different from those in extensively used contexts outside. As a further consequence
of such behavior, outside and inside hearths vary in the degree to which the
distribution of ash and other debris spreads away from the hearth. In my experi-
ence, hearths used for cooking inside houses are usually lined with substantial
stones to prevent the flooring of the house (vegetation, skins or mats) from catch-
ing fire. The stones containing the hearth also prevent the ash from being
         People in their Lifespace

         dragged out into the seating and work areas which are concentrated abouta hearth
         in the confined space of a house. On the other hand, outside hearths are generally
         not so contained, When plants or animals are being cooked, the constant search-
         ing in the ashes for the roasted foods causes ash and fire-cracked rock to be
         dragged away from the center of the hearth; over time this results in considerable
         smearing of ash, charcoal and other hearth debris all around the seat of the fire.
         Ill. 94, for instance, shows a Masarwa Bushman woman scraping ash out ofa
         hearth in order to recover roasted nuts. As fires are kindled over and over again
         in the same general area and this smearing increases, the center of the fire tends
         to drift. Large distinctive hearth features occur solely in areas outside houses,
         where space is less constrained and activities may be more extensive in character.
             Our knowledge about the meaning of the distribution of waste can be used to
92, 93   interpret the behavior that took place at the French Palaeolithic site of Pincevent,
         dated to the Magdalenian period about 15,000 years ago.'? If one takes the
         seating model of men around a hearth from the modern Eskimo hunting stand at
         the Mask site, readjusts the scale, and applies it directly to the distribution of
         debris from stone tool manufacture at this archaeological site, it fits exactly. The
         excavator of Pincevent, Leroi-Gourhan, interpreted the pattern of archaeological
         remains at this site as evidence for a house, but I doubt that he is correct: as we
         have seen in the ethnographic record at least, the doughnut-shaped distribution
         of waste material is typical of activities which take place out-of-doors.
            Ethnoarchaeological research provides additional evidence to support my
         interpretation of Pincevent. When people are sitting outside with no shelter, they
         alter their position frequently in accordance with the wind direction. For instance,


                                                           94 Masarwa Bushman woman
                                                           dragging ash out of a fire while
                                                           recovering nuts which had been
                                                           roasted. Note the arrangement of
                                                           the hammer, anvil and nuts where
                                                           a seated worker had been working
                                                           earlier (cf. ill. 82). (Photo courtesy
                                                           of the National Cultural History
                                                           Museum, Pretoria.)




                                                                                                    77.i




                                                                                                      ie
95 Leroi-Gourhan’s reconstruction
of the three hearths at Pincevent
One. (Reproduced with permission
from Leroi-Gourhan and Brézillon
1966, fig. 78, p. 363.)


if there is a flat area where people prefer to sit, they will locate their hearth accord-
ingly; if, however, the wind direction changes so that the smoke begins to disturb
them, they do not abandon their preferred position, but simply turn around on
the spot and build a new fire. In this way, they donot have to move all their gear
to another side of the original fire and sit where they had previously been tossing
their garbage. When one is not constrained by a house or a temporary shelter,
then building another hearth is easier than relocating oneself relative to existing
facilities. Since wind direction has no effect on the orientation of debris with
respect to a hearth within a house, the rotation of hearths would only be expected
for fires used outside.
   The distribution of the debris in relation to the three hearths at Pincevent             92, 93
suggests that only one person dominated the use of two hearths. What appears to
have happened is that the wind changed direction and the seated worker simply
rotated 180 degrees and built another hearth to avoid the smoke. Since wind only
affects hearths outside, Leroi-Gourhan’s reconstruction of a complex skin tent              95
over all three hearths!? cannot be sustained, at least in terms of our new under-
standing of site structure derived from ethnoarchaeological research.
160    People in their Lifespace



                             ~@                            SLEEPING                                         PIE ARTH
                                                            EPRESSIONS
                                                                       nny,
                                                                                                                    sth
                                            a mi) oS         wn,                                               wo         %
                                                                                  Z                     =     5               nw
                                                                                                                               =
                                                                                      ZZ               y$                     ::
                                                                                           My “iyanw’ Sy       2 “Haw *




                                   N@ATATUARA                       MEN'S     BUSH               CAMP
                                            REDR4WN            FROM   GOULD   I977,        Fig. 22

                               AUSTRALIAN                              ABORIGINES

                   Baek     BEOS


                                                                                                                          NU ita,
                                   ay,                                                                                     Wine’
                                   eK            t,




                                    REDREAWN                 FROM     VELDER      1963,             Fig.2




                                                  " \y7
                                             S         %                                                       OS
                                        =             ww




                                                                                                             I Ora’
                                                                                                             ASS


                                                              BED  OF WOVEN
                   BED    OF DRY                              PALM BRANCHES                                 7 ©)
                                                                                                              Yn|
                   LEAVES

                                   MraBrR)                  Came       * 4 —12                 Aputtrs

             HUNTER—               GATHERERS                           OF         NorRTH                            THAILAND
                                                            ScALE       IN    METERS

                                                                                                                                   =         10
                                                                                                                                       LE   BINFORD



       96 Comparative sleeping arrangements documented among the Australian Aborigines
       and Mrabri of North Thailand (see ill. 1). Note the recurrent patterns of alternating beds
       and hearths. (Based on Gould 1977, fig. 22; Velder 1963, fig. 2.)



       Sleeping Areas

       Another way in which the size and basic mechanics of the human body affect
       patterning in the archaeological record may be seen in terms of the space required
       for sleeping. Although many different arrangements for sleeping have been
  96   observed in the ethnographic record, they all depend ona limited series of known
       factors. For instance, in a Ngatatjara Australian Aborigine camp occupied by an
       all-male hunting party,'* an alterating pattern of beds and hearths occurred. In
       contrast, when married couples are present at the camps, as has been recorded
                                                                                                                                                                         People in their Lifespace                                      161




                                                                                                                         \ lag ,
      j                                       hi                                             :
                                          bint
                                            oe                                           \
                                                                                           cS                      S
                                                                                                                    aS                   ()
                                                                                                                                            i



                                                                                             ©

                                                                                                                               \
                                                                                                               z              RY                                                                                            =
                                                                                                                   fay"            lay                                                                                      =
                                                                                                                                                1uA\                                                      Dp           S=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ¥
              SLEEPING                    AREA                           M                                                                                                    %/ “fyy vilowhi"'S              s’
                               Scarce     iN        MerTreERS                                                                                                                     Ee          aca         ”
                                                                                                                                                                         //                        “amy




                                                                 t                                                                 —2.15
                                               Y ny,                                                                                     Le
                                                       ;$|       |        :                                                              Vix%          xES
                                                        qs            s                                                                     ZaN
                                                        5:           N=                                                                      “aN
                                                             5       N


                                                                 ©

                                                                         “%,                                              a               Ss
                                                                                                                                            y,
                                                                                                                                            SY %                 S
                                                                                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                                              yj ys                      “Annu


                                                                                                           nn            nH ENN F977                                                                                                }
                      ust BHF yer,                                                   2               5
                                     %          5                                        z           5


                           / \ \=                                                        BB                                                                                                    Q
          d                          {i                                              =           E                                                                                             a


                 tn              ow ws                                              S5               z%y
                Been                                                           ro                        ninininitigy®
                        52                                                                                 —                   1.9) ——
                        2.08                                                                                                   235                           :

     L                                                                                                                                                                                 LR BINFORD                               |



97 Sleeping area models: a generalized diagram of the arrangement and size of sleeping
areas based on observations among a large number of hunter-gatherer societies.




for the Mrabri (a hunting and gathering group in the tropical rainforest in
Thailand),!> the hearths were interspersed with double rather than single beds;
both single and double beds separated by hearths were laid out when the social
composition of the group was mixed. Regardless of slight variations in the number
of single and double beds, the basic arrangement, including the alternation of
beds and hearths, appears to be found all over the world.
   The size of the beds is not determined solely by the number of people sleeping
on them: more space is required, for example, if people sleep in clothes, rather
than under a cover. Given the relevant factors seen in contemporary situations 97
162   People in their Lifespace


                                                 f+              WAL    OF        ROCKSHELTER
                                        J i[E    NZ   Z| |B
                                                                                             peed        model


                                                                                        mm          +H        eE ARTH
         MaAssSiVE                                                                    RRR           '
                                                                                        x           ‘
         ROCKFALL                                                            ee         8    ST t LITHIC
                                                                                  /             ! DEBRIS

        Limits oF
       Ke Mey eTION




                                        OA.

                                                ye feen
                                                HEARTH




                 FORMATION           MopDELS                  FOR      TWO             LEVELS                 AT
               AsBri       Patauno      ,       Les            Evyzies                , FRANCE
                                       ScaAceE        iN      METERS

                                                                                                    ut
                                                                                                         L&   Binrors



      98 Formation model of the sleeping arrangements for several levels in the Abri Pataud
      rock shelter. (Archaeological information from Movius 1975.)



      analogous to those of prehistoric times, one could hope to calculate how much
      space would be required for a bed, in just the same way that an architect today
      determines how much space to allot for particular areas within a modern house.
         The sleeping arrangements typical of rock shelters are especially interesting,
      because variations in the positions of the beds are determined by the season of the
      year. In winter, beds are usually located parallel to the back of the shelter; for a
      single bed a hearth is placed about 1.20 meters from the rock, or about 2.00 meters
      in the case of a double bed. In summer, when ideally one would like to reduce
      exposure to the heat from the sun which has been absorbed by the rock, the beds
                                                                 People in their Lifespace   163

  are placed perpendicular to the back wall and people sleep with their heads away
  from the source of the heat; in this arrangement hearths are located between the
  beds.
     Just as with the models of seated workers around a hearth (discussed above),
  these general patterns of sleeping arrangements derived from the ethnographic
  record can also be applied to the interpretations of archaeological sites: the basic
  structure of the human     body, after all, has remained    the same   for a very long
  period. The value of this approach can be demonstrated by an analysis of the
  distribution of hearths at the Upper Palaeolithic site of Abri Pataud in France,
  excavated by H. I. Movius.'® By superimposing standard bed sizes, for which I
  have extensive ethnographic documentation, on the plan of a level belonging to
  the early Aurignacian I phase at Abri Pataud, I found that an arrangement of               98
  single beds in between the hearths fits the archaeological spatial patterns ex-
  tremely well. Among modern groups, as I have already mentioned, the alterna-
  tion of hearths and single beds typifies the sleeping patterns of all-male hunting
  camps. The combination of this form of bed distribution with the presence of
  roasting pits located in front of the sleeping area suggests to me that, at this date,
  the site was not used for residential purposes (as Movius originally proposed), but
  was a temporary camp.
     Another level at Abri Pataud, belonging to the Perigordian VI phase, should
  also be regarded as representing a temporary hunting camp, because of the
  spacing ofthe hearths. An interesting feature of the hearths in this level, however,
  is that the side which faces the sleeping area at the back of the rock shelter is flat;
  from ethnographic data, we know that hearths are often built this way to prevent
  bedding from catching fire. On the other hand, in a slightly different lens of the
  same level, there are some hearths located about 2.00 meters from the rear wall
  of the shelter, suggesting that double beds were positioned there. In front of the
  sleeping area is a group of stones which I would interpret as a windbreak. The
  archaeological remains of this portion of the rock shelter suggest that we are
  dealing with a small family camp, something quite different from the hunting
  camp previously described and probably representative of a different part of the
  overall settlement pattern of the Upper Palaeolithic people who lived in this area
  (cf. Chapter 6 for a description of variations in hunter-gatherer settlement
  patterns).



  Breakfast in Bed

  One further interesting fact has emerged from these ethnographic studies: the
  bedding area of a site is often not necessarily used exclusively for sleeping. Com-
  monly, people conceive of a bed as a private, personal area. If, for example, a




———————
      164             People in their Lifespace

                      man goes and sits on his bed, it is a signal that he does not want to be bothered.
                      He may do a variety of tasks while there — think quietly, make tools, comb his
                      hair — but the rest of the community knows that he does not want to talk. I have
               99     found this same relationship between personal space and sleeping area among all
                      the hunting and gathering groups with whom I have worked. I have even
                      observed men in hunting camps make beds which are in a sense symbolic, since
                      they are not used at all for sleeping, but simply as a place where one can repair
                      tools in peace and quiet or just be by oneself,
                         Such use ofbeds as personal spaces at a camp creates some interesting distribu-
                      tions of material which we can also hope to monitor in the archaeological record.
                      Hunter-gatherers usually consume a prepared meal as a group in the evening,
                      but often everyone takes some of the left-overs from the meal, such as cold meat
                      or a rabbit bone, and puts them by their bed so that they can have a snack for
                      breakfast. Understandably, in the morning when it may be cold and people are
                      likely to be sleepy and slightly grumpy, they are content to sit on their bed and
                      eat in silence. As a result, a small midden or deposit of waste is created around
                      each bed. In addition to left-overs from the previous day, the middens around the
                      beds may contain the bones of small mammals which have not been shared among



—
                      the group but cooked in the hearths by the beds and consumed there. The waste



                                                                 Oe         of        EXCAVATION



                                                                                                            99 Pintupi Aborigine camp
                   ETHNOGAPHIC                                                   =
                                                                                 N;
                                                                                      a   ¥
                                                                                              AN
                                                                                                            showing small hearths and
                   CONTEXT                                                                                  waste fragments from break-
                   KNOWN~
                   EXCAVATION                                                                               fast snacks around the sleep-
                   BY  BRIAN                                                                                ing areas. (Based on Hayden
                    Hav Pen,            IS79                                                                1979, fig. 125B, p. 152.)


                   "Corporate ”
                     hearth


                                                                                                                                            U)Fe
                                                                                                                                             PI



                                                                                                                                            3




                                                                                                                                            3
                                                      Bed        hearth                                                                     ?
                               \)   /                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                            ;
          %                    "
          %                \                A
              “y                            =
              Ny      ts
    Sea        My
                ting ws
                   iiF                  =2                                                >
‘                                       ®
                                                                          4=THREE             YOUNG   MEN
                                                                          2=MAN & Wire
                                                                          @= GRINDING 4sTONE


                   PINTUPI                  —         AUSTRALIAN                              SITE
                                                ScaALeE     in     METERS
                                                                       People in their Lifespace     165




                                   cen
                                    a                                                                Ow
                                   *
                                   %

                                    \.   y:    a                                            4


                                                                                           4 Ae      2000
                                                                                                =    OUMP




                                         CENTRAL
                                          TOSS epee




                                         Note: CONTOURS
                                         INCREASE   IN
                                         INCREMENTS    OF
100 !Kung San camp no. 7               5 BONES PER 5O              ‘
                        >                  .                   /
as recorded by-: John Yellen.          ge
                                       MAP   was REDRAWN    te
                                                               ;
Note the door dumps to the             FROM YELLEN 1977     \,
right of the entrance to the
huts. These contain the waste
from   breakfast   which   was                     ,
consumed on beds inside the              IKUNq@ SAN      Camp *7—~ NIABESHA
huts. (Based on Yellen 1977,                  SITE SoM venore & Ouaetelye Det sir
unnumbered      end-plan   of              SS
camp 7.)                                                                          ion                       eee



from individual snacks and from communal meals, therefore, can be expected to
be differentially distributed on archaeological sites,
  The debris from ‘breakfast in bed’ is not always deposited around the area
where the meal was consumed, At a Bushmen camp after everyone has woken up                          100

and eaten their individual snacks in bed, the debris from the meal is collected in
the skins or blankets which make up the bedding, carried to the door of the hut
and discarded there.!’ This behavior creates a breakfast dump just to the side of the
sleeping area or immediately next to the door. I have also observed door dumps at
Eskimo and-Australian Aborigine camps and have additional data of the same
sort from settlements occupied by horticulturalists,



Extensive Activity Areas

Some tasks, since they are performed from a standing position rather than when
seated, create large and extensive scatters of debris. One good example of an
activity which takes up large amounts of space in this way is the preparation and
use of roasting pits out-of-doors. The Alyawara Aborigines with whom I have                         101-6
                            101 Alyawara Aborigine butchering a
                           female red kangaroo. A small hole is
                            cut in the abdomen and the viscera
                            are removed exclusively through
                           this small opening. The hole is later
                           closed by using a small twig as a
                           pin; this prevents ash, soil and
                           charcoal in the roasting pit from
                           entering the abdominal cavity as
                           the animal is cooked.




                           102 Digging the roasting pit. The pit
                           is dug in a relatively clear area, the
                           loose soil being tossed on one side of
                           the hole with the explanation that
                           ‘it's better to heat up dry soil’
                           (which refers to the fact that the
                           fire is kindled alongside of the pit
                           as well as inside it). The soil heated
                           up on the platform next to the pit is
                           later shovelled into the pit to seal
                           the earth oven for cooking (cf. ill.
                            105).   In   this picture   firewood   is
                            being placed on the platform next
                            to the pit.




                            103 Singeing the kangaroo. After the
                            firewood is arranged inside the pit
                            and on the platform, it is ignited.
                            Once the fire is burning well, the
                            kangaroo is tossed on to singe the
                            hair and then flipped out again, so
                            the scorched hair can be scraped
                            off. This procedure takes place
                            because the hair is excellent insu-
                            lation and, if left on the skin, tends
                            to retard or even prevent cooking.
                            Since the hair does not burn off all
                            at once, the animal must be flipped
                            in and out of the fire several times.



106 (Opposite) Map of the Alyawara roasting pit area. Note the
location where the Aborigines consumed a snack while waiting
for the meat to cook; ‘LRB’ and ‘JO’C’ indicates the area where
the archaeologists consumed their own snack of canned beans!
The map illustrates nicely the extensive area occupied byan
activity such as cooking food in a roasting pit.
104    Preparing the charcoal. The
burning wood is flamed up to a fast
burn. Singeing the game as well as
occasionally beating the burning
wood results in the accumulation of
a substantial bed of charcoal. Once
it is judged that enough charcoal
has been scaled off the burning
wood, the remaining burning sticks
are pulled out and tossed to the side,
leaving only the charcoal in the pit
and on the platform as shown here.
The circular walk area around the
pit can be clearly seen, as can other
food to be cooked      (laid on a small
table of leaves to keep it clean).




105 Placing the food in the oven. The
kangaroo is nested in the charcoal
within the pit, followed by the
birds wrapped in leaves to hold in
the juices formed during cooking.
Once the hot sand and charcoal
from the platform are shovelled into
the pit to cover the meat, the
cooking begins.



       LIMITS     OF     FIT    USE
      AREA      © 1/712




                                                            RoasTtine
                                                              Pit




                                                             DENSE
                                                             CHARCOAL




                                                   Ss IOQMETERS       TO
                                                   BUTCHERING          AREA
                          HEARTH


       ALYAWARA                  FieLD          Cookinae     SITE
                               SCALE      IN   METERS

                                                                  o
      People in their Lifespace

      worked use roasting pits for a wide range ofunctions, but one occasion in particu-
      lar which James O’Connell and I had the opportunity to observe illustrates nicely
      how the construction and utilization of a roasting pit itself contributes to the scale
      of the resulting activity area. At the time we were deep in the bush with a group
      of Alyawara males on their way to a stone quarry, but en route the men killed a
      female red kangaroo with a baby ‘joey’ in its pouch and three Australian bustards.
      On warm. days such as the one in question, field parties which kill game some
      distance from the residential camp normally cook the meat in the field to prevent
      it spoiling before they return with it to the camp.
         The men began their work by butchering the kangaroo with a stone knife and
      a metal ax which we had with us. Large animals of this sort are generally cooked
      within their own skins, so after the viscera had been removed through a very small
      hole in the abdomen ofthe kangaroo, the opening was plugged and laced up with
      a small acacia twig. Next, a roasting pit about 14 meters long and a little over
      4 meter wide was excavated to a depth of around § meter. Firewood was gathered,
      placed on the platform next to the pit and the fire was kindled. As the firewood
      was burning down, the kangaroo was tossed in to singe the hair so that it could
      be scraped off more easily. In the meantime, leaves were laid out nearby (to
      prevent the cooked meat from getting covered with sand) and the birds were
      partially plucked and wrapped with leaves which would absorb the grease as they
      were roasted. When the fire had died down, the Alyawara took a stick and beat
      the firewood so that the scale of charcoal fell off into the bottom of the pit. Finally,
      having determined that the fire was ready, the men placed in the pit the kangaroo,
      with its legs sticking up, and the birds in their leaf packets and then added the
      remaining charcoal. The meat was left to roast for about an hour.
         While this activity was going on, we noted the spatial patterns generated by
      all these tasks and we also made a map of the area, recording the location of all
      the features that would be potentially observable at an archaeological site. The
107   roasting pit, the area where the fire burned, the dirt from the pit, the place where
      the extra firewood was tossed aside, the boughs of trees for laying out the meat


                                                           107 A roasting pit repeatedly used
                                                           at an Alyawara Australian resi-
                                                           dential site. The substantial scatter
                                                           of charcoal which accumulates
                                                           around such a feature is very
                                                           obvious. Such ‘dirty’ and spatially
                                                           extensive features are almost always
                                                           located away from the core activity
                                                           of a living site.
                                                             People in their Lifespace   169

                                                               =Ss    RE og   Srey
                                                                aes   he




 108 Nunamiut Eskimo butchering
a caribou killed during the spring
migration. The circular work space
being used by Johnny Rulland
around the animal is similar to the
one around the Alyawara roasting
pit shown in ills. 106 and 107.


before cooking, the place where the tail of the kangaroo was processed while the
meat was cooking, even the area where Jim O’Connell and I had our own hearth
to cook our beans — all these were carefully plotted on the plan.
   One interesting fact that emerged from our study of this kangaroo roast is that
there is some regularity in the amount of space occupied by people performing
activities when standing (about 17—24 square meters of space). Furthermore, the
activity sequence I have described results in a classic feature-centered pattern
with the roasting pit in the middle, a work space around this feature and a ring
around the periphery, where any discarded items can be expected to accumulate.
The debris from the immediate use of the pit is concentrated around the pit,
whereas the other waste comprises a toss zone located around the feature, but at
some distance back from it.
   Another standing-up activity which produces a very similar debris pattern is
the butchering of animals. The principal difference between roasting and
butchery is that in the latter case no central feature remains for the archaeologist 108
to see. Typically the person cutting up the animal works in a circular area around
it; he may flip over the carcass from one side to the other, using the skin as a
protected work surface. The result is (1) an empty walk/work space focused 109
around the animal and (2) debris which has been tossed away from this work zone
and has accumulated on the periphery of the work area. According to my observa-
tions among the Nunamiut Eskimo, caribou butchery demands about 30 square
meters of space. In ill. 59 this model of butchering behavior can be seen super-
imposed on the actual archaeological distribution resulting from the cutting up
of caribou at the Anavik site. Butchering areas on Eskimo and Aboriginal sites are
interesting for another reason as well. Meat distributions among these groups’ ®
170    People in their Lifespace




                                                                                 7Oss
                                                                         ye      “LONE

                                   —ll———   STOMACH    CONTENTS      -
                                                              ee
                             =                             oe
                  BuTCHERING                          Activity               AREA
                                    ScALE        NI     METERS

                                                                3        a         Ss

                                                                      LE     BINFORD



       109 Activity area used by the Nunamiut to butcher one caribou. The structure of the work
       space is nearly identical to the Alyawara roasting pit pictured in ills. 106 and 107. The
       total area used is slightly greater in this case because unwanted parts have been disposed of
       on the periphery of the walk/work area.


       generally take place at the butchering areas themselves rather than in the
 110   residential area, because (as informants noted) sharing meat was the occasion
       for a different kind of visit than when kinsmen come to ‘talk’, implying that the
       etiquette of hospitality applied only within the confines of the ‘home’.
          Analogous distributions of debris at spatial scales similar to the butchering
       areas have been observed by Robert Hard among the Tarahumara of Mexico.
       These people cook desert plants in large roasting pits, which are usually positioned
       behind the house and away from the doorside activity areas. It is generally true,
       in fact, that activities like roasting and butchery, which monopolize considerable
       amounts of space, are located away from areas used intensively on a day-to-day
       basis. For instance, even on sites where only a minimal stay is anticipated,
       Australian Aborigines nevertheless construct their roasting pits in positions
       peripheral to the focus of camp life — areas used for sleeping, conversation, and
       small-scale food preparation and craft activities. I have observed a similar
110    Alyawara    Australian    dis-
tributing meat from a kangaroo
which was roasted at a pit located
on the periphery ofa residential
camp. Children are frequently used
as runners for carrying meat to
persons not present to receive their
share.




111 Bushman scraping an animal
hide at the Mokudi camp in the
Nyae Nyae area of Namibia, 1976.
(Photo courtesy of the South
African Museum, Cape Town.)




                                        112 Large roasting pit located
                                        behind a Tarahumara house in
                                        northern Mexico. The walk/work
                                        area around the pit is clearly visible.
                                        Here we have a spatial analogy to
                                        the butchering area seen among the
                                        Eskimo (ill. 109) and the roasting
                                        pit used     by the Australian
                                        Aborigines (ills. 106, 107). (Photo
                                        courtesy of Robert Hard.)
172    People in their Lifespace

       strategy of placement among the Eskimo and the Navajo: commonly their roast-
       ing pits are located adjacent to places used as minor dumps or for wood chopping,
       so as not to interfere with the normal activities of camp life. Along these same
       lines I have found that at Australian and Eskimo sites, spatially extensive, stand-
       up work areas are often next to each other. For example, in Eskimo sites butcher-
  Tp   ing areas are frequently located adjacent to sled loading and storage areas, all of
       which will be found on the edge of the residential core area, because they all
       require a large amount of space.
           Hide working is yet another activity repeatedly seen to occur in areas peri-
       pheral to the central parts of residential camps. When only one or two hides are
       being worked, they may be staked out just to the side of or slightly behind shelters,
       but if larger quantities are involved, they will be carried a greater distance from
       the center ofresidential activities, It is not uncommon for rather flat ground to be
       selected for hide working and for stones to be cleaned back from the chosen area
       if it is rocky; the“‘ring’ of stones produced in this way may subsequently be used
       as weights to secure the hide. In most cases, an archaeologist would interpret such
       a pattern as a tent ring or would infer the existence of some kind ofstructure from
       piles of stone which in reality had simply been removed to clear a surface for
       hide working.



       Site Structure: Combining the Models

       As described previously, sites are composed of different arrangements of facilities,
       surfaces and items. So far we have seen how these basic elements can be combined
       into general spatial models relating to particular activities (e.g. seated worker
       arrangements, group seating arrangements, sleeping areas, extensive standing-up
       work places, etc.). At this point we can now turn to the analysis of archaeological
       sites as wholes and begin to investigate how the models identified previously fit
       together to comprise a complete site. This is what I call the analysis of site structure:
       how spatial models mesh within the structure ofa site as an entity in its own right.
       While there is no room here to consider the entire range of variability in site
       structure observed ethnographically, we can begin to use some of the knowledge
       gained so far in order to give meaning to some of the spatial patterns observed in
       the archaeological record.
          As a first example, let us consider how activity models can be used to analyze
Te     the site structure of a typical Bushman camp. In the Kalahari Desert, people
       construct small huts more for protection from the sun than for warmth. The
       temperature can rise quite high at midday and at this hottest part of the day the
       Bushmen generally sit inside on their beds. Since they may use the time to make
       tools or carry out other tasks, debris from the activities which take place in the
                                                                   People in their Lifespace




113 Bushman camp in Angola, c. 1930. These are the so-called ‘Yellow Bushmen’, also
known as Sekele. (See Almeida 1965 for further details.) Note the position of the hearth
in front of the shelter erected to provide shade during the hottest part-of the day. (Photo
by J. Drury, courtesy of the South African Museum, Cape Town).




shade is distributed in the sleeping area. In contrast, the cooking hearth used for
corporate meals is located just outside the hut near the door; when food is eaten              114
at this hearth a doughnut-shaped ring of food remains is formed around it.
   This same pattern is found at many other sites. Examining data from three
different hunter-gatherer groups, !Kung Bushmen, Nunamiut Eskimo and                           115
Ngatatjara Aborigines, one can see that the spacing of the house, sleeping areas
and external hearth is very similar. The reason for the considerable consistency
in the measurements is simply that the factor which conditions them is the same
in all cases— the human body. In this instance, it is simply a function of the amount
of room required to seat a group of people around a hearth and still allow reason-
able space for access to the hut. The sizes of the huts at the Bushmen camp are also
nearly identical ;variation is due simply to the number of people occupying them.
The simple mechanics of the body contribute to both these basic repeated situa-
tions and, since these properties are the same for all humans, it is no wonder that
there is a tremendous degree of repetitiveness in the spatial measurements of
camps used by hunters and gatherers.
 174    People in their Lifespace


                              USED      BY    ONE                           AREA    OF   SCATTER*         8.5m*
                             FAMILY        FOR     TWO
                             DAYS  - ZADULTS
                             3S CHILDREN - AGES
                             4,7, £/3
                             °°   Bone
                             ~    BEAN       Poo
                             *    MeEeLon                             *
                             ¢    Fruivr
                                                       --09_,
                                             pees               we
                                        ad                            %




                                     #Toma’s                    Domestic           AREA
                                  Hut *2 —/TANAGABA~ Camp *5
                                    Reprawn                From           YELLEN     ,|I9TT
                                                 ScALE           IN       METERS

                                                   1                  2        3s             4                 5
                                                                                              LR   BINF   ORD




        114 Map ofa typical !Kung Bushman hut with associated hearth. (Based on Yellen 1977,
        unnumbered end-plan of camp 5.)




          Now, although the actual form of the various models is highly repetitive from
       site to site and from one group of people to another, differences among them can
       also be extremely informative. For instance, at the corporate      Nunamiut hearths
       (ill. 115) the most common seating pattern isa circle, with the attendant drop and
88, 89 toss zones as discussed previously. There are, of course, other ways of organizing
       food preparation and consumption, for instance, when there is a strong division
       of labor in terms of who cooks the meals. In many types of Nunamiut camps,
        females cook food at an outside ‘kitchen’ hearth, but serve the meal in a different
  116   area. Where this arrangement exists, a small brush windbreak is often placed
        around the hearth or, if it is very hot, a kind of ramada or sunshade may be
        erected over the kitchen to protect the cook. For example, ill. 75 depicts the
        distribution of items with respect to an outside kitchen hearth among the Nun-
        amiut. Access to the hearth is almiost exclusively reserved for the cook and this
        area is generally kept quite clean. Debris from food preparation may be dumped
  115   across the hearth, resulting in what I call a ‘butterfly distribution’ of waste. Once
        prepared, the food is then served to the men in a separate area which is outside
                                                                                     A=    SEAT                        C= BED
                                   aw!                                               B=    HEARTH                      D=lLivingq             SPeace

                       5.78                    |
          Bitty        Morry’s               Camp                                LEROI—~                 GOoURHAN’S                         Mover
          NunNamiutr              EsKimo




                                                                                  NonNAmMiut               RESIDENTIAL                        MoDoEL
          PuryKara            *1
          NGaTaTuaRaA              AUSTRALIAN




    9
                                     #TOMA’S         Camp
    ‘             Oe                     'KUNq      San
        ‘e,        :                                                      VG   vt         om         —                         3
          al                                                               ieo   “ans       oo a               \                   ;           Dror
                                                                               e838                                                            Zone
                                                                                               \               I
                                                                                      ac        “s         /

    a 2.66                                                                       Nunamiur                          HUNTING                  Camp


        CAMP               COMPARISONS                           ~—           Cases                        & MoveLs
                                                     ScALE       iN   METERS

                       1      °          5      2    3       a        5          ©         te        &             3      10
                                                                                                                                       LR   Bineora
=



    115 On the left, comparative sizes and layout of houses and hearths for three different
    hunter-gatherer groups, the !Kung Bushmen, Nunamiut Eskimo, and Ngatatjara
    Aborigines. Depicted on the right are three hypothetical models for site structure, the
    lower two of which are based on ethnographically documented sites.
  176     People in their Lifespace




          116 Blackfoot American Indian camp c. 1920 showing the outside kitchen hearth on the
          left, with a tripod supporting a sun shade. The house itself is located to the right. (Photo
          by H. F. Robinson, author’s print.)




          if the weather is fair, but is near their beds within a shelter if the weather is
          inclement. As a result of this behavior, in which meals can be eaten either inside
          or out-of-doors, a disposal zone of debris is formed on both sides of the wall of
          the tent.



          Inside Palangana’s House

          One of my most detailed studies of space use has focused on an ethnohistorically
80, 117   well-documented Eskimo winter dwelling, Palangana’s house.’? The distribution
          of small splinters, produced as a result of cracking marrow bones, forms a well-
          defined semi-circular pattern around the north side of the hearth; the position of
          these bits, which fell in the drop zone between the knees and alongside the legs of
          the seated men, betray the seating arrangement of those consuming meals, In
          contrast, the southeast side of the hearth contains far fewer chips and parts of its
          rim lack them more or less completely. This paucity of bone splinters identifies
          the place where the cook had access to the fire for preparing and serving meals.
          Although the larger bones are not shown in ill. 109, there is no toss zone associated
          with this bone splinter drop zone, for the Eskimo never toss the larger bones back
          on to their beds and into the recesses along the house walls where their belongings
          are normally stored. Two facts, both related to maintenance of this living space,
                                                                                 People in their Lifespace   177


           DIRECTION
                                  OUTSIDE        CacHEeE
           OF SUNLIGHT
              PRoB4aBLeE        <<      PLATFORM
                                             Ree          set
               WinDOoW                                      “*        7
                                      <                         PROBABLE    De

                                            ye                    “         Ne
                                       e™        %




                                                                              Post      Motos



                                                                                       Note:
                                                                                     DENSITIES
                                                                                     PLOTTED ini
                                                                                     TERMS   oF
                                                                                     50cm. Squares




                                                                            Limits  oF
               INFERRED                                                     EXCAVATION
               Limits   oF
               House




                             PALANGANAZS                          House
                             RoNnE=     SPUNTER                 DENSITIES
                                      SceocteE       in    METERS

                                                                                  LF    BINFORD




117 Contour map showing the density of small splinters of bone in and around an Eskimo winter house
(Palangana’s House) at Tulugak Lake, Alaska. (See ills. 53 and 66 for exact location of the
site.) The highest densities identify the general seating locations of male consumers during
meals and when eating snacks during the day. The distribution of splinters is mainly
centered around the hearth, although it is concentrated on the left-hand side, leaving free
an area of domestic work space largely used by the women during the preparation of meals.
The positions marked ‘a’ and ‘B’ almost certainly represent the habitual seating spots of
the man (B) and the woman (A) of the house.



reveal the distribution of bones and splinters as-one produced inside a structure.
(1) The presence of a drop zone composed of debris biased toward the smallest
bone splinters indicates that regular cleaning of the area took place; this size bias,
coupled with the existence ofa large outside door dump, further demonstrates the
tidying up of the intensively used space around the hearth. (2) The tell-tale
absence of the toss zone is also associated with ‘preventive maintenance’ following
consumption.
178    People in their Lifespace



                  DIRECTION
                     UL                 OUTSIDE Cé4CHE                      NOTES
                                                                           DENSITY   PLOTTED
                  Cia SO Suee hye ||     Ron                               ON A 20cm. Grip
                     PROBABLE
                      WINDOW                                ProBssLE




                                                                          Limits      oF
                                                                       a              Ion



                                                                               oS
                                     PALANGANAZS                House
                                   DENSITY     oF PRESSURE FLAKING     CHIPS
                                             Scale     iN METERS

                                                                                 LE   BINFORD




       118 Density map of pressure flaking chips from stone tool manufacture in and around Palangana’s
       House (cf. ill. 117). The distribution is distinctly window-oriented: that is, it is related to the
       position of natural light inside the dwelling during the limited hours of daylight in the
       arctic winter. Two concentrations correspond roughly to dense distributions of bone
       splinters marked ‘a’ and ‘B’ on ill. 117.




          By way of comparison, we can also look at the distribution within the house of
 118   the small chips produced as a by-product of pressure flaking stone tools. It is clear
       that these flint chips are densely distributed away from the hearth and are com-
       mon on the southwest side of the house (upper left in ill. 118), an area where low
       densities of small bone splinters were observed. This contrast must be understood
       in terms of the positioning of craftpersons relative to the source of light. People
       working and repairing stone tools presumably sat so as to take advantage of light
       coming into the house through the window. The bone splinters, on the other hand,
                                                                                             People in their Lifespace   179


           DIRECTION
                                    OUTSIDE   CacHE
           OF SUNLIGHT
               PRoB4aBLE             —PLaArrForm
                Window
                                                            PRoBsaSsSLE
                                                              ~ Door,




            GEnerRai
            Domesmnc
             SrPaceE ——             oe aR

            OuTrsiveE           i
            Work
             AREeEs     —,



                                                                                    ;   Nera        MoriDs



                                                             awstlni ff
                                                                          :
                                                    a              ie                   ae    Beps
                                                                                    1

                                                        J                     Fr
                                                            OLE       av
                                                                               E‘
                                                                          ve
                                                                                        Limits  oF
               INFERRED                                                                 EXCAVATION
               Limits oF             J
               House




                             PALANGANA’S                          House
                                     FORMATION       Movei
                                     ScecteE   nN   METERS


                                                                                               LE    BINFORD




119 Reconstruction of the spatial organization of major use area within Palangana’s House. The
symbols for seated figures indicate the major sitting places identified by the distributions of
bone splinters and flint chips (cf. ills. 117, 118). Individuals numbered 8 and g represent
the same person who adjusts his position to the hearth depending on whether food
consumption is going on (8) or craft activities are being conducted (g). The reason he often
moves back from the hearth is due to the presence of a roof support which served as a back
rest and was located just in front of the stone shown behind person no. g. In this case he
changes his seat when he needs light from the window to facilitate craft activities. Seating
positions nos. 3 and 5 are almost certainly those used primarily by the woman of the house:
position no. 3 being her ‘light-oriented’ seat needed for carrying out manufacturing or
repair of artifacts, while position no. 5 is the area reserved for the cook’s access to the hearth,
at which time it is quite likely that she sits on her bed. Note also the table rocks to the right
of her sitting position at the hearth (5). Seating places nos. 1 and 2 are located outside the
house in the sun where almost certainly men sat on rare warm days during the early and
late winter working on crafts and eating snacks.
      180     People in their Lifespace

              would be produced primarily during the evening meal which, in winter, is served
              after the few hours of available light have passed and the house is warmed by the
              fire used in food preparation; at that time, consumers are seated out of the major
              work space of the cook but in the light created by the hearth. Thus, differences in
              the distributions of these two classes of item (bone splinters and flint chips) are
              governed by where and when the tasks took place. Even so, there are also some
              features common to both distributions: (1) bone splinters and flint flakes are most
              densely concentrated at points A and B (ill. 117) and (2) they share a concentra-
              tion outside and to the south ofthe house itself. These correspondences betray the
              habitual seating position of people repairing tools or eating. The seating arrange-
   81, 119    ments I would infer from such data can be summarized in a model of space use
              inside Palangana’s house. The sleeping area shown in ill. 119 (corresponding to
              Leroi-Gourhan’s ‘Zone C”°) yielded little debris from manufacturing activities
              and had a lower overall density of artifacts than other areas inside the house, a
       120    characteristic anticipated by Leroi-Gourhan. The superimposition of the dis-
              tribution of industrial debris on the house plan reveals two interesting points.
                 First, there is a generalized scatter in the quadrant of the house nearest the
              window (the domestic work space). This area is equivalent to ‘Zone B’ in Leroi-
              Gourhan’s model, but its breakdown into two subunits, as that model predicts, is
              not-found here. In Palangana’s house what we see are: (1) hearth-centered
              activities derived from, or related to, food consumption and carried out largely
              during hours of darkness and (2) daylight-centered activities oriented to the
              source of daylight within the domestic space. The distinction made by Leroi-
              Gourhan between the ‘fine’ and ‘crude’ activities expected to occur on different
74; 75> 89;   sides of the hearth is much more likely to be applicable to outdoor hearths, where
   KOS 10s    aggregate materials are dumped to the side of work spaces.
                 Secondly, the Nunamiut characterize the different use areas around the hearths
       11g    within a house as the ‘women’s’ side (the light area of domestic space) and the
              ‘men’s’ side (the darker zone of domestic usage). These terms do not imply any
              rules for use or exclusive access to these spaces by men or women; they only
              describe the relative frequencies with which the different sexes do in practice use
              each area. In fact, most male crafts are conducted in a men’s house, a special struc-
   80, 122    ture common on winter sites. Not infrequently, the men’s house is the initial
              structure erected at a site for use as shelter while the men build the winter houses
              and before their families move to the site. Here men in groups spend many days
              working on crafts, often in the company of boys who are learning the techniques
              of tool manufacture and repair. In the men’s house, craft items may be left in
              place and need not be cleaned up when the woman of the house needs space, for
              example, to prepare meals or attend to the children before bed. Consequently, it
              is a special activity area, where tool manufacture and repair can be carried out
              independently of work space in the residential house. On less permanent sites or
                                                                          People in their Lifespace     181



           DIRECTION
                                OuTSIDE        CacHeE                Wee          eee. eee
           OF SUNLIGHT            “2 PLarrorem                       *   AntTier-Woom   DeEBRieES
              PROBABLE
               Window
                                                        PrRoBsasLE
                                                          ~-Door




                                                                         Post     Mortps




            STONES


                               3e.,   ee
                                           2         aee-            Limits  oF
              INFERRED                                               EXCAVATION
              Limits    oF
              House




                             PALANGANAZS                    House
                              MANUFACTURING             DEBRIES
                                  Scale         iN   METERS

                                                                             LF    BINFORD          |




120 Distribution of manufacturing debris within Palangana’s House. Rach dot represents an
item whose discrete position was plotted during the excavation of the site. It is clear that
there is a concentration of material in the quadrant of the house adjacent to the window
fer alls. 007, 118).



those occupied in warmer weather, there is usually a men’s seating area outside
the house, where males carry on crafts and even eat some of their meals; it is
usually in a well lit and relatively warm and protected place, quite often along
the southern wall of the house, as shown in the generalized Nunamiut residential
model in ill. 115. In very warm weather, when women’s activities too may move
outside, meals are prepared on the outdoor kitchen hearth, near which is usually
the women’s conversation area, where they sew, manufacture or repair items, or
simply keep an eye on the young children playing nearby. In summer, therefore,
the house becomes merely a sheltered sleeping and storage area used for other
activities only during bad weather.
182   People in their Lifespace



                DIRECTION               OUTSIDE   CacHE
                OF   SUNLIGHT       <—— PLATFORM
                     PROBABLE       \
                     Wistar                               ProBsasLE
                                                             ~ Door




                 GENneRaAi—
                 Domestic




                                                                      oe                i
                                                                      8,           “4
                                                                              @         <= HOSsT: MortDs
                                                       Wor
                                                       ho! Pywilyn,           ‘
                                                                              Ay




                                                          OOTTTTT Toa
                                                                       soFy
                                                                         /

                                                                      ve
                 STONE oN                                              /

                      CooK=

                                                                                    Limits   oF
                     INFERRED                                                       E xcAVATION
                     Limits   OF                               \



                [oer
                     House




                                   PaALANGANAYS                House
                                        FORMATION       Move.
                                        Scare     iN   METERS

                                                                                             LE   SINFORDS
                                                                                                             ot



      121 Formation model of activities at Palangana’s House. The distribution of manufacturing
      debris as shown in ill. 120 and the positions of tools or their parts has been superimposed
      over the seating and space use model presented in ill. 119. The open circles are stone tools;
      filled circles represent antler artifacts; the small dots are pieces of lithic manufacturing
      debris; ‘A’ represents waste from production of antler tools; and ‘W’ is debris from
      manufacture of wooden tools. It should be noted that the tools are grouped in small
      clusters on the right-hand (north) side of the hearth, as opposed to the isolated and
      dispersed occurrences to the left and above (south and west of) the hearth. Most of the
      tools were cached or tucked away and were not seen or were forgotten at the time the site
      was abandoned. This pattern of tool dispersal is very common in bedding areas of many
      sites.




                                                                                                                  eT
                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                  f ee
                                                                                      People in their Lifespace         183



                 DisTRIBUTATION      of   Bones




                                                                                         —   BONE    SPLINTER
  CONSTRUCTION                                                                               ceLehane
  House




             Bone   *MeEaL


             Bone   SeuNTerRs

             Heamrn

                                                               BoiLing       HEARTH
             STONES

             Wood                                                                                   WINTER   Flogs &

                                PALANGANA     Site;             House             *1     AgeeEA
                                    TULUGAK       LAKE,                  ALASKA
                                                                         4
                                                      METERS




122 The Palangana site, Tulugak Lake, Alaska showing the distribution of bones (except within
the house itself) (cf. ill. 80). Part of the scatter of bones is related to the feeding of dogs
which were tethered along the northwest edge of the site. Additional bone is related to
special features such as the stone boiling hearth, but most of it is scattered in the same
general area as the bone splinter dump, the most readily recognizable feature on the site.



   Returning to the internal organization of space within a house, it is clear that
the domestic space is defined by the dense distribution of artifacts and fragments                                     121
of debris from the manufacture or repair of wood and antler artifacts, Within this
area the distribution of artifacts is itself interesting. In the first place, there is a
major concentration between the beds and at arm’s distance to the right of seating
position no. 5 (the cook). Similarly, there are small clusters of artifacts to the rear
of, or just beside, all the male seating positions on the dark side of the hearth:
these tools are either disassembled items in the process of being manufactured or
completed tools in mint condition, which have been stored near the men’s
habitual seating spots or in sleeping areas. Cached items tend to be found less
     184      People in their Lifespace

              commonly in the domestic space, because it is regularly cleaned. I have noted
              that little caches are characteristic of sleeping areas, particularly where housing
              is permanent, so that the male or ‘dark’ side of the house is poorly lit at the time
              of moving; where a tent is taken down, however, the search for lost items on the
              dark side of the hearth is facilitated by daylight.



              Outside an Eskimo House


              Turning from the interior of a single house to the site as a whole, we can observe
              a contrast in the structure of space use between the highly differentiated and
              intensively used area within the shelter and the more grossly partitioned space in
  80, 122     the yard outside the house. In the area along the upper margin of the site plan
              (ill. 122), four dogs were tethered and between the dogs and the house was a big
              dump ofbone splinters. To the west of the house was a large and extensive feature,
              a stone boiling hearth used in the rendering of grease from caribou bones, It
              should be noted that the area occupied by the stone boiling hearth and its
              associated bone meal dump is almost as large as the house itself.
                  There are present on this site some special features which would be hard to
              interpret, were one to ignore the problems which the environment presents to the
Wilh, WARE,   Eskimo at different seasons, For instance, in ills, 119 and 121 there is shown out-
       22)    side the house a pile of rocks which is designated as a cache platform. In the Arctic,
              items laid on the ground prior to the major snowfalls during the months of
              October and November become frozen onto the surface and cannot be removed
              without the expenditure ofa great deal of effort in chipping the ice away. For this
              reason, bundles of rarely used items to be stored over the winter are placed on
       123    small platforms made of stones or (if stones are not readily available) of antler.
              Such special storage areas for goods needing special protection, but for which heat
              and light are not required, are a common feature around Eskimo houses: for
              example, a large winter meat storage rack is almost certainly located just south
              of Palangana’s house, in an area which was not excavated.
                 If we now stand back from the site for an overview of its spatial organization,
       122    what generalizations emerge? We can clearly see a core area — in this case the
              house interior, which was intensively used and internally partitioned in a very
              fine-grained manner. Immediately adjacent to it are areas more grossly differen-
              tiated in spatial terms, areas given over to activities which individually occupy a
              considerable amount of space: the storage racks and platforms, plus the door
              dump. Moving still further away from the house, we observe the largest and
              functionally most specialized areas: the dog tethers and the stone boiling hearth.
              Such empirical generalizations are useful and interesting, but how can we use
              these observations about an Eskimo winter settlement to help us interpret the
                                                                 People in their Lifespace




123 Caribou antlers used as storage facilities at Anaktuvuk Pass village, fall 1969. To
prevent items cached outside from freezing to the ground, packages of stored goods are
placed on top of antler platforms. This also facilitates access to the goods once the ac-
cumulation of snow has become substantial. (Photo courtesy of C. Amsden.)




archaeological record more generally? The answer is that we need to build theory
to explain patterns and structures of the sort noted at the site of Palangana’s house.



Constraints on the Use of Space: Heat and Light

Palangana’s house provides an example of spatial organization constrained by a
limited amount of sheltered living space. The house provided shelter for a wide
variety of activities distributed differentially in both time and space. Some of these,
such as crafts and food preparation, were conducted in the same spaces at different
times (intensive use), whereas others, for instance domestic activities and sleeping,
were more permanently segregated in spatial terms (extensive use). In essence, we
can consider the organization of space within the house primarily in terms of two
dimensions: heat and light. The position of heat within the building was roughly
symmetrical while light was distributed asymmetrically relative to the design of
the structure. Thus, activities requiring both light and warmth (various craft and
food preparation tasks) were localized in the lighted quadrant of the house and
were carried out sequentially, largely during the hours of daylight, but within an
area of intensive use; other activities requiring only heat and minimal light (e.g.
186   People in their Lifespace

      eating and sleeping) were concentrated in those areas of the house poorly illum-
      inated by outside light.
         Against the backdrop of general spatial organization — a compromise in the
      requirements for heat and light — we must view the effects of the division of labor
      in society, insofar as it was role differentiated in terms of sex and age. Many ofthe
      men’s activities, including the manufacture of tools and other useful items,
      required relatively large amounts of space and sometimes took a long time to
      complete.”! This being so, the setting up of specific use areas offered the advantage
      of not usurping or disrupting the daily cycle of space use in the limited domestic
      space within the confines of the house.
         Site structure, in addition to being affected by limitations on space use, must
      also be understood in terms ofthose factors which favor intensification within the
      utilized space, It is clear from the preceding discussion that the level of the outside
      temperature is a major factor contributing to site structure, for the colder it
      becomes, the more activities must be conducted in sheltered spaces, But this raises
      the problem that the construction ofa structure or the use ofa sheltered location
      tends to restrict the quantity and distribution oflight within it. Palangana’s house
      illustrates rather well how a limited quantity of light tends to favor intensification
      in the use of spaces with adequate light. The reverse is also true: when light is
      more generally available, a more extensive use of space may take place. Limita-
      tions on the distribution of heat should also increase the intensification of activities
      into more restricted spaces. For these reasons the more critical shelter becomes
      (mainly as a function of environmental conditions), the more differentiation of
      space use in response to lighting limitations may be anticipated.
         The effects of constraints on space use is illustrated by John Yellen’s*? observa-
      tion that the !Kung Bushmen move around during the day but, depending on the
      shifting distribution of shade, carry out essentially the same activities in a variety
      of different places. Such extensive use of space is really only possible if there are
      no other constraints on the appropriateness of places for doing tasks of short
      duration and with relatively small requirements for space. Faced only with the
      problem of maintaining an advantageous relationship between work space and
      shade, Bushmen workers are able to adapt their work space to take account of the
      distribution of shade. This example suggests that the more a particular task
      requires a very specific sort of setting for its performance, the more intense will be
      the concentration of activity in places which meet those requirements, The
      domestic space within Palangana’s house is a case in point.
         Regardless of environmental conditions, individual tasks differ in the degree to
      which they demand extensive use of space. For instance, a variety of tasks which
      can be accomplished by a single seated person might all be conducted in the same
      place, provided they did not overlap in time — a point to which I return below.
      On the other hand, activities requiring vastly different amounts of space for their
                                                                People in their Lifespace

execution tend to be independently distributed. We saw earlier in this chapter,
for instance, that a roasting pit is a facility dominating about 17 to 24 square
meters and its use considerably modifies the land surface (e.g. by the accumula-
tion of charcoal), making it unsuitable for use in many other ways. An activity
of this sort, therefore, will usually be given an area all to itself,



Turnover Rates


An additional factor which causes certain activities to take place in special areas
is variation in the time required to complete them. Tasks that monopolize space
for extended periods are rarely conducted in areas of intensive domestic use,
where the normal pattern involves activities of short duration which can be
slotted into the daily schedule of eating and sleeping. Many manufacturing tasks
require the production of parts which are gradually fitted together as each one is
completed, so that any interruption along the way is a real nuisance. We have all
experienced as children the frustration of laying out a puzzle or game on the
kitchen table, only to be told to pick up our things so that a meal can be prepared
— and, of course, the ‘picking up of our things’ largely destroys the progress
already made. For precisely the same reason, those tasks expected to take some
time are therefore generally relegated to areas where they can monopolize space,
while not interfering with tasks which require shorter periods of time (i.e. those
with a more rapid ‘turnover’ rate).?°



Effects of Bulk Processing

There is still another consideration to bear in mind when examining the organiza-
tion of space use: how bulky are the by-products generated by different tasks?
Regardless of its duration, any activity which creates a lot of waste takes up space,
not only during its execution but also afterwards, for until the waste is removed
its presence may make the surface inappropriate for other activities. This is true
no matter how fast the task is performed. When a Jemez Indian processes corn for 124
storage at harvest time, for example, a huge mound of debris is generated. It does
not take much imagination to realize that, as long as the debris from shucking the
corn is left in place, the area is of little use for other purposes.
   At sites occupied for a short time, activities producing waste products in bulk
may be located peripherally to intensively used areas and the debris from them —
allowed to remain in situ. On the other hand, with longer-term occupations, even
the activity areas located on the edges of the site may be tidied, so that the same
or different activities can be scheduled to take place later in the same place.
  188     People in their Lifespace




                                                         124 Jemez Pueblo Indian man pro-
                                                         cessing corn for winter storage, south-
                                                         western United States, October 1976.
                                                         (Photo courtesy of theMaxwell Museum
                                                         of Anthropology, University of New
                                                         Mexico. )




          Initially, I was surprised to observe the Nunamiut cleaning up their large spring
          and fall hunting sites, located at great distances from their village. They explained
          that the large quantities of bones and antler left lying around from previous mass
          butchering got in the way and were apt to cause accidents, Thus, during the off-
          season for caribou hunting, they collected the bones at key, repeatedly used sites
59, 125   and burned them.** Sites which were used only in response to one specific
          situation or which were otherwise unrelated to regular land use strategies were
          not cleaned up in this way. Il. 125 shows a site which is functionally equivalent
          to the hunting stand and butchering site at Anavik. The latter was cleaned up,
          since the site was intended to be used time after time, whereas the former was left in
          the state shown in the photograph, being judged unlikely to be used again. In
          short, bulk processing sites illustrate two points. Firstly, the size of the area re-
          quired and the quantity of debris anticipated may well determine the selection
          of the place where an activity is to take place. Secondly, the extent to which it is
          expected that the area will be used again, coupled with the durability of the
          bulky waste by-products generated there, affects how clean even peripherally
          located activity areas are kept.
                                                                     People in their Lifespace   189




125 Caribou kill and butchering site on the north slope of Anaktiqtauk River, Anaktuvuk
Pass, Alaska. (See ill. 53 for exact location.) Butchering debris which is scattered on a site
not intended for re-use is simply abandoned; but at other sites repeatedly used for similar
functions, the large antlers and bones are often gathered up and burned.                    =




Clean-up Strategies

The Eskimo butchering sites emphasize an additional factor which conditions the
structure of archaeological sites: site maintenance. Perhaps no archaeologist has
been more responsible for calling attention to this important aspect than Michael
Schiffer.7° In my experience as an ethnographer, site maintenance involves at
least two kinds of tactics: (1) preventive maintenance (the disposal of items away from
intensively used spaces) and (2) post hoc maintenance (the actual cleaning up of
areas and the transport of the debris collected to special dumping areas). Gener-
ally speaking, preventive maintenance involves some degree of anticipation of the
amount of rubbish likely to accumulate in the course of a given activity and this,
in turn, affects the differential placement of activities in the first place (as exam-
ples discussed earlier clearly indicate).
   In the case of activities occurring outside a structure, preventive maintenance
commonly takes the form of throwing waste out of the area of immediate action,
resulting in the build up of a deposit or toss zone on the edges of the intensively
used area. Technically speaking, this debris is primary refuse (in Schiffer’s terms’°),
190    People in their Lifespace

       because the items have been disposed within the immediate context of their use.
       Within a house, preventive maintenance is usually linked explicitly with clean-up
       strategies. For instance, inside an Eskimo dwelling items which otherwise might
       end up ina toss zone are placed instead in little piles around the hearth?’ orina
       bucket which is later taken to an outside dump. Likewise ‘aggregate’ refuse, such
       as that contained in a cooking pot, is deliberately carried out of the house to a
       dumping area, whereas in a more transient or unsheltered situation the same
  go   contents might be dumped directly to the side of the hearth. Both the distinct
       dumps created by preventive maintenance inside the house would be classified
       by Schiffer as secondary refuse (i.e. redeposited waste), yet they could contain
       exactly the same things as the toss zones around a hearth, which Schiffer would
       almost certainly recognize as primary refuse. The important difference between
       these two situations is the scale of the area being intensively used and maintained:
       In the former case it was quite small (the seating area relative to the peripheral
       toss zone), while in the latter it was the entire interior of a house, including the
       areas for seating, domestic work and sleeping. So understanding the organiza-
       tional relationships among items recovered from the site depends on teasing out
       structural patterns in the observed data, not on some conventional separation,
       made on purely formal grounds, between primary and secondary refuse.”®
          I think it is fairly obvious that the care with which an area is maintained is
       related to the intensity of its use, other things being equal. Areas used intensively
       are maintained the most thoroughly and will therefore be associated with
       specialized disposal areas. The degree to which this is true, however, is also a
       direct function of the length of time that such intensive use lasts — maintenance of
       areas used intensively only for short periods is minimal. This means we can expect
       a strong set of relationships in such areas between duration of occupation and the
       investment of effort in maintenance. Moreover, the longer the occupation, the
       more diverse are the activities which are likely to be conducted, so there should
       be a correlation between length of occupation and the numbers of special-
       purpose activity areas and/or the quantity of carefully maintained, large-scale
       areas on the periphery of the major activity area. This latter proposition certainly
       seems to be warranted by Yellen’s observations among the !Kung”? and is
       sustained by my own research, at least for residential sites.



       Building a Theory of Site Structure

       Enough has been said to indicate, albeit in a preliminary way, the directions that
       my attempts at theory building are taking with respect to site structure. Since
       both light and temperature are factors which vary in regular ways on a global
       scale, we should therefore be able to begin to suggest correlations between site
                                                             People in their Lifespace   IQ!

structure and geographical variations in both seasonal and day-to-day tempera-
tures, as well as in cycles of natural light. Other Se eonntentally conditioned
properties of settlement systems, such as mobility,*° may also be related in func-
tionally determined ways. For instance, the less mobile or more se dentary a group
is, the greater the likelihood of conflicts in the scale and duration of activities
carried out at any one place. We have already seen that variables ofthis sort affect
the extent to which different activities are likely to be spatially segregated or to
which space within sites is intensively or extensively organized. Similarly, the
more complex the technology and social organization ofa group using a site, the
more intricate will be the activities involved in manufacturing and processing
materials for use and consumption. This can only lead us to expect yet greater
complexity in site structure. If we also add environmental variables — for instance,
rain or intense sunlight, both of which have considerable influence on the use of
shelter — understanding spatial organization in human behavior becomes a still
more challenging and interesting area for research,
    I hope I have demonstrated how the investigation of functional relationships**
can help us develop methods for interpreting accurately observed patterns in the
archaeological record, Given some success in the development of interpretive
methods with faunal remains and with aspects of site structure, I think we can
now tackle the interesting task of trying to understand, in terms of the internal
organization of past systems, the variability in assemblage composition illustrated
by the ‘Mousterian problem’. The interpretive examples and resulting general-
izations discussed here should be regarded as illustrations of a particular research
strategy and I hope may also demonstrate the potential of this approach for the
study ofsite structure. Needless to say, however, much more has to be done before
we can take a scatter of artifacts and begin to reconstruct the dynamic contexts in
which such distributions took shape.
   Throughout this section of the book I have used the controversy about the
Mousterian to illustrate a much more general problem which archaeologists
simply have not faced: namely, that criteria based on similarity are insufficient
to demarcate the boundaries of past cultural systems. Recall for a moment the
different kinds of sites which were illustrated in Chapter 6: they demonstrated
repeatedly that a living system is composed of internally differentiated (1) places,
(2) labor forces, and (3) sets of tactics. Archaeologists must recognize that
different archaeological complexes represent expressions of functional differentia-
tion within single systems, not necessarily differences between systems. Simply to
group things which are similar ensures that we will never see a system in realistic
terms. We need ways of reliably bringing together all the different archaeological
aspects of a single system.               3
   These represent central challenges   9
                                       to archaeological   method. But there are
further implications to be drawn from the study of site structure for the discipline
192   People in their Lifespace

      as a whole. In Chapter 3 I discussed the difficulties experienced by archaeologists
      in recognizing the material expression of certain important types of sites in the
      past, such as base camps. The very notion of a base camp, for instance, carries
      with it implications about its inhabitants eating and sleeping in one and the same
      place, about the organization of social roles in terms of age and sex differences,
      about sharing behavior among those playing different roles, about how adaptive
      technology was supplied and maintained — all activities centered on discrete
      ‘living places’. Understanding the static spatial consequences of the way these
      different dynamic dimensions of organization were functionally integrated is a
      fundamental prerequisite for the accurate recognition of this or any other class
      of site in the archaeological record. This ability to recognize characteristics which
      are believed to reflect important, ‘pace-setting’ transformations is crucial, if we
      hope to discuss man’s evolutionary history in a realistic manner. Current con-
      ventions — for instance, arguments about artifact densities or the association of
      artifacts and bones — stem largely from wishful thinking and do not represent
      sufficient diagnostic criteria. We must abandon the idea that plausibility itself
      serves as ample justification for the meanings we give to archaeological observa-
      tions: better procedures than this are needed.
         Confronted with a recognizable pattern in the archaeological record, we have
      to begin by asking ‘What does it mean?’, But then we must follow the scientific
      approach that involves investigating properties of the external world in order to
      gain better understanding. Investigation of the relationships between dynamics
      (human behavior) and the resulting statics (artifacts, site structure, faunal
      remains) must be directed towards the development of reliable and accurate
      methods for inferring ‘what it was like’ in the past. In this section, I hope to have
      illustrated how research must move back and forth between (1) the recognition
      of patterns in the archaeological record, (2) asking the important question ‘What
      does it mean?’, and (3) conducting ‘actualistic’ studies in order to develop
      methods which aim to make inferences about ‘what it was like’ absolutely water-
      tight. Once we know something of the nature of the archaeological record, in
      terms of how it might have been formed, we will be in a position to make much
      more accurate statements about certain aspects of past reality.
                               Part lil
       WHY                  DID IT HAPPEN?

Certain events in the past we know must have happened. It isfairly clear, for instance, that at
one time we were all hunters and gatherers ; then somewhere, somehow, people started to plant
crops and to domesticate plants and animals, Similarly, it seems reasonably obvious that all
 mankind at one time lived in small, mobile groups, with little social superstructure in the
form of major political and religious institutions ;somewhere, somehow, these modes of life
changed and complex political systems came into being. So we can ask ‘Why did it happen?” ,
 without necessarily knowing much about the archaeological record of the times and places
 where such events occurred.
     To ask such a question is certainly not unique to scientists: cultured man has sought
explanations for known or imagined events ever since he has been capable of their cognitive
 appreciation. One of the main kinds of cultural variability recognizable in the world today,
indeed, ts the discrepancy among the intellectual biases favored in different styles of explana-
 tion. Certain events may be explained by a Marxist as deriving inevitably from the dialectical
 interplay of social forces ; a creationist may see the self-same events as the hand of God at
 work in all things ; those of other cultural persuasions will emphasize the causal role of human
 choice, population pressure, cybernetic looping, and so on. All such explanatory arguments
suggest necessary linkages between one set of conditions and another. They are arguments
about the kinds of causes that are thought to be operative.
     Once a problem (for instance, the origins of agriculture or the causes of complex society)
has been recognized, cultural bias alone can suffice to frame an explanatory argument. Given
only some form of received understanding of how the world works, it is possible to organize
 that understanding so as to provide a post hoc account for the ‘problem’ facts. In fact this is
 the commonest mode of argument in which cultural man engages, endlessly advocating this
position or that. He justifies his position by citing selected bits of evidence — observations
mustered for or against particular views of how the world works. The meanings of these
observations are generally assumed or taken to be self-evident. Since all such arguments are
based on assumptions about how the world worked at some time in the past, it is impossible
to reach a conclusion about the past which is inconsistent with the premises upon which the
argument is based. This means, inevitably, that there are as many explanations for past events
as there are fundamental differences in the basic assumptions made at the time of inference.
All arguments which try to make such inferences plausible by appealing to additional facts
which did not figure in the original argument are like advertisements : they are making claims

                                              193
194
       about the ‘utility’ ofthe mode ofthought being advocated.’ Most of the time such appeals to
      facts are equivocal, in that the meanings attached to the observations cited are not justified
       independently of the arguments to which they are referred as evidence.
           It is perhaps ironic that many of the general theories which archaeologists employ were
      generated, or at least stimulated, by the study of contemporary or historically documented
       cultural phenomena. Since I have in the past urged the crucial role of ‘actualistic’ studies in
       the development of our methods for inference,” obviously I do not disapprove of this situation.
       But it must be stressed that general theory is not middle-range theory. General theory
       involves arguments advanced to explain why the past was the way it appears to have been.
       Most of the theoretical propositions generated by the study of contemporary societies involve
       speculation about the sequences of events that might have characterized the transformation of
       one form of system into another. They take the form of extrapolations from one state of the
       system to another, with arguments about how the transformation took place.* What the
       theorist observes when viewing a living ethnographic situation, however, 1s the functioning of
      a system already in the state for which an explanation is sought.* For instance, in his classic
       argument relating irrigation to ‘Oriental’ forms of state organization, Wittfogel” suggested
       irrigation’s causal role on the basis of an observed correlation between hydraulic systems and
       socially stratified political systems. He understood from the functioning of such systems that
       the monopolistic control of irrigation technology seemed to provide the basis for the maintenance
       of power within the system. The next step was to suggest that this functional relationship
        between a productive monopoly and political power also caused the rise of socially stratified
       societies. A similar relationship must stand behind the essentially functional argument of
       Marshall Sahlins® that chiefs, since they function as redistributive agents, come into being
       under conditions which favor redistribution’ Such views are perhaps an inevitable outcome of
       having only ethnographic experiences to serve as the basis for speculations regarding evolution-
      ary processes.
          Archaeologists (and perhaps some historians) are the only researchers with facts of direct
       relevance to evolutionary episodes. All ethnographic observations are at best referable to the
      functioning of relatively stable systems: so why do we use them to prompt our imaginations
       regarding the evolution of systems? Archaeologists, in general, have not recognized the need
      for middle-range theory of their own. They have instead adopted the general theoretical
       arguments advanced by historians and ethnographers and accommodated observations from the
       archaeological record to them. It is merely an exercise in tautology when (as frequently
      happens) these observations in turn are cited as proof that the general theories are true!
          So archaeologists must abandon this profitless pastime. We need to concentrate on the
       development of middle-range theory — an area where ethnographic and historical observations
       are crucial in testing — and to use the methods for inference developed in this way to get answers
      to questions such as ‘What does it mean?” and ‘What was it like ?’. Only if reliable answers
       to these questions can be obtained might work on the question ‘Why did it happen?’ be
      profitable.
                       to}
         On the Origins of Agriculture

A professor of mine once remarked that you can spend your life trying to explain
why the earth is flat and be a total failure. He was quite right; if you ask a silly
question, you can waste a lot of time. In this chapter, therefore, I begin by briefly
sketching some of the basic models and arguments that have commonly been
adopted by archaeologists and anthropologists in approaching the problem ofthe
origins of agriculture — a global phenomenon beginning in some areas about
10,000 years ago, I shall point out what I think are some of the weaknesses in these
arguments and then proceed to outline a few research directions which seem
provocative. These new arguments are by no means finished; they are merely
probes. Even so, they indicate some slight but significant changes in the way we
may ask a question.



Approaches to the Problem of Agricultural Origins

I suppose there must have been speculation about the origins of agriculture as
long as man has been aware of his own history. Within our own cultural tradition,
writings by Charles Darwin! and by H. L. Roth” perhaps represent some of the
earliest serious attempts to deal with the problem, For all his insights into biology,
Darwin did not have quite such good ones into the origins of agriculture. In a
paper speculating about what would prompt man to realize that a plant would
grow from a planted seed, he approached the problem with the assumption that
the critical and determinant variable for the beginning of agriculture was
knowledge; he felt, that is, that agriculture was the inevitable consequence of the
knowledge that a seed planted in the ground would grow into a plant. This
erroneous view did not end with Darwin. There are still many who would argue
that agriculture is a mode of production with self-evident advantages and that
man will inevitably adopt it if he knows about them.
   An early form of mechanistic argument first emerged in England, initially
popularized in the writings of Peake and Fleure® and later in the works of V.
Gordon Childe.* It was a Darwinian argument (in the sense of Darwin’s biological
ideas) since there was some attempt to imagine what conditions in the past might

                                         195
196   On the Origins of Agriculture

      force man to experiment with new means of production. To what degree did man
      modify his behavior under pressure, because his existing strategies were failing?
      Did he adopt new strategies as a result of his own insight into what the future
      might hold? How far did certain pressures force man to cope with new problems,
      experiment with his environment and, eventually, become an agriculturalist?
      These important early ideas — ones with which we must still cope — were made
      popular by Childe and are well-known as the so-called ‘Propinquity Theory’ or
      ‘Oasis Theory’ of agricultural origins. In what now seems a charming but naive
      scenario, he imagined that as the Sahara Desert and other areas became increas-
      ingly desiccated at the end of the last Ice Age, all the animals (including man)
      progressively began to aggregate in the river valleys. There ensued a ‘crunch’,
      rather like catching a commuter train, in which animals and man, now cheek by
      jowl, had to find some mutual arrangement for working out their problems. In
      such favored environments where all forms of plants would grow, Childe wrote,
      men practicing agriculture would obviously provide the grazing animals with
      great amounts of food in the form of stubble. So there was envisaged a shift from
      man’s parasitic way of life as a hunter and gatherer, to the kind of symbiosis
126   between plants and animals which Childe believed characterized the agricultural
      way of life.°
         This-argument was not really an explanation, but what the philosopher of
      science Carl Hempel® might call an ‘explanation sketch’ ; that is, it included some
      variables and some ideas of mechanism, but it also included a model of history.
      Now the problem with successful model-building is that all the imagined events
      must be accurate (something theories do not demand). Where variables are



      126 The village farming community. An agricultural village established at the end of World
      War II on the island of Yaeyama (Ryukyu Islands) by displaced persons from Okinawa,
      Iwo and Siepan. (Photo taken in June 1953 by E. Santry, on assignment with the author.)
                                                          On the Origins of Agriculture




127 The herders’ village. Navajo settlement of Ah Tso lige near Red Lake in Arizona, c.
November 1935, at the time of counting sheep. (Photo courtesy of the Maxwell Museum of
Anthropology, University of New Mexico.)



 combined with events, there is the danger of attack on both fronts: your historical
facts may be proven to be wrong, or it may be argued that your variables were
inappropriate. Frequently, by showing one of these two elements to be ill-
 conceived, the other one is also rejected. This was exactly the strategy followed
 by Robert Braidwood (then of the Oriental Institute in Chicago) and his co-
workers, in attacking Childe’s argument based on mechanistic aggregation.’ He
 employed a variety of techniques, such as pollen analysis and sedimentology, to
 evaluate whether there had, in fact, been an environmental change prior to the
appearance of agriculture in the Near East. His conclusion, basically, was that
there had been no major period of desiccation.® If that was the case, then clearly
Childe’s model was wrong.”
   Braidwood’s own approach to the question was essentially idealist, since he too
shared the perspective that knowledge was a limiting factor. He argued that man
became more familiar with environments at the close of the Pleistocene and that
this familiarity built up to the point where he realized that he had enough
knowledge to manipulate the environment to his own ends. The concept is that
of crossing a sort of intellectual Rubicon. To use Braidwood’s own phrase, man
‘settled in’ to his environment,’® like the chicken getting comfortable on the nest,
and then — one must suppose — had great thoughts! If man settled into, and
accumulated knowledge about, an environment that contained potentially
198   On the Origins of Agriculture

      domesticable plants and animals, then there seemed to be a certain inevitability
      about the end results of the process.'' That is, ifhe settled into an area with wild
      wheat, he would become a wheat farmer; if he settled into an area with mountain
      sheep, he would become a sheep herder. This was more or less the level of under-
      standing of mechanism to be found in much of the argument about the origins of
      agriculture between the end of World War II and the early 1960s. The ‘settling
      in’ notion is still with us. I think it underlies much of the work by the late
      Eric Higgs and his associates,'* in which they argued essentially that domestica-
      tion was a protracted learning process, a very gradual dawning on man of the
      possibilities for manipulation offered by his environment. So the gradualism
      characteristic of Braidwood’s writing is not at all missing from the contemporary
      literature. In fact, a resurgence of this type of argument is apparent.
         It is worth noting, incidentally, that an additional element was often implicit
      in the idealist literature of pre- and immediately post-war periods. Those theoriz-
      ing about the origins of agriculture along the lines I have just mentioned would
      occasionally be confronted with an ethnographic counter-case in which, say, a
      human group lived in an area where wild corn grew, but did not domesticate
      corn. One explanation was that they were dull people who did not learn very
      well. Conversely, a group who practiced agriculture in an area where it did not
      seem they should had to be regarded as exceptional, since one of the determinant
      variables upon which the theory depended was a quality of the actor— that is, his
      ability to learn.
         The Childean approach involving the push-and-pull of selection, then, was
      replaced entirely by Braidwood’s view of agriculture as an emergent process — a
      view to which there were no effective alternatives in the archaeological literature
      of the 1950s. Indeed, this was a period during which ‘The Emergence of. . .” was
      a common title for articles and there was much discussion of the zncipience of
      various phenomena (with definitions of incipient, epi-incipient and post-incipient
      phases). The general picture was one of man’s gray dawning before illumination:
      he was floundering around in his environments, trying this or that. My own minor
      challenge to the Braidwood view, in a paper published in 1968,'* had some effect
      on the field. In fact, it appeared contemporaneously with other arguments in
      which population growth was cited as a major factor conditioning the appearance
      of technological innovations,'* as well as more complex forms of socio-political
      organizations.'> My argument was adopted for the data from the Near East!®
      and for a time enjoyed some popularity. Nevertheless, it suffered from some of the
      same weaknesses of Childe’s earlier arguments — namely, it was a combination of
      conjectural history and theory, an ‘explanation sketch’. I tried to use some
      variables that I thought were important in a model based on what we thought at
      the time the past had been like. Unfortunately, I was wrong about what the past
      had been like; and if that could be demonstrated, then it was also fairly easy to
                                                       On the Origins of Agriculture   199
dismiss the variables I had been working with as unimportant, In fact, after the
initial popularity of so-called ‘demographic’ arguments, there set in a reaction,”
Many authors today simply declare that such arguments are naive or have been
proved inadequate.'®
   Regardless of controversy over the importance of demographic factors per Sse,
the methodological message coming forth was the following. Agriculture is a way
of making a living, a solution to a fundamental human problem ~ getting enough
to eat. Now if agriculture developed in some way out of the practices of non-
agricultural people, then it seems reasonable to suppose that it arose to solve a
problem that some of them were facing. What on earth could that problem be?
Surely it was environmental, because the problems of food procurement for
hunters and gatherers must be a by-product of the dynamics of the environment
in interaction with man. Are the animals where they are supposed to be? Are
they there in the numbers they used to be? Are plant resources being over-
exploited? In other words, what is the interaction between man and the environ-
ment? Quite justifiably, therefore, there was a period of intense interest in the
analysis of environments, with the work becoming more and more detailed. The
archaeologists were still gradualists, but they were now working within an
ecological context.
    It was interesting, then, to see what happened when someone came along to a
lecture series and asked, say, ‘Why didn’t the Californian Indians practice
agriculture?’. The lecturer might respond by asking what kinds of plants they
had, and the audience would usually supply the data at this point: “They had lots
of acorns’. The question was then brushed aside by observing that the Indians
didn’t need agriculture in such a lush environment. This exemplifies an argument
that increasingly appeared both in lectures and in print. I call it the Garden of
Eden Proposition. Contrary to the Bible, it seems, there was not just one Garden of
Eden, but lots of them (and they are being generated rapidly as a function of the
number of people who write about the origins of agriculture!). Let me explain.
   There are many ethnographic accounts of non-agricultural peoples present in
interesting parts of the world during the period of exploration or colonial settle-
ment. Consequently, whenever an argument was advanced about why agricul-
ture was adopted, it was possible to do a quick test of logic by asking ‘If that’s
true, why didn’t the So-and-So have agriculture?’. Such continuous testing of
hypotheses was possible with the availability of ethnographic material, about
which, however, the environmental specialists knew very little. So there came to
be a wonderful game played between people who had ethnographic expertise and
people who thought they knew about the environmental background of agricul-
tural origins; it was a game I have seen played over and over in recent years.
   Someone might be offering an argument about the origins of agriculture,
urging the importance, for example, of diminishing quantities of pistachio nuts
200    On the Origins of Agriculture

                             gw




                               NY
                          ; )"eBf
                               ©
                             ©: |
                             ral




       128 ‘Man and all the animals in the Garden of Eden’. Many archaeologists have suggested
       that rich environments such as this, with plentiful food just for the picking, provided the
       setting for the beginnings of sedentary life and the origins of agriculture. (Drawing by Iva
       Ellen Morris.)


       among the hunters and gatherers of the Near East and pointing out that complex
