i A0 FH Ll e e e =y , . ; T # LT M g ol e : TSI P TNy
; &

~
X ,

Anthropology
& the Colonial Encounter
Anthropology
& the Colomial

Encounter
Edited by Talal Asad

Ithaca Press: London
Humanities Press: Atlantic Highlands, N.J.
First edition printed & published
by Ithaca Press and Humanities
Press

Reprint 1975 by Ithaca Press
and Humanities Press

© The Authors 1973
Printed in The United States of America
ISBN 0-903729-00-8 Library Edition

ISBN 0-903729-01-6 Paperback Edition
U.S.A. ISBN 0-391-00391-7 Paperback edition
+

.+

Contents

21
23

4]
71
103

121
123

153

173

199

223

245

259

273
285

Talal Asad: Introduction

Part 1: General Studies

Peter Forster: A Review of the New Left Critique of Social
Anthropology

Wendy James: The Anthropologist as reluctant Imperialist
Stephan Feuchtwang: The Discipline and its Sponsors
Talal Asad: Two European Images of Non-European Rule

Part 2: Case Studies

Helen Lackner: Colonial Administration and Social
Anthropology : Eastern Nigeria 1920-1940

Jame$ Fans: Pax Britannica and the Sudan: S F Nadel
Richard Brown: Anthropology and Colonial Rule: Godfrey
Wilson and the Rhodes-Livingstone Institute, Northern
Rhodesia

John Clammer: Colonialism and the Perception of Tradition
in Fiji

Roger Owen: Imperial Policy and Theories of Social Change:
Sir Alfred Lyall in India

Roy Willis: An Indigenous Critique of Colonialism: The Fipa
of Tanzania

Abdel Ghaffar M Ahmed: Some Remarks from the Third
World on Anthropology and Colonialism. the Sudan

Philip Marfleet: Bibliographical Notes on the Debate
Index
INTRODUCTION
Talal Asad

British functional anthropology began to emerge as a distinctive
discipline shortly after the First World War through the efforts of
Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown, but it was not until after the
Second World War that it gained an assured academic status in the
universities. Compared with the two decades before the Second
World War an enormous quantity of anthropological writing was
published in the two decades after it. Within this brief period its
claim to academic respectability was virtually unchallenged. By
1961 a prominent sociologist could write that ‘‘social anthropology
is, among other things, a small but I think flourishing profession.
The subject, like social work and unlike sociology, has prestige’.*
A few years later a political scientist contrasted social anthropology
favourably with sociology, declaring that unlike the latter, but
like the other bona fide social sciences, social anthropology ‘‘had
built up a body of knowledge which cannot readily be described as
anything else”.?

Functional anthropology had barely secured its enviable academic
reputation when some serious misgivings began to make themselves
felt from within the established profession. In 1961, Leach claimed
that ‘“functionalist doctrine [has] ceased to carry conviction™.® Five
years later Worsley wrote his trenchant critique under the signifi-

'Donald G. Macrae, Ideology and Society, London, 1961, p. 36.

’\b’}?. Cis Runc;man, “Sociologese™ in Encounter, December, 1965, Vol. XXYV.
0. 6, p. 47.

‘E. R. Leach, Rethinking Anthropology, London, 1961, p. 1.
INTRODUCTION 10

cant title “The End of Anthropology?”’ By 1970 Needham was
arguing that social anthropology ‘“has no unitary and continuous
past so far as ideas are concerned”, ‘“Nor is there any such thing
as a rigorous and coherent body of theory proper to social anthro-
pology”. A vear later Ardener observed that, ‘“‘something has
already happened to British anthropology (and to international
anthropology in related ways such that for practical purposes text-
books which looked useful, no longer are; monographs which used
to appear exhaustive now seem selective; interpretations which once
looked full of insight now seem mechanical and lifeless”.?

The plausibility of the anthropological enterprise which seemed
so self-evident to all its practitioners a mere decade ago, is now no
longer quite so self-evident. A small minority, apart from the names
just mentioned, has begun to articulate its doubts in radical terms.*

What has happened to British social anthropology?

At the organisational level nothing very disturbing has happened.
On the contrary, the Association of Social Anthropologists
flourishes as never before; it holds annual academic conferences
whose proceedings are regularly published in handsome hardcover
and paperback editions. Monographs, articles and text-books by
writers calling themselves anthropologists appear in increasing
number. A prestigious series of annual lectures on social anthro-
pology has recently been launched under the auspices of the British
Academy. The subject is now taught in more university and college
departments than ever; the profession is even negotiating to intro-
duce it as a sixth-form ,option in schools. Seen in terms of its public
activity, there is no crisis in social anthropology.

On the whole, professional leaders of British anthropology are
not impressed by alarmist talk about crisis.” They would maintain,
if pressed, that as the older ideas of social anthropology became
exhausted, it was natural that one should turn to fresh sources of
supply.® So they prefer to talk of increasing specialisation, which

‘Rodney Needham, ‘“The Future of Social Anthropology: Disintegration
or Metamorphosis?™ in Anniversary Contributions 1o Anthropology :
Twelve Essays, Leiden, 1970, p. 36 and p. 37.

*Edwin Ardener, “The New Anthropology and its Critics” in Man N. S.
Vol. 6, No. 3, September 1971, p. 449.

*The most interesting of these include Banaji, “Crisis in British Anthro-
pology”, New Left Review, No. 64, 1970, Copans, “Pour une histoire et
une sociologie des études Africaines”, Cahiers des études Africaine, No. 43,
1971, and Leclerc, Anthropologie et Colonialisme, Paris, 1972.

‘See for example I. M. Lewis, Introduction to History and Social Anthro-
pology, London, 1968, p. xv.

*It is this line of reasoning that Firth adopts to explain and endorse the
TALAL ASAD 11

they see as a sign of the intellectual vitality of the profession.” And
more positively, they affirm that classic functionalist assumptions
are still viable.*?

Yet we would be well-advised not to be too easily persuaded by
such bland assurances. After all, it is a tendency of establishment
leaders to maintain at least the myth if not the reality of smooth
continuity. There can be no doubt that at the ideological level
something has indeed ‘‘already happened to British anthropology™
as Ardener put it, although this event is better seen as a disintegra-
tion of the Old Anthropology rather than as a crystallization of the
New.

There was a time when social anthropology could and did define
itself unambiguously as the study of primitive societies. ““The scope
of any science’, wrote Nadel shortly after the Second World War,
“‘is to obtain and extend knowledge. In social anthropology as it is
commonly understood we attempt to extend our knowledge of man
and society to ‘primitive’ communities, ‘simpler peoples’, or ‘pre-
literate societies’. . . If an anthropologist asks naively why, if we are
only interested in studying society writ large, we should turn to
primitive cultures rather than our own civilization ... the answer is
simply that our own society is not the only one, and its phenomena
not the same as those found, or apt to be found, in primitive
society’.!! Statements of this kind do not indicate a very sophisti-
cated concern for the definition of a problematic, but they reflected
an element of pragmatic truth, and it was this that gave social an-
thropology a practical plausibility. When Evans-Pritchard published
his well-known Introduction to Social Anthropology in 1951, it
seemed reasonably clear what the subject was about. “The social
anthropologist”, he explained, “studies primitive societies directly,
living among them for months or years, whereas sociological re-
search is usually from documents and largely statistical. The social
anthropologist studies societies as wholes—he studies their oecolo-
gies, their economics, their legal and political institutions, their
family and kinship organizations, their religions, their technologies,

recent anthropological interest in Marx, in his British Academy lecture
The Sceptical Anthropologist? Social Anthropology and Marxist Views on
Society, London, 1972,

*See for example the Introduction by Max Gluckman and Fred Eggan to
mlhc first four volumes in the ASA Monographs series.

See for example Social Science Research Council's Research in Social
uAmhrcu)o»logy, London, 1968.

S. F. Nadel, The Foundations of Social Anthropology. London, 1953, p. 2.
INTRODUCTION 12

their arts, etc., as parts of general social systems™.* The doctrines
and approaches that went by the name of functionalism thus gave
social anthropology an assured and coherent style.

Today by contrast even this coherence of style is absent. The
anthropologist now is someone who studies societies both ‘simple’
and ‘complex’; resorts to participant observation, statistical tech-
niques, historical archives and other literary sources; finds himself
intellectually closer to economists or political scientists or psycho-
analysts or structural linguists or animal behaviourists than he does
to other anthropologists. To describe this state of affairs in terms of
scholarly specialization is surely to indulge in mystification. The
‘cognate disciplines’ of politics, economics, etc., have been in exist-
ence from long before the classical functionalist phase of social
anthropology. The question that must be asked is, why was it only
comparatively recently that they have been discovered by anthro-
pologists? Why is it, for example, that in 1940 anthropologists could
write: ‘“We have not found that the theories of political philo-
sophers have helped us to understand the societies we have studied
and we consider them of little scientific value™;'* and in 1966: “We
consider that the time is ripe for a dialogue, if not for marriage be-
tween anthropology and the other disciplines concerned with com-
parative politics”.’* What made the time ripe? How was it that the
separate disciplines (economics, politics, jurisprudence, etc.) which
reflected the fragmented self-understanding of bourgeois society.
with its own historical contradictions, were ready to inspire anthro-
pology?

The answer 1 would suggest is to be sought in the fact that since
the Second World War, fundamental changes have occurred in the
world which social anthropology inhabits, changes which have
affected the object, the ideological support and the organisational
base of social anthropology itself. And in noting these changes we
remind ourselves that anthropology does not merely apprehend the
world in which it is located, but that the world also determines how
anthropology will apprehend it.

The attainment of political independence by colonial, especially
African countries in the late *S0s and the early ’60s accelerated the
trend, apparent since the war, of socio-economic change, involving

“E. E. Evans-Pritchard, Social Anthropology, London, 1951, p. 11.

“"M. Fortes and E. E. Evans-Pritchard, (eds.), African Political Systems,
London, 1940, p. 4.

“M. J. Swartz, V. W. Tumer, A. Tuden, (eds.), Political Anthropolagy,
Chicago, 1968, p. 9.
TALAL ASAD 13

these countries in the planned development of national networks of
communications, electrification and broadcasting; the promotion
of education and of rural improvement projects; the shift of
political power from ‘tribal’ leaders to the nationalistic bourgeoisie.
Mainly as a consequence of nationalist expectations, scholars
began to recover an indigenous history.'> Some nationalist writers
denounced the colonial connections of anthropology. Thus increas-
ingly the larger political-economic system thrust itself obtrusively
into thg anthropologist’s framework, as did the relevance of the
past, both colonial and pre-colonial. At another level, mounting
criticism of the functionalist tradition in American mainstream
sociology contributed indirectly towards the undermining of func-
tionalist doctrine in British social anthropology.!® Since it had never
adequately clarified the distinction between a totalising method (in!
which the formation of parts is explained with reference to a
developing structure of determinations) and cthnographic holism
(in which the different ‘institutions’ of a society are all described
and linked one to another);'” and since it had in general confused
structural determination with simultancity, concrete devclopments
in the world outside pushéd Turictional anthropology until it collap-
sed into micro-sociology. So it is that today most anthropologists
have choscn to re-orient themselves in relation to a multitude of
fragmentary problems—political, economic, domestic, cultic, etc.—
at a ‘small-scale’ level, and have found in this state of fragmenta-
tion their sense of intellectual direction provided for them by their
relevant ‘cognate discipline’. These changes in the object of study
and in the ideological supports of social anthropology might by
themselves have led to a disintegration of the discipline, but the
same post-war period witnessed a significant development in the
organisational base of social anthropology which saved it. In 1946

“Partly by challenging the functional anthropologist’s dogma that only
written records could provide a reliable basis for reconstructing history.
Cf. J. Vansina's Oral Tradition, a Study in Historical Methodvlogy, Lon-
don, 1965, originally published in French in 1961. The general tendency
of functional anthropology was to assimilate indigenous history lo the
category of myth—i.e. to view it in tecrms of instrumentality rather than of

Llruth in the classical non-pragmatist sensc.

"Leading sociologists in America,—e.g. Parsons, Mecrton, Homans—had al-
ways taken an active and sympathctic intercst in British social anthropo-
logy, and their wrilings in turn were a source of inspiration and support to
funotional anthropologists. The attack on American structural-functionalism
by such writers as R, Dahrendorf and C. Wright Mills was therefore bound

Lo affect the doctrinal self-confidence of British social anthropology.

"That this distinction remains unclear to many anthropotogists even today
1s apparcnt from the over-confident remarks of Levi-Strauss in his polemic
14 INTRODUCTION

the Association of Social Anthropologists of the British Common-
wealth (ASA) was founded with under 20 members; by 1962 the
membership had risen to over 150, “even though election to mem-
bership required normally both the holding of a teaching or a
research post in the Commonwealth and the attainment of either
a post-graduate degree (usually a doctorate) or substantial publica-
tions™.!® Once this base was in effective operation, social anthro-
pology as institutionalised practice could dispense with the doctrinal
specificity it had previously insisted on. Professional distinctiveness
could now be maintained through an established network of vested
interests—for which the ASA was a co-ordinating agency—rather
than by any particular doctrines or -methods. Anthropology was
now truly a ‘profession’.

Ironically, the same forces that were contributing to the ideo-
logical dissolution of classical functional anthropology had also
contributed to a strengthening of its organisational base. Thus
Fortes notes that during the Second World War in Britain, “econ-
omic, political and especially miltary necessities aroused a new and
lively public interest in the African and Asiatic dependencies of
Britain and her allies. The plans for post-war economic and social
development in these areas generated under pressure of war-time
experiences included big schemes of research in the natural and
social sciences. The boom in anthropological studies thus fore-
shadowed began after Radcliffe-Brown had retired from the Ox-
ford chair [in 1946]”.'° It was in the year of Radcliffe-Brown’s retire-
ment that the ASA was founded by scholars who were already
members of the long-established but far less exclusive Royal An-
thropological Institute. An exclusive ‘professional’ organisation was
clearly far better placed to exploit the new funding possibilities for
research in the changing power-pattern of the post-war world.

It is not a matter of dispute that social anthropology emerged as
a distinctive discipline at the beginning of the colonial era, that it

against Sartre: “It is possible that the requirement of ‘totalisation’ is a
great novelty to some historians, sociologists and psychologists. It has been
taken for granted by anthropologists ever since they learnt it from Mali-
nowski”. The Savage Mind, London, 1966, p. 250. What anthropologists
learnt from Malinowski was ethnographic holism, not the method of
totalisation.
®M. Ghickman and Fred Eggan, “Introduction” to The Relevance of Models
for Social Anthropology, London, 1965, p. xii. By 1968 the Association
had about 240 members (Social Science Research Council, Research in
Social Anthropology, London, 1968, p. 79.)

M. Fortes, (ed.) Social Structure, Oxford 1949, p. xiii.
TALAL ASAD 15

became a flourishing academic profession towards its close, or that
throughout this period its efforts were devoted to a description and
analysis—carried out by Europeans, for a European audience—of
non-European societies dominated by European power. And yet
there is a strange reluctance on the part of most professional anthro-
pologists to consider seriously the power structure within which
their discipline has taken shape. The typical attitude is well repre-
sented by the following passage from Victor Turner’s Introduction
to Volume Three of Colonialism in Africa 1870-1960, (Cambridge.
1971), in which the problem of the relationship between anthro-
pology and colonialism is trivialised and dismissed in the space of
two short paragraphs:
It used to be argued by officials of the ancien régime that anthro-
pologists, immersed as they were in the specificities of African
life, came to accept the structural perspective of their informants,
became their spokesmen, and by their words and works
impeded the efforts of district and provincial administrators to
govern cfficiently. Some were even accused by white settlers
and European civil servants of being ‘Reds’, ‘socialists’ and
‘anarchists’. It is now asseverated by African leaders and
administrators, down to the district level, that anthropologists
before independence were ‘apologists of colonialism’ and subtlc
agents of colonial supremacy who studied African customs
merely to provide the dominant whitc minority with information
damaging to native interests but normally opaque to white
investigation. Thus yesterday’s ‘socialist’ has become today’s
‘reactionary’. Sir Alan Burns (1957) and Frantz Fanon (1961) °
are improbably allied. ‘
It is true, of course, that in their personal capacity anthropolo-

. -—

gists, like everyonc else, have a wide spectrum of political
views. Some are known ‘conservatives’; others lean far to the
‘left”. But as professionals, anthropologists are trained, over
glmost as many years as doctors, to collect certain kinds of
information as ‘participant observers’ which will enable them,
whatever may be their personal views, to present as objectively
as the current level of their discipline’s development permits, a
coherent picture of the sociocultural system they have elected
to spend some years of their lives in studying, and of the kinds
of processes that go on in it. It is their ultimate duty to publish
tpexr findings and expose them, together with an exact descrip-
tion of the means by which they were obtained. to the
international public of their anthropological colleagues and

f

'
i

16 INTRODUCTION

beyond that to the ‘world of lcarning’. Eventually, news of their

work and analyses, through their own ‘popular’ writings or

through citations, résumés (not infrequently bowdlerised) and
digests by non-amhropologists seeps through to the general
t reading public. Time thus winnows their reports and rids them

| of much that is biased and ‘loaded’, There is no point in special

‘ﬁréiid‘mg or tendenfious argument; there are professional

standards against which all reports are measured, and, in the

end, the common sensc of the common man. (pp.1-2)

But to speak about ‘professional standards’ and the authority of
‘common sense’ is surely no less naive than are wild remarks about
anthropology being mercly the handmaiden of colonialism. There
are todav no clear-cut standards in anthropology. therc is only
a flourishing professional organisation; and thc common sense
of Western common man, himself an alienated and exploited
being, is hardly reliable as a critical test of anthropological know-
ledge. And yet the casy assurance of Tumer’s remarks is itself an
indication of the kind of commonsense world that the typical an-
thropologist still shares, and knows he shares, with those whom he
primarily addresses.

We have been reminded time and again by anthropologists
of the ideas and ideals of the Enlightenment in which the intellec-
tual mspuauon of anthropology is supposed to lie.?® But anthro-
pology is also rooted in an unequal power encounter_between the
West and Third World which goes back to the emergence of bour-
geois Europe, an cncounter in which colonialism is merely one
historical moment.?* 1t is this encounter that gives the West access
to cultural and historical information about the societies it has
progressively dominated, and thus not only gencrates a certain kind
of universal understanding, but also re-enforces the inequalities in
capacity between the European and the non-European worlds (and
derivatively, between the Europeanized clites and the ‘traditional’
masses in the Third World). We are today becoming increasingly
aware of the fact that information and understanding produced by
bourgeois disciplines like anthropology are acquired and used most
readily by those with the greatest capacity for exploitation. This
follows partly from the structure of research, but more especially

“See for cxample E. E. Evans-Pritchard, op. cit, M. Harris, The Rise of
Anthropological Theory, London, 1969, R. Firth, op. cit.

“'C. Levi-Strauss was one of the first anthropologists to note this important
" fact, although he has barely gone beyond noting it. See The Scope of An-
thropology, London, 1967, pp. 51-2. C
INTRODUCTION 17

from the way in which these disciplines objectify their knowledge.
It is because the powerful who support research expect the kind of
understanding which will ultimately confirm them in their world
that anthropology has not very easily turned to the production of
radically subversive forms of understanding. It is because anthro-|
pological understanding is overwhelmingly objectified in European
languages that it is most casily accommodated to the mode of life,
and hence to the rationality, of the world power which the West
represents.

We must begin from the fact that the basic reality which made
pre-war social anthropology a feasible and effective enterprise was
the power relationship between dominating (European) and domin-
ated (non-European) cultures. We then need to ask ourselves how
this relationship has affected the practical pre-conditions of social
anthropology; the uses to which its knowledge was put; the theo-
retical treatment of particular topics; the mode of perceiving and
objectifying alien societies; and the anthropologist’s claim of politi-
cal neutrality.

The colonial power structure made the object of anthropological
study accessible and safe—because of it sustained physical proxi-
mity between the observing European and the living non-European
became a practical possibility. It made possible the kind of human
intimacy on which anthropological fieldwork is based, but ensured (
that that intimacy should be one-sided and provisional. It is worth
noting that virtually no European anthropologist has been won -
over personally to the subordinated culture he has studied; although ,
countless non-Europeans, having come to the West to study its cul-
ture, have been captured by its values and assumptions, and also’
contributed to an understanding of it. !

The reason for this asymmetry is the dialectic of world power.
Anthropologists can claim to have contributed to the cultural
!:leritage of the societies they study by a sympathetic recording of
indigenous forms of life that would otherwise be lost to posterity.
But they have also contributed, sometimes indircctly, towards main-
taining the structure of power represented by the colonial system.
That such contributions were not in the final reckoning crucial for
the vast empire which received knowledge and provided patronage
does not mean that it was not critical for the small discipline which
offered knowledge and received that patronage. For the structure
of power certainly affected the theoretical choice and treatment of
what social anthropology objectified—more so in some matters
than in others. (We should in any case avoid the tendency found

18 INTRODUCTION

among some critics and defenders of social anthropology of speak-
ing as though the doctrines and analyses labelled ‘functionalism’
were parts of a highly integrated logical structure.) Its analyses—
of holistic politics most of all, of cosmological systems least of all
—were affected by a readiness to adapt to colonial ideology. At any
rate the general drift of anthropological understanding did not con-

‘stitute a basic challenge to the unequal world represented by. the

colonial system. Nor was the colonial system as such—within which
the social ob]octs studied were located—anafy_@ed by the social
anthropologist. To argue that the anthropo]"ogmt s expertise did not

..

that this expertise was malformed. For any ob]ect which is subor-
dinated and manipulated is partly the product of a power relation-
ship, and to ignore this fact is to miscomprehend the nature of that
object.

Clearly the anthropologist’s claim to political neutrality cannot
be separated from all that has been said so far. Thus the scientistic
definition of anthropology as a disinterested (objective, value-free)
study of ‘other cultures’ helped to mark off the anthropologist’s
enterprise from that of colonial Europeans (the trader, the mission-
ary, the administrator and other men of practical affairs); but did it
not also render him unable to envisage and argue for a radically
different political future for the subordinate people he studied and
thus serve to merge that enterprise in effect with that of dominant
status-quo Europeans? If the anthropologist sometimes endorsed or
condemned particular social changes affecting “his people”, did he,
in this ad hoc commitment, do any more or any less than many
colonial Europeans who accepted colonialism as a system? If he
was sometimes accusingly called ‘a Red’, ‘a socialist’ or ‘an anar-
chist’ by administrators and settlers, did this not merely reveal one
facet of the hysterically intolerant character of colonialism as a
system, with which he chosc nevertheless to live professionally at
peace?

I believe it is a mistake to view social anthropology in the colo-
nial era as primarily an aid to colonial administration, or as the
simple reflection of colonial ideology. I say this not because I sub-
scribe to the anthropological establishment’s comfortable view of
itself, but because bourgeois consciousness, of which social anthro-
pology is merely one fragment, has always contained within itself
profound contradictions and ambiguities—and therefore the poten-
tialities for transcending itself. For these contradictions to be ade-
quately apprehended it is essential to turn to the historical power
INTRODUCTION 19
relationship between the West and the Third World and to cxan!ine
the ways in which it has been dialectically linked to the practical
conditions, the working assumptions and the intellectual produoct
of all disciplines representing the European understanding of non-
European humanity. .

The papers that follow analyse and document ways in which anthro-
pological thinking and practice have been affected by British colo-
nialism, but they approach this topic from different points of view
and at different levels. All but Roger Owen’s were presented first at
a Seminar held in Hull in September 1972. Although each contribu-
tor has had the opportunity to revise his paper in the light of dis-
cussions that were held at the Seminar, no editorial attempt has
been made to impose any unity on them, or for that matter to en-
sure that together they represent a comprehensive coverage of the
problem. They stand as individual contributions to an argument
that is only just beginning, and in which as yet only a handful of
anthropologists are seriously interested. (It should be noted that in
over a quarter of a century since it was founded, the ASA has never
regarded colonialism as a topic worthy of a conference.)

The group which met wishes to thank the University of Hull for
providing funds and facilities for the Seminar. Most especially, we
wish to thank Ian Cunnison, Head of the Department of Sociology
and Social Anthropology at Hull, without whose active help and
constant encouragement the Seminar would probably not have
taken place. It was he who canvassed Anthropology Departments
in various Universities for possible contributors, and undertook
most of the organisational duties in preparation for the meeting.
March 1973
Part 1: General Studies
EMPIRICISM AND IMPERIALISM:
A REVIEW OF THE NEW LEFT CRITIQUE OF SOCIAL
ANTHROPOLOGY
Peter Forster

The question of the relationship betwcen anthropology and colo-
nialism has been raised in various quarters recently by various
writers who declare that they are approaching their subject from the
point of view of a left-wing political value-orientation. The differ-
ences in scope, origin and perspective of the various writers are
considerable, and some limitation on the subject-matter must be
imposed. Particular attention will here be focused on three different
sources, one British, one Current Anthropology Review Article, and
one French. The British source will be the articles that have
appeared in the New Left Review: Goddard', Banaji’, and, to a
lesser extent, Anderson®. The Current Anthropology source will be
the symposium on social responsibilities, with contribution from
Berreman', Gjessing®, and Gough®. The French source will be the
recently published book by Leclerc?, which deals explicitly with the

'D. Goddard, “Limits of British Anthropology”, New Left Revi
..('1 9g9)’ op. "’71%89. pology”, ft Review, No. 58
"J. Banaji, “The Crisis of British Anthropology”, New Left Review, No. 64
(1970), pp. 71-85, polosy /
E- Anderson, “Components of the National Culture”, New Left Review,
“SDt' d50 (1968) pp. 3-57. Reprinted in A. Cockburn and R. Blackburn,
196?) ent Power: Problems, Diagnosis, Action”, Harmondsworth, Penguin,
G B pg. 214-284.“Page references are to the reprint.
Anthr ei'rem,gn, Is Anthropology Alive? Social Responsibility in Social
'G G".°P‘? ogy , Current Anthropology, Vol. 9 (1968) pp. 391-396.
Anth Jessing. “The Social Responsibility of the Social Scientists”, Current
i Bropology, Vol. 9 (1968), pp. 397-402.

+ Lough, “New Proposals for Anthropologists”, Current Anthropology,
\

24 THE NEW LEFT CRITIQUE

question of the relationship between anthropology and colonialism
from the point of view of ‘critical’ anthropology; although appear-
ing in France, this latter work has as its prime focus of attention
the British school of anthropology. This list is far from exhaustive;
however, the positions adopted by the various writers here con-
sidered are sufficiently diverse and unfamiliar to mainstream British
social anthropology to make it worthwhile to examine their argu-
ments carefully. The basic unity of the critique revolves around
discussion of the colonial situation and the place of anthropology
within it. Sometimes the focus of attention is British imperialism
(Gjessing, Leclerc, Goddard, Banaji, Anderson), sometimes Ameri-
can neo-imperialism (Berreman, Gough). The stand taken may be
the theoretical limitations of classic anthropology (Leclerc, Ander-
son, Goddard, Banaji) or alternatively, a plea for social responsi-
bility, value-awareness, and politically relevant anthropological in-
vestigation (Berreman, Gjessing, Gough). Other source-material dis-
cussing the general question of anthropology and colonialism, or of
the future of anthropology, will be referred to in the text, and some
other writers mentioned may well wish to associate themselves with
the New Left; however, I have deliberately avoided an unfortunate
tendency characteristic of certain recent exercises in ‘critical’ or
‘radical’ sociology, of investigating the left-wing credentials of the
authors considered before considering their contributions as valid
statements of an argument.

The origins of the New Left cnitique of social anthropology are
fairly easy to discern. Politically and historically interest in this kind
of introspection stems from the dismemberment of colonial empires
which were previously the stamping ground of anthropologists; from
the sociological concomitants of ‘development’ in the Third World:
and more recently from the exposure of anthropological work
sponsored by the United States Central Intelligence Agency, and
the successful passing of a resolution about the Vietnam war at the
American Anthropological Association meeting in 1966. Theore-
tically, the critique forms part of a more general disillusionment
with functionalism (a characteristic of radical sociology t0o0); with
cmpiricism, sometimes within the framework of criticisms voiced
elsewhere about the lack of comparison in a supposedly compara-
tive science®, sometimes as part of a general critique of the lack of

Vol. 9 (1968), pp. 403-407.

'G. Leclerc, Anthropologie et Colonialisme, Paris, Fayard, 1972.

‘Sec particularly E. Leach, Rethinking Anthropology (title-essay), London,
Athlone Press, 1961, pp. 1-27.
PETER FORSTER 25

: -~ - £ a
thropological theory (Goddard, Bang]l), ar}d again, as part O
;:neralpodisillusionment with microscopic studies (Gjessing, Gough).
Goddard and Banaji both hold that British social anthropology has
suffered from over-concentration on normative and jural pheno-

mena; Goddard advocates a greater concern with the metaphysical
etements in Durkheim’s thought, while Banaji prefers a greater con-

——————

cern with Lévi-Straussian structural anthropology, considering that ;

its most fruitful aspects have been either ignored or “naturalised”
in British anthropology. Leclerc also, where he puts fqrward thf:ore.:-
tical proposals, suggests that anthropology should avou! fhe objecti-
fication characteristic of its colonial past, and is critical of.the
behaviourism and empiricism of British anthropology: he mentions
with approval writers such as Griaule®, for whom native cosmology
is not to be secen as a mere superstructure: interpretative analysis
is not to be made at the expense of indigenous interpretation. Fin-
ally, a common criticism voiced on both political and theoretical
grounds is that classical anthropology has either ignored or taken
insufficient account of the colonial situation. Thus Goddard criti-
cises British anthropology for speaking of *‘primitive’ rather than
“colonised’’ peoples, and for its lack of a total conception of the
colonial situation. Anderson is critical of Evans-Pritchard for his
lack of attention in The Nuer'® to the colonial situation while at the
same time approving of Leach (Political Systems of Highland
Burma'') for the incorporation of the colonial situation into his
analysis. Banaji, by contrast, regards Leach as equally culpable in
his lack of attention to the colonial situation. Leclerc suggests that
much British anthropology, especially applied anthropology, was
closely integrated with Indirect Rule. This he suggests prevented
classical anthropologists from seeing the colonial system as a politi-
cal and historical problem. The Current Anthropology symposium
here considered is more concerned with neo-imperialism than with
palaeo-imperialism; none the less, Gjessing particularly is critical of
the a-historical (Radcliffe-Brown) or anti-historical (Malinowski)
perspective of classical anthropology in the colonial situation, and
of the functionalist approach which tended to be reformist with
regard to the colonial administration.

Thus as can be expected from a list of issues raised by writers
grouped together as the ‘New Left’, both political and academic

M. Gnaule, Dicu d'Eau, Paris, Editions du Chene, 1948.
“E. E. Evans-Pritchard, The Nucr, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1940.
“%S}‘_each, Political Systems of Highland Burma, London, Athlone Press,
26 THE NEW LEFT CRITIQUE

issues are raised, the academic issues being primarily raised in the
authors by their political concerns. The academic issues will be the
main concern of this discussion, but the political proposals put for-
ward are suggested by some authors as binding on the anthropo-
logical community generally, and as inseparable from the academic
issues, and are too important to be ignored. I do not intend to speak
of the seriousness of purpose of those who espouse the political
views concerned, of the importance of the issues they raise, or of
the validity of the views they hold. The importance of the political
views held by the writers concerned will be taken to be the effect
of these on academic scholarship. This basically resolves itself
around three areas of concern: the question of a value-free social
anthropology and social science generally, and the role of the
anthropologist in society; the concept of relevance; and the concept
of commitment. These, in different ways, are the concern particu-
larly of the Current Anthropology Social Responsibilities Sym-
posium.

The question of value-freedom in social anthropology and the
role of the anthropologist in society are raised particularly by
Berreman and Gjessing, as a response generally to the literature on
responsibility in science, including the sociological literature, and
more specifically to the Vietnam resolution at the AAA, and to the
exposure of anthropological complicity with the CIA. Particularly
in the context of serious political issues of this nature, it is welcome
that the question of a value-free anthropology has been raised, as it
should be in all social science; but if the discussion of the issue is
to have any lasting value, a number of matters need to be clarified.
This is a useful exercise, as it can also be linked up with the general
question of the effect that palaeo-colonialism had on an anthropolo-
gist’s academic work. Many important issues are raised by the
whole question of what it means to be value-free; these have been
raised many times before by non-anthropologists, but a number of
common confusions remain. Thus, as far as I am aware, no social
scientist has ever suggested that the investigator of society should
have no value-commitments at all, and Weber strongly repudiated
such a suggestion. The issue of value-freedom unfortunately does
tend to submerge different issues which are easily separable. For
a start, the question of value-freedom is frequently confused with
the question of objectivity. In his critique of some tendencies in
radical sociology, Bandyopadhay'> emphasises the importance of

“P. Bandyopadhyay, “One Sociology or Many—some issuecs in Radical
Sociology”’, Sociological Review, Vol. 19 (1971), 5-29.
27
PETER FORSTER

.. distinction, indicating that left-wing ideology has re]eqted any
;ﬁ‘;'ggs’ffon of a value-free social scfience but has emphasxs?:i ltmhe
importance of objectivity. In a different context, Maquet*® has
raised the question of objectivity In specflﬁc reflatlon to social anthro-

logy. In the context of the present discussion, to affirm the value
of objectivity would presumably be to agree with the seriously
politically committed writers who plead for a relevant apth ropology.
If, for instance, Gough’s new proposals for anthmpologxst§ are to be
put into practice and thought to make a valuable contribution to
the advancement of socialist revolution, the findings must be objec-
tively valid. The same idea of objectivity would be even more
important to someone with the political commitment of Frank,
for instance, in the Current Anthropology discussion. If the politi-
callv committed and active anthropologist is to put his knowledge
to zfny use for the revolution, *“like the guerrilla doctor who treats
his wounded comrades”, what he has to say had better be true.
Likewise, only objectively valid information collected by the CIA
can be considered dangerous; if information available to the CIA is
not objectively valid, it can only work against the interests of its
neo-imperalist policies. Pseudo-subjectivity is a dangerous luxury
for radical anthropologists to engage in, and can be just as mis-
leading as pseudo-objectivity. To examine the limits of objectivity
in science is a very valuable exercise, but the end in view in this
exercise must be to enable the scientist to move from the less objec-
tive to the more objective. The issue has also been raised not in
relation to ‘‘objectivity’’ but in relation to “‘objectification” (Lec-
lerc, p. 196); I shall return to this in considering the theoretical
implications of the New Left critique.

A serious issue is raised by a concept which again arises out of
the issues surrounding the idea of a value-free social science,
namely the concept of relevance. Berreman and Gijessing both
suggest that anthropology today is in danger of becoming “irrele-
vant”, and also are heavily critical of the Ivory Tower. A number
of issues again need to be disentangled here, and a number of
questions need to be asked. Firstly if one accepts that anthropology
arose largely out of the needs of colonial administration, anthro-
pology will indeed suffer from a crisis of identity, now that the
colonial empires are dismembered. More generally, however, the ob-

"I. J. Maquet, “Objectivity in Anthropology’, Current Anthropology, Vol 5
(1964), pp. 47-55.

"A. G. Frank, Comment to Current Anthropology Social Responsibilties
Symbposium, Current Anthropology, Vol. 9 (1968), pp. 412414,

——
28 THE NEW LEFT CRITIQUE

vious question of relevance for what? suggests itself. Gough, to her
credit, is completely consistent in putting forward counter-proposals
to the activities sponsored by the CIA, drawing the anthropological
community’s attention to these, and declaring her own value-orien-
tation. There is a danger however, present throughout the Current
Anthropology symposium, of harnessing most or all anthropological
rescarch to immediate short-term aims rather than to development
of the discipline. and in consigning those who have fundamental
theoretical aims in view to the Ivory Tower. In the first place, future
generations of scholars might have cause to see research geared to
short-term aims as irrelevant, just as applied anthropology that
existed in the colonial situation is now thought to be irrelevant.
Anthropological research has usually been escteric, but esoteric
subjects can be of fundamental importance to the comprehensibility
of history and society and this to my mind has been one of the most
valuable distinctive contributions of anthropology to the social
sciences generallv. Do we for instance consign Gough’s work on
the Nayar and matrilineal kinship to the scrap-heap on the grounds
of ‘irrelevance’? Some of these issues are raised in the discussion to
the symposium. Klejn, a Soviet contributor, is critical of this
approach:
I agree completely with Gjessing when he holds that social an-
thropologists should approach the problems of the ‘rising
nations of the non-Western world’ with a view to satisfying
the requirements and interests of these nations themselves. 1
am worried, however, about the implication that we should
reduce the aims of social anthropology to such narrowly prag-
matic ones. Does this turn out to be the same as Malinowski’s
functionalism, but inside out—the same pragmatism, merely
diverted from the British colonial administration to the local
national interests? Of course, it would be much better to have
the ‘ten anthropologists’ continue the job of the ‘ten troops’;
but I think that to limit thus the aims of our science would
benefit neither the science nor the rising nations. General
theoretical research is important; we need to know the laws of
social life, the lessons of social history!s,
Lewis in the discussion is also heavily critical of the authors’ com-
ments on relevance?®:

“L. S. Klejn, Comment to Current Anthropology Social Responsibilities
Symposium, loc. cit., pp. 415-417.
*I. M. Lewis, Comment to Current Anthropology Social Responsibilities
Symposium, loc. cit., pp. 415417.
PETER FORSTER 29
1 disagree with Gijessing’s diagn.osis. that social at}th.ropology is
‘today in grave danger of becoming irrelevant’. This, indeed,
is the exact opposite of what Kathleen Gough’s gloomy assess-
ment of the strategic importance ascribed to anthropological
research in the United States would suggest...Social anthr0pqlogy
has never been merely an aid to enlightened colonial adminis-
tration, nor should it be viewed now as merely an aid to
development in new states. When anthropology ceases to have
anything of wider interest to say, it deserves to die.

Lewis here points to the crucial danger of over-cmphasis on rele-
vance. If it leads to nothing more than the reiteration of certain
views of society which anyone can hold whether he knows any
anthropology or not, there is no point in having any anthropology
at all. The issue of fundamental importance is surcly the develop-
ment of the discipline to further the comprehensibility of history
and society. In the past, it has frequently been conservatives who
have insisted on immediate relevance and immediate practical appli-
cability of the findings of scientists, while those of more radical
opinions have defended the value of fundamental academic defini-
tion of problems. In the current discussion of relevance, one often
finds these positions reversed.

The concept of relevance leads directly to the concept of com-
mitment, or partisanship. As with relevance, so with commitment,
the question ‘commitment to what?’ immediately springs to mind.
Are all social commitments acceptable, and if not, why not? In the
case of Berreman and Gjessing’s suggestions, notions of commit-
ment are expressed which could include any kind of social commit-
ment. In the discussion, Gulick quite reasonably remarks that'":

Consider those anthropologists, mentioned by Berreman, who are

working professionally for the United States government for

the primary purpose of facilitating the militaristic policies of

the United States in South-East Asia. They could quite logically

claim that they are being professionally responsible to society.

There is an underlying assumption throughout discussion of com-

mitment that political commitment can only be to left-wing ideo-

logy. This is surely absurd to anvone who has the slightest degree
of political awarcness and one could consign the perpetrators of
such a myth quite rightly to the Ivory Tower. The papers here con-
sidered show quite cnough disunity of commitment to the Left, let
alone anywhere else, to suggest anything other than that each an-

“J. Gulick, Comment to Current Anthropology Social Responsibilities Sym-
posium, loc. cit., p. 414.
30 THE NEW LEFT CRITIQUE

thropologist can and will choose his own barricades. The real issue
is the extent to which anthropologists have the right gua anthro-
pologists to make collective commitments, Appeals to truth, human-
ism, and similar generalised beliefs exclude some commitment but
accept most; the arguments for a more precise collective political
commitment on the part of the anthropological community generally
are not adequately presented in the Current Anthropology sym-
posium. Nor does it help the advancement of the discipline to make
declarations such as Haber and Haber’s ‘“We are not intellectuals
above it all who say the truth to whomever will listen or asks: we
are partisans™ 8, It is surely any academic’s right to engage in par-
tisanship, but it is surely also any academic institution’s right to
insist that its members engage in academic work. The call to sub-
ject all academic work to partisanship helps least of all those who
sincerely wish to be both scholars and partisans. Further problems
arise with partisanship when anthropological investigation in the
field is considered. If partisanship is carried on in the field, the
accessibility of fields of investigation for future scholars is placed
in jeopardy, and anthropology is in danger of being associated in
the minds of informants with a particular political and social com-
mitment. The well-known association of anthropology with colonial
administration is a good case in point; Jaspan, speaking of Hur-
gronje’s research in Sumatra, which was openly associated with
colonial ideology, warns that :
The consequences of partisan commitment almost seventy years
ago and at the opposite end of a large island are still to be felt,
and have a negative effect, on rapport formation by present
day ethnographers. This should, if nothing else, suggest to those
who tolerate or justify commitment its unpredicatable con-
sequences for other ethnographers and for the profession as a
whole*®.
At the same meeting at which the Vietnam resolution was passed,
the AAA expressed criticism of one form of ulterior commitment :
There...is good reason to believe that some anthropologists have
used their professional standing and the names of their academic
institutions as cloaks for the collection of intelligence informa-
tion and for intelligence operations?°.

*Quoted in A. G. Frank, op. cit., p. 413.

M. A. Jaspan, “Anthropology and Commitment to Political Causes”, An-
thropological Forum, Vol. 1 (1964), pp. 212-219.

“*‘Statement on Problems of Anthropological Research and Ethics by
Fellows of the Amcrican Anthropological Association”, American Anthro-
pologist, Vol. 69 (1967), p. 382.
1
PETER FORSTER 3

The implications of this criticism must be borne in mind for ot_hsr
forms of ulterior motive in the field. Quite apart from moral objec-
tions, ulterior use of the anthropologist’s position to support colo-
nialism or the CIA is dangerous for thp development of .the dis-
cipline. Still, the anthropologist committed to left-wing ideology
must also consider the implications of politically laudable ulterior
motives for the development of the discipline as well.

[ shall turn now to examine the New Left contribution to theo-
retical development of anthropology. One can state at the outset
that the contributions to this subject at any rate have the ultimate
welfare of the discipline in mind and arc more worthy of bcing
considered seriously by the profession as a whole. The argument
common to them all is that anthropology has suffered theoretically
from its association with colonialisni,” Theoréfical “critiques are
son and Leclerc. Anderson, Goddard and Banaji form a consistent
series of critiques and a number of themes reappear in them all.
The characteristic feature is the emphasis on the way in which
British society gave rise to a distinctively empirical Weltanschauung,
eliminating metaphysical elements, at the same time failing to artic-
ulate a conception of society as a totality. This criticism is voiced
notably in Anderson in relation to British intellectual life as a
whole. He stresses the lack of distinctive British sociology and the
lack of acceptance of Marxism in Britain. Anthropology, he sug-
gests, is a partial exception, and has been distinguished as a dis-
ciplinary tradition from sociology (in a way in which Durkheim,
for instance, was not interested). A holistic view, and a functionalist
framework, were adopted in the study of colonised peoples. This
was also a consensus model, in which even conflict could be seen as
producing ultimate cohesion (Gluckman). By excluding the colonial
administration from their field of investigation (a good instance
being Evans-Pritchard on the Nuer), and by so doing concentrating
on fairly safe subjects, British social anthropology during the colo-
nial period suffered theoretically. Only after the second World War,
and the crisis in the imperial system, was any theoretical advance
made, notably by Leach in Political Systems of Highland Burma.
Leach also stands outside the general empiricism of British aca-
demic life in his recognition of Lévi-Strauss and his use of struc-
tural analysis of myth. This development is characteristic of the
distinctive place of anthropology in the national culture:

Both traditional functionalism and the structuralism of Leach’s

later work arc anomalies for English empiricism. Anthropology

J
e —

32 THE NEW LEFT CRITIQUE

formed a deviant sector within English culture, because its
application was outside it. The exception here is a corollary of
the rule??.
This dogma of the New Left Review, the empiricism of British cul-
ture, is a feature pervading the general theoretical critique of social
“anthropology by both Goddard and Banaji. The focus of the criti-
que is different, but Goddard and Banaji both find British anthro-
pology just as culpable in its over-empiricism as are other aspects of
British intellectual life. British social anthropology is, if anything,
characteristic of British empiricism rather than deviant from it.
Goddard centres his critique on the notion of structure that British
social anthropology has worked wm deficient, he argues,
in being identified with the totality of empirically given social rela-
tionships in a tribal society. This highly empirical concept was easily
integrated into functionalism by Radcliffe-Brown; no investigation
was made of hidden relations, principles, or forms, or even of the
possibility of constructing models or theories to explain observed
\ phenomena. As part of the structural-functional framework, a
' general normative emphasis and particularly, a jural focus pre-
}vailed. The jural focus was derived from Maine, and notably from
: Durkheim’s Division of Labour in Society. It permeated the study
of all custom supported by binding sanctions, and notably, the study
of kinship. This approach, Goddard argues, has severe theoretical
limitations. There is an emphasis on normative facts, but there is
no recognition that normative facts may be shaped by covert, non-
normative “facts”, accessible only to critical analysis. Method and
theory completely converge. Durkheim was the main theoretical
inspiration for social anthropology in Britain, but his framework
was highly selectively adopted:
Durkheim’s rationalist, Cartesian mode of analysis of social phen-
omena, by reducing them to their constituent elements, was
interpreted uneasily as a ‘sociological positivism® and thus
made to correspond as nearly as possible to the methodological
conditions of traditional empiricism. The ‘metaphysical’
elements on Durkheim—society as a phenomenon sui generis,
the apparently outrageous analysis of religion—were quietly
suppressed or conveniently forgotten??,
Thus British empiricism expressed itself again in British social
anthropology, and the issues central to Durkheim’s preoccupations

**Anderson, op. cit.,, p. 268.
*Goddard, op. cit., p. 89.
33
PETER FORSTER

were dismissed or misunderstood. Such is Goddard’s explanation
for the pervasiveness of empiricism and fu.ncuonallsfn.l in British
social anthropology. The dogma of the esspntxally cmpiricist charac-
ter of British thought 1s aggin reasserted, in a yet stronger form, by
Banaji who concentrates his attention on post-wa; anthropp]qu,
whose roots he traces in the global revolution against coloma11§m
and in the growth of structural anthropology, the second reflecting
the first. Some of Goddard’s criticisms are reiterated, but the focus
of Banaji’s critique is primarily on the diachronic variant of func-
tionalism, scen particularly in the work of Leach and Needham,
and on the response in British social anthropology to the work of
Lévi-Strauss. The argument is not always casy to decode, as the
pages of Banaji’s article are bespattered with trendy structuralist
jargon, but the main strands can be seen as a continued critique of
over-cmpiricism and functionalism, which have continued to be
characteristic of post-war British social anthropology. Functionalism
was in fact a non-theory, a theory which arose out of the practice
of fieldwork, but the practice of fieldwork sometimes found func-
tionalism wanting, Leach’s work in Burma becing a notable case in
point. There was an anti-functionalist response within functionalism,
from Leach, foreshadowed by Gluckman’s response to Malinowski,
which still appealed to the idea of a self-stabilising system. This
stood in sharp contrast to Lévi-Strauss’s opposition to function-
alism, which concerned itself with the unconscious nature of collec-
tive phenomena and in this way broke sharply from empiricism.
There has been a response in Britain to Lévi-Strauss which can be
seen as the ‘‘naturalisation” of structuralism in accordance with
British empiricism. Here we see an argument which corresponds
closely to Goddard’s assessment of the British reaction to Durk-
heim. Leach, the main British expositor of Lévi-Strauss, none the
less took an over-empiricist model in both Pul Eliya and in Political
Systems of Highland Burma. He distinguished between actors’ con-
scious models and the empirical field so as to conform to the func-
tionalist distinction between rules and behaviour, but it never occur-
red to him that the anthropologist might perceive a different reality
transcending both of these. Needham, for his part, regretted the
over-empiricism and lack of theory in British anthropology, but
himself applied structuralism only to systems of prescriptive alli-
ance. Mythologiques was neglected, and Les Structures Elémentaires
de la Parenté was misunderstood either as a model or in its entirety.
Structuralism, however, Banaji admits, has an ambiguous relation
to history, and part of its limited impact on British anthropology
34 THE NEW LEFT CRITIQUE

is due to its own limitations. Its focus of attention is quite different
from that of functionalism:

Structuralism’s break with functional anthropology consisted in

a sharp and deliberate displacement of the entire axis of

comprehensmn from the phenomenal space of an immediate

intuitive encounter with the savage to the lj@ space of
pensée sauvage, established like any code, by the rigorous non-
intuitive procedures of science®,
Thus while providing a break from functionalism, structuralism was
uneven and distorted in its impact on British anthropology. British
empiricists have done the same to Lévi-Strauss as they have done in
the past to Durkheim.

Thus the critique of British social anthropology in the New Left
Review can be seen as part of a general critique of empiricist phil-
sophy which is seen as a characteristically British phenomenon. It
remains therefore to consider Leclerc, a French critic of British
social anthropology, who again stresses a critical, Marxist perspec-
tive. His approach centres on the relation betwen anthropology and
colonialism, present but peripheral to the British New Left, but the

\ key problem to Leclerc. Two issues stand out: first, and most im-
sportant the relatnonshlp betwen functionalism and colonialism;
second a critical view of the ‘objectification’ characteristics of
British social anthropology (to which structuralism, however, is not
regarded as the automatic answer). Leclerc suggests that function-
alist anthropology had no conception of colonialism as a sytem,
and points to the ambiguous use of ‘primitive’ in anthropological
work. In contrast to the Victorian evolutionists, who did have a
conception of colonialism (justifying it), classic functional anthro-
pologists saw colonialism in a neutral manner, as a specific form of
social change. There were schools of applied anthropology, but the
proponents of these supported Indirect Rule and hardly saw the
colonial system as a political and historical problem. No total
critique of colonial reality was provided, and functionalism was
unable to provide one. American cultural anthropology was more
anti-colonialist in its interests, and in the 1930-1950 period Ameri-
can anthropologists have been to some degree spokesmen for the
indigenous inhabitants of colonised societies. Ideas of cultural rela-
tivism could compete with colonial ideology.

On the question of objectification, Leclerc considers particularly

the reaction of the Third World to classical anthropology. The

*‘Banaji, op. cit., p. 82.
35

PETER FORSTER
i nt characteristic of classical anthropology
soveragnbec?:ctcm;e:ﬁstic of the African response, where objecti-
has not has been criticised. Ethnocentrism has been much more
gf%:;ﬁﬁ to eradicate than the post-Victorian ‘ an}hropologxsts
thought. The concepts of accult}lrauon an_d modgrmsanon ha\fe a.Jso
d for not having given sufficient weight to exploitation

een criticise 3
lz::m:l domination. Leclerc does not present any definite new pro-

als Tor anthropologists; he recognises the ambiguity of. the con-
cept of development, and the fact that some Marxists have
supported colonialism. In h_1s theoretical conc!usnons, howev?r, he
does give approval to the kind of anthropological work that is not
‘objectifying’. He gives approval to the work of Griaule, Oscar
Lewis and Jan Myrdal, but still stresses the importance of scientific
investigation. Thus objectification is not to be rejected by the rejec-
tion of objectivity; the difficulty of translation of cultures is recog-
nised as problematic, though Leclerc himself does not propose an
alternative solution.

Despite the diversity of conclusions in the work here reviewed, a
basic unity of concern of the writers here considered can be seen to
be the general relationship between anthropology and colonialism.
As one can expect, this is likely to be a concern of the intellectual
Left and it remains to assess the attention that the discipline as a
whole might pay to this critique. The whcle concept of develop-
ment is too ambiguous, from diverse standpoints, to enable one to
say retrospectively what anthropologists should have done about
the colonial situation. As far as the issues of relevance and com-
mitment are concerned, it can only be stated that the advocates of
such stances are putting forward a heavily empiricist view of social
anthropology. If anthropology is to be geared directly to practical
politics, the empirical conclusions are of major importance; struc-
turalism as well as classical anthropology would be ruled out by
such an emphasis on relevance and commitment. The British New
Left critique, in sharp contrast, takes empiricism as one of its main
targets of attack, and Banaji, at any rate, is favourable to structur-
alism. But although left-wing political value-orientations have led
to widely divergent views of anthropology, it remains true that
there are important issues to be raised about the relationship be-
tween social anthropology and the colonial situation, and the effect
that had on the content of discipline during the colonial period. It
can be argued that the colonial situation did make for a tendency
to concentrate on empirical studies, particularly in Britain where
the system of Indirect Rule was adopted. It might also be argued
36 THE NEW LEFT CRITIQUE

that the concern for the collection of unfamiliar ethnographic data
might have led some anthropologists to concentrate in their empiri-
cal studies on the traﬁ&z_al/clgments of the societies they investi-
gated (though the discipline itself has produced some sharp criticism
of this kind of approach**). There is considerable justification for
the view that functionalism and empiricism are closely related,
functionalism (particularly in anthropology) emerging as a non-
theory, as Goddard and Banaji both suggest. The use of the func-
tionalist framework produced a behaviourist, normative focus In
research reports, and by taking inadequate account of actor’s defi-
nitions of the situation (which may not coincide) ignored the basic
conflicts and power-relationships in society. The latter perspective,
while by no means confined to Marxists, is the perspective that a
Marxist would adopt. The issue of lack of comparison, lack of
theory, and over-empiricism in social anthropology has been raised
before, and a realisation of some of the issues here outlined might
be helpful for those who would like to see a more theoretical an-
thropology. None the less, if one examines certain trends in so-
called radical sociology, one should be wary of an over-contempt
for the empirical. Bandyopadhyay, criticising some of these tenden-
cies, points to one form which entertains:
The belief that sociology is not only non-objective, but cannot
even be empirical, since to treat the enquiry as an empirical
one is to accept some version of the correspondence theory of
truth and this would lead to one-dimensional analysis leaving
out the role of alternative visions or ‘utopias’ in changing social
relations. Sociology, if empirical, would be insufficiently
dialectic!2®
This position, associated notably with the Frankfurt school of soci-
ologists, excludes any kind of integration of theory and empirical
research : this latter problem being one that sociology has grappled
with from its beginnings, and is worthy of investigation in anthro-
pology too. If a non-empirical social science is one extreme position,
then empiricism is the other extreme. It can be seen that an empiri-
cist social science is likely to produce a functionalist perspective,

*'Sec paiiicularly J. C. Mitchell, “Theoretical Orientations in African Urban
Studics ” in M. Banton (Ed.): The Social Anthropology of Complex
Societies, London, Tavistock Publications, 1966; A. L. Epstcin, Politics in
an Urban African Community, Manchester U.P, 1958. M. Gluckman,
“Anthropological Problems arising from the African Industrial Revolution”

in A. Southall (Ed.): Social Change in Modern Africa, London, O.U.P.,
1961, pp. 67-83.

“Bandyopadhyay, op. cit., p. 6.
PETER FORSTER 37

empiricism and functionalism frequemly being components of the
actor’s conscious model of his own society. vaxqusly one can see
from Talcott Parsons that not all functionalism 1is empiricist, bgt
even here, as Mills** points out, one can see the easy coexistence in
American sociology of Grand Theory and Abstracted Empiricism.
Another aspect of functionalism is its a-or anti-historical ap-
proach and it is this particularly that made for some of the defi-
crencies in some anthropological work in the colonial situation: a
different matter it should be stressed from sweeping assertions
about ‘anthropologists ignoring the colonial situation’. As Evans-
Pritchard points out, social anthropology has an important part to
play in making the history of colonised territories more than just a
history of colonial rule in such territories.?” Social anthropology,
like social history and many branches of sociology has made a dis-
tinctive contribution to the study of society in its investigation of
those affected by the decisions of powerful men: in contrast to
history (as an Arts subject), economics. and political science, which
have generally been far more concerned with the study of the
powerful than with those affected by political decisions. Social an-
thropology has never regarded the colonised as ‘*‘irrelevant’” and
only the colonialists as ‘“‘relevant”: but if their comments on the
“irrelevance’” of microscopic studies are to be believed, some would
seem to prefer to concentrate on the study of colonial rule.
Fortunately there is a tendency in a number of monographs to
criticise the leading assumptions of functionalism and to adopt a
historical perspective. Leach in Political Systems of Highland
Burma questions a number of leading functionalist assumptions,
notably the equilibrium model, behaviourism, the assumption of
homogeneity, and the non-historical approach. Asad?® in The
Kababish Arabs is also critical of the equilibrium model and the
behaviourist approach, and regards consensus as problematic rather
than as given. It is true that studies of this kind are the product
uf empirical field-work, but this does not invalidate them, and they
are clearly integrated into the mainstream of social science. There
is no reason, as Banaji seems to suggest, to adopt a structuralist
paradigm merely because it is called social anthropology. The fact

*Mills, C. Wright, The Sociological Imagination, New York, Oxford Uni-
_versity Press, 1959.

“Evans-Pritchard, E. E. “Anthropology and History” in Essays in Social
_Anthropology, London, Faver and Faber, 1962, p. 64,

*T. Asad, The Kababish Arabs: Power, Authority and Consent in a Noma-
dic Tribe. London, Hurst, 1970.
38 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST

that British scholars have directed their attention to the empirical
world and thus produced the most sophisticated corpus of social
anthropology does not invalidate their findings. If Durkheim and
Lévi-Strauss have been ‘naturalised’, there is no reason to suppose
that this is for the disadvantage of the discipline in its attempt to
make sense of aspects of the empirical world.
THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST
Wendy James

Current criticisms of the social anthropology of the colonial period
acknowledge that more than a handful of individual anthropologists
were of liberal or even radical political outlook. But they usually
maintain that this fact is not relevant for analysis of the develop-
ment of the subject or its place in the colonial situation. The con-
text is represented as fostering an cssentially conservative subject,
shaped within the same political ideology as colonial domination
itself and bolstering its intcrests to such an extent that the percep-
tions and problems of even the liberal-radical practitioner were
falsely formulated. At best, it might be admitted, in the words for
example of Kathleen Gough, that

Anthropologists in those days seem to have played roles charac-

teristic of white liberals, sometimes of white liberal reformers,

in other spheres of our society...living closelv with native

peoples, they tended to take their part to try to protect them

against the worst forms of impcrialistic exploitation...

Applied anthropology came into being as a kind of social work
and community development effort for non-white peoples.!

Not much attention has been paid to the implications of this ad-
mission. The dissent indicated among anthropologists is not usually
considered important ecnough to qualify Gough’s picture of the
subject as the “child of Western imperialism”’.

But it can be argued that the appearance of a radical element

'K. Gough, “New Proposals for Anthropologists”, Current Anthropology,
Vol. 9. 1968, 403-7, at p. 403.
42 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RALUCTANT IMPERIALIST

among anthropologists is neither unimportant nor irrelevant; on the
contrary that it has been significant for the development of certain
aspects of the subject; and further, that the very existence of social
anthropology in the colonial period constituted a source of potential
radical criticism of the colonial order itself. The occurrence of liber-
al views within the subject was therefore not an accident; it was en-
tailed by the nature of anthropological research, which by definition
reaches out geographically, linguistically and philosophically beyond
the bounds of received western civilisation in search of alternative
modes of understanding and living. Of course a good deal of trite
and mediocre work has been produced in practice, and the promise
of the anthropological perspective has rarely been fulfilled. But the
critical questioning of the basis of social life implicit in anthropology
has remained at the heart of the subject, and its growth within wes-
tern culture during the colonial period necessarily constituted a
source of informed critical comment, since it was ideally based upon
experience of life on the reverse side of the colonial coin inaccessible
to most other members of the dominant society. The subject was
not spurned by the earlier generation of nationalist politicians; and
though the structures of Empire have now collapsed and cleared the
way for a more profound critical appraisal, a historical perspective
reminds us of some of the contradictory aspects of the place of
social anthropology in the colonial situation, the arguments it pro-
voked and the resistance it encountered from the very body of offi-
cial opinion and authority with which it is now sometimes assumed
to have lived in a cosy conspiracy; or at least a web of unspoken
understandings. As an individual, the anthropologist can often ap-
pear as a critic of colonial policy, of the philosophy of western
superiority upon which it was based and in terms of which it was
justified; and he was usually at odds with the various administrators,
missionaries, and other local Europeans he had dealings with. He
cannot often be seen unambiguously as a willing agent of colonial-
ism. But he was nevertheless dependent upon colonial authorities for
permission to carry out his studies, and sometimes for material sup-
port; and in the inter-war period at least, open political dissent was
scarcely possible within colonial society. An anthropologist who
turned out to be anything more than a mild social embarrassment
could scarcely have been tolerated; and thus, for anthropology to
continue at all, appearances of co-opecration had to be kept up.

The place of anthropology in the colonial situation was in fact
doubly ambivalent. On the one hand, as I have suggested, there was
an ambivalence in relation o official authority, for although anthro-
WENDY JAMES 43

ed worthy of support, its personnel and their act-
iv&?gy v:v;se Squu[;z?isonable; and on the other hand, in relation to the
growing nationalist and reyolutnonary movements, anthrqpology,
though initially regarded with sympa}hy, came to appear increas-
ingly conservative. This double ambivalence, in my opinion, ex-
plains why social anthropology has been the object of more suspi-
cion, accusation and blame from both _sxdes ot: .t.he deve]opm‘g
colonial situation than the low number ?f its practitioners and their
relatively small output would appear to justify. It would .also appear
to have had important effects on the growth of the .sub]ect, ax.ld‘xts
changing emphases. During the period of the twenties and thirties,
there was undoubtedly tension between officialdom and the expand-
ing subject of anthropology, making it natural for there to be a
strong svmpathy between the subject and the early development of
nationalism; but later, particularly after the Second World War, the
perspective of nationalist and revolutionary ideologies made anthro-
logy merely a conservative ally of colonial control, itself increas-
ingly liberal and progressive.

This essay draws attention in particular to the inter-war period.
The first part discusses social anthropology as the problem child of
the colonial encounter in Africa, the ways in which it constituted a
body of radical criticism and how this was necessarly tempered.
The second part considers the case of Malinowski’s arguments from
1929 onwards for the involvement of anthropology in the “‘chang-
ing” African scene, some effects of these arguments on the develop-
ment of the subject, and some responses to them from representa-
tives of both colonial officialdom and the new African nationalism.

|
What can ‘‘radical criticism’”’ mean in the context of colonial an-
thropology? Examples of explicit criticism will be considered in the
second part of this essay, but firstly the implicitly critical character
of much anthropological writing should be noted. A large propor-
tion of the anthropology of the inter-war period is clearly partisan;
in its choice of problems, and the very formulation of substantive
analysis, it is often defensive of the weaker societies and cultures;
of the sophistication of their language and thought, and of the
“rationality”” of primitive economics, politics, witchcraft, religion
and so on. This defensive position extended on occasion to matters
of native land rights, and treatment of migrant labourers in the new
industrial areas and under the law. This intellectual and moral de-
fence of the rights and dignity of peoples who had previously been
44 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST

regarded, under the evolutionary racist theories of the nineteenth
century armchair anthropologists, as scarcely human, was more
than an academic reaction to earlier theories: it was at the same
time a gut-reaction to the persistence of these ideas of cultural and
racial superiority among the colonial rulers, local white settlers, and
in popular opinion back at home. Although colonial anthropologists
could rarely be described as radicals in an active political sense,
which would have been almost impossible anyway, I believe that
much of their work was given direction by radicalism of a moral
kind.

For example, in the thirties the problem of witchcraft was discus-
sed a good deal in colonial circles: on the whole it was accepted that
natives possessed a different quality of mind, such that apparent
irrationalities could scarcely be dealt with reasonably, but only
through the application of laws against the practice or accusation of
sorcery or witchcraft (see the special number of Africa, 1935%). The
common assumptions of the practical men of the colonies, I would
judge, were fairly close to those of armchair anthropologists of a
previous generation, concerning the relative nature of thought
and rationality in primitive society. Evans-Pritchard’s argument in
Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic among the Azande (1937) was des-
igned at least in part as a criticism and a refutation of such theories:
and on another level, it could be seen as an answer to the prejudices
over native mentality commonly held by those with colonial exper-
ience, which must have been the despair of many fieldworkers. This
aspect of Evans-Pritchard’s work appears clearly in the following
quotations from an early Zande article, Sorcery and Native Opinion.
The article begins as follows :

It is important to understand native opinion about black magic,

not only for the anthropologist but also for the colonial

administrator and missionary, if they wish to show to the
peoples whom they govern and teach that they understand their
notions about right and wrong, The native does not so much
distrust European justice and education as he despairs of the
administrator and missionary ever understanding, or attempting
to understand, his point of view as expressed in laws and public
opinion. This despair springs largely from the handling by

Europeans of such matters as sorcery, with which both

missionaries and administrators frequently have to deal. The

native becomes convinced finally that the European is quite

*Africa VIII, No. 4, Oct., 1935.
45
WENDY JAMES
e of seeing the difference between right and wrong,
between the proper use of a cgltural weapon fully sanctioned
by public opinion, such as white magic, and a heinous gnd
cold blooded murder, such as the crime of black magic or
3
Afstz:c;r)c’:.areful and detailed ex.posi.tioP of this crucial moral d.is.-
tinction as seen by Azande, and its sngmfxcance for §ocnal and politi-
cal life, Evans-Pritchard concludes with suggestions as to .how
administrators might benefit from understanding such questions.
How far we may wonder could such hints be of much practical use
to administrators? In any case, they scarcely mask the strong tone
of criticism with which the article comes 1o a close:
In conclusion. we may address ourselves to those administrators
and missionaries and doctors whose lives are spent amongst
primitive peoples in Africa. If, as we think, a public opinion
which classes some types of magic definitely as base and
criminal, and others as virtuous and legal, whilst judging yet
others with an uncertain voice, exists and functions not only
amongst the Azande of the Nile-Uelle Divide but in many
other savage communities, it behoves Europeans to be discreet
in their dealing with it. Upon no other subject are Europeans
in the tropics generally so ignorant and in no other sphere of
native life is ignorance more likely to lead to infliction and
destruction of good institutions. Such activities as those which
we have described in this essay are, for reason which we have
set forward, more conformable to preservation than breach of
the peace, to conserve than subvert stable administration. We
may well leave the natives to decide between good and evil,
morality and immorality, right and wrong, crime and law.
Moreover, the European may well be advised to remember that
such acts of magic, the performance of which are public enough
to be brought to the notice of his office and to be proved to
have taken place, are little likely to be condemned by public
opinion as illegal or immoral. Lastly, we may all do well to
reflect that the mind sensitive to tales of sorcery reveals its own
crudeness, for it has often been shown that when two civilizations
come into contact the lesser is always accused of sorcery by
half-studied and ill-formed judgements of the greater.*
This is not a position of ultra-relativism, of which colonial anthro-

incapabl

‘E. E. Evans-Pritchard, “Sorcery and native opinion”, Africa IV, 1931,
22-55, at p. 22.
‘Ibid., pp. 54-55.
46 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST

pology has (sometimes with justification) been accused. The mora
rights of peoples living under colonial administration are defended
in terms of universal categories; and the right of the ruling com.
munity to a monopoly of moral judgement is sharply questioned.
The practical men, however approving they were in the abstract
of lending support to anthropological research, must often have been
puzzled and disappointed at what the anthropologists actually pro-
duced. They must even on occasion have been resentful of rebukes
such as those of Evans-Pritchard in the passages just quoted, where
the anthropologist thumbs his nose at the sacred civilising mission.
Without doubt a good deal of tension existed: and I consider that
some of the characteristic methods and theories of this period were
the outcome, not of conspiracy between scholars and officialdom,
but on the contrary, of compctition and intrigue between them. Im-
pressive claims had to be made by anthropologists for their subject.
Because their resources, duties and even rights were so uncertain,
and because their work was so often regarded as quaint (in back-
ward areas) or as unnecessary meddling (in central and significant
areas), anthropologists were frequently obliged to defend their act-
ivities. This could hardly be done on metaphysical grounds, or in
terms of a conviction of political or moral obligation; the lines of
defence were rather of a kind more likely to appeal to colonial
officialdom. This is partly why there was such an insistent claim by
anthropology to be a proper science; for the idea of science carries
great respectability. Science represented to the crude colonial mind
a great achievement of the modern west, and the idea of its applica-
tion to native peoples, as objects, was promising. (Interestingly en-
ough, literature in anthropology of the kind which I have suggested
is motivated by moral radicalism often emphasizes the scientific
character of native thought). Thus it was good tactics for anthro-
pologists to put forward the claim that their subject, at least the
modern variety, was a dispassionate, scientific and important study
of the variety of social forms, which deserved the respect and facili-
ties granted to other sciences, like tropical medicine or geology, and
like them had to be based on first-hand investigation. It was also
prudent for them to add that, of course, it was a study which could
yield valuable information for administrators and planners, who in-
deed would scarcely avoid serious mistakes without the benefit of
its expert advice. This double claim gave anthropologists the advan-
tage of being able to stress their practical value when approaching
potential sponsors, and nevertheless to resist requests for direct
assistance on the grounds that their subject was essentially an ab-
WENDY JAMES 4
from which practical men would have to draw their
own conclusions. The separation of t.he objective scientist from the
committed feeling man can thus'be viewed as Part of the §trategy of
colonial anthropologists in calmmg any suspicions qf their personal
motives which mighf damage their clal.ms ,for oﬁicu}l support and
facilities. The following passage from Firth’s conclusion to We, the
Tikopia (1936) illustrates some of the relevant f:mpha-scs of the time:

A last word may be said about one practical aspect of. anthro-

pological study. In revulsion frc_>m the mere fq]klonst attltude:
of antiquarian anthropology, science today is in danger of being
caught up by practical interests and made to serve them, to the
neglect of its own problems. Social anthropology should be
concerned with understanding how human beings behave in
social groups, not with trying to make them behave in any
particular way by assisting an administrative policy of a
proselytizing campaign to achieve its ends more easily. The
scientist gives generalizations regarding the nature of the
working of institutions; it is not his duty to affix ethical values
to them, nor by conniving at such an ethical evaluation to pave
the way for their modification. Missionary, government officer
and mine manager are free to use anthropological methods and
results in their own interests, but they have no right to demand
as a service that anthropology should become their handmaid.
Nor can the standards which they invoke—*civilization’,
‘Justice’, ‘the sanctity of human life’, ‘Christianity’, ‘freedom of
the individual’, ‘law and order’—be regarded as binding; the
claim of absolute validity that is usually made for them too often
springs from ignorance, from an emotional philanthropy, from
the lack of any clear analysis of the implications of the course
of action proposed, and from confusion with the universal of
what is in reality a set of moral ideas produced by particular
economic and social circumstances.

This is not to say that the scientist himself may not have his
own personal predilections based on his upbringing and social
environment, his temperamental disposition, his aesthetic values.
He may regard the culture of a primitive, half-naked set of
people in an island of the Solomons as a pleasant way of life,
giving expression to the individuality of its members in ways
alien to western civilization; he may regard it as something he
would like to see endure, and he may strive to preserve it in
the face of ignorance and prejudice, pointing out the probable
results of interference with ancient customs. This he does as a

stract science,
48 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST

man; his attitude is part of his personal equation to life, but it is
not implicit in his scientific study. The greatest need of the
social sciences today is for more refined methodology, as
objective and dispassionate as possible, in which, while the
assumptions due to the conditioning and personal interest of the
investigator must influence his findings, that bias shall be
consciously faced, the possibility of other initial assumptions be
realised and allowance be made for the implications of each in
the course of the analysis.®
But how successful were these pleas for acceptance and support on
the basis of the claim of anthropology to be trustworthily objective
and useful? Some doubt is thrown on the extent to which this argu-
ment carried much weight in a post-war article by Evans-Pritchard
on applied anthropology. His argument is defensive of pure re-
search, and very critical of the lack of interest on the official side:
Mr. Sol Tax remarks...that although he had spent some ten years
in research into the social anthropology of the Chiapas and
Guatemala Indians no one had ever asked his technical assis-
tance in solving the social problems of the region. Other
anthropologists have experienced the same thing. Professor
Seligman once told me that in all the years he had worked in
the Sudan or on Sudanese problems he was nevcr asked once for
his advice and that the only time he volunteered it in connection
with the rain-makers of the Nuba Hills, it was not taken.
During the fifteen years in which 1 worked on sociological
problems in the same region I was never once asked my advice
on any question at all.?
Evans-Pritchard ends with an appeal. The Colonial Office and Colo-
nial Governments should understand that:
Much as we would like to help them, with our present limited
resources research in social anthropology is only kept going and
certainly does not keep pace with the deterioration of the
primitive field, so that they cannot expect us to turn aside from
our scientific rescarch and teaching to investigate their practical
problems and advise on their policies. If they want qualified men
to assist them they must create posts in the colonies which will
attract them...Colonial administrations do not expect to have the
services of doctors, botanists, geologists and engineers without

‘E. S]¥37 Evans-Pnitchard, “Applied Anthropology”, Africa XVI, 1946, 92-8,
p. 97.
‘R. Firth, We the Tikopia, 2nd ed. 1957, pp. 487-88.
WwENDY JAMES 49
em appointments on their establishments. Why should
the services of anthropologists on different terms??
remains as to why anthropology had not been accep-
ted more wholeheartedly by the colonial authorities. Some irgdicat_ion
of the answer is implied in that part of Evans-Pnp:hard S artlcl.e
where he discusses his Libyan work. He contrgsts.hls pre-war posi-
tion in the Sudan with his position in Cyrenaica in tl}e. @rly.x.lme-
teen-forties, where he was a full member of the British Military
Administration, as Tribal Affairs Officer, with access to official
documents, and entitled to play a part in policy-making. The signi-
ficant featurc of this contrast between his status in the Sudan and
Libya lies perhaps in the fact that the Italians had recently been
ousted by the British when he was in Cyrenaica: and thus a critical
anthropological study of native affairs would reflect on the Italians,
rather than on his sponsoring authority. With such a conjunction of
interests bctween his sponsors and himself, it was possible for
Evans-Pritchard to write a book of unusually committed characters
The Sanusi of Cyrenaica (1949) in its treatment of an anti-colonialist
national movement and its clcarly anti-Fascist sympathies, is in it-
self an answer to naive radical criticisms of anthropology. In the
older colonies, the anthropologist was rarely so trusted as to have
access to archival materials and policy discussions which would be
necessary for a historically significant study. One may well ask
whether it would have becn realistic to expect anthropologists to
write books opcnly critical of any of the forms of colonial rule
under which they worked.

The contradictory positions assumed simultaneously by the colo-
nial anthropologist, that he is extremely useful to administration and
at the same time that he must be frce to pursue his specialist in-
terests, arise out of the profound paradox of the subject in relation
to its sponsoring authorities. Reclatively peaceful and progressive
colonial rule in the inter-war period was prepared to permit and
even encourage field-working anthropologists to carry out personal
investigations of a direct kind which had scarcely been possible pre-
viously, at least in the Old World. The *‘sociological” character of
their work increased steadily, and with it a greater awareness of the
relevance of the overall economic and political situation. The anth-
ropologist of this period, more than the missionary, and more than
the bush administrator, found himself speaking not only of, but for,
the local populations he knew well. He tended more than others to

giving th
they expect
The question

'1bid., p. 98.
50 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST

know the common man, and to bypass the local chiefs and digni.
taries. There was little possibility of a European traveller knowing
the people intimately in the pre-colonial period: contacts in the
nineteenth century for example, between the classic explorers and
the local populations of Africa, were usually with kings and chiefs,
or otherwise with servants and runaway slaves. The situation of a
lone European living for months or years in an ordinary village
without a retinue was only possible when benevolent colonial ad-
ministration was well-established. And yet the situation of such
study was often so demanding in personal as well as intellectual
terms that a commitment to something stronger than data-gathering
was surely required. The collection of facts from the grass-roots
level of society in the industrial West has frequently grown out of,
or resulted in, a radical orientation; and anthropological fieldwork
in the Malinowskian tradition shared this character to some extent
in relation to the colonial regimes. The colonial period thus para-
doxically opened the way for the creation of a body of literature
that itself reflected criticism upon the prevailing situation and the
political philosophy which justified it. I see, therefore, the colonial
anthropologist as a frustrated radical: and his claims t{o scientific
status, the separation of his work from any apparent moral or poli-
tical views, and the avowal of its practical usefulness, as largely
determined by the need to make a convincing bid for the survival
and expansion of his subject.

|
All these sides of the dilemma are clear in Malinowski’s efforts,
from the late nineteen twenties to the end of his life, to extend the
scope of scientific anthropology to embrace the study of social and
cultural change in Africa. Indeed his dilemma is more complex; for
wher~as 1n the early thirties, he was arguing that scientific study was
uninvolved and therefore of use to administration, his sympathies
for developing African nationalism sharpen with time and in his
later writings he comes to argue that scicntific research must be poli-
tically committed. Malinowski’s writings on Africa are not in them-
selves a major contribution to the subject; but he was a most influ-
ential teacher, and his interest in the expansion of social anthro-
pology into the area of modern African problems led to a large
number of studies in this field by his students. The significance of
his views is therefore greater than his actual published writings
might suggest, for it is implicit in the work of others, particularly in
the direction of “social change™ and so forth. However ‘“‘practical’’
51
WENDY JAMES

ini ‘vely useful these studies might claim to be, and
and admggrsxtsreﬁ;teigc some later studies of this type turned out to
h°‘”.§"§;s the radical sympathies of Malinowski and his undoubted
g::gilrc to shake up the placjd c_olon}al establishment which originally
pushed anthropology in thui dl’recnon. ) . .
An article of Malinowski’s in 1929 on Pracpcal anthropology
marked the beginning of a debate on the question of the usefulness
of anthropology, and a long series of defensive articles by anthro-
logists which continued until well after the war. Man)( were pub-
lished in Africa, journal of the International African Institute (foun-
ded 1926). One of the Institute’s main aims was “the closer associa-
tion of scientific knowledge and research with practical affairs”, and
a good deal of applied anthropology was encouraged and supported.
In spite of this supposed collusion of anthropology and practical
affairs, the tone of the debate which followed Malinowski’s initial
provocative contribution suggested underlying frictions. Malinow-
ski's own previous work had been on the “‘traditional’” community
of the Trobriand Islands in Melanesia, but in his 1929 article he is
staking out a much wider claim for the subject and its relevance.
He challenges the practical men who dismiss the subject, and recom-
mends it to their notice in terms they are likely to find acceptable.
He emphasises that it is politically unbiased, and thercfore scientific;
and highly useful and up-to-date, since it is concerned with chang-
ing conditions. The modern ‘“‘functional”’ type of anthropology is
contrasted in these terms with old-fashioned antiquarianism, of
whose usefulness the practical men were justifiably sceptical. I think
that by “functional” in this context Malinowski meant little more
than “sociological”, as against the approach of what he had referred
to elsewhere as the *“‘dusty museum-moth’’. He writes :
The Institute stands in the first place for the practical application
of scientific knowledge. It can reach on the one hand various
Colonial interests in their practical activities, while at the same
time has at its disposal the knowledge of theoretically trained
specialists.

I think that in the very combination of practical and theoretical
interests lies the proper task of the Institute. There is a gap
between the theoretical concerns of the anthropology of the
schools on the one hand, and practical interests on the other.

The gap must be bridged over, and in doing this the Institute
can make itself very useful.

*B. Malinowski, “Practical Anthropology”, Africa 11, 1929, 22-38.
52 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST

The practical man is inclined to pooh-pooh, ignore, and even to
resent any sort of encroachment of the anthropologist upon his
domain. On the other hand it is not always easy to advise the
colonial administrator or missionary just where to find the
anthropological information he requires. Now I think that the
gap is artificial and of great prejudice to either side. The practical
man should be asked to state his needs as regards knowledge
on savage law, economics, customs, and institutions; he would
then stimulate the scientific anthropologist to a most fruitful
line of research and thus receive information without which he
often gropes in the dark. The anthropologist, on the other hand,
must move towards a direct study of indigenous institutions as
they now exist and work. He must also become more concerned
in the anthropology of the changing African, and in the
anthropology of the contact of white and coloured, of European
culture and primitive tribal life...

It is then the thesis of this memorandum that there cxists an
anthropological No-man’s land; that in this are contained
studies of primitive economics, primitive jurisprudence, ques-
tions of land tenure, of indigenous financial systems and taxation,
a correct understanding of the principles of African indigenous
education, as well as wider problems of population, hygiene
and changing outlook. Scientific knowledge on all thesc
problems is more and more needed by all practical men in the
colonies. This knowledge could be supplied by men trained in
anthropological methods and possessing the anthropological
outlook, provided that they also acquire a direct interest in the
practical applications of their work, and a keencr sense of
present-day realities.®

Under the heading ““Scientific control of colonial administration’ he
continues:
By the constitution of the Institute all political issues are elimina-
ted from its activities. This can easily be done by concentrating
upon the study of the facts and processes which bear upon the
practical problems and leaving to statesmen (and journalists)
the final decision of how to apply the results.
There follows a general statement of support for the concept of in-
direct rule; but unless anyone should think that anthropologists are
pggtically biased in any way instcad of being objective scientists, he
adds:

‘Ibid., pp. 22-23.
53
WENDY JAMES

whether we adopt in our practical policy the principle of
direct or indirect control, it is clear that a fu}l ‘kn(?wledge of
indigenous culture in the subjects indicated is indispensable.
He then defends the . usefglng:ss of functional apthropologx '(as
against the earlier antiquarianism) for such que:,stlons as political
organisation, law, language, land tenure, economics, and the chang-
ing native. His article ends with a plea for assistance from the IAI
for promoting work in the “modern Functional School of Anthro-
po}lghgg following year, 1930, two replies appeared in Africa. The
first by Major Ruxton, formerly Lt. Governor of Southern Provinces,
Nigeria, was sympathetic to Malinowski’s claims, indeed strengthen-
ing them for applied anthropology:
As there is a distinction between the pure and the applied chem-
ist, so there should be one between the pure and applied
anthropologist. The latter cannot exist without the former, but
it is the latter who is required to advise on the practical work
of administration, and the Institute can do much to evolve him.
As the field of work of the pure anthropologist is that of
yesterday, so that of the applied anthropologist should be today,
preferably tomorrow.°
But the second reply from P. E. Mitchell then provincial commis-
sioner in Tanganyika, and later Governor of Kenya etc., was ex-
tremely sceptical of the usefulness of anthropology, unless the
subject could enable the “practical men™ of the colonies to carry
out their jobs better:
Professor Malinowski...writes...as an anthropologist, and he pro-
poses that the anthropologist shall record the facts and the
‘practical’ man draw his deductions therefrom. How many
anthropologists would agrec that a division into anthropologists
and practical men is satisfactory is open to doubt: but as I am
certainly not an anthropologist I hope that I may speak for the
practical man.

As Malinowski points out, anthropologists have largely occupied
themselves with the past, or at least with the passing; and they
have developed a technique of their own in recording and
discussing in particular the curious or quaint in primitive
societies. Thus if an inhabitant of a South Sea Island feels
obliged on some ceremonial occasion to eat his grandmother,

But

"F. H.zRuxton, “An anthropological no-man's land”, Africa I, 1930, 1-12,
at p. 2.
54 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIAL]ST

the anthropologist is attracted to examine and explain the
ancient custom which caused him to do so: the practical man,
on the other hand, tends to take more interest in the grand.
mother...

Practical men are concerned first with making secure life and
property and with the complex administrative arrangements
which modemn economic life demands and they are of all men
least likely to underrate the importance of accurate knowledge.
They certainly endorse the view that any organisation, for
example the Institute, which assists them to that knowledge,
must be of value in proportion to the efficiency of the service
that it renders, and invaluable if it reaches that point of efficiency
where the correctness of its statements of fact can be taken
for granted and be made generally known. But that is the
difficulty.t

He goes on to criticise the length of time taken by anthropologists
and missionaries for their work to be completed—it is often out of
date when it appears and has little bearing on the future; and the
minute detail of anthropological observations, which makes the
study of large areas out of the question. He compares the anthro-
pological specialist to the laboratory scientist, and asks where is the
general practitioner, who can tackle important and urgent problems
when needed.
As Malinowski implies, the anthropologist has in the past been
mainly interested in the ancient and the curious: he has
studiously pursued knowledge of primitive mankind, and has
occupied himself little, if at all, with the present and future.
His method has been built up to serve his purpose; his
technique is that of the laboratory and what he has been dis-
posed to call his field-work has been the field-work of a
collector for a museum. But now he is waking up to the splendid
prospects of service to mankind which the science to which he
has devoted himself holds out, and is casting round for the
means of applying to practical things the knowledge which he
possesses, or feels confident that he can acquire; and he stands
a little dismayed before a world which hurries past him and
seems to care little for the help which he can give.

Now it seems to me that the main difficulty lies in this, that the
anthropologist is disposed to look out at the busy world from
his laboratory window; and when he offers help, it is in terms

"P. E. Mitchell, “The anthropologist and the practical man: a reply and
a question”, Africa 111, 1930, 217-23, at pp. 217-18.
55
WBNDY JAMES
ory methods. He must learn to come down into thg
eet and join in the life which he desires to inﬂ}lence if he is
fgplay the part which he wishes to play, and which I am

confident he can play with great profit especially to all those

who are struggling with the complex problems of twentieth-

century colonisation in East Africa.'? -
He suggests there is a need for the trained ‘‘general practitioner”

as well as the laboratory spcciali§t; such men do exist., but not in an
organised body, or with organised training. In this category of
“general practitioner’”” Mitchell m.clpdes all the prachc?.l men of the
colonies: and not merely administrators and missionaries, but
traders and commercial men—in fact one presumes he means the
whole of the expatriate community, perhaps even the European
housewife. Mitchell certainly makes it clear what sort of use he
reckons ought to be made of social anthropology in the interests of
colonialism—but how many anthropologists of that time, let alone
now, would agree with him? In explaining what he means by a
general practitioner of social problems, he writes :
For example, the planter who is engaged in working out a practi-
cal and just relation between white employer and native
labourer is, in this sense, a general practitioner. By organising
these men, by helping them to realise the community of
interests which they have, but infrequently understand, by
mobilising them in fact, the Institute can perform a function of
the highest value...by harnessing in the service of our common
humanity those who are intimately concerned, because they
are a part of it, in the life of the countries in which they live.
This is to my mind the direction in which effort should be made
rather than the projection of the laboratory worker into the
field, into the turmoil of everyday life, into an atmosphere of
which he has had no experience and which he cannot be
expected to understand.
Social anthropology is dismissed as purposeless unless made to serve
the interests of practical colonialism :
In the relation of man with man and race with race; in those com-
plexities which we call ‘the State’ or ‘Government’; in the
many-sided economic life of our modern world; in all that goes
to make up the great problems of our time; in all this the
acquisition of knowledge is a well-developed science, but in its
pursuit we have rather overlooked the means of applying our

of laborat

Ibid., p. 220.
56 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST

knowledge when we have acquired it. As I see it, its acquisition
and application should be complementary branches of the same
activity. Obviously the latter is impossible without the former:
but the former if not followed by the latter is purposeless.

If anyone has had the patience to read this far, he will I hope
have reached the same conclusions as the writer, that the true
practical anthropology is that which devotes itself to enlisting
and organising, as the complement of the scientific worker,
those practical men, and there are many, who are ready to
serve the community in which they live; at times we shall have
urgent need of this specialist, but we must not, for that reason,
forget the family doctor.?

It is clear from Mitchell’s article what kind of anthropology the col-
onial establishment would like to have seen—a real tool of imperial-
ism. But anthropologists were not on the whole prepared to play this
part. Later in the same year (1930) Malinowski published a reply to
Mitchell in the same journal. In this he defends anthropology from
the suggested close co-operation with practical men; he argues its
essential requirement of independence as an objective science; and
to my mind at least, this claim stems from a refusal to side unam-
biguously with the colonial attitude. He starts by bemoaning the
mechanisation and over-rapid “progress’” of the modern world.
which is due to science. He admits that traditional anthropology
represented an escape from this, but grants that it has to change.
and become of use to the science of progress. He regrets this, how-
ever, and writes:
And now, after twenty years of anthropological work, I find my-
self, to my disgust, attempting to make the science of man into
as bad and dehumanising an agency to man as physics, chemistry,
and biology have been for the last century or so denaturalising
to nature. In short, I am attempting to make anthropology into
a real science, and science inevitably has to introduce uniformity
and rationalisation into the phenomena with which it deals.
So that is Malinowski’s opinion of the kind of anthropology that the
colonial establishment would like to see. But he goes on to explain
that of course anthropology will change: and that the new func-
tional method will be both scientific and of use to the practical man.
He complains that Mitchell’s criticisms are out of date, that they

“Ibid., p. 223.
“B. Malinowski, “The rationalization of anthropology and administration”,
Africa 111, 1930, 405-29, at p. 406.
WENDY JAMES >
ay apply to amiquarian.anthropology but not to the modern func-
may hool: and that Mitchell has attacked anthropology on imag-
-mna'l S:ound’sr-—for example the reference to eating grandmothers in
inary 70 ¥ eas, which Mitchell says should be called murder and
thelt with accordingly. Malinowski suggests that even such judge-
gf:ms are not alwa_ys unambiguous, and that right and justice may
not all be on one side: ‘ .
Fortunately or unfortunately, the custom, born in the imagination
of Mr. Mitchell, does not really exist, so the functional .
anthropologist need not concern himself very much about it.
But the practical man, who very often on equally imaginary
grounds cries ‘Murder’ and hangs a native, might thereby
provoke some other natives to retaliate and then we should
have a punitive expedition in which the ‘practical man’ himself
would act as the murderer. Mr. Mitchell’s example is imaginary,
but unfortunately I could quote numerous cases from the South
Seas in which the practical man, having ‘regretfully’ and
unintelligently violated native customs by the mere right of his
ignorance and moral zeal, has brought whole native tribes to
grief. Let Mr. Mitchell read the report of the Goaribari
massacres in New Guinea; the history of ‘black-birding’ in the
South Seas; or even the data referring to the repatnation of
the blackbirded Kanakas to the Melanesian homes; for that
matter, the antecedents of any of the numerous punitive
expeditions in the South Seas. Africa is not my special field,
but I have a vague idea that ‘punitive expeditions’, wholesale
massacres of natives by whites, strange retaliations in the names
of ‘justice’, ‘prestige’, and ‘the white man’s honour’ did also
occur in the Dark Continent, and that it is not only the coloured
African there who deserves the title of ‘murderer’, nor is it the
white European who should use such terms of abuse as marks
of his own racial superiority.??
The mounting intensity of Malinowski’s criticism finds more specific
expression in relation to the problems of land tenure, which Mitchell
suggested could not be dealt with realistically because of the length
of time a full anthropological survey would take. Malinowski re-
minds Mitchell of the method of science :
Precision, thoroughness and accuracy do not consist in a blind
and pedantic accumulation of useless evidence, but in a critical
selection of the relevant by crucial tests. It is this spirit of

“Ibid.. p. 411.
58 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPER]ALIST

relevancy as against mere accumulation, of critical selection

as against groping in the dark, that the scientific anthropologist
might bring to the assistance of the man who has a practical
interest in the control of human affairs.

My critic confidently affirms that ‘the only method which can
be called practicable is that of question and answer and daily
observation of the lives of the people’. Has this method, unaided
by any guiding theoretical principles, given such brilliant
results? In the matter of land tenure, for instance, do we know
this subject in a satisfactory manner in any part of Africa?
Why is it that such serious blunders in the framing of policy have
been made as the individualising of land tenure in Uganda,
which avowedly led to the greatest difficulties; or the haphazard
methods of dealing with this question in West Africa, which
brought into being committees and commissions, the results of
which could not even be published? Was the question of land
tenure studied in South Africa and a wise policy laid down by
the practical men who were settling and organising that
country? Let Mr. Mitchell look for the answer in the Report
of the Natives’ Land Commission, 1916.

And again, why is it that the fundamental principles of British
land policy in Africa have not been laid down in any consistent
manner? The decisions of the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council regarding the native rights to land are contradictory.

In Southern Rhodesia it was held that natives had really no
rights to their land whatever. On the other hand. in Nigeria the
Privy Council ruled that the rights in land were vested in the
natives. What is more important for the present argument,
however, is that the judgement was based on an admission of
ignorance, since it was held that ‘it was really a matter of
conjecture to say what the rights of the original ‘‘natives” were’.
Their Lordships’ decision further stated that :

‘The estimation of the rights of aboriginal tribes is always
inherently difficult. Some tribes are so low in the scale of social
organisation that their usage and conceptions of rights and
duties are not to be reconciled with the institutions or the legal
ideas of civilised society. Such a gulf cannot be bridged. It
would be idle to impute to such people some shadow of the
rights known to our law, and then to transmute it into the
substance of transferable rights of property as we know them’.

Hence the Judicial Committee plainly regard the question of
native land tenure as both beyond the scope of practicable
59
WENDY JAMES
ad below the dignity of legal recognition. O.n the
I maintain that there is no people ‘so low in the scale
f social organisation’ but have a perfectly well-defined system
Of land tenure. It is absurd to say that such a system ‘Caf“_“?t
ge reconciled with the institutions or ghe legal ideas of cwxhged
society’. To reconcile the two is precisely the task of Colonial
statesmanship.’® o ' , .
Malinowski also heaps criticism upon Mitchell’s .concepthn of there
being a community of interests between all practical men in the col-
Juding commercial men—which he invited the anthropo-

onies—inc _ : - ;
logist to join and to advise; he takes this to be the ‘‘central miscon-

ception” of Mitchell’s argument. . _
Why have these men not yet organised themselves nor achieved
any singularly constructive results? Let us look more closely at
the possibilities of team-work done by missionaries and settlers,
administrators and journalists, engineers and recruiters. And
here I should like to ask why does Mr. Mitchell not include
among them the native African, ‘savage’ and detribalised alike;
or the West Coast lawyer; or the black expert in yellow
journalism; and incidentally also the East Coast Indian? They
are also actors in the play; they also, no doubt, share in the
‘community of interests’. Why does the idea of harmonious
co-operation between them appear hardly plausible? Because
we know that these groups, far from having any ‘community’
of interests, are divided by profound, indeed irreconcilable,
differences. And why, again, is this the case? Because they have
deeply-rooted personal interests at stake, which cannot possibly
be brought into harmony with each other. And this is not because
of any lack of goodwill or of knowledge. The dissensions
involved far transcend any intellectual effort or emotional
adjustment; they cannot be bridged over by mere goodwill.

The whole life-work of, say, an economic exploiter on the one

hand and a missionary on the other, develops in either case
an entirely different type of bias in the individual. The one has
vested his capital, his life-interest, and his work in some venture,
which may fail or succeed according as to whether he can secure
an adequate supply of native labour. However much he may
sympathise with the natives, he is bound to have more sympathy
with his wife and children, with his dream of success and
constructive enterprise, with the belief, shared by industrialists

inquiry 2
contrary.,

“Ibid., pp. 414-5.
60 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIAL|ST

and financiers, that a maximum production of wealth is an
unqualified blessing for the world at large...

To speak of a ‘community of interests’ between the recruiter
and the missionary, or between the Indian trader ana the whitc
settler, is a travesty of facts. Above all, I doubt whether the
idea of ‘the planter who is engaged in working out a practical
and just relation between white employer and native labourer’
is not a sporadic phenomenon. On every question, whether it
be land tenure and native reservations or the political power
of tribal authorities, there must crop up deep-seated differences
of opinion, influenced, not merely by self-interest, greed, or
ruthless rapacity on the one side, and mawkish sentimentalism,
wrong-headed dogma, or false humanitarianism on the other;
but also by the fundamental assumptions as to what is good foi
the native and for the white man, and what is the aim of African
development. And these assumptions arc bound up with the very
existence of the several classes of African workers, classes
which, again, differ profoundly...'”

As though feeling that he might have gone too far, for these passa-
ges are surely very strong words for 1930, Malinowski then soberlv
insists on the responsibility of administrators for the decisions they
must take, although anthropologists can act in an advisory capacity.
He anxiously emphasises that there is overall agreement on this
question. But talk of economic exploiters, the land rights of natives
in Southern Rhodesia, criticism of the Buganda land tenure agrec-
ment and so on must be taken as serious evidence of political dis-
sent from colonial policies within the camp of social anthropology.
Malinowski’s position is further consolidated during the thirties.
He appears increasingly concerned with political realities, and less
with the need to put up a pleasing case to officialdom. Significantly,
the ideals of scientific integrity are evoked to justify the study of
vital and relevant problems of an economic, political and legal kind
in a review article of 1939. Malinowski is criticising the abstract
“culture trait” approach of Herskovits to problems of change, in
the latter’s book Acculturation (1938), and recommends instead
British methods. as laid out in Memorandum XV of the 1A,
which take political realities into account.
The contact anthropologist has to study the methods of
recruitment and the wage system, the effects of the Colour Bar
legislation and of the anomaious contracts of African labour, as

"1bid., pp. 421-22.
WENDY JAMES ol
well as of the Pags Laws: He must study these facts scienfiﬁcz_tlly,
objectively, and in relation to ;ach other. He need not in h1§
scientific work be conc?med with any partisan or even practical

:csues. But his study will reveal to him that for the present the

Furopeans are in a position to dictate the legal and economic

rerms. The conditions thus imposed are found to produce definite

effects. Thus, if he studies the budgets of a family dependent
on wages, he will find that the income does not really balance
with expenditure. Scientific field-work reveals that the wages
received by a mine labourer do not compensate the tribal
economy for the total loss caused by his absence. From this it
would be his duty to draw the conclusion that a system which
produces inevitable impoverishment in a native reserve must
lead through malnutrition, disorganization, and demoralization
to gradual demographic decay . . .

Those of us who advocate *‘practical anthropology” insist
only on the study of vital, relevant, and fundamental problems.
That such problems affect practical interests directly is not our
fault. That a question does not become less scientific because it
is vital and relevant will only be denied by one who imagines
that academic pursuits begin where reality ends. Professor
Herskovits has never laid himself open to such criticism in his
field-work or in his treatment of actual questions. It is therefore
both regrettable and incomprehensible that he chooses to attack
practical anthropology as a matter of method.'®

The increasingly political stand taken by Malinowski is an indica-

tion of his sympathy for the growing nationalist movements of

Africa. Jomo Kenyatta’s presence at Malinowski’s seminars in

London in the thirties, and Malinowski’s own visits to Africa, where

he called on several of his own students engaged in field-work, must

have opened his eyes to the explosive situation in what had been
peaceful anthropological territory. In his Introduction to Kenyatta’s

Facing Mount Kenya (1938) he touches on the dangers of totali-

tarianism; the current spread of political opinion in Africa; and the

question of whether the minority of agitators *“‘will be able to keep

a balanced and moderate view of economic, social and political

issues, or whether by ignoring them and treating them with con-

tempt we drive them into the open arms of world-wide Bolshevism”.

He mentions various events which are ‘‘uniting the world of

“B. Malinowski, “The present state of studies in culture contact: some
comments on an American approach”, Africa XII, 1939, pp. 27-47.
62 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST

coloured peoples against Western influence and above all againg;
Great Britain and the United States”, and introduces Kenyatta's
book on the Kikuyu people as a salutary eye-opener to the West :
Mr. Kenyatta has wisely refrained from using any such language
as appears in my last sentences. He presents the facts objectively,
and to a large extent without any passion or feeling. That some
of this is contained in his presentation of facts is a help and not
a hindrance. For if the present book does nothing more but to
help us to understand how Africans see through our pretences,
and how they assess the realities of the Dual Mandate, it will
be rendering a great service . . .!°
Whatever may be thought of Kenyatta’s book today, it is beyond
question that at that time he saw in social anthropology something
that could be turned to use as part of the growing nationalist chal-
lenge to colonial rule; and his book was regarded both in nationalist
and official colonial circles as a highly political document. In his
Preface, Kenyatta thanks among others *‘the members of the Kikuyu
Central Association, my comrades-in-arms of the past, present and
future” (the Mau-Mau rising was still to come) and goes on:
In the present work I have tried my best to record facts as I
know them, mainly through a lifetime of personal experience,
and have kept under very considerable restraint the sense of
political grievances which no progressive African can fail to
experience. My chief object is not to enter into controversial
discussion with those who have attempted, or are attempting, to
describe the same things from outside observation, but to let the
truth speak for itself. I know that there are many scientists and
general readers who will be disinterestedly glad of the opportunity
of hearing the Africans’ point of view, and to all such 1 am glad
to be of service. At the same time, I am well aware that I could
not do justice to the subject without offending those ‘professional
friends of the African’ who are prepared to maintain their
friendship for eternity as a sacred duty, provided only that the
African will continue to play the part of an ignorant savage so
that they can monopolise the office of interpreting his mind and
speaking for him. To such people, an African who writes a study
of this kind is encroaching on their preserves. He is a rabbit
turned poacher.
But the African is not blind. He can recognise these pretenders
to philanthropy, and in various parts of the continent he is

“B. Malinowski, “Introduction” to J. Kenyatta, Facing Mount Kenya, 1938,
PP X-Xi.
WENDY JAMES 63
waking up to the rqﬂisation that a .running river cannot be
dammed for ever without breaking its bounds. His power of
expression has been hampered, but it is breaking thfough. .and
will very soon sweep away the patronage and repression which
surround bim.*° :

In the body of the book the Kikuyu Qeoplf: are presented as a

ple who have suffered conquest, subjugation and loss of land;

for example: . .

Since the coming of the Europeans the warrior organisation has
been rendered powerless . . . the spirit of manhood in the youth
has been almost killed by the imposition of imperialistic rule
which restricts people from moving and functioning freely in
their own country. The European prides himself on having done
a great service to the Africans by stopping the ‘tribal warfares’
.. . But consider the difference between the method and motive
employed in the so-called savage tribal warfares, and those
employed in the modern warfare waged by the ‘civilised’ tribes
of Europe, and in which the Africans who have no part in the
quarrels are forced to fight . . . It would have been much better
for the Africans to continue with their old tribal warfare, which
they fought with pride and with the loss of a few warriors, rather
than receiving the so-called civilising missions which means the
subjugation of the African races to a perpetual state of serfdom.

In the old order of the African society, with all the evils that
are supposed to be connected with it, a man was a man, and as
such he had the rights of a man and liberty to exercise his will
and thought in a direction which suited his purposes as well as
those of his fellow-men; but today an African, no matter what
his station in life, is like a horse which moves only in the direction
that the rider pulls the rein. The harmony and stability of the
African’s mode of life, in political, social, religious and economic
organisations, was based on the land which was, and still is, the
soul of the people. The first step which the European civilising
missions took to disorganise the Africans in order to exploit
and oppress them, especially in South and East Africa, was to
take away the best African lands . . .*

Other writers who had been trained to some extent by Malinowski

were carrying out sociological investigations of a kind which re-

*J. Kenyatta, Facing Mount Kenya, 1938, pp. Xvii-xviii.
"1bid., pp. 211-13.
64 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIAL]SY

vealed the hard facts of survival and subsistence in rural areas of
Africa drained of manpower by the developing mining and indus.
trial towns. Audrey Richards’ Land, Labour and Diet in Northerp
Rhodesia (1939) is an outstanding example of this kind of work.
She also confronted the dilemma of why there was suspicion and
non-co-operation between anthropologists and officials, when the
work of anthropologists ought to be practically useful. She contri-
buted to the debate in Africa in 1944,2 with an article which surveys
the previous fifteen years in which there was supposedly a good deal
of development in practical anthropology, but in fact real co-opera-
tion and support from the authorities for the subject was disappoint-
ingly small. Among the positive achievements in the subject she
notes the change in focus away from primitive communities: ‘““Most
of Malinowski’s pupils, however worked among the larger African
tribes of the greatest political importance and where European
contact had been at its maximum.’’?® One might ask whether this
could be one of the reasons why the official attitude was so luke-
warm. Certainly, in giving the reasons why she judges that therc
had been only verv moderate success for the IAI programme of
closer association between research and practical affairs, reflected
in the small number of research posts and the difficulty of financing
research, she refers to suspicion of the social investigator. Both in
such work in Britain, and in Africa,
The protests do not come from the individual questioned, for
most people like to talk about themselves and to find that their
views are considered important . . . The criticisms in both cases
come from those in authority: the Mayor or the M.P. of the
English borough, the district commissioner or the missionary
in Africa. These probably fear disturbances of some kind or other
as the result of the investigation, and probably feel resentment at
a stranger making inquiries in an area over which they have
control.?!
In a footnote she points out that in South Africa, the Union Gov-
ernment as a wartime measure was refusing permission to anthro-
pologists to enter Native reserves. The article goes on to discuss the
personal misunderstandings and suspicions which dog an anthro-
pologist’s fieldwork, and diplomatically gives a reasonable explana-
tion of the (scientific) reasons why the anthropologist ‘““is bound to

“*A. L. Richards, “Practical anthropology in the lifetime of the International
African Institute”, Africa XIV, 1944, 289-301.

¥Ibid., p. 291.

*1bid., p. 293.
d a life which is very strange in the eyes of other EUFopeanS”’
lcaving the reputation of “‘dancing round a tom-tom in a loin-cloth”.
o all directed at officialdom; and ends with an implied appeal

;f)';lsgreatcf research support. For earlier in the article Audrey

Richards comment.cd th.at “It looks as though the anthropolggist
had becen advertising his goods, often rather clar&orously, in a
market in which there was little demand fpr them™’,?* and a§k§d
whv. The fundamental answer to her question surely would lie in
the‘gulf of serious mutual distrust bet\ivc.aen at least some brands of
social anthropology and the authorities responsible for “good
administration’”.

The debatc over the use of anthropology, conducted in the pages
of Africa for a couple of decades, does not appear to have led to
greater understanding. On the contrary, there was in some respects
a polarisation of opinion. For example, on the official side, in 1951
Sir Philip Mitchell was able to state his earlier misgivings about
anthropology in an even more slighting manner than he had done
over twenty years earlicr. In a review of Lord Hailey’'s Native
Administration in the British Territories in Africa, he writes of the
contribution of anthropology as follows:

It has always been a matter of particular difficulty in colonial

Africa to ensure that those who are responsibie for the initiation

of policy or legislation, or for important administrative action

or decisions (and in African conditions a heavy responsibility
may rest on very young shoulders) should be adequately
informed not only of past events and old customs, but of current
social, political and economic conditions, in their own country
and in others offering useful analogies or experience. There was,
especially during the nineteen twenties and thirties, a spate of
special reports and investigations; at one time, indeed, anthropo-
logists, asserting that they only were gifted with understanding,
busied themselves with enthusiasm about all the minutae (sic) of
obscure tribal and personal practices, especially if they were
agreeably associated with sex or flavoured with obscenity. There
resulted a large number of painstaking and often accurate
records of interesting habits and practices, of such length that
no one had time to read them and often, in any case, irrevelant,
by the time they became available, to the day to day business
of Government.?®

*1bid., p. 292.
“P. E. Mitchell, review of “Native administration in the British territories
in Africa”, J. African Administration II1, 1951, 55-65, at pp.56-57.
66 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIAL|sy

This clearly unfair jibe received a sober reply from Schapera 22
spelling out once more the case for the usefulness of anthropology
and suggesting co-operation on the ground between anthropologists
and administrators, but protectively retaining the right to invest;.
gate esoteric scientific problems. The terms of the debate were thyg
very close to what they had been for a generation: and this in itself
suggests that a fundamental opposition of interest, sympathy and
commitment between the camp of colonial officials, on the one
hand, and of social anthropologists on the other, had not been
overcome.

Indeed, Malinowski’s position had hardened even further. His
most powerful statements on the need for the work of the social
scientist to be politically involved appear in the collection of his
writings posthumously edited by Phyllis Kaberry under the title
The Dynamics of Culture Change: an Inquiry into Race Relations
in Africa (1945). There is a markedly more intense tone in these
later writings, partly perhaps a sign of increasing disaffection with
the apolitical, amoral natural science approach of those influenced
strongly by Radcliffe-Brown, and of a deepening personal radical
commitment. In the first chapter we read:

There is a moral obligation to every calling, even to that of a

scientific specialist. The duty of the anthropologist is to be a fair

and true interpreter of the Native . . . In reality, the historian of
the future will have to register that Europeans in the past
sometimes exterminated whole island peoples; that they
expropriated most of the patrimony of savage races; that they
introduced slavery in a specially cruel and pernicious form; and
that even if they abolished it later, they treated the expatriated

Negroes as outcasts and pariahs. . . .

The Native still needs help. The anthropologist who is unable
to perceive this, unable to register the tragic errors committed
at times with the best intentions, at times under the stress of dire
necessity, remains an antiquarian covered with academic dust
and in a fool’s paradise . . . Research in order to be of use must
be inspired by courage and purpose . . .

Shall we, therefore, mix politics with science? In one way,
decidedly ““‘yes” .. .28

*1. Schapera, “Anthropology and the administrator”, J. African Adminis-
tration I11, 1951, 128-35.
“*B. Malinowski, The Dynamics of Culture Change: an Inquiry into Race

Relations in Africa, 1945; edited, with a new Introduction , by P. Kaberry,
1961, pp. 3-4.
NDY JAMES 67

wWE
Malinowski develops his argument I:h:alt ix;] the comgxt of d{\f.ri.ca,
change is proceeding everywhere, there can be no division
wher;n the theoretical and the applied aspects of anthropology.
I}Jf:gnsists on the need for a broad prospe?tivc?: ‘ -
We are dealing with a sub]ecg matter which is in ﬂux.; ?he rapidity
of change confuses observation and confounds policies. The
growth of new unexpected forces and factors, such as {\fncan
nationalism and the development .of _autonomous Afrlcan
churches, poses difficulties of description and analysis a§‘well as
of policy. In this new work the theoretician and practitioner
must take account of wide issues of Western rule, economic as
well as imperial; they have to be acquainted with the rudiments
at least of economic, legal, and political theory and, with all this,
of anthropological method.?®
In the subsequent chapter he claims that *“‘the whole range of Euro-
pean influences, interests, good intention, and predatory drives must
become an essential part of the study of African culture change.”
It is not merely a question of considering local Europeans as part
of an integrated community with the Africans.
The treatment of the complex situation of change as one ‘well
integrated whole’ . . . ignores the whole dynamism of the
process . . . Above all, it obscures and distorts the only correct
conception of culture change in such areas: the fact that it is
the result of an impact of a higher, active culture upon a simpler,
more passive one.3°
The “contact’ situation is highly one-sided: in a list of its character-
istics in the fifth chapter of the collection, Malinowski notes that
Europeans have not given African people instruments of physical
power, “firearms, bombing planes, poison gas, and all that makes
effective defence or aggression possible”. Nor do ‘“we” give instru-
ments of political mastery; nor do we share with them the substance
of economic wealth and advantages. “Even when, under indirect
economic exploitation as in West Africa and Uganda, we allow the
Natives a share of profits, the full control of economic organization
remains in the hands of Western enterprise’.?* Nor do we admit
of social, political or even religious equality. On the whole we are
more generous with spiritual gifts, while withholding wealth, power
and independence. And now for the justification of his stand in
terms of science:

“Ibid., p. 9.
*Ibid., p. 15.
“Ibid., p. 57.
68 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIAL[sT

This argument may be mistaken by the superficial reader as an
outburst of pro-Natlve ranting. It is nothing of the sort. All this
is simply a statement of one of the most scientifically relevan
factors in culture change as it occurs in parts of Africa. To
ignore the fact that there is a selective giving on the part of the
Europeans makes for a distortion of evidence, and this is a sin
against science.??
It is true that Malinowski was afraid of extreme nationalism and
the political dangers of its spread, and was not committed to a
revolutionary position. But he sketches clearly in these later writ.
ings the essential features of the developing political situation,
makes plain his own sympathies, and justifies them in terms of the
scientist’s duty. The colour bar for example “has to be put on the
methodological map’, because of its theoretical importance in cul-
tural change.
Indeed, the sooner we speak quite freely and openly about it
and also with a complete scientific detachment, the better; for
the educated Africans are rapidly becoming aware of, and
exaggerating, the situation. The African is becoming an
anthropologist who turns our own weapons against us. He is
studving European aims, pretences, and all the real and
imaginary acts of injustice. Such an anthropology is no doubt
mutilated and misguided, full of counter-prejudices, and charged
with bitter hostility. It is often blind in its intransigence and
sweeping in its wholesale indictment. But it cannot be ignored
by the man of science; and it would be better if the practical
man did not treat it as a joke or as an insignificant and minor
excrescence. For on the whole it contains a great deal of truth,
and it foreshadows the formation of a public opinion, of a
national and racial feeling which, sooner or later, will have to
be taken into account by the practical contact agents.3?
And even more explicitly:
The various movements which have so far appeared have broken
down largely because the Natives are not yet ripe for national,
well-organized, collective action. By the time, however, when a
European power in control may become politically embarrassed
and when there is fertile ground for the combination of the
Natives from the Lakes to the Cape, such a collective body of
opinion may not be an irrelevant factor. The anthropologist

“Ibid., p. 58.
®Ibid., p. 59.
WENDY JAMES 69
should have as on¢ of his duties, not to act as a spy, still less as
an agent provocateur, but to study tl}e growing forces of Baqtu
hationalism; to insist as all those with knowledge and foresight
do, that an improvement in social and, above all, economic
co;lditions, constitutes the only way out of the ghfﬁcu]ty; and
that no price is too high to pay to prevent me\.utab.le disaster.®

Malinowski does not face the question of how ‘‘inevitable”’ d1§aster

can be prevented. In positive terms,.he merely suggests some liberal

reforms, and the need for the continuance of some elements from
the traditional past. On these points he could certainly be said to
stand close to official colonial policy and practice.

But I have quoted extensively from Malinowski and some of his
contemporaries and his pupils, in order to suggest that taken as a
whole, his views nevertheless constitute a point of view of greater
political perception and radical significance than might at first be
thought. Of course Malinowski was not trying to overthrow the
svstem. His students’ grants would have soon dried up if that were
the case. Of course his activities and writings, and those of his
colleagues, were contained within the total colonial situation; how
could it have been otherwise? But just as Malinowski himself
rejected the concept of the “culture contact” situation as an inte-
grated whole, we must reject the concept of the colonial situation
in the inter-war period as an integrated whole. We must recognise
that there were developing contradictions, not merely between the
administrators and their philosophy of just rule on the one hand,
and nascent nationalism and socialism on the other, but between
each of these and social anthropology, caught in the middle and
constrained from either side.

In the inter-war period, the main constraints were from colonial
authority itself. A historical view of the subject should therefore
give full weight to the ways in which social anthropology was a
vehicle for criticism of that authority.

Ibid., p. 61.

In the preparation of this article, I have been indebted both to discussions
at the Hull seminar and to helpful criticism from Natale Olwak Akolawin.
Maurice Freedman and Godfrey Lienhardt also kindly read and com-
mented on the manuscript.
THE COLONIAL FORMATION OF BRITISH SOCIAL
ANTHROPOLOGY
Stephan Feuchtwang

Preliminaries: scope, plan and definitions

The subject of this paper is the relation between British anthro-
pologists and their sponsoring institutions. The objective of this
paper is to locate the effect on anthropological knowledge of the
social conditions of British anthropology as it became an institution,
the so-called discipline and profession of social anthropology. I
shall not be concerned with the history of social anthropology as a
history of knowledge and its production per se. I am not going to
produce a reading of the frames of reference of social anthropology
as part of an ideological practice within the complexity of practices
which constitute British society. I am concerned only with one rela-
tion in that complex, namely the relation between the material con-
ditions of that ideological apparatus which is social anthropology,
as it was formed historically and the knowledge produced in it.

The intentions of the anthropologists and their sponsors are be-
side the points I will make. I am looking for the effects of an institu-
tional formation, and of a large number of events. That the events
should have a combined effect is no reason to think either that it
was intended or that I must have direct recourse in explaining it to
its being intended.

The plan of this paper is to start from the present and first to
think out what are the inevitable effects of the type of sponsorship
sought and given for anthropological research, then to analyse the
match between anthropologists’ actions toward sponsors and the de-
72 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSORS

velopment of anthropological theory, methods and its objects of
study. The third and largest part will then recount a history of the
formation of the institution of social anthropology as a profession
and a discipline, and the concluding part will be a more informed
and precise argument of the fit between it and its sponsoring insti-
tutions, predominantly those of the British imperial state. From
this plan it should be apparent that I do not aim to be empirically
conclusive, but rather to put forward an informed argument as a
necessary step at the beginning of the neglected work of knowing
what social anthropology is and does, is not and does not do.*

By ‘the discipline’ I mean what I take to be the prominent char-
acteristic of British social anthropology, which I think is the
seeking of knowledge of total systems or structures from small-scale
social units by direct personal observation with as little participa-
tion as possible. The broken relation of someone who goes out
directly to experience the life of people quite other than himself
while at the same time preserving a distance and an ethic of non-
interference which maintains that otherness has its counterpart in a
theory of total social systems in small social units, to be understood
inductively but nevertheless involving reconstruction and isolation
from an encompassing system which is analytically ignored. I want
to dwell upon this distance, and amplify it, because I think it is the
point at which the relation of the discipline to its practical con-
ditions and sponsoring institutions is clearest.

By ‘the profession’ I mean the establishment of British social an-
thropology as university department and degree, where it is taught
as a mental discipline: the teaching of anthropology, writes Ray-
mond Firth, is more the implanting of a view and method than the
imparting of information, ethnographic detail and the ‘right’ theory.?

I want to note here that I will be concerned with that period par-
ticularly in which the classics of British social anthropology were

'Argumentative initiatives have already been made, it is true, in the New
Left Review, the first by David Goddard, ‘Limits of British Anthropology’
(NLR 58, 1969). While the first two paragraphs of his article, which statc
that anthropological studies in Britain grew up as part of the colonial
situation, are also my starting point, he follows them with a critique of
British structural-functionalism unrelated to its institutional conditions.
Like Jairus Banaji’s later article (‘Anthropology in crisis’, NLR 64, 1970),
his critique is made by contrasting British empiricist structuralism with
Lévi-Straussian structuralism.

’Raymond Firth, ‘Aims, methods and concepts in the teaching of social
anthropology’, in D. Mandelbaum (ed), The Teaching of Anthropology,
American Anthropological Association, Memorandum 94, 1963.
STEPHAN FEUCHTWANG 73

roduced which we still now, in London at Jeast, include in the first

ears of indoctrination to social anthropology, namely tt_ne late colo-
nial period. Some of the developments of anthropology in tl.le 1960s
included in the latter years of indoctrination have broken with some
of the characteristics of the anthropology produced in the late co}o-
pial period, but others, in which the one I have isolated are in-
cluded, are still maintained. Professor M. G. Smith in a seminar on
the history of British social anthropology at University College,
London, in 1971, talked of the break-up of colonial complacency,
and in it the demise of functionalism. How complecte, how radical,
is its demise? We still put priority on ‘community’ studies, on ‘exo-
tic’ societies, as he himself called them, and on ‘preliterate’ societies,
a term he also used for the subject matter of anthropology. These
terms, reserving structure from dynamics, repressing history into
code of myth or into moments of equilibrium, are derived from the
products of an anthropology formed as I shall argue in a complex
of colonial attitudes, and surviving reformed in neo-colonial

conditions.’®

1. Three ways in which research cannot help being efiected by its
SPONSOrS

We live in a political system in which research and teaching are
segregated from applied research, training, and government in insti-
tutions called ‘academic’, a segregation legitimated by an historic-
ally founded conventional idea of ‘academic freedom’. Social an-
thropological teaching and research is subject to this segregation
into academic and applied, so much so that the possibility of ‘pure’
research is a firm belief and the possibility of its use either ignored,
this ignorance being the ‘correct’ attitude, or clse denied.
(1) Nevertheless, anthropology is thought to be useful by some
agencies, apart from its use as a mental discipline (an ideology).
Many of the funds for social anthropological research are given for
its practical use in multi-disciplinary development projects in Mal-
aysia, for community development in Africa, for public security

*For present purposes what I mean by neo-colonial conditions is a global
system of nations in relations of economic dependence upon and actual or
potential militarv subordination to metropolitan nations, and which are to
a large extent successors to colonial rclations. The rulers of subordinate
nations in this system service these relations if they do not actively break
with them.- Most anthropological research is conducted through and
financed by them, or by the mctropolitan agencies of the metropolitan
nations, rarely if ever by the nations and movements which have broken
from these relations.
74 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSORS

and military intelligence in Thailand, for the training of district
officials in Papua New Guinea. Even supposing that much of the
data of this work is not published, going only into reports or data
banks access to which is restricted, it is still likely to be part of and
informed by the rest of its researchers’ contributions to social anthro-
pology and must also to some extnet help them form their ideas of
anthropology as a discipline which they simultaneously or in the
future will conduct and administer. And of the published work
which forms the discipline’s ethnographic groundwork we can ask,
with some certainty of its being a substantial question, how much
of it was done on commission, determined not by anthropology
alone but also by the demands of colonial and neo-colonial relations.
(2) On the other hand, contracted research has been distinguished
from academic research and the use of an academic name and place
of study for contracted resecarch called a breach of professional
ethics, especially while the research report is restricted and not
made freely available to the scientific community.* The Scarborough
and Hayter ear-marked government funds which financed so much
of area studies, including anthropological study, in Britain after the
second world war, and the Ford foundation which did the same in
the U.S., may have been provided with an idea of the national in-
terests, but the funds were administered by academics in the hope
that this would guarantee an impartial use of the funds for scientific
advancement. Is such a hope realistic?

Are there not, especially as funds begin to flow less easily, lists of
non-academic priorities such as those Lucy Mair mentions as having
existed for the Colonial Social Science Research Council® and which
are being worked out by the U.S. Social Science Research Council,*
possibly guided by the U.S. government Foreign Areas Research
Co-ordination Group?’ Do not the academic administrators direct
research toward topics and areas which they know or guess to be
favoured by their sponsors?

“This was the gist of many contributions to the discussions of Project
Camelot at the annual meeting of the American Anthropological Associa-
tion in 1966. I think I am justified in taking examples from U.S. post-war
anthropology because in the first place many British anthropologists at
some timeor other in the research areas themselves, or in Britain and the
U.S.A., are sponsored by U.S. agencies, secondly because I find many a
parallel in the present U.S. relations between profession and sponsors with
the British profession and its sponsors.

*Lucy Mair, ‘The social sciences in Africa South of the Sahara: the British
contribution’, Human Organisation, 19: 3, 1960.

*According to Dr. Jack Stauder, in a paper on ‘The “relevance” of anthro-
pology’ given to a Wenner-Gren Symposium, 1970,
STEPHAN FEUCHTWANG 75

Eric Wolf and Joseph Jorgensen, membqrs of the Amc?rimn An-
thropological Ass.ociat.ion’s Ethics Committee, found® in the ar-
rangements of university contracts for. counter-insurgency wc?r'k’ in
Thailand an ‘ambiguity of motive: is the government soliciting
social scientists or is the social science community soliciting govern-
ment?’ The Committee on African Studies, which included anthro-
pologists, in a report to its sponsor the Ford Foundation in 1958
wrote: ‘It seems to us most appropriate and desirable to encourage
Africanists individually and in their associations, to provide assist-
ance in professional consultation, in training for specific needs, in
designing research (my emphasis) so as to be useful to government
and business.” The American Anthropological Association itself, in
its Fellow Newsletter 8:1, January 1967, p. 7, reported that it was
setting up a committee for liaison between the Association and
government agencies ‘to suggest improvements in the use of anthro-
pology (my emphasis); to strengthen the relations between Govern-
ment and the profession; to visit agencies to discuss policies and
actions with respect to anthropological methods and data, employ-
ment, contracts, grants and fellowships.’*’

As we will see, this academic solicitation, seeking to be useful
especially to government, was true of British anthropology in its de-
velopment from the turn of the century. It is of coursc possible that
there be no disagreement between the professional anthropologists
and their sponsors and so no reason for any disavowal of the spon-
sors’ interests since they are the same as or compatible with those
freely accepted by the anthropologists. But then surely one is bound
to ask whether this arrangement was arrived at by means of anthro-
pological reasoning and work, and not by some other contingent
decision. And the answer is that it cannot possibly have been when
there is so little, almost no, work done by anthropologists on their
own governments’ and societies’ relations to the external societies
they choose to and are paid to study.'' In fact the only criteria for
such agreement that were mentioned in the past in Britain and at

“Presumptive evidence for an inquiry into a military-academic synapse . .’
one of whose links is between the FAR Group and the SSRC in the United
States is summarised in ‘The American Asian Studies Establishment’, in
Bulletin of Concerned Asian Scholars, 3: 3 and 4, 1971,

‘So they wrote in New York Review of Books, 19, Nov. 19, 1970, p. 27.
*as quoted in Stauder op. cit.

"*ibid.

"'Study of the relationship between them is not entirely absent from social
anthropology, but it is not social so much as cultural and is limited to the
phenomena of contact itself (culture contact in the past, ethnicity now)
not the social system of contact.
76 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSORg

present in the U.S. have been deliberately differentiated from ap.
thropological work as such and categorised as the ‘Ethical’, ‘per.
sonal’ and ‘common sense’ responsibilities towards the individuals
with whom they (we) have worked in the field and towards col-
leagues in the profession. A self-censorship, a limitation of the dis-
cipline, has been exercised. The discipline does not include analysis
of its sponsors and its relations to them.

A pure form of this self-censorship, in which no criteria, not even
ethical, are offered for the choice of sponsor and the use of research,
is the claim that it makes no difference who provides funds so long
as the researcher is allowed to conduct the research project he has
devised, so he claims, independently, nor is it of scientific or profes-
sional concern how the result is used so long as it is accessible to
professional colleagues. Such a purist concern, is questionable. Has
the discipline in fact developed under its own logic, independently?
I shall pose this question in the second part of this paper.

(3) If government funds, or the funds of government-supporting
agencies are used and foreign government permission to conduct in-
vestigations needed, then the work will be limited according to
government diplomatic policy. This in itself must impose contingent
limits upon the geographical distribution of ethnographic research,
as Kathleen Gough has pointed out.'? Future funds and future per-
mission for each anthropologist and his successors are determined,
furthermore, by whatever is the record of his or her research, pub-
lications and reputation in the sponsoring agencies’ sources of in-
formation. As Wolf and Jorgensen pointed out, academics in Thai-
land who collaborated in counter-insurgency work feared losing the
opportunity for further research if they refused. Of course it is pos-
sible to conduct research of one’s own and on the side do what
pleases sponsors, but the limits within which this can be done need
investigation. I am not satisfied with the obvious fact that there is
some leeway. Apart from prior geographical limitations there is the
restraint on publication of any analysis that might be taken as critic-
al of the sponsor or permission-giver. The professional demand for
publication would make it scnseless to do work that was not pub-
lishable. Any analysis is critical at least in the limited sense that it
distinguishes phenomena and representations—such as a particular
government policy or project, or an educational programme—from
the basis, and finds the consistency and contradiction in an historic-
al system or structure. It can easily be offensive. Has the choice to

*Kathleen Gough, ‘Anthropology: Child of Imperialism® Monthly Review,
April 1968.
STEPHAN FEUCHTWANG 7

grsue it regardless of tact and professional considerations often
been taken?

2. Has the discipline developed under its own logic? '

Take as a point of departure a paper by Peter Worsley entitled

«The End of Anthropology?’, given at the 6th World Coggr.css of
Sociology, May 1966. As an anthropologist and from within the
discipline and its theoretical foundations, he found, if I read hxm
correctly, that three major directions implied in those foundations
had been neglected.
(1) The development of theory of direction, or emergence, has
becn avoided. Worsley sees this as an ideological reaction: in avoid-
ing imperialist and racist notions of superiority anthropologists had
for half a century recourse instead to a combination of universalism
and relativism.

But this is also a change consistent, as I will argue in the next
part, with the changed character of late colonial relations. It was in
any casc not a change which came about through internal criticism
and reasoned rejection but by means of a process of discrediting the
scientific study of history and of causal explanation in social science
on tangential and external grounds.'® If evolutionary thought had
engendered the idcology for a reactionary and oppressive politics
and produced untenable theories of race and the mechanistic stages
of progress, this does not mean that a more rigorous approach could
not produce more adequate and tenable evolutionary theories and
theories of large-scale types or modes of social relation. Yet this is
what the founders of British social anthropology in their wholesale
rejection of all causal reasoning in anthropology would have us
belicve.

(2) Worsley points out what anthropology could have been doing
as a self-professed science of society whose subject-matter was the
variety of human or social tvpes. It could have been developing an
adequate comparative theory and typology starting with such types
as had already been developed. Instead, a surreptitious evolution-
ism, unworked and unquestioned except as a matter of fact, has
continued in the dualist vocabulary used to identify anthropology’s
subject-matter : primitive/modern, simple/complex. There has been
in British social anthropology no systematic inquiry into and trans-
formation of the concepts of social types such as the hunting-

"See R. Makarius’ introduction to the French edition of Morgan’s Ancient
Society (L. H. Morgan, La Cociété Archaique, 1971) pp xiv-xxvii, for a
description of this process.
78 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSQRg

gathering, the pastoral, the hydraulic, the feudal. Where there by
been comparison it has been regional or of types of a single instiy,.
tion (e.g. the family, marriage, descent) or a universal mechanigy,
(e.g. conflict), never of total social systems.

Totality has been stressed often enough, but never as that of ,

type of system, rather as that of a unique society or institution deg.
cribed. Possibly this was to some extent a consequence of the choice
of field out of contingent rather than for scientific reasons. Societieg
so chosen at least clustered regionally and so even if the choice of
people to study was not based on a typology and a comparative
theory, that still left regional variation as the grounds for descrip-
tive comparison.
(3) Worsley notes the absence of studies of numerically large and,
to the new state being formed, economically important regions of
the Sudan, one of the principle hunting grounds of British social
anthropology. Instead, minute ‘primitive’ populations were isolated
in study. Now, if we look at the data provided by historians, we
find that the social systems which anthropologists chose as units of
study were very often parts of much larger social systems, which
might just as well have been the unit of study in a science of social
types. A well known case in point is that of the Tallensi as part of
the Dagomba-Mamprusi-Mossi Tri-dominion and then afterwards,
of coursc as part of the British colonial system.'* I doubt that the
larger-scale system was rejected just because a system that size was
not amenable to direct observation. There are other ways of study-
ing a society than the observation of its entirety, indeed even field-
work observation in the British ethnographic tradition is used as the
basis for the description of much more than was actually observed.
The scale of the theory based upon observation and of the concepts
used in description is ncver in any event confined to that of the ob-
servations made. Why should the particular method of study, so-
called participant observation, have been so stressed and celebrated,
and the empiricist ideal—inducing social structure only from what
was known through the senses of the observer'*—have been given
such currency? Perhaps the method and its stress were and are con-
commitants of the study of societies as isolates, not a cause.

The poignant distance of the ficld-work relation, the distance of
the analyst from his own analysis, is conceivably part and parcel of

1See R. F. Stevenson, Population and Political Systems in Tropical Africa,
1968, chapter VL.

A. R. Radcliffe-Brown, ‘The concept of function’, in Structure and
Function in Primitive Society, 1951, p. 190.
srEPHAN FEUCHTWANG [

distance of the sponsors from that analysis. The distance kept
the een the people who are the subject-matter of social anthropol-
belf'and the production of social anthropology itself also fits the
og;d-work method. It fits the institutional definition of knowledge
e academic and it fits the sponsors’ imperial and neo-colonial re-
?:tions 1o the same people, as colonial subjects, to be kept in order,
ut to work and aided, at a distance. The anthropologist studies the
peasant, the hunter, the farmer, the labourer. He studies mainly the
[literate. Sometimes he studies the numerate entrepreneurs and the
iiterate minor officials and local notables, even small kingdoms and
their courts, but never the imperial, aiding, government-advising or
funding agency or boss of the local entreprencurs and local rulers.
Yet it is precisely in the opposite ratio that the readership of the
anthropologists’ work is ranged.

Literacy has been one of the main criteria of social classification
in anthropology and of what is central to its study: preliterate
peoples. It has another side in the development of anthropological
theory besides defining its subject-matter, and that is the lack of
challenge by its subjects, unable to read the finished work. Surely
this lack of challenge has encouraged notions of immutable and un-
conscious structures and left un-raised in social anthropology the
question and theory of the state of consciousness and of the internal
transformation of society and social production of its own know-
ledge.

3. The formation of British social anthropology

The method emploved in writing this history is to generalise from
official statements of major institutions of anthropological research,
teaching and funding and the writings of professors of anthropology
and notable colonial administrators who sponsored anthropologists.
I take these to be key instances of British social anthropology be-
cause of their co-ordinating functions or, in the case of the profes-
sors, their influence as teachers and administrators of social anthro-
pology.

The history of organised anthropology before the second world
war was one of very slow development, out of origins in humani-
tarian reform and political involvement, which were then set aside
and distinguished from a ‘purely’ scientific interest. This separation
manifested itself in the duality of the several appeals to government
for funds. They met with success only when the colonial govern-
ments were forced to engage in policies of major reform leading,
after the second world war, to the granting of formal political inde-
80 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPOI\‘SORS

pendence to colonies and to the establishment of social anthyq.
pology as a teaching profession in its own right for the first time i,
several universitics in Britain.

In a continuous line of successive institutions, the Royal Anthyq.
pological Institute (RAI) can be taken back, as George Stocking has
done,'® to the Aborigines Protection Society, founded in 1838 afiay
parliamentary hearings on the Kaffir wars. The RAD’s goals were tq
pursue an evangelism abroad that would administer the same
justice and civilisation in the colonies, as it did at home: ‘not tg
halt European colonisation overseas, but to change its character’,
It tended, however, in its history to move toward the study of abo.
rigines ‘in the purity of their race’ as ‘objects of interest in the natu.
ral history of man’ (as the Society’s Fourth Annual Report put it),
until members formed, in 1842, a separate body entirely for this
purpose, and called it the Ethnological Society of London. Through
a combination of medical-anatomical and linguistic-philological ap-
proaches its main objective of study was to trace the essential unity
of man.

To put them in a larger context, it must be noted that the Abo-
rigines Protcction Society and the Ethnological Society of London
were in line with one side, in the controversy in Britain reflecting
the two sides of the American Civil War. The other side stood, of
course, for the natural inferiority of the Negro race and its separatc
origin. Dissension on these lines, between those tracing a single
origin and those tracing several origins of human races, split the
Ethnological Socicty of London itself, and those with the multiple
origin theories that favoured slavery and natural aristocracy sepa-
rated from it and formed, in 1863, the Anthropological Society of
London.'” Its members conducted mainly physical anthropological
research, pioneering the measurement of physical types and their
classification, and advocated racist policies to colonial administra-
tors while, by contrast, the Ethnological Society of London main-
tained a ‘liberal political orientation’.

But in 1870 the two anthropological societies were reconciled into
the single Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland
(now the Royal Anthropological Institute) in which the postulates
of original unity and of Darwinian evolution were united with a re-

*George W. Stocking Jr., “‘What’s in a name? The origins of the Royal
Anthropological Institute (1937-71)’, Man 6: 3, 1971. All quotations in
this and the next two paragraphs are from Stocking’s article.

'"M. Banton, Race Relations, 1967, p. 34, cites its presidential address in
favour of slavery.
{{AN FEUCHTWANG 81
for the careful study of the differentiation of human types.
spect rejected in the 1840s the left hand of philanthropy, it (or-
‘Having - hropology in Britain) rejected in the 1860s the right
nhseof political racism. For the next two decades . . . the Anthro-
nase. | Institute stayed in the centre of the road. It took for gran-
pologier . ’ d the White Man’s Burden, but it was not
ted the British Empxr.e and the e Man; . vas
ctively concerned with either colonial policy or savage uplift.” (p.
386). It was dependent on its subscriptions for funds. But in the
1890s, as Stocking also notes, this changed. British organjsations of
anthropology began to petition government sponsorship, and 'began
a long history of attempts to make anthropology attractive to
British colonial administrations.'®

In 1896 the subsection for Ethnology (formed in 1846), of the
British Association for the Advancement of Science, with the An-
thropological Institute and the British Muscum petitioned govern-
ment for funds and facilities to found an Imperial Bureau of
Ethnology, modelled on the American Burecau of Ethnology,
the Dutch government’s policy of educating its East Indian ad-
ministrators in cthnology, the cthnological wealth of the Leyden
museum, and on the precedent of British Imperial ethnological
work already done in reports by colonial administrators and for
the Census of India. The aims of the Imperial Bureau were to
be two-fold, for science and for colonial administration. The scien-
tific aim, repeated into the present day, was archival, historical, and
an academic reason for focusing on small-scale social units and not
on large-scale systems, namely to record data from peoples vanish-
ing through contact with Europeans—the aborigines of Australia,
Oceania and the East Indies, the so-called tribals of India and
tribes of Africa, not the so-called civilisations of the Far East and
India, Malaya, Burma, Siam, the Middle East. The administrative
aim was to co-ordinate information on the subject peoples for the
preparation of colonial administrators so that they would not make
ancw the mistakes of the past. The only result of this petition was a
room in the British Museum for an ethnology section.

Another appeal by the Anthropological Institute, this time with
the Folklore Society of Great Britain and Ireland, was made in 1900
to Joseph Chamberlain, Secretary of State for the Colonies, for funds
to compile records of the customs of the native people of South
Africa who were, to everyone’s surprise, not disappearing under

SsTEP

"*The first part of this history is told by J. L. Myres, ‘Anthropology and the
State’, Presidential address to the Royal Anthropological Institute, JRH

1929.
82 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSORg

European contact after all, but whose social organisation wag
breaking up in an alarming way. The records would help in the
difficulties ‘of management by a European government’ to contrg]
the disruption of contact with knowledge of the pre-contact socia]
order. Chamberlain was unresponsive. But in 1908 there was some-
thing in the naturc of a delayed response to the 1896 appeal,
when Wingate invited Oxford and Cambridge anthropologists
to train administrators for his newly formed Sudan civil service,
In the same year and the next Ridgway, Cambridge professor
of anthropology and President of the Anthropological Institute, re-
newed the 1896 appeal for an Imperial Bureau of Ethnology, to be
housed in the Institute, and addressed it to the India and Colonial
Offices and then to Asquith the Prime Minister. The appeal'® was
signed by administrators, merchants, bankers, and shipowners. It
repeated, in substance, the two aims of the former appeal and
added a third, namely to make anthropometric surveys in order to
gauge physical improvement and deterioration. There was no con-
crete response to this appeal either. Anthropology was considered
important but not useful by the government. In 1914 there was an-
other minor success; the Australian government began the training
in ethnology of administrators of aborigines. In the same year a
Royal Commission on Higher Education heard Sir Richard Temple,
a fellow of the Royal Anthropological Institute and representative
of the Anthropological section of the British Association, recom-
mend the training of colonial service officials in anthropology,
more specifically in language and the knowledge of racial charac-
teristics—still apparently the two major concerns of anthropology.
For this purpose anthropology departments should be opened in
British universitics. War put an end to that hope. But British West
African colonial administrations had officials trained in anthropo-
logy (Meek, Rattray, Talbot) from 1920 onwards, to conduct sur-
veys and reports.

In 1921 Temple went ahead on his own initiative to organise
under RAI auspices a Joint Committee on Research and Teaching,
representing all anthropologists in British education, in order to
collect and publish anthropological information ‘for the use of the
Imperial services, teachers, misionaries and others’. Money for it
came from an appeal fund and a grant from the Rockefeller foun-
dation, not from the British Imperial government. Shortly after-
wards, within five years, teachers, missionaries and others, with the

'*Royal Anthropological Institute Documents AS6 and A10; 3.
STEPHAN FEUCHTWANG 83
rt of their universities and missionary societies all over Europe,
SUPPO" Jed also by the Rockefeller foundation, with in addition the
gmeaie, foundation, and some colonial governments, founded the
IntemZtiOﬁal Institute qf African Languages and Cultpres (IAID).
Not only did some colonial governments help to finance it, but Lord
Lugard, ex-governor of Nigeria, agreed to l?eqome head of its .[jlx-
ecutive Council, ‘and it is largely through his influence that Bnt.lsh
administrations in Africa have given such generous and unswerving
support to the Institute from the beginning.’*°
I think the founding of the IAI is a turning point in the attrac-
tiveness of anthropology to colonial administrators. It is important
to note the differences between its aims and those of the previous
anthropological projects, including Temple’s. The practical aims of
the latter were to support a simple one-sided, application of im-
rial rule in the situation of contact, whereas the IAI was founded,
among other things, to improve the education of natives ‘on modern
lines’ in the situation of contact,?' a more complex, two-sided, sup-
port of modern (i.e. imperial) rule. Indeed, some of its members may
have seen the IAD’s activities as a preparation for formal political
independence. And the anthropology of the IAI was different. In
1931 it made a five-year plan for itself, based on Malinowski’s
article, ‘Practical Anthropology’, published in its journal Africa
2:1, ‘to study the processes of change in a purely objective scien-
tific way.’?* Under this plan, studentships were given to colonial
administrators and to missionaries to take academic courses, many
of them under Malinowski at the London School of Economics, and
research fellowships to academic social scientists giving special em-
phasis to language studies and to culture contact and culture
change. Their research was to include direct observation—field-
work. A Readership had been created at the LSE for Malinowski
in 1923 and he chose for it the title social anthropology. In these
same years Radcliffe-Brown had taken up professorships created
for him at the university of Cape Town, and then in Sydney, and in
both he was much engaged in training administrators of the natives
and conducting projects in applied anthropology.
The functionalist anthropology of Malinowski and Radcliffe-
Brown was a wholesale break with the philological, evolutionist,
racialist, and historical (diffusionist) anthropology offered in Britain

“‘Rev. E. W. Smith, of the IAI and the RAI, in Memorandum XII of the
TIAI 1932.

ibid.

“ibid.
84 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONS()&S

until the 1920s. There are grounds for considering the turning poijp,
of the late 1920s as a move either toward an anthropology more
suited to colonial administrative need or else as a change which mey
with new colonial administrative needs more than the previoyg
anthropology could.

In his African Survey (pp. 54-61 of the 1957 edition), Lord
Hailey, a key link between colonial administration and the new ap.
thropology, identifies social anthropology with functional, practica]
and applied anthropology. He notes that it made a break with the
anthropology of origins and became a kind of knowledge more use.
ful to colonial administration in doing so. The Union of South
Africa from 1925 employed a staff of trained anthropologists in its
administration, and the use of anthropologists to conduct surveys
spread to other British African administrations besides those that
had already used and continued to use anthropological expertise.
Social anthropologists who were commissioned in the 1930s to con-
duct surveys or make reports, mentioned by Hailey, were 1. Scha-
pera in the High Commission Territories of South Africa, M. Read
in Nyasaland, A. 1. Richards in Northern Rhodesia and P. J. Peri-
stiany in Kenya.

Education of the colonial subjects and both sides of the pheno-
mena of ‘contact’ were thc main concerns of the Standing Commit-
tee on Applied Anthropology which the RAI constituted in 1937.
It was not government sponsored but intended, in its own words*’
to ‘study the problems of culture contact and the application of
anthropological knowledge to the government of subject races’ by
means of publication, representation to governments, and personal
contacts with officials. Man 1938 contains records of a number of
initiatives taken by the committee: a memorandum to the Austra-
lian Prime Minister that the inviolability of reservations be en-
forced; a deputation including Malinowski and Margaret Read to
the Secretary of State for the Colonies to draw attention to the need
for a better understanding of native opinion and the correct trans-
lation of new political institutions into the native words of the terri-
torics to be transferred to the Union of South Africa; a suggestion
that anthropological research might, among other things, ‘indicate
the persons who hold key positions in the community and whose
influence it would be important to enlist on the side of projected
reforms’ and reports on the use of anthropological study for edu-
cation in colonial development, to point out habits and prejudices

*in Man, 1937, Article 139.
sl'EPHAN FEUCHTWANG 85
might be obstacles to ‘hcalth programmes in Ea}st Afnca a}nd
a sense of citizenship and loyalty to quern institutions ‘on
standards of respect for obligation implicit in the native system’.
pot let us forget that thej modern institutions, the new political
. itutions, and the educational _programmes were al.l part of a
in> ernment of subject races’. This independent committee had no
gggk whatsoever with the contemporary nationalist movements in
:Le colonies, interested though anthropologists were in contact and
change, and sensitive to them as they should or must have been.

In the same year the committee sent a deputation to the Secretary
of State for the Colonies with a memorandum on “The place of an-
thropology in colonial studies’.?* In the same year, Lord Hailey,
from the administrative side, had written in African Survey, as cited
in the committee’s amemorandum: ‘The professional anthropolo-
gist’ should be ‘of great assistance in providing Government with
knowledge which must be the basis of administrative policy’. One
of the advantages to government of a professional anthropologist is,
the memorandum mentions, that in investigating such essential sub-
jects as native customary law and land tenure he will not be ob-
structed as would an investigator known to be connected with the
executive side of government. The memorandum suggested a Colo-
nial Research Fund (as had Lord Hailey) and the appointment of
between twelve and sixteen research fellows and six and eight lec-
turers in British universities, who would respectively spend half
their time in the colonial field and in training experts—the training,
it was stressed, to be general in the first instance, emphasising the
totality of social systems. The other half of their time was to be in
academia. Research institutes, such as the Rhodes-Livingstone
Museum founded two years before, should be established as re-
search bases in the colonies.

The Colonial Social Science Research Council (CSSRC) con-
stituted six years later under the Colonial Development and
Welfare Act of 1940 with special provisions for ‘the acquisition
of knowledge required for implementing projects of social or
economic development’,”® followed the recommendations of the
RAI committee closely. One of its standing committees was for
anthropology and sociology, its first secretary was Raymond Firth,
half of the Colonial Research Studies series written by its Colonial

to

*RAT document AS57.
*Forward by Lord Hailey to HMSO, A Review of Colonial Research 1940-
60, edited by Sir Charles Jeffries, 1964.
86 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONgqp,

Research Fellows and its members between 1944 and 19,
were by anthropologists, all of whom were later, if not then, teagy,.
ers of social anthropology and most of whom teach it now. Half 4
the CSSRC’s total allocation of funds went to the establismeny o
institutes in the colonial territories.

The President of the RAI in this crucial period of the institutiop,.
alisation of social anthropology, from the year following the depy,.
tation from the committee for applied anthropology to the formg.
tion of the Colonial Research Committee in 1942 which planned the
CSSRC and which included Lord Hailey and Audrey Richards, of
the TAI, was Radcliffe-Brown. His efforts, according to Fortes 2
laid the basis for the boom in anthropology which was part of the
general boom in natural and social science education arising out of
the experience of the second world war. His and Malinowski’s stu.
dents filled most of the teaching posts in the university departments
of anthropology that were created and expanded in Britain after the
war. The Association of Social Anthropologists of the British Com.-
monwealth, membership of which requires ‘normally both the hold-
ing of a teaching or research post in the Commonwealth and the
attainment of either a postgraduate degree (usually a doctorate) or
substantial publication’ was formed in 1946 with under twenty
members, and had grown by 1962 to more than one hundred and
fifty.?”

Whereas until the war social anthropology, that is British struc-
turalism and functionalism, had begun to flourish in certain colonial
conditions, the war itself seems to have generalised those conditions
cnough to have stimulated a qualitative leap into professionalisation
under state sponsorship. The war entailed a suddenly increased and
widespread need for the co-operation of colonial subjects beyond
the level required by colonial governments normally concerned to
save on the costs of administration. And as we know well it also en-
tailed as an aftermath the intensification of anti-colonial struggles
which forced the metropolitan government to adopt a new kind of
colonial policy, namely withdrawal from direct rule while endeav-
ouring to ensure co-operation after the retreat.

As a paternal ruler and pragmatic advisor to the British govern-
ment, Lord Hailey recognised the war to be a watershed in colonial
policy. During the war itself he wrote a confidential report (Native

*in the preface to M. Fortes (ed), Social Structure: papers in honour of A.
R. Radcliffe-Brown, 1949,

**'Max Gluckman and Fred Eggan (eds.) in The Relevance of models for
Social Anthropology, A.S.A. Monographs 1, 1965, pp. xi-xii.
STEPHAN FEUCHTWANG 87
. :-n and Political Development in British Tropical
Adrplﬂ .s;;a :: njnquiry he conducted in 1939-1940 for the Secretary
Afr mt)e The war, according to Hailey, saw the ascendancy of the
of Stad 'of two schools of thought. The first was the laissez faire
Secoﬁl of thought which had ‘little belief that self-government can
Sc,h (r) be realised in our African dependencies on any terms which
:,Viﬁ benefit their populations at large or will avoid prejudice to their
connection with Great Britain’ (p. 50). The second believed that
self-government would enhance the connection. Its ‘forces at home
and in the dependencies’ ‘will exert increasing pressure for the ex-
rension of political institutions making for self-government, and for
the fuller association of Africans with them. The strength of this
pressure is likely to be enhanced as the result of the war.” He had
already noted (p. 3) that at home, in Great Britain, ‘it had been
necessary for the State to come to the aid of under-privileged areas
or communities. It has become clear that in the Colonies the main-
tenancc of the doctrine that they should be independent of assis-
tance from the British Treasury would condemn some of them to
the permanent position of depressed areas.” ‘The government must
(it is generally felt) exercise a degree of intervention in both the
economic and social life of the nation which would not have been
accorded to it by an earlier generation. The influence of these ideas
has been increasingly felt in the interpretation which the general
public now places in its obligations towards the colonial dependen-
cies. It has been reflected in a concrete form in the passing of the
Colonial Development and Welfare Act of 1940.°
Lord Hailey was obviously central in the articulation of colonial
administration and professional anthropology. Writing from the
vantage point of 1944 he described colonial development as pass-
ing through three stages, the first being introduction of law and
order and creation of basic infrastructure for the economic develop-
ment (i.e. extraction) of natural resources, the second, which he
judged had then been reached, being one in which the colonial ad-
ministration is faced with the ‘problem of assisting the indigenous
communities to advance their social life and to better their standard
of living.’ This would lead to the next stage, which he envisaged as
the political advance of indigenous peoples. So his practical and
effective interest in anthropology coincided with his second stage of
colonial development. The anthropology which took his administra-

"Is.org Hailey, ‘The role of anthropology in colonial development’, Man 44:
, 1944,
88 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSORS

tive interest was not the study of human origins, it was the study of
how societies work.?* And the societies with which he thought 54
ministrators needed most help from anthropologists were not sog;.
eties where an easily understood and compatible system could pe
incorporated easily to colonial rule using native personnel. Thesge
we may note, were the ‘civilisations’ and ‘despotisms’ of the Eagt
given to another set of academic disciplines and institutions altogether
—namely, Oriental studies. Anthropology could help with another
kind of people and imperial problem, tribal peoples of India anq
Africa and the Pacific ‘where administrators encountered cultureg
which were to them of a novel type, and where they did not find
personnel of a class which they could readily associate with them.
selves in the formation of the legal administrative institutions of the
country’ (i.e. colony).*’

To sum up the story so far, then, organised anthropology when
finally established as a government sponsored profession was dom-
inantly social anthropology and it was institutionalised at a certain
distance from practical application of knowledge even as it had had
to be as an unsuccessful petitioner of imperial government. Administ-
rators were trained by but not the same as anthropologists. Anthro-
pologists made investigations useful to but not identified with ad-
ministration.

Lucy Mair, a student of Malinowski who worked on the African
Survey, has linked Indirect Rule closely with the pre-war
study of social anthropology in Africa: ‘As far as Africa is con-
cerned, it is mainly in colonies governed under the system of In-
direct Rule, where the economic policy is to encourage independent
native production, that the study of social anthropology receives
official encouragement.’*’ Indirect Rule is what Lord Hailey and
C. K. Meek, one of the Nigerian government trained in anthropol-
ogy, referred to as the use of native institutions and personnel for
local government. It is of great interest, then, to see what working
in this system meant to Lucy Mair. ‘To me,” she wrote, ‘the question
of primary intcrest is: How should we study an African society in

®ibid.

ibid. C. K. Meek wrote much the same about ‘the government’s attitude
towards anthropological research’, namely that it should provide ‘data
which would help the government to make the fullest use of native institu-
tions as instruments of local administration’—in his Law and Authority
in a Nigerian Tribe, 1937, p. xv.

"Lucy Mair (ed.), Methods of Study of Culture Contact in Africa, 1938,
(Memorandum XV to the IAI) p. 1.
SrEPHAN FEUCHTWARNG 89
jay down lines of policy which would be oriented not
rds some necessarily vague ulUma}e ideal, but towards the
toWwa" " "¢ specific problems of adaption which have arisen or
solution of SPp o 33 This attitud
may be expected to arise In the ncar future; " Ths attitude
owards the limitations of app}xefi anthropology®* is, if it was
-peral, of great significance. It is in sharp contrast to the anthro-
ology rejected as conjectural history by the fgngtnopahsts. with
its long-term 1nterest ar}d perspectives. And it is in apparent
contrast with the scientific amb1t19ns of Radclﬁe-Browq fqr a
natural science of society and with the global generalisations
made by Malinowski. Indeed, Malinowski himself criticized
Fortes for being too functionalist, functionalism having been work-
ed out as a method for studying one culture alone ‘which through
age-long historical development had rcached a state of well-
balanced cquilibrium,” whereas contact with Europeans meant dis-
equilibrium, and functionalism had to be applied in a more com-
plex form as ‘the search for the Common Measure’ determining
new emerging institutions in order to predict and advise on how they
might reach stability.** Nevertheless this was a short-term perspec-
tive, and governments did not want advice on long-term policy.
Translated into social science this comes out, in Gunter Wagner’s
words as accepting as given ‘the essentially rigid forces’ of change.*s
As for the kind and scale of social unit toward which interested ad-
ministrators would have drawn anthropologists Lord Hailey iden-
tified them, in the passage already cited, as ‘tribal peoples’. Lord
Lugard gives some more definitc indications of what this meant
methodologically in his preface to A Black Byzantium, 1942, by S.
Nadel, at that time a government anthropologist of the adminis-
tration of the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan. Lugard notes that Nadel’s
first object was to discriminate between the essential characteristics
of Nupe culture, and the variations from the typical pattern in a
‘heterogeneous society divided by gulfs of culture, ethnic extraction,
community and class’. This involved an examination of ‘the factors
of social cohesion upon which the claim of a community to rank as
a unit of sclf-government is based.” ‘Since it is the declared policy
of the British Government to help different units of native society

*ibid.

“She repeated this attitude in fuller form in 1956. ‘Applied Anthropology
and Development Policies’, British Journal of Sociology 7. 1956, reprinted

Jn her Anthropology and Social Change, LSE monographs 38, 1969,

:‘In Lucy Mair (ed.) 1938 p. xxxvi.

*The study of culture contact in its practical applications’ in Lucy Mair
(ed.), 1938, p. 105.
90 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITs SPONsols

to govern themselves in accordance with civilised canons of just
and of impartiality between rival claims . . . it goes without =,
how valuable such an objective study would be to the Adminiss;lr"g
tion. We find that, in fact, it has been utilized in conjunction Witk
the researches of District Officers’ (p. iv). Not only were the Nupe o
be known and kept as a division of sub-units of social cohesiop but
the Nupe themselves, in fact, were a sub-unit of Fulani overlordg;
supported by and mediating colonial British rule. The adminjsty,_
tion was not, of course, interested in the detailed study of the Nyp,
so much as in the lessons to be drawn for administration of t},
larger territory of which the Nupe constituted one division.

So anthropology was useful to colonial administration when, iy
showing how systems of stability and internal cohesion workeg
(functionalism), it showed them to be small scale tribal divisions of
systems. But the founders of functionalism had global perspec.
tives. Radcliffe-Brown’s presidential address on applied anthropol.
ogy to the Anthropology Section of the Australian and New
Zealand Association for the Advancement of Science in 1940 is re-
markable for its ambitious plan for anthropology to be the theoreti-
cal side of the social experiment which was imperialism. It also en-
visaged the end of imperialism: ‘Imperialism is the self-assumed
role of controller of other peoples. They will not let this continue
indefinitely. In the meantime, let this blind experiment become less
blind. Let it become experimental anthropology leading to better
knowledge of the control of society and social change in our own
societies.” But it was not as a science of social change that social
anthropology became famous. It was for its small scale, intensive,
timeless ethnographies. Although in his address Radcliffe-Brown de-
fined the task of social anthropology as the formulation of ‘the
general laws of the phenomena that we include under the term cul-
ture or civilisation’, the address itself in its references to social an-
thropological subject matter was restricted to ‘primitive peoples’,
and to references to his own work with African and Papuan tribes,
without any construction of social types (such as he could have
been building on the basis of Marx and Morgan). And although in
the same address he stresses social evolution, it is an evolution to-
wards more complex and higher-order systems. They are systems
of integration. Change is reduced to integration, The more encom-
passing level is that imposed by ‘Western administration’ in the
imperial experiment. Social evolution in this scheme is to be obser-
ved and modified by anthropologists, through the training of ad-
: rs and the advice to administrations, so that it becomes
mimstfatﬁ’ od process in which some evolve more than others, indeed
a cogt;g some evolve the others. . . . .
jn whi temporary article in Africa by Malinowski**—an expansion

A co@rlier one' on ‘Practical anthropology’, written after corres-
of ntg:nce and agreement with a former Licutenant-Governor of
thern Nigeria—1s also ambitious in its vision for the anthropolo-
>0 h not quite so visionary as Radcliffe-Brown’s. He too saw

s‘]‘BPHAN

i hou o o - . .
glsttfl:opolgbgy and administration coming together in the long-term
2':nntcrf:sts of the native: ‘One class of men who can and must or-

nise . . - who have to keep their ha.td.abo‘ve the chaos of conflic-
{ing opinions and the.turmoﬂ of conﬂlctnqg interests . . . are the ad-
ministrators. It is their professional and implicit duty to look after
the interests of the natives, who do not and cannot (my stress) share
in deciding about their own destinies, though, sooner or later, they
may have to be admitted to some joint councils. The greater his
capacity to foresee the course of events and frame the policies ac-
cordingly, the better he (i.e. the administrator) will acquit himself of
his task. And here, in the capacity for looking far ahead, know-
ledge, statesmanship, and research meet, and they ought to be made
to collaborate.” °. . . in Africa there is one element which is largely
deprived of voice and immature in its own judgment, that is, the
native.’ {pp. 432-4). Social anthropology was firmly to be identified
with a paternal authority. Such an identification with colonial ad-
ministration of course precludes any questioning of it. Lucy Mair
writes of Malinowski’s ‘pre-occupation with policy’ and of *his con-
viction that the main purpose of the study of social change was to
enable governments to control it.”*’ Some of the implications of this
stance are brought out in Malinowski’s Dynamics of Culture
Change, in a chapter on ‘Indirect Rule and its Scientific Planning’,
in which much of the ideology of present-day development policy
has its franker and more open precedent. Indirect Rule is welcomed
because it means ‘the maintenance of as much as is possible of the
Native authority instead of its destruction’ (pp. 138-9). The qualifi-
cation, ‘as much as is possible’, is presented as a matter of indis-
putable scientific judgment of an inevitable social evolution: ‘the
progressive adaption of native institutions to modern conditions.’
The problem for cultural anthropology, he writes, is of finding in

"‘1'['923 rationalisation of anthropology and administration’, Africa 3: 4,
In R, Frith (ed.), Man and Culture, 1957 p. 241.
92 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSQRg

the culture of the native compensations for the loss of his militar,
power, for the substitution of new for the old ‘sources of revenyg’
and for a new ‘pative capacity for legislation’, but here’s the ryp
‘leaving the ultimate control in the hands of Europeans.” It meapg
in addition, finding ways of avoiding certain new developments iy
the situation of contact, notable among which is the educated native
(who has found voice and judgment) who challenges the colonij)
right: the problem, that is, of ‘obviating those situations in which
an illiterate chief has to deal with an educated clerk, with educated
commoners, and upstart demagogues’ (p. 145). ‘The object is tg
create in Native authority a devoted and dependable ally, contro].
led, but strong, wealthy and satisfied’ (p. 147). Elsewhere he calls
this process a ‘complex experiment’ in ‘the gradual growth of col-
laboration’ (p. 141). But in later pages Malinowski makes it plain
that what he means by alliance and collaboration is assimilation to
what is unquestionably a supecrior mode of life: ‘If from the outset
it were possible to make quite clear in preaching the gospel of civi-
lisation, that no full identity can be reached: that what are being
given to Africans are new conditions of existence, better adapted to
their needs but always in harmony with European requirements, the
smaller would be the chances of a strong reaction and the formation
of ncw, potentially dangerous, nationalisms’ (p. 160). Such national-
isms are ‘sociologically unsound’.

Tutelage and trusteeship were then the slogans of imperial ideol-
ogy,*® and Malinowski’s chapter on Indirect Rule follows closely
the conclusions of Lord Hailey. The latter in a talk given to the
Royal Institute for International Affairs in December 1938°°, had
praised Indirect Rule not as an efficient means of administration
but as the most efficient educative instrument in the transition to
self-management at a local level. He reminded his audience of the
lessons to be learned from the experience of British rulc in what he
called ‘the East’, in particular the disruptive (i.e. nationalist) effects
of higher education for the colonial subjects, concluding: ‘Pru-
dence seems to lie . . . in securing the early association of educatced
Africans with our administrative institutions. If we do not do so,
there will inevitably arise a state of tension which, sooner or later,
we shall have to meet by large-scale political concessions. And in
that case, they will not necessarily be made either in the right way,

¥See for instance Lord Hailey's remarks on ‘the tutelary power’ in An
A frican Survey, 1938, p. 413.

*Published as ‘Some problems dealt with in the African Survey’ in Inter-
national A ffairs, March 1939,
sTEPHAN FEUCHTWANG 93

or to the right class, or with the best re§u]t for all the people con-
erned.” The concordapce o.f the two views of. the .anth.xopologlst
znd the administrator is plain, though the one is veiled in the lan-
guage of science, the other in the language of bourgeois paternal
rectitude. : :

Evolution for Malinowski was a matter of culture—forms of be-
paviour, ceremony and speech and the development of values
which he took to be absolute such as survival and, in his latest
work, freedom. For Radcliffe-Brown it was a matter of higher-
order systems of integration with a strong identification of system
with norms and jural order. Divisions in the terms of their science
are therefore cultural, customary or jural divisions, and change or
contradiction are matters of temporary maladjustment of values
and norms in a superior, and global system of civilisation or inte-
gration. To identify such divisions, and in this way, was of course
much more congruent with imperial administration than to identify
competition or contradiction between economic systems or between
total political and economic systems, only one of which was the im-
perial system. To have done the latter would have meant having to
choosc sides in the application of anthropology. In the former the
sides are there, there is still an us and a them. But the choice is
loaded with a moral and social justification in the favour of us, and
they are the ones divided.

Anthropology, as social anthropology, became important to ad-
ministration, colonial administration, in the context of retreat from
direct cocrcive rule and in the context of its direction of reforms
from above, after it had been involved in what it recognised to be
wasteful mistakes or when a need for a response from its subjects
arose and was in danger of being thwarted. It may have been direct-
ly after a rebellion and its suppression. In the second world war
these conditions were generalised. But perhaps the Aborigines Pro-
tection Society itself is the prototype, founded as the result of the
Kaffir Wars, and much later examples are the commissioning of
Evans-Pritchard to study the Nuecr after their rebellion and its sup-
pression, and Meek’s study after the women’s rebellion in Eastern
Nigeria.

The present professors of social anthropology, authors of texts
much used in teaching undergraduates its foundations, did the re-
search for them in the pre-war, war-time and immediate post-war
period. Social anthropology as a discipline was first formulated in
the mid ’twenties and became a fully formed profession in the late
‘forties. Thenceforth application of anthropology was less simple
94 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITs SPONSQRs

because imperial relations were no longer colonial, no longe,
single political system of administrative apparatuses, and it was g4
vocated less frankly and openly than it had been. Social anthy,.
pology was justified to a much more exclusive extent than jt hag
been as a study for its own sake.

But ‘theoretical’ studies are not, Lucy Mair has remarked*’ of p,
interest to ‘the practitioner of government’. The example she giye,
of a kind of theoretical study that is of interest to ‘administratjye
officers’ is “work of the type that can be described as ‘mapping’,
Under their (the Rhodes-Livingstone Institute and the East Africap
Institute) auspices what were unknown regions, from the sociolo.
gist’s point of view, have become areas with well-marked charac.
teristics, about which theoretical generalisation is both possible and
profitable, and into which administrative officers, if they wish cap
now venture with much better guidance than was available to their
predecessors.” This work, funded by a Colonial Research Grant,
was published serially as the Ethnographic Survey of Africa. It was
in fact the kind of work, survey work, undertaken by a number of
Colonial Research Fellows in the late ’forties with guidance from
colonial governments*'—Firth in West Africa and Malaya, Leach
in Sarawak, Richards in East Africa. And, although administered
by academics, the grants were nevertheless guided, as Lucy Mair
also notes** according to government policy priority lists, so that
rescarch institutes and applicants for Colonial Research Fellowships
‘know that a project which is on the priority list stands a better
chance of a grant than one which is not’.

Nevertheless, at the end of the second world war Evans-Pritchard
gave a talk on applied anthropology, published in 1946,** in which
he distinguished between scientific work and practical advice, the
first free of moral values, the second necessarily based on moral
values and common sense. Both Ian Hogbin'* and Lucy Mair*’

“Lugg Mair, ‘Social sciences in Africa South of the Sahara’, 1960, op. cit.

p. 98.

*'according to HMSO op. cit., p. 61: The second need (i.e. beside mainly
demographic data) which the Council (CSSRC) identified was that of
assessing priorities amongst the many urgent problems calling for investi-
gation. Here the Council felt that the best guidance was to be obtained
from the colonial governments themselves, from personal discussions with
colonial officials and by visits of members of the Council or other experts
to particular territories.” Such visits included those of A. I. Richards and
R. Firth, mentioned in the text.

“Lucy Mair, 1960, p. 98.

“*Applied Anthropology’, Africa, 16: 2, 1946.

“In Firth (ed.), Man and Culture op. cit., p. 253.

“In ‘Anthropology and the underdeveloped territories’, a lecture given in
sT
. e then upheld the same distinction, in which the anthro-
have 51:‘13 said to bring to maiters of policy-making and judgement,
po log}s :sm of a colonial policy specifically, no special knowledge
rcsponsibility other than that of an unusually well informed lay-

or

maE'{,ans.Pritchard urged the anthropologist to ‘restrict his research
to scientific problems’. ‘We study primitive societes . . . to gain 2
better understanding of ourselves’ anc! to Feach ‘a clearer under-
standing of the nature of hqma.q society in general’ (p. 93). He
argued, on the by now familiar lines of dual purpose, for know-
ledge itself and secondly for expert practical advice, that rgsearch
was urgent because of the disappearance of primitive societies and
that more teaching positions in universities and more technical ad-
visory positions in colonial governments be established for anthro-
plogists in order to consolidate the science and also for the ultimate
gain of administration which must depend on the advance of the
science. He himself had filled both the roles of researcher and ad-
visor and saw no incompatibility between the two reporting as ad-
visor (he was Tribal Affairs Officer in the British administration of
Cyreneica during the war) on ‘native problems’ and making sure
the natives got ‘a square deal’ ‘accommodated to administrative re-
quirements and imperial policy’ (p. 96).

Why is there no scientific incompatibility with accepting imperial
policy? Was there not, in 1946 and before, the possibility of an
analysis of the imperial system, an analysis which might turn out to
be the basis for criticism of the whole system as such? And why is
Evans-Pritchard still scientifically concerned chiefly with ‘the primi-
tive field’ (p. 98)? Is that a scientific category, a type of social
system? And if so, is it disappearing any faster than other kinds?
These questions which are a fundamental step to the statements by
which they justified their discipline and its practice, have hardly
been asked even today by the leading social anthropologists. ‘Primi-
tive societies’ were an administrative and perhaps a cultural fact
within the colonial system, unquestioned until their conversion into
‘new nations’ was imminent.

Such questions began to surface in 1949, when, as members of
the CSSRC, Evans-Pritchard and Firth contributed an article on
anthropology and colonial government to Man*¢. They discussed the
problems of ‘a science of which the objectives are still in process of

“1950, printed in her Anthropology and Social Change, op. cit., p. 40.
Article 179, Man, December, 1949.
96 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SFONsqp,

definition’, and they proposed ‘some division of function betwe
government anthropologists and those working in COHaborali(,n
with but not in the service of governments.’ They pointed to the the,,
retical interest of ‘colonial affairs as such’ and of the ‘rapid change:
of colonial societies which until then were ‘a special type of sociy)
order, in which external political dominance and ethnic sectiona];.
sation are marked features’. But, after this promising opening, they
summed up the subject at its largest as ‘the general processes of
Westernisation’, and with hopes that the change was towards de.
mocracy and meritocracy. From the war until very recently, how
litle has in fact been written on the colonial system in social ap.
thropology and how absent it is from its teaching syllabi is shown
elsewhere in this volume.

Common to all these writers on the use of anthropology seems to
have been a strict limitation of its practical analysis—in the size of
unit studied and the time-scale of prediction—in contrast with the
universalism of their theoretical generalisations and of their moral
attitudes. The intercsts of the subjects of their studies, to whom an-
thropologists often became attached enough to defend, were left to
personal ethics, to a humanitarian, universal morality (of which
only Malinowski tried to make a scientific principle) and to predic-
tions and recommendations on the short-term effects of colonial
policies. Thus they excluded from rational analysis the transforma-
tion of different kinds of social system, and the possibility that the
intercsts of their subjects and the reality of the social forces they
represented meant a total riddance of the sponsoring agencies of an-
thropology. The agents of change were given, not studied. The im-
perially transformed were studied as structures of ideas or relations
that were also empirically there, as natural facts. The contradiction
between studying change without studying the system of change it-
self was resolved by posing change as disintegration and its curc,
re-integration. Neither the subject ‘colonial affairs as such’, nor the
methods for its study were cultivated. Instead, the study of social
change was relegated to a second-class, impure realm. Applied an-
thropology was included if at all in the academic discipline as an
optional subject, and was thought to be less rigorous, and only in
applied anthropology was social change studied.

4. Conclusion

The rejection of history as a science, with the implicit assumption
that such a science must accept a determinist ideology, is, in the
history of anthropology, the moment in which the combination of
EPHAN FEUCHTWANG 97
into the original unity of man with the differentiation of
becomes a combination of the psychic unity of man
with the relativity of cultures and societies, more or less explicitly
.o 3 now unstudied evolutionary scheme. The new com-
cxpfessmg .o . . . . f
pination fits the nced§ of Br}tlsh colonial administration for a prag-
matic knowledge qf its subjects—how we can lfeep t:bcm working
so that they administer themsq:lves. without disrupting our rule.
Origins. history. evolupqn e_md diffusion qf cultu‘re are of no mt.erest
to administration until it is forced by its sgbpcts to recogoise a
history they are making for themselves despite it. But in that case
the administration wants a short-term solution. It wants to over-
come what, to it, is an obstruction of its own interest in an undis-
rupted order of its making and of the interests of competitive
strategy and exploitation of resources and manpower in which it
feels itself in the name of civilisation, trade, the balance of pay-
ments, and devclopment, to be, and in fact is, bound to act.

While British anthropology was still diffusionist, colonial ad-
ministration had to rcly on its own officers’ intelligence reports
among which were some made by government anthropologists.
Even so, government anthropologists and district officers before the
formulation of British social anthropology, although able to report
on language, custom, diet and disease as a series of topics in any
one culture, were less able to make social order as such intelligible.
Whenever the administration had been unable to use or were un-
successful in using a diplomatic, political, or legal handle which it
could recognise, to maintain order and the boundaries of its rule,
such serial and impressionistic reports must have been visibly de-
ficient, since it was the system of law, thc secret of order, which it
needed to know. An anthropology which could produce such
knowledge—and the pre-1950 pride of social anthropology was the
knowledge of the political systems and systems of kinship in which
societies with little or no central administrative handles were ordered
—did in fact replace diffusionist anthropology between the 1920s
and the 1940s.

The influence of social anthropology was probably directly prac-
tical only in the elements of survey information which it provided.
Its colonial formation was not in its success as a useful adjunct to
colonial administration as such, but in conforming to an approach
which seemed attractive and was no threat to it, or at least not to
the reformers and developers in it. To the more reactionary elements
in the colonies and in their administrations anthropologists were, no
doubt, dangerous intruders. To officials and officers of the colonial

inquiry
racial types
98 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSORS

services concerned with immediate action anthropologists wep,
woolly, impractical, utopian. But this need not mislcad us into thip.
ing that anthropology devcloped independently of colonial interegyg
It means that we must specify the colonial interests with which gy,
thropology was most closely identified : it supported the ideology of
the wclfare state in the depressed (for which read tribal) areas of the
colonies. If Lord Hailey was a typical, though promincnt, as well a5
formative sponsor of social anthropology we may see in his writings
onc way in which anthropology provided this support. His surveys
mediated the work of anthropologists to administrative officers. Ip
the war-time report already cited, he drew support from the exper-
tisc of sociologists and anthropologists as a generality, their warn.
ings against undcrestimating the strength of native custom and the
integrity of native social structure, in recommending the develop-
ment of native authoritics for local ‘sclf-government’. After the war
he published Native Administration in the British African Terri-
tories, (4 vols 1950-51, and a 5th in 1953 on the High Commussion
Territories), an expansion of the war-time survey, written ‘to meet
the nced fclt by officers of the African Administrations for infor-
mation rcgarding the practice followed in areas other than thosc
with which they are personally acquainted’. In these volumes social
anthropologists are his chicf refercnces for the African political and
property systems in all the territories surveyed.

The pre-condition for such problems of administration in which
anthropology was needcd is the wide-sprcad establishment of colo-
nial administration itsclf, which rcached its greatest gcographical
cxtent for Britain in thc vears of Joseph Chamberlain and his suc-
cessors, the point of greatest expansion being reached with the distri-
bution of ex-German empire in 1919.

This is the prima facie argument for the existence of an historical
relationship between British social anthropology and British colo-
nial administration in those problematic conditions of administra-
tion which I have specificd above. Evidence of a critical attitude
towards colonial administration being a common feature of social
anthropologists’ writing would not of itsclf contradict thc argument
put forward here, if it is truc that they rarely, if cver, amounted to
an analysis of the administration and of the imperialist system it-
self. Social anthropologists, I argue, did not analyse colonialism,
they reproduced the colonial divide in an inverted form as a colo-
nial ‘us’ intcrpreting or representing a colonized ‘them’. Criticism
commonly amounted to appeals to the given colonial administra-
tion for protection from too sudden change which would bring
about the disintegration of the social order anthropologically ana-
- G 29
STEPHA

1ysed. However well represented, however altruistically, it was done
wi direct rule in Africa was thc mould of British social anthro-

Inct 1t was itself a formalisation of policy at a high administra-
p.ozog])évcl of the British colonial apparatus by administrators
uv ugard and Hailcy) whose previous cxperience and modecl (both
¢ and positive) was the Indian empire. The first field work
founders of British social anthropology was not in Africa
cither, neverthcless t.heu' .advnce was sought mainly in A.fnca and
sponsorship for training given first and foremost for work in Africa.

Indirect rule gave to anthropologists small-scale cultural forma-
tions as units of study to be treatcd. as integratcd and complete
social systems. These units were studied on the one hand as facts
related immediatcly to universal humanity and on the other hand
as matters for reccommendations on short-term effects of colonial
policy. The intercsts of the subjects of the units, through which the
anthropologist might havc analysed himself and the system in
which he came to study them, werc instead treated as matters of
personal ethics or as identical in the long term with the European
colonial valucs of civilisation, modernity, justice, law and order.
Anthropologists never applied the test of rescarch to the practical
condition of rescarch.

It has been pointed out to me in discussion that it could not have
been otherwisc. There was no choice of doing otherwise. This is
true in the colonies only until the time an anti-colonial movement
developed. But in the metropolis this is not so. Long beforc the
period with which we are concerned, both political and theorctical
positions had bcen developed which could exposc the historical
limitations in which the colonics were held.

That anthropological research is uscd, has its application, is rc-
lated to practical action, was not denicd in the pre-war vears. In
the post-war dccades the regional administrations of the imperial
Systcm have been replaced by national governments and the high-
level, metropolitan impcrial apparatus by a Foreign and Common-
wealth Office, a Ministry for Overscas Development and a large
number of advisory missions. Social anthropology has become an
undergraduate, and will shortly become a sixth-form examination
syllabus, and anthropological rescarch is now funded in the main
by an internal government body the Social Science Research Coun-
cil. Though the imperial relations of dominance and dependence
remain, the political system has changed. Internal divisions of
the system have become national divisions. That anthropology has

necga tv
of the
100 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSORS

a use is frcquently denied nowadays although the anthropological
research of the colonial era is the mainstay of the first years ¢
teaching. This denial is part of a generally held notion that jt
possible institutionally to pursue knowledge in abstraction. It js g
expression of a more developed institutionalisation of the distanc,
between knowledge and its use, maintained before the war but noy
expressing an even further removal from direct administration thay
the indirect rule of the ‘twenties, ’thirties and ’forties. It is manifegt
in the methodological pride of British social anthropology: field.
work, in which the derivation of knowledge from a practice is cele.
brated but that knowledge is rarely returned to or shared with the
observed in practice; in which the social scientist’s empathy with
his subject-matter is celebrated because the subject-matter is after
all of the same order as himself, but he must do his utmost to re-
press his presence.

The effect of the discipline as it has developed has been to
atomize and universalise the knowledge of total systems sought,
Real participant observation, the comparison of socio-economic
types. an historical science of social formation and of the transition
between types, and the study of imperialism as a system, these are
parts of a social science that could logically have been anthro-
pology, but have not been.
TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEAN
RULE
Talal Asad

I
In order to understand better the relationship between social anth-
ropology and colonialism, it is necessary to go beyond the bound-
arics of the discipline and of the particular epoch within which that
discipline acquired its distinctive character. The descriptive writings
of functional anthropology are largely devoted to Africa, are in
effect virtually synonymous with African sociology during the
twentieth century colonial period. But we need to see anthropology
as a holistic disciplinc nurtured within bourgeois society, having as
its object of study a variety of non-European societics which have
come under its economic, political and intellectual domination—
and thercforc as merely one such discipline among scveral (orien-
talism, indology, sinology, etc.). All these disciplines are rooted in
that complex historical encounter between the West and the Third
World which commenced about the 16th century: when capitalist
Europe began to emerge out of feudal Christendom; when the con-
quistadors who expelled the last of the Arabs from Christian Spain
went on to colonise the New World and also to bring about the
direct confrontation of ‘civilised’ Europe with ‘savage’ and ‘bar-
baric’ peoples;' when the Atlantic maritime states, by dominating
the world’s major scaways, inaugurated ‘the Vasco Da Gama epoch

"““The Americas were therefore the scene of the first true empires controlled
from Europe, and Western imperial theory originated in sixteenth-century
Spain.” P. D. Curun, (ed.) Imperialism, London, 1972, p. xiv. For further
information on this subject, see J. M. Parry, The Spanish Theory of Empire
in the Sixteenth Century, Cambridge, 1940,
104 TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEAN Ry,

of Asian history’;? when the conceptual revolution of Moderp,
science and technology helped to consolidate Europe’s world hege.
mony.? The bourgeois disciplines which study non-European SOC?e.
ties reflect the deep contradictions articulating this unequal hjg.
torical encounter, for ever since the Renaissance the West hyq
sought both to subordinate and devalue other societies, and at the
same time to find in them clues to its own humanity. Although
modern colonialism is merely one moment in that long encounter,
the way in which the objectified understanding of these modern
disciplines has been made possible by and acceptable to thap
moment needs to be considered far more seriously than it has.

The notes that follow constitute an attempt to examine some of
the political conclusions of functional anthropology (African stud-
ies) and of orientalism (Islamic studies) in order to explore the ways
in which the European historical experience of subordinate non-
European peoples has shaped its objectification of the latter. I hope
that such a comparison will make somewhat clearer the kind of
determination exerted by the structure of imperial power on the
understanding of European disciplines which focus on dominated
cultures. Such an attempt is not without its dangers for someone
who is trained in only one of these disciplines, but it must be made
if we are to go beyond simplistic assertions or denials about the
relationship between social anthropology and colonialism. I should
stress that I am not concerned with all the doctrines or conclusions
of functional anthropology—or for that matter of orientalism.

What I propose to do in the rest of. the paper i1s to concentrate
on two general images of the institutionalised relationship between
rulers and ruled, objectified by the functional anthropologist and
the Islamic orientalist. As we shall see, the images are very different,
for the first typically stresses consent and the other repression in the
institutionalised rclationship between rulers and ruled. After sketch-
ing in these two images, I shall go on to indicate significant omis-
sions and simplifications that characterise each of them, and follow
this up with some more general theoretical observations concerning
what they have in common. I shall then turn to the wider historical
location of the two disciplines which, so 1 shall argue in my con-
clusion, help us to understand some of the ideological roots and
consequences of these images.

*Cf. K. M. Panikkar, Asia and Western Dominance, London, 1959.
'Cf. J. D. Bemal, Science in History, London, 1965, especially Part 4.
ALAL ASAD 105
II
[ begin b characterising what I call the functional anthropologist’s
sow Of political domination. - . '
“I eneral, the structure of traditional African states is represen-
nE of balance of powers, reciprocal obligations and value

ted in terms OL ; .
consensus—as 10 the following passage by Fortes and Evans-Prit-

Ch;riélatively stable political system in Africa represents a balance
between divergent interests. In [centralised political systems]
it is a balance between different parts of the administrative
organisation. The forces that maintain the supremacy of the
paramount ruler are opposed by the forces that act as a check
on his powers; [...] A general principle of great importance is
contained in these arrangements, which has the effect of giving
every section and every major interest of the society direct or
indirect representation in the conduct of government [...]
Looked at from another angle, the government of an African
state consists in a balance between power and authority on the
one side and obligation and responsibility on the other [...] The
structure of an African state implies that kings and chiefs rule
by consent.*
Echoes of the same view are also found in a comparatively recent
paper by P. C. Llovd, “The Political Structure of African King-
doms’:
The political elite represent, to a greater or lesser degree, the
interest of the mass of the people. In African kingdoms perma-
nent opposition groups within the political elite are not found [...]
A vote is never taken on any major issue, but all concerned
voice their interests and the king, summing up. gives a
decision which reflects the general consensus.”
This, then is the functional anthropological image of political dom-
ination in the so-called tribal world: an emphasis on the integrated
character of the body politic, on the reciprocal rights and obliga-
tions between rulers and ruled, on the consensual basis of the ruler’s
political authority and administration, and on the inherent efficiency
of the traditional system of government in giving every legitimate
Interest its due representation.
The orientalist’s image of political domination in the historic

‘M. Fortes and E. E. Evans-Pritchard, (eds.), African Political Systems,
London, 1940, pp. 11-12.

‘M. Banton, (ed.), Political Systems and the Distribution of Power, London,
1965, p. 76 and pp. 79-80.
106 TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEA N Rupg

Islamic world is very different. Here there is a tendency to see th
characteristic relationship between rulers and their subjects in lermg
of force and repression on the one side, and of submission, ing;s.
ference, even cynicism on the other. The following brief quotayjgy,
from Gibb’s essay “Religion and Politics in Christianity and Islap,»
illustrates the kind of view I am thinking of:
... [the governor’s] administrative regulations and exactions g
land, industry and persons, and the processcs resorted to by
[their] officers were regarded as arbitrary and without authority
in themselves, and directed only to the furthering of their
private interests. In the eyes of the governed, official ‘justice’
was no justice. The only authoritative law is that of Islam;
everything else is merely temporary (and more or less forced)
accommodating to the whims of a changing constellation of
political overlords.*
A similar kind of image underlies the following remarks by von
Grunebaum:
As an executive officer, thc [Islamicl ruler is unrestricted. The
absoluteness of his power was never challenged. The Muslim
liked his rulers terror-inspiring, and it seems to have been bon
ton to profess oneself awestruck when ushered into his
presence [...1 [The medieval Muslim] is frequently impatient
with his rulers and thinks little of rioting, but on the whole he
is content to let his princes play their game.”
The same author, tracing the political theories of Muslim canonical
jurists writes:
So the requirements of legitimate power had to be redefined with
ever greater leniency, until the low had been rcached and the
theoretical dream [of a civitas dei] abandoncd. The believer
was thought under obligation to obey whosoever held sway, be
his power de jure or merely de facto. No matter how cvil a
tyrant the actual ruler, no matter how offensive his conduct,
the subject was bound to loyal obedience.
He then proceeds, with the aid of further quotations to characterise
what he calls “that disillusionment bordering on cynicism with
which the Oriental is still inclined to view the political life™.
The essential features of this image are to be found in the pion-

‘J. H. Proctor, (ed.). Islam and International Relations, London, 1965, p. 12.
‘G. E. Von Gruncbaum, Islam. Essays in the Nature and Growth of a
Cultural Tradition, London, 1955, pp. 25-6.

*G. E. Von Grunebaum, Medieval Islam, Chicago, 1946, p. 168.
107
’]‘ALAL ASAD
., works of orientalism at the turn of the last century—as in this
qnge by Snouck Hurgronje: ’
passas rulers paid no more attention to the edicts of the fugaha, the
nglLiialists in law, thap suited them; these }ast in their turn,
were less and Jess obliged. to take tl}e requirements of practice
into account. S0 long as they refraxqu from preaching revolt
directly or indirectly against tl}e political rulers, t'h§y werc
ajlowed to criticise the institutions of state and society as
bitterly as they liked. In fact, the works on [religious law] are
rull of disparaging judgements on conditions of ‘the present day’.
What is justice in the eyes of princes and judges is but
injustice and tyranny...Most taxes which are collected by the
government are illegal extortions...; the legally prescribed
revenue...is collected in an illegal manner and spent wrongly...
Muslim rulers, in the eyes of the fugaha, are not the vice regents
of the Prophet as the first four Caliphs had been, but wielders
of a material power which should only be submitted to out of
fear of still worse to follow, and because even a wrongful
order is at least better than complete disorder...[In fact in
Islamic history] the people obeyed their rulers as the wielders
of power, but they rcvered the ulama [learned men of religion]
as the teachers of truth and in troubled times took their lead
from them...In this way. the [religious] law, which in practicc
had to make ever greater concessions to the use and custom
of the people and the arbitrariness of their rulers, nevertheless
retained a considerable influence on the intellectual life of the
Muslims.?
So the orientalist’s image may be characterised briefly as follows:
an emphasis on the absolute power of the ruler, and the whimsical,
generally illegitimate nature of his demands; on the indifference or
involuntary submission on the part of the ruled; on a somewhat
irrational form of conflict in which sudden, irresponsible urges to
riot are met with violent repression; and, finally, an emphasis on the
overall inefficiency and corruption of political lifc.

I
The historical realities, of course, are more complicated than these
views, But the remarkable thing in both cascs is the direction in
which the simplification occurs.

‘Selected Works of C. Snouck Hurgronje, edited by G. H. Bousquet and
J. Schacht, Leiden, 1957. pp. 265 and 267.
108 TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEAN gy,
B

In Africa, a basic political reality since the end of the Nineteey
century was the pervasive presence of a massive colonial poe,
the military conquest of the continent by European capitalist cou;
tries, and the subsequent creation, definition and maintenance
the authority of innumerable African chiefs to facilitate the admip.
istration of empire.’® Everywhere Africans were subordinated in
varying degree, to the authority of European administrators. Apg
although according to functionalist doctrine “Every anthropologig,
writes of the people he works among as he finds them”,** the typicy)
description of local African structures totally ignored the politicg)
fact of European coercive power and the African chief’s ultimate
dependence on it.

For example Fortes’s The Dynamics of Clanship among the Tal-
lensi describes Tale political structure with only a few brief ambig-
uous references to British rule in the introduction and then again in
the final section of the final chapter. Yet in a paper published seven
years earlier (“Culture Contact as a Dynamic Process”) he had
noted that the local District Commissioner among the Tallensi was;

6 miles from a police station, and some 30 miles from a pcrma-

nent administrative headquarters. The political and legal

behaviour of the Tallensi, both commoner and chief, is as
strongly conditioned by the ever-felt presence of the District

Commissioner as by their own traditions{...] The District

Commissioner is in direct communication with the chiefs. To

them he gives his orders and states his opinions. They are the

organs by which he acts upon the rest of the community, and

conversely, by which the community reacts to him.*?
In spite of all this, Fortes had seen the District Commissioner essen-
tially as a “Contact Agent” between European and native cultures,
and not as the local representative of an imperial system. It was
this non-political perception of a profoundly political fact which
led him to assert that the District Commissioner was not regarded
‘““as an imposition upon the traditional constitution from without.
With all that he stands for, he is a corporate part of native life in
this area”.

One might suggest that, in spite of methodological statements to

"For a summary of these developments with special reference to East Africa
(including the southern Sudan) see chapter 11 of L. Mair's Primitive
Government, London, 1962.

L. Mair, op. cit., p. 31.

YMethods of Study of Culture Contact in Africa, International African
Institute Memorandum XV, London, 1938, pp. 634.
109
paLAL ASAD . .
rary functional anthrop.o}oglsls were reglly not analysing
liiical systems but writing .the ideologically loaded con-
: history of African states prior to the European conquest.
Stltutlonal irly help to explain the following remarks by the
. would certainly nelip P g ren y
This v of African Political Systems: “‘Several contributors have
odlwl:;cd the changes in the political systems they investigated
dcs-crﬁ have taken place as a result of European conquest and rule.
Whli do not emphasise this side of the subject it is because all con-
gj.;vutors are more interested in anthropological thar} ix} afiminis-
(rative problems”.'? One rcason why developments in indigenous
olitical structures due to European conquest and rule‘were seen as
«:administrative problems” by European zfnthropologlsts was that
real political forces ip all .thc?ir complexnt.y formed the primary
objects of administrative thinking and mampulatton' on the part of
European colonial officials. Yet the result of identifying the con-
stitutional ideology of ‘centralised” African politics with the struc-
tural reality meant not analysing the intrinsic contradictions of
wer and material interest—a form of analysis which could be
carried out only by starting from the basic reality of present colo-
nial domination.

Even when later anthropologists began to refer to the colonial
presence as part of the local structure they generally did so in such
a way as to obscure the systematic character of colonial domination
and to mask the fundamental contradictions of interest inherent in
the system of Indirect Rule.!* The role of new political-economic
forces brought about by European colonialism (labelled “Social
Change™) were usually not thought to be directly relevant to an
understanding of the dynamic of African political structures opera-
ting within the colonial system of Indirect Rule (labelled “Political
Anthropology”).

With regard to the orientalist’s view of typical Islamic political
rule there are several negative features [ want to point to. The first
1S that no serious attempt was made until relatively recently!® to

the COﬂt

:M. Fortes and E. E. Evans-Pritchard, op. cit., p. 1.

For example L. A. Fallers in his well-known study of the Basoga of
Uganda, Bantu Bureaucracy, (Cambridge, 1956) focuses on the way in
which “co-existence in a society of corporate lineages with political in-
stitutions of the state type [introduced by the colonial government] makes
for strain and instability” (p. 17)—an essentially Parsonian problem. He is
not concerned with the colonial system as such, but with role conflicts
inherent in the positions of African headman and civil-servant chief, and
European District officers.

“An example is I. Lapidus’s excellent monograph Muslim Cities in the Later
Middle Ages, Cambridge, Mass., 1967.
110 TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEAN RULE

explore in detail the process of mutual accommodation between
Islamic rulers and their subjects—as noted, surprisingly enough, ,
Gibb, who has been so ready elsewhere to project the orientaliy
image of Islamic rule:
We know, in fact, exceedingly little of the inner relations betweep
the government and the people... It can scarcely be doubted
that government, in its administrative aspect, was not merely
a set of forms imposed upon the people by the will of the
conqueror, but an organism intimatecly associated with the
structure of society and the character and ideas of the
governcd, and that there was a constant interplay between
governors and governed. It is necessary to clear the ground of
the misconceptions engendcred by the abuse of European terms
such as despotism and autocracy, and to submit all the
traditional organs and usages of government to rc-cxamination,
in order to bring out the underlying ideas and relations, and thc
principles which guided their working.!*
But something that we do know a little about is the populist tradi-
tion in Muslim societies as expressed in thc repeated popular re-
volts'™ deriving their legitimation from Islamic ideology, as well as
in the popular distrust of aristocratic institutions'® (which is by no
means the same thing as “oricntal cynicism in relation to political
life’’). Most oricntalists have tended to sec these revolts as evidence
of disorder and dccay rather than as the re-affirmation of a populist
tradition in Islamic politics.'> Why, instcad of emphasising disorder
and repression and explaining this by reference to an intrinsic flaw
in Islamic political thcory (usually invidiously contrasted with
Greek and Christian political theory) did oricntalists not attempt
to account for the continuing vitality of a populist tradition within
changing socio-economic circumstances? More important, why,

“H. A. R. Gibb and H. Bowen, Islumic Society and the West, Vol. 1, Part
1, London, 1950, p. 9.

'“Arab historiography from Taban to Jabarti is full of information on these
revolts. Useful summaries of revolts in the carly period of Islam are avail-
able in W. Montgomery Walt, Islam and the Integraiion of Society, Lon-
don. 1961. For a work on working-class organisation and rebellion in
medieval urban Islamic society, sce C. Cahen, Mouvement Populaires ci
Autonomisme Urbain dans I' Asie Musulmane du Moyen Age, Leiden, 1961.
But in both works there is little discussion of the dialectical relationship
between political-economic expcrience and ideological response—although
Montgomery Watt makes some attempt in that direction.

"This point s interestingly made by M. G. S. Hodgson, “Islam and Image™”,
in History of Religions, Vol. I, Winter, 1964,

"Scc E. Abrahamian. “The Crowd in Iranian Politics 1905-1953" (Past and
Present, no. 41, 1968) for an attempt at describing thc active rationality of
TALAL ASAD 1
eneralising about thc cssence of Islamic political rule, did
when glists not recognise that their textual sources represented the
Orlcr‘utlllar moral stance of a mobile class of religious literati-cum-
partl‘;ams with a nced for political orderliness in particular periods
Ir}crcrc:at social upheaval? Finally, why did oricntalists make no
Ottegmpt to analyse the way in which devcloping class relations
i’ithin Jlate medicval Islam were affected by 'its changing commer-
cial position vis-a-vis E}lropc and Asna.(es.pecnally under the impact
of Europcan mercantilism) and t}lc significance 9f suc.h devg:lop-
ments for relations between Islamic rulers and their subjects?*

v
Decspite the great diffcrences in the images I have becn talking
about, onc pre-disposition that both disciplines appear to have
shared is the reluctance to talk explicitly and systematically about
the implications of European development for the political systems
of non-European societics. There are other parallels also, in the
orientation of the two disciplines, to which I now turn.

The functional anthropologist stresscd consent and legitimacy as
important clements in the political systems of relatively small homo-
gencous ethnic groups in Africa whose history was assumed in most
cascs to be inaccessible, and which were seen and rcpresented as
intcgrated sysicms. In general he equated cmpirical work with field-
work, and therefore tendcd to define the theoretical boundaries of
the system undcr investigation in terms of practical fieldwork. His
interest in a-historical, ‘traditional’ systems (set within an imperial
framework which was taken for granted) lcd him to emphasise the
unifying function of common religious values and symbols, and of
‘agc-old’ custom and obligations in the relationship between tribal
rulers and ruled. Where the anthropologist was faced with availablc

political crowds in the modern Islamic world. (I am indebted to Peter
Worsley for this reference.) “While European journalists have invariably
portrayed oricntal crowds as ‘xenophobic mobs’ hurling insults and bricks
at Western embassies.” observes Abrahamian, “local conservatives have
frequenily denounced them as “social scum’ in the pay of the foreign hand,
and radicals have often stereotyped them as ‘the people’ in action. For all,
the crowd has been an abstraction, whether worthy of abusc, fear, praisc,
or even of humour, but not a subject of study.” (p. 184). It seems that
sometimes there is little to distinguish the attitudes of European journalists
from that of orientalists.

“Social and economic history of the Tslamic world is in its infancy (see
M. A. Cook (ed.). Studics in the Economic History of the Middle East,
London, 1970)—an indication of the extent to which idealist explanations
in tzrms of “the religious essence of Islam” have been in vogue among
oricntalists. This is not unrelated to the fact that orientalists have typically
worked on composed literary texts and not in archives. See also R. Owen's
112 TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEAN RULg

historical evidence relating to conqucst—as among the Zuly ang
Ngoni of southern Africa, or among the Fulani-Hausa of Northery
Nigeria—he was of course aware of the importance of force apg
repression in African political history. But the functionalist per.
spective made it difficult for him to absorb the full significance of
such events into his analysis and so they were generally seen as pre.
ludes to the establishment of integrated on-going African politicg)
systems which constituted his principal object of enquiry. It is com.
mon knowledge that this mode of analysis in social anthropology
derives from Durkheimian sociology, which never really developed
an adequate framework for understanding historical political pro.
cesses. The interesting thing is that for a long time the social anthro.
pologist writing about African political systems felt no need to
overcome these theoretical limitations. The role of force in the
maintenance of African systems of political domination (or of the
colonial system of which they were a part) received virtually no
systematic attention. The primary focus was usually on the juridi-
cal definition of rights and duties between the chief and his sub-
jects.?!

At this point it should bc noted that the orientalist’s image of
political rule in Islamic society covers a historical span of several
hundred years, from the middle ages (the so-called formative period
of Islam) until the eighteenth century—a period of economic devel-
opment and decline, of conquests and dynastic wars, and rule by
successive military elites, notably Mamluke and Ottoman. The
orientalist, concerned to present a relatively coherent picturc of
typical rule for such an epoch, could scarcely leave the element of
force unmentioned. But the interesting point is that the element of
force is not only mentioned, it is made the defining feature of the
total political picture, which is then sometimes contrasted with the

critical review of The Cambridge History of Islam in The Journal of Inter-
disciplinary History (in press).

“'This is also true of Gluckman, who is usually cited as being one of the first
anthropologists to have dealt directly with problems of force and conflict in
traditional African societies. Gluckman’s view of conflict has typically been
a junistic, legalistic one, whence his particular interest in “discrepant and
conflicting rules of succession” which he sees as the primary focus of tradi-
tional African rebellions” (See his Introduction to Order and Rebellion in
Tribal Africa, London, 1963). For this reason he fails to mrake an analytic
distinction between ‘popular’ armed uprisings and dynastic rivalries. The
question as to whether a particular internal military challenge against the
state's authority is rooted in (actual or potential) class consciousness is
more basic than the task of labelling it ‘rebellion’ or ‘revolution’. His failure
to appreciate this helps to explain why Gluckman paid no attention to the
question of African popular rebellions against European colonial rule.
TALAL ASAD 113
dly different character of political rule in Medieval Christen-
allegeC> ion being that since Islamic society lacked a t
(The suggestion being that since Islamic society lacked a true
om. stion of political authority, i.e., of political domination based
Congcral consent. it was inevitable that force should play such a
on 81 ole in the Tslamic political order).*
Cc{}-hc orientalist concerned to generalise was here faced with a
thcorctical problem with which the functioqal anthropologi.st hqs
not been much troubled. For the anthropologist reared on a-histori-
cal Durkheimian soc:ology, society .and po!lty were usually coter-
minous. The horizontal links of ‘tribal society’ were conveniently
definable in terms of the vertical links (whether hierarchical or seg-
mentary) of ‘tribal political organisation’. But for the orientalist
concerned with Islam there was hardly ever such a convergence
after the de facto break up of the Abbasid Empire. So in his desire
(o characterise a distinctive ‘Islamic societly’. on the basis of a con-
siderablec body of textual material relating to many eventful cen-
turies, he is led to adopt a partly functionalist perspective: for the
emphasis on the integrative role of Islam as a religion is reminiscent
of the social anthropologist’s treatment of the integrative function
of ‘tribal’ religious values in many African political systems. Isla-
mic history thus collapscs into an essentialist synchrony. for much
the same rcasons as African history does in the hands of the func-
tional anthropologist.

Since the orientalist is concerned by definition with ‘a society’ of
much complexity, hc must stress what may be called a form of
horizontal integration: the fact that Muslims seemed bound to-
gether, despite their subjection to different sccular rulers, by their
common loyalty to Islam as a religious system—an Islam which
was interpreted by, and indecd embodicd in, an ‘international’
community of learned men—the ulama, the sufi shaikhs and so
forth. This horizontal religious consensus is then opposed by the
orientalist to a vertical political dissensus, in which “everything elsc
1s merely temporary and more or less forced accommodation to the
whims of a changing constcllation of political overlords”. This con-
trast between an intcgrated Islamic society and a fragmented Isla-
mic polity has encouraged orientalists to oppose the supposedly
universal authority of the sharia (Islamic law) to the changing con-
stellation of political regimes and practices, often accompanied by

“See Gibb in Proctor (ed.), op. cit.
114 TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEA N RULE

violence—an opposition with which the medieval Muslim Writer
were themselves much preoccupied. In fact it may be argueq tha
insofar as the modern orientalists can be said to have an explicy
interpretive theory, this is largely quarried from the historicyy,
conditioned writings of the great medieval Muslim theorists—jy,
Khaldun, Mawardi, ibn Taymiyya. The result is a remarkable byy,.
ring between historical object and interpreting subject.

My suggestion here is that ultimately the functional anthropol,,.
gist and the orientalist were concerned with the same theoreticy]
question: what holds society together? How is order achieved o
destroyed? The former, viewing ‘tribal’ society as defined by (nor.
mative) polity, focussed on the consensual relations between Afri.
can rulers and ruled. The latter, viewing sharia-defincd society ag
fragmented by (secular) polity, focused on the repressive relations
between Islamic rulers and ruled.

\
I have been trying to argue that both functional anthropology and
orientalism, by selecting certain phenomena, by not asking certain
questions, by approaching history in a certain way, by taking the
problem of social order as their basic theoretical concern. tended to
project characteristic images of the political structure of the non-
European societies they studied. I am now going to suggest that the
historical formation of these European disciplines helps us under-
stand better why the selection and omission occured as thev did.

What I want to emphasise here is this: that in contrast to the
modem discipline of Islamic orientalism. functional anthropology
was born after the advent of European colonialism in the societics
studied—after, that is, the First World War when the Pax Britannica
had made intensive and long-term fieldwork a practicable proposi-
tion.

Tribal rulers could be viewed as representative partly because the
anthropologist in the field coming from a crisis-ridden Europe, ex-
perienced them as conforming to ‘traditional’ political norms (as
these had come to be underwritten by a paternalist colonial admin-
istration), Colonial ideology generally stressed the essential con-
tinuity, and therefore the integrity, of African political cultures
under colonial rule. The anthropologist, it may be argued, was pre-
pared to accept the total colonial system (while quarrelling with
particular colonial policies in relation to ‘his tribe’) because he was
impressed by its obvious success in maintaining itself and in secur-
ing an apparently benign form of local order within the ethnic
115

TALAL ASAD

he observed so intimately. He was concerned, as the Euro-
grovP dministrators for their own reasons were equally concerned,
pear amw&ﬁng subordinate African cultures, and was therefore
with ged to accept the colonial definition of African polities, and to
t definition in terms of consent. (Consider to what extent
this image has begun to b}'eak 40wn with decolonisation in the *60s.)
The point is that un}xke nineteenth century anthropo}ogy. the
objectification of functional anthropologists occured within the
context of routine colonialism, of an imperial structure of power
already established rather than one in process of vigorous expansion
:n which political force and contradiction are only too obvious.
Orientalism belongs to a different historical moment, and its
methods, assumptions and pre-occupations are rooted in the Euro-
n experience of Islam prior to the advent of Western colonialism
in the Middle East. Among the cultural forebears of the modern
orientalists were the medieval Christian polemicists who sought to
defend the values of Christendom against the threat of Islam.?
Although modern orientalists rarely engage in overt propaganda,
and have adopted a more secular and detached tone, they have still
been concerned to contrast Islamic society and civilisation with their
own, and to show in what the former has been lacking. In particular,
they have been concerned to cmphasise the absence of ‘liberty’,
‘progress’ and ‘humanism’ in classic Islamic societies, and in general
to relate the reasons for this alleged absence to the religious essence
of Islam.?¢ Thus in contrast to the social anthropologist whose in-
tention has often been to show that the rationality of African cul-
tures is comprehensible to (and thercfore capable of being accom-
modated by) the West, the orientalist has been far more occupied
with emphasising the basic irrationality of Islamic history.
Norman Daniel, in his valuable study /slam, Europe and Empire,

restate tha

“Sec N. Daniel, Islam and the West, The Making of an Image, Edinburgh,
1960; and R. W. Southern, Western Views of Islam in the Middle Ages,

_Cambridge, Mass., 1962.

“Thus the influential orientalist von Grunebaum: “It is cssential to realise
that Muslim oivilisation is a cultural entity that does not share our primary
aspirations. It is not vitally interested in analytical self-understanding, and
it is even less interested in the structural study of other cultures, cither as
an cnd in itself or as a means toward clearer understanding of its own
character and history. If this observation were to be valid merelv for con-
temporary Islam, onc might be inclined to connect it with the profoundly
disturbed state of Islam, which does not permit it 1o look beyond itself
unless forced to do so. But as it is valid for the past as well, one may
perhaps seek to oonnect it with the basic antihumanism of this civilisation,
that is, the determined refusal to accept man to any extent whatever as
the arbiter or the measure of things, and the tendency to be satisfied with
116 TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEAN Ry

(Edinburgh, 1966) has traced the European cxpcrience of Isia._
and especially of the aggressive Ottoman Empire of the sixteeny,
and seventeenth centuries—which helped to fashion its image of the
tyrannical Islamic polity in the nineteenth century. He suggests thay
the three most important elements in this experience were fear of
Turkish power, the absence of a Muslim gentry and the subordinae
position of Muslim women. “To the mind of aristocratic Europe™.
Daniel writes, “tyranny was common to all three—to the extcrna]
threat, to a polity internally servile and to an enslavement of
women. As time passed, there was increasing communication with
eastern countries and gradually, as the centres of power in the
world shifted, fear gave way to patronage”. (p. 11). But the image
of a tyrannical Ottoman structure, as Daniel gocs on to show,
remained unquestioned throughout the nineteenth century, and be-
came reinforced through the special notion of Islamic misrule —ip
the double sense of incfficient government and fiscal oppression
(both, he might have added, grave sins in the eyes of a sclf-con.
sciously progressive capitalist Europe).

It was towards the end of the nineteenth century on the eve of
massive imperial expansion, that the foundations of modern oricn-
lalism were laid.?® The literary, philological method of his study
(based on chronicles and treatises acquirced from Islamric countries
and deposited in Europecan libraries) meant that thc orientalist had
little need for direct contact with the people whose historical culture
he objectified, and no necessary interest in its continuity. In so far
as he addressed himself to the contemporary condition of Islamic
peoples, he saw in it a rcflection of his idealist vision of Islamic
history—rcpression, corruption and political decay.

Most members of the European middle classes beforc the First
World War viewed the imperialist ambitions of their governments
as natural and desirable.*" In keeping with these attitudes the opin-
ions that prevailed among them regarding prospective or recent
victims of colonial conqucst were usually highly unflattering. This

truth as the description of mental structures, or, in other words, with
psvchological truth.” Modern Islam, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1962, p. 40.
For an cxtremely intcresting response by a Muslim intellectual see Moham-
mcd Arkoun, “L’lIslam modernec vu par le professeur G. E. von Grune-
vaum” in Arabica, vol. x1, 1964.

“Cf. C. ). Adams, “Islamic Religion™” (Part I), in Middle East Studies Asso-
ciation Bulletin, vol. 4, no. 3, October 15, 1970, p. 3.

“Cf. H. Gollwitzer, Europe in the Age of Imperialism: 1880-1914, London,
1969. For a study of British public opinion in relation to events preceding
the British occupation of Egypt in 1882, see H. S. Deighton’s excellent
article, “The Impact on Egypt on Britain”, in P. M. Holt, (ed.), Political
TALAL ASAD 117

s as true of Asia as it was of Africa in the latter half of the nine-

h century.”” In this period, influential writers such as Ranke
teent . . .

d Burkehardt, Count Gobineau apd Benan. alth.ough. in d1§agree-
aﬂem on important matters, were significantly united in their con-
g;mptuous views of Islam.?® In this respect, their perspective was
not profoundly different from th'z.rt of the founders of modern orien-
ralism—e.g. Wellhausen and Noéldeke,”* Becker and Snouck Hur-
gronje.” It would have been surprising had it been othem{lsc.
[ eonc Caetani, an Italian aristocrat, was exceptional among orien-
ralists in condemning European colonial expansion into Islamic
countries.’* In his commitment to empire and the White Man’s
Burden, Snouck Hurgronje was far morc typical.*?

The orientalist’s image of repressive relations between Islamic
rulers and their subjects is thus rooted not only in the historic
Christian experience of aggressive Islam (an experience the West
had never had in relation to Africa),’® but more importantly in the
bourgeois European evaluation of ‘unprogressive’ and ‘fanatical’
Islam that required to be directly controlled for reasons of empire.

As recent rulers of vast Muslim populations, the imperialist rulers
could attempt to legitimise their own governing position with argu-
ments supplied by the orientalists: that Islamic rule has historically
been oppressive rule (colonial rule is by contrast humane), that
Islamic political theory recognises the legitimacy of the effective
de facto ruler (colonial rule is manifestly better than the corruption,
inefficiency and disorder of pre-colonial rule), that political domina-
tion in Muslim lands is typically external to the essential articula-
tion of Islamic social and religious life (therefore no radical damage
has been done to Islam by conquering it as its central political
tradition remains unbroken).®*

It is therefore at this ideological level, I would suggest, that the

_and Social Change in Modern Egypt, London, 1968,

“Cf. V. G. Kiermman. The Lords of Human Kind, London, 1969, and the
_documentary collection edited by P. D. Curtin, op. cit.

*Cf. J. W. Fuck, “Islam as an Historical Problem in European Historio-
graphy Since 1800” in B. Lewis and P. M. Holt, (eds.), Historians of the
_Middle East, London, 1962,

*J. W. Fiick, op. cit.

‘]Cgf6 2J .—J. Waardenburg, L'Islam dans le miroir de I'occident, The Hague,

1. W. Fiick, op. cit. For further details on Prince Caetani, see A. Bausani,
‘l‘gssl_:;mic Studies in Italy in the XIX-XX cc.” in East and West, vol. VIII,

"With respect to Holland’s colonial role in Indonesia, Snouck Hurgronje
wrote: “Il ne s’agit que d’eveiller une prise de conscience...considerant que
l'independence de la vie spirituelle et la libération de son développment de
118 TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEAN Ry

two objectifications of political rule again converge. For the orijey,.
talist’s construct, by focusing on a particular image of the Islam;.
tradition, and the anthropologist’s, by focusing on a particuly,
image of the African tradition, both helped to justify colonial dom,.
ination at particular moments in the power encounter between the
West and the Third World. No doubt, this ideological role was per.
formed by orientalism and by functional anthropology largely un.
wittingly. But the fact remains that by refusing to discuss the way,
in which bourgeois Europe had imposed its power and its own
conception of the just political order on African and Islamic
peoples, both disciplines were basically reassuring to the colonia)
ruling classes.

de toute pression matérielle est I'une des plus grandes bénédictions de notre
civilisation. Nous nous sentons pousses par un z¢le missionaire de |a
meilleure sorte afin de faire participer le monde musulman 24 oette satis-
faction.” This was what ultimately justified colonialism: “Notre domina-
tion doit se justifier par l'accession des indigénes a une civilisation plus
élevée. Ils doivent acquérir parmi les peuples sous notre direction la place
que méritent leurs qualités naturelles.”” Quoted in J.—J. Waardenburg,
op. cit., pp- 101 and. 102. See also W. F. Wertheim, “Counter-insurgency
research at the turn of the century—Snouck Hurgronje and the Acheh
War”, in Sociologische Gids, vol. XIX, September/December 1972, (I am
grateful to Ludowik Brunt for this last reference.)

“For a discussion about the various elements that went into the making of
European views about Africa at the end of the eighteenth century and the
first half of the nineteenth, see P. D. Curtin, The Image of Africa, London,
1965. According to Curtin this earlier image was on the whole far more
favourable than the one prevalent in the latter part of the nineteenth cen-
tury—i.c. on the eve of the Partition of Africa.

“The orientalist’s image is still very much alive and still rooted in a structurc
of sentiments remarkably akin to that displayed by the founders. (“Al-
though there are exceptions,” observes C. J. Adams in his survey article,
“in the cases of individuals or particular fields of study (Sufism, for ex-
ample, or Islamic Art and Architecture), to be sure, on the whole one is
struck with the negative tone—or if negative be too strong a word, with the
tone of personal disenchantment—that runs through the majority of [orien-
talist] writing about Muslim faith.” Op. cit., p. 3). I attribute this persis-
tence to the fact that despite profound changes in the world since the late
nineteenth century, the power encounter between the West and the Mus-
lim countries continues to express itself typically in the form of hostile con-
frontations (for reasons too involved to discuss here) and the methods and
techniques of orientalism as a discipline, with its basic reliance on philo-
logical analysis, remain unaffected. These facts and not mere ‘excellence’
account for the continuity noted by Adams: ‘““In fact, basic ninefeenth-
century Islamic scholarship was so competent and exhaustive that it has
intimidated many later scholars from at‘tem?ting re-examinations of funda-
mental issues. Much of what the pioneers of Islamology wrote has scarcely
been improved upon, not to say superseded; it has merely been transmitted
and continues to be the most authoritative scholarship we possess in many
fields.” (loc. cit.). Of how many other historical or social science disciplines
can such a statement be made?
Part 2: Case Studies
SOCIAL ANTHROPOLOGY AND INDIRECT RULE. THE
COLONIAL ADMINISTRATION AND ANTHROPOLOGY
IN EASTERN NIGERIA: 1920-1940.

Helen Lackner

Any attempt to look at the role anthropologists could play at pres-
ent and in coming years should, it seems to me, start by analysing
the history and development of anthropology since its origin as a
separate discipline. Going back to the records of the 1930s and
1940s, it becomes clear that the concern of anthropology was then
to be of use, directly or indirectly, to the colonial administration;
that, therefore, anthropologists then saw their work as relevant to
the world they lived in. When we now read these books, many of
which are classics, we should be aware of the context in which they
were written and read them in this light.

I cannot pretend to cover this vast field, or to analyse the history
and the theory of anthropology; I merely wish to look in some de-
tail at a few problems and to suggest some directions towards which
further research could be directed. This is a very tentative and frag-
mentary attempt at examining the development of social anthro-
pology in Eastern Nigeria during a period of considerable political
agitation, which was also a time when British social anthropology
was expanding vastly in cooperation with the policies of the colo-
nial administration; anthropology was being accepted by colonial-
1sm and anthropologists were being emploved by the administration.

Within the theoretical and historical framework that is here
broadly outlined, this study may contribute a further element to-
wards explaining the emergence of Biafran Nationalism, by showing

‘A first draft of this paper was presented as a dissertation to London
University in 1971.
124 EASTERN NIGERIA 19)()_, %4

how the administrative system during the colonial period gyq
atically exacerbated all possible contradictions between the .. -
colonial structure of the South East and the forms of administral- )
imported from the North whose pre-colonial political system wasl(?“
contrast with that of the south; the hierarchical authoritarian Strul
ture of the North was the model for indirect rulc in the Ibg arey
which was acephalous and fragmented. These contradictions we,
systematically made worse throughout the Colonial period and con%
tinued under the neo-colonialist administration that took over afte,
“Independence” in 1960. It would be interesting to do more re.
search on this point. This might show how artificial ‘‘borderg»
created by imperialism and the forms of administration withj,
them have affected pre-colonial nations, either by “integrating”
them into wider frameworks (Biafra in Nigeria) or by splitting them
between many states, (Manding in West Africa); such problems
raised by colonial policies bring up the National question. It i
worth finding out what role, if any, was played by anthropological
studies in the determination of these policies.

The Creation of “Nigeria”.
The end of the legitimate slave trade (1807) in Nigeria meant very
radical changes in the trading pattern. The British continued to
trade with the same pecople, but the commodities were now palm-oil
and ivory. After 1886, the trade was monopolised by the Royal
Niger Company, which, after the 1885 Berlin Conference had ac-
knowledged Britain’s claim to the area, was given power by Britain
“to administer, make treaties, levy customs and trade in all terri-
tories in the basin of the Niger and its affluents™.? At that time, the
Delta was declared “The Qil Rivers Protectorate” (1885). Over the
next few vears, Britain extended her control over the area through
traders and the establishment of consuls; when, in 1893, the Protcc-
torate was cxtended to the hinterland, the whole area was renamed
the Niger Coast Protectorate and in 1900 it became the Protectorate
of Southern Nigeria. Meanwhile Lagos had been annexed as a
colony in 1861 and in 1906 was amalgamated with the South to be-
come the Colony and Protectorate of Southern Nigeria. The North
had in 1900 become the Protectorate of Northern Nigeria when the
British Government took over from the Royal Niger Company. In
1914 Lugard amalgamated the two areas to form the Colony and
Protectorate of Nigeria.

The way in which this country was formed was due far more to

*J. S. Coleman: Nigeria, Background to Nationalism, p. 41.
HELEN LACKNER -

| than (o interna.tl pressures. By ¥he time of a{llalgamation
exterPe  as an artificial entity with no internal cohesion on which
“ngcnaa unified state: the North was composed of centralised
to base Emirates whose organisation had given rise to Lugard’s
ISIa-mlct Rule and the South East was made up of the remnants of
[nd?cmcr decentralised trading Statcs whose very structures had
the Odesu'oyed by the British®. The areas had previously been ad-
l;b,ﬁrilstcred in different ways because British interests in the North
and the South were divergent. Most of the country had been taken
over during the Scramble: pressurc on Britain’s trade froxp Frgnge
and Germany tilted the balance in favour of those forces in Britain
who supported full-scale colonisation; this indicated the defeat of
those who belicved that trade was possible without neccssarily
being accompanicd by occupation and administration of territory.

Despite amalgamation the North and the South remained separ-
ate entities and were administered as distinct provinces; the unifi-
cation of administration was a slow and unthought process :

Although the broad principles of the native administration

system were slowly extended from the north to thc south, the

diffcrent policics and conceptions of colonial administration

which had evolved in cach of the two Protectorates during the

fourteen years of their separate cxistence continued to dominate

official thought and action®.

Previous to amalgamation more thought had been given to the
administration of the North than to that of the South. This mcant that
later, the higher ranks of the administration in the united Nigeria
werc dominated by officers whose main experience and allegiance
was to the North and who were unaware of thc fundamental differ-
ences between the North and the South. Such men decided on poli-
cies for the South and, not surprisingly thcy madc some decisions
which had unsatisfactory results.

What were the main events in British Nigeria between amalga-
mation and the Sccond World War?

The first Governor was Sir Frederick Lugard (1914-19) who in-
troduced to thc South a version of Indirect Rule modelled on that
operating in the North: Native Courts and Native Authorities were
introduced in the South in 1914 and 1916 respectively. Lugard
wanted to unify the administration of the country by creating the

“For an excellent account of the history of the Niger Delta in the pre-
British period, see K. O. Dike: Trade and Politics in the Niger Delta
1830-1885.

'J. 8. Coleman, ibid., p. 46.
126 EASTERN NIGERIA 19204 4

same institutions everywhere. Apart from the two just Mentiop

he immediately proceeded to investigate the possibilities for thew'
troduction of direct taxation in the South. This proved feasible".l‘
some parts, but seemed inadvisable in the East, because of wh;n
the Administration termed the *“‘backwardness” of the Ibo. l

The next Governor, Sir Hugh Clifford (1919-25) had a differey,
interpretation of “Indirect Rule” from Lugard’s and spent hjs time
consolidating institutions rather than introducing new ones. Dy
his term of office, the situation in the East was investigated, pe,
cause, at that time already, it secmed clearly unsatisfactory®, T,
report made many recommendations which at that time were poy
implemented but were returned to ten years later after the Womep'g
War. In 1925 Sir Graeme Thomson succeeded Clifford and withoy
much consultation, decided to extend direct taxation in the East i
the form of a poll tax to be levied on adult males. Assessment of
the population for tax was begun in 1927 and caused fewer distur.
bances than had been expected. However many precautions were
taken in 1928 when the tax was to be collected for the first time.
The Government had concentrations of troops and police every-
where in case of need. In fact that year the tax was collected with
little difficulty. But before the Government had found time to con-
gratulate itself on such a success, things went wrong.

In 1929, which was a bad year in many ways, the slump started
affecting the palm-oil prices, and thus the general standard of living
in the East. It was also becoming apparent to the people that the
introduction of taxation had brought few if any benefits, despite the
claims made by the Administration in their pre-taxation propa-
ganda. A rumour developed in the East that women were also to be
taxed and this was confirmed when one particular Warrant Chief
Okugo counted womcn and children when assessing his area. This
incident started off what came to be known as the “Women’s War’’
or the ““Aba Riots”, in which thousands of women in the East
fought the Administration®. They were primarily concerned with
the destruction of the Native Courts and the Warrant Chief system.

‘See the Reports by Grier and Tomlinson in 1922 and 1923 on Policy in the
Eastern Region.

*The most detailed published account of the Women’s War is in M. Perham,
Native Administration in Nigeria, pp. 206-220. The Report of the Second
Commission of Enquiry gives enormous amounts of detailed information
on what happened, how and why; it is by far the most comprehensive
document on the subject. “Report of the Commission of Enquiry appointed
to inquire into the disturbances in the Calabar and Owerri provinces,
December 1929, Sessional Paper no. 28 of 1930, Government of Nigeria.
HELEN LACKNER 2
foreign institutions which had been imposed on the area re-
otally of local traditions. The women protested against taxation
g“'dlcss fall in palm-oil prices. The war lasted almost three weeks
ang 3:: Government had to call in troops to bring it to an end. They
an and killed large numbers of women.
Shgrthis event considerably affected the Colonial Administration and
.« officials were thoroughly shocked by it. First, it was an indication
lt: the total failure of the policies they had adopted to administer
fhc area and thus demanded radical changes in outlook. Second, a
long-lasting revolt by thousands of WOMEN (anywhere) who more-
over were neither accompanied nor led by men was a totally un-
heard of and outrageous phenomenon for a colonial Government, a
male chauvinist institution par excellence; it therefore called for
urgent investigation to ensure that such an outrage be not repeated.
Two Commissions of Enquiry were set up to discover the causes of
the war and to make recommendations, the second of which
went thoroughly into the background of these events. The contra-
dictions which were brought to light by the Women’s War are di-
rectly relevant to the theme of this study: —the dogmatic introduc-
tion of Indirect Rule from the North into the area without any
previous attempt at either estimating its suitability or adapting it to
the specific conditions of the South-East;—the total ignorance of
the Ibo’s social, political and economic structures. The discovery of
all these failures induced the government to develop its interest in
anthropological studies. We shall first look at the problematic of

Indirect Rule and its development in Nigeria.

Indirect Rule
Indirect Rule as a form of colonial administration arose as an
answer to a combination of factors. The British were faced with the
problem of administering vast expanses of conquered territories
throughout the planet with little money (because London’s colonial
policy at that period refused to spend much on administration) and
few men. Added to this, their previous experience in India had been
in centralised societies, ruled more or less autocratically by princes.
Northern Nigeria fitted easily into the pattern since it was com-
posed of Islamic Emirates, with Emirs who had considerable
authority and a clear hierarchy: on the surface therefore local
social organisation secmed quite suited to Indirect Rulc. Having
conquered the Emirates, Lugard was well aware of this and it allow-
ed him to introduce Indirect Rule in Africa. He determined a policy
described as follows by Lord Hailey:
128 EASTERN NIGERIA 192&1940

On the one hand, the Emirs were given Letters of Appointmey,

which made it clear that they were not regarded as possessjy t

sovereign powers, and that they were to obey the laws of Niger;

“The policy of Government was that these Chiefs should govemla'

their people not as independent but dependent rulers.” 1In the

terms subsequently used, their status was to be that of Wakilg

Governors, cxercising only such jurisdiction as might be confe,.

red on them by law. On the other hand, when in 1903 the terr;.

tory was divided into 14 Provinces, the Residents in charge of
them werce told that their duty was to act as advisers to the

Emirs, not to usurp their functions.”

Lugard is regarded as the initiator of Indirect Rule or Native Ag.
ministration, and after Amalgamation in 1914 he imported it lock
stock and barrel to the South. This had disastrous effects to which
we will return. But let us now look at the controversy about
Lugard’s concept of Native Administration.

One of his most virulent critics says ‘‘one can sce that Lugard’s
idea of rule was simple autocratic rule from himself downwards™:
in his book Nicolson portrays a dictatorial ambitious man primarily
conccrned with his own political advancement, with little interest in
the welfarc of thos¢ whom he administered. He gives the impression
that what we know as Lugard’s Indirect Rule system, was nothing
more than a channel for his own decisions to be transmitted to the
people and implemented by them. Whatever the case may be,
Lugard’s ideas werc not followed precisely by his successors, and
while he saw Indirect Rule as a way to transmit orders through the
people’s traditional rulers, his successors saw it as the government
of colonial subjects through their own institutions. Lugard saw it as
a form of Local Government that would be a medium for the intro-
duction of radical changes in the society :

However, many of Lugard’s successors followed a policy of mini-

mal interference in the process of local government, preferring

to let the traditional political institutions develop along

their own lines rather than along lines laid down or suggested by

the European administrator. In its extreme forms such a policy

came close to a Protectorate or ‘Native States’ policy, whilst that
of Lugard, in its extreme forms, came close to Paternalism.

Lugard’s policy can be characterised as Interventionist Indirect

"Lord Hailey, Native Administration in the British African Territories,
Part III, West Africa, Nigeria, London, HM.S.0O. p. 48.

"1. l;’é_’Nicholson, The Administration of Nigeria 1900-1960, O.U.P. 1969,
p.
129

that of his successors, Non-Interventionist Rule.?

Rule. pat came to be known as Indirect Rule in Africa was the

fact ‘:f Colonial Administration first applied by the British in
sy§te‘r.’ There was 10 claborated set of principles to guide admini-
Nigeria- no “Guide to Indirect Rule”’; Indirect Rule usually de-
strators, as a policy from decisions taken empirically. Its practice
velop ded that it be “‘theorized” and we are now looking at the
deman f this form of administration as it was developed by its

. o
ldr‘;,?;lt(i)tgic))(ners. mainly servants of the Colonial Administration at all

jevels of the hierarchy. .
As seen by Lugard’s successors, Indirect Rule meant that:

the European colonial powers should govern their African sub-
jects through their own political institutions. Here it is very neces-
sary to emphasise that Indirect Rule, at least in theory, did not
mean government of African peoples through their chiefs. In
practicc, Indirect Rule laid heavy emphasis on the role of the
chief in the government of African peoples, even for those peoples
who traditionally did not have political as distinct from religious
leaders.*’
As it was first introduced in the North of Nigeria, Indirect Rule
was a very successful system of administration. This was due main-
ly to the already very hierarchised organisation of the Emirates
which were autocratic and were thus good vehicles for the adminis-
tration, as it thought it could add a new level at the top of the hier-
archy and the system would continuc to operate. However the
notion that Indirect Rule allowed the traditional system to develop
along its own lines is obviously a mystification. It was clearly im-
possible for thc colonial administration to use the native system
without distorting it, since any system operates to bring about certain
ends, and the aims of the British were clearly different from those
of the previous system; therefore the dynamic had been changed.
Administrators seemed to be unaware that the ‘“‘changes™ they de-
manded would inducc a thorough disruption of the original political
system and destroy its base. As Crowder put it:
The use of indigenous political institutions for the purposes of
local government was contingent on certain modifications to these
institutions. These modifications fell into two categories: modi-
fications of aspects of traditional Government that were repug-
nant to European ideas of what constituted good government;

*M. Crowder, West Africa Under Colonial Rule, London 1968, p. 169.
°1bid., p. 169.
130 EASTERN NIGERIA 192&194

and modifications that were designed to ensure the achievemey,
of the main purpose of colonial rule, the exploitation of the col
nised country. Examples of the former would be the abolitigp ofo '
human sacrifice or the abandonment of certain methods of treg_
ing criminals. Examples of the latter would be the introductioy,
of taxes, designed to stimulate production of cash crops for
export.''
It is precisely because the British Government’s aims and interesyg
were different from those of the traditional systems that they foypg
it necessary to impose basic changes in the traditional system. Djf.
ferent economic and political interests could not fail to change the
ideology of the ruling structure. This is very clear in cascs like that
of land tenure (in the traditional system there is no private owner.
ship of land, because ultimate ownership is the prerogative of the
ancestors, gods or whatever, whereas after British occupation, land
became just another object of investment). The ideological basis of
the traditional system has been destroyed. This has been put very
well by Rattray:
In introducing indirect rule into this country, we would thercfore
appear to be encouraging on the one hand an institution which
draws its inspiration and validity from the indigenous religious
beliefs, while on the other hand we are destroying the very foun-
dation upon which the structure we are striving to perpetuate
stands. Its shell and outward form might remain, but it would
seem too much to expect that its vital energy could survive such
a process.'?
Indirect rule was, within its own limits, quite successful in thc
Northern Emirates, because of the hicrarchical nature of the tradi-
tional system. But what happened in the South? As far as the
South-West is concerned, success was limited, due to the fact that:
Although fairly strong traditional authorities were in power in
that area, the kings (obas) were ultimatcly accountable to, if not
the mouthpieces for, councils of hereditary title holders and rep-
resentatives of societies. The idea of direct taxation was only
slowly and reluctantly accepted.'®
The real problems however appeared in the South-East. Unlike
the North, which previous to colonisation had been hierarchised and
centralised, the political organisation of the South-Eastern Ibo arca

"'Ibid., p. 169.

“R. S. Rattray, Ashanti Law and Constitution, London 1929, p. ix.
). S. Coleman, ibid., p. 51.
N LA CKNER 131
been decentralised and small scale. The village had been the
had unit, and political “‘authority” articulated through mass
P"m- s: chiefs and council elders occupied merely presidential
meet{l;is’ and were invested with no executive power. Other forms
‘mc? anisation such as age-grades, secret societics, and women'’s
Ofoon%sations could if necessary act to counter any decision.
OrThe, first steps towards the introduction of indirect rule in the
south-East had been the setting up of Native Courts in 1914 and
Native Authorities in 1916, these measures had been taken to put
Lugard’s principlcs into app.lication. These institutions bc?re no re-
lation to the traditional political system. Very early on, this form of
administration was scen to be an abysmal failure. Clifford, in 1919
-mmediately suggested that it be investigated. This investigation
produced the reports by Gricr and Tomlinson in 1922 and 1923,
summarised thus by Crowder:
Indirect Rule had been an almost total failure. Despite superficial
trappings, the area was in fact administered directly. The warrant
chiefs were cxceedingly unpopular with the people and were
backed up by little, if any, traditional authority. They were
generally corrupt. Worse still, the native courts, the main agen-
cies for British Administration, were deeply resented. The court
clerks and court messengers abused their positions of power so
blatantly that they wcre described in the report as ‘licensed
libertines’.'*
Despite the very early awareness of the failure of this system, and
the recommendations made by Grier and Tomlinson no steps were
taken. Among their recommendations were some relating to investi-
gation of traditional institutions but no changes were made and the
System was maintained. When in 1926, Governor Thomson decided
to introduce direct taxation into the area, those were the channels
used. Direct taxation was seen by Thomson in Lugardian terms:
‘without a tax therc can be no treasury and without a treasury no
rcal eventual measure of sclf rule’ (Lugard : The Dual Mandate)
.. . 1t must be clearly understood that the present proposals are
~ not primarily inspired by financial considerations.'®
In the same document Ruxton, the Lieutenant Governor of the
Southern Provinces says that the:
chief rcason for introducing taxation is an administrative one:
therc can be no true advance without direct taxation and no pro-

HE

"“M. Crowder, The Story of Nigeria, 1962, p. 231.
“Colonial Office, Correspondence, November 1926, file X811-.
132 EASTERN NIGERIA 192014,

gress in sclf-government without experience in controlling a¢ leg

a part of the revenue locally raised. Moreover, to tax 18 Provip %

and to leave 6 untaxed for no avowable reason must have a5 m(ies

effect on both the taxed and the untaxed.**
Thus the introduction of direct taxation was seen to be an essen.
tial concomitant of indirect rule, and in this case, it demonstrageg
the bankruptcy of the system. This was revealed by the Womep,
War, which was directed as much against the Native Courts and
Warrant Chiefs as against taxation as such.

It was only after 1930, that the problems of Indirect Rule in the
South were seriously faced by the colonial administration. The Re.
port of the Commission of Enquiry into the Aba Riots emphasiseg
the importance for government to be familiar with native instity.
tions. This was given official sanction when Lord Passfield, thep
Secretary of State for the Colonies, wrote:

The nced for further enquiry into the social organisation of the

inhabitants of the South-Eastern Provinces naturally suggests the

question to what extent the services of investigators trained in
anthropological science has been, and may still be profitably
employed . . . I propose to take steps to improve and increase

the amount of instruction in anthropology imparted to newly-

appointed administrative officers who are busily engaged in the

work of administration to carry out anthropological research of

great value.'’
It is now becoming clear how, in the understanding of top-level
administrators, the failure of Indirect Rule in South-Eastern Nigeria
was seen to be directly related to lack of knowledge of local con-
ditions and Ibo social Organisation. Lord Passfield’s recognition of
the use of anthropologists seems to be a good starting point for a
more careful look at the colonial government’s attitude towards an-
thropologists. We will later attempt to examine the dynamics of the
relationship between indirect rule and British School social anthro-

pology.

The Colonial Office’s View of Anthropology
Throughout the colonial period, the Colonial Office had a most am-

LIbid.

""Despatch from the Secretary of State for the Colonies to the officer ad-
ministering the Government of Nigeria regarding the Report of the Com-
mission of Inquiry into the Disturbances at Aba and other places in South-
Eastern Nigeria in November and December 1929, Cmd 3784, of 1931.
N LA CENER 133

s attitude towards anthropologists, at times wanting to hire
d at other times maintaining that the work could be done

them an . s . . e

B s well by political officers. They wavered in a similar manner

just am lue of anthropological work as such.

er the va > .

m;‘ the correspondence arising out of the Aba Commission Re-

r':m the whole issue of the employment of anthropologists was
thoroughly debated in the Colonial Office. The survey goes back to
the employment of Northcote Thomas and also discusses contem-
porary issues.

The memorandum on the employment of Northcote Thomas,
compared to the letters discussing the problem in 1930, shows that
the terms of the debate had not changed, even though the outcome
had. In the first decade of the century the Lugardian anti-anthro-

ologist faction won and the anthropologist was dismissed; in the
late 1920s at the time of post-Lugardian Indirect Rule, under the
influence of Clifford and more emphatically after the Aba Riots
Report and Lord Passfield’s despatch, anthropology was in high
regard.

iet us look at Northcote Thomas’s career: he was the first
government anthropologist ever to be appointed, first in Nigeria in
1906 then in Sierra Leone where he was transferred in 1913. He
wrote a six-volume ‘‘Report on the Ibo-speaking Peoples of
Nigeria” published in 1913. The first and fourth volumes deal with
“Law’’ in two Ibo areas, and the other volumes are concerned with
languages and proverbs.

In 1930 a memorandum on the employment of Northcote
Thomas was circulated in the Colonial Office by a Mr. Fiddian'®
who tells us that Northcote Thomas was appointed Government an-
thropologist in 1906 because it was felt that the information collec-
ted in a questionnaire sent to District officers was insufficient and it
was necessary to have it studied and elaborated by an expert.
Northcote Thomas spent three tours of service in the Ibo and Edo
areas. In 1912, when the termination of his appointment was con-
sidered Mr. James, who opposed this suggestion, sent a report
saying:

there was no question of the ultimate value of anthropological

work in connection with the problem of administering a country

biguo¥

“i(i:ldoniall Ooogﬁce, Correspondence arising out of the Aba Report, 1930-31,

e no. .

"Colonial Office, Ibid., Document E, Memorandum entitled “Appointment
of 3%11 Anthropologist to West Africa” by Mr. Fiddian, dated 16 December,
1930.
134 EASTERN NIGERIA ] 92@19 40

like this, but he feared it was sometimes difficult to avoid ove;.

looking the ultimate benefits in view of the apparently smal] re.

sults achieved in actual practice in the early years of such wor 2
The appointment was renewed, but when the question next capy,
up, it was handled by Lugard?®' who says in his report:

I am, generally speaking, inclined to think that researches into

native law and custom are best conducted by Political Officers

and I have found that in Northern Rhodesia there is no lack of
qualified officers who are deeply interested and quite capable of
reproducing their work in book form. . . #
Lugard then recommends the termination of Thomas’s appoint.
ment, and he is transferred to Sierra Leone. In the same memoran-
dum Fiddian writes about the next developments in the administra-
tion concerning anthropology.

Governor Clifford had initially shown more interest in the work-
ings of native institutions and had asked Grier and Tomlinson to
report on the state of Indirect Rule in the East from the point of
view of Native affairs. In 1923, Governor Clifford thought of :

forming an anthropology department on the grounds that con-

ditions in Nigeria were ‘changing so rapidly that many things of
great scientific value’ were vanishing. It was not, apparently, pri-
marily in Sir H. Clifford’s view, a matter of direct interest to the
administrative side. The Lieutenant-Governor, Southern Pro-
vinces, and the Acting Lieutenant-Governor, Northern Provinces,
expressed themsclves strongly in favour of encouraging ethno-
logical and anthropological research . . . (they were of the opin-
ion . . . that scientific study of tribal origins and institutions is
vital to successful administration, and that much valuable infor-
mation was being lost for the want of collating and sifting by an
expert hand.*
The plan for such a department was never implemented. There
were only however, reports such as Grier and Tomlinson’s on the
administration of the East and local Residents’ reports over the
period when the introduction of direct taxation was being planned.
These reports often emphasised the problem of the administration’s

*1bid.

*1G. Leclerc, Anthropologie et Colonialisme (1972). His interpretation is that
Lugard supports the employment of anthropologists (see pp. 48-52). This
book will be discussed further in the conclusion. It is to be noted however,
that Leclerc, who uses Nigeria as his most precise and frequent illustration,
appears to interpret many points differently from me.

"""Co:ionial Office, Ibid. Document E.

21bid,
Lgnorance of native affairs, as can be seen from the following report
OfI‘gg no record of any attempt having been made to enquire into
the native institutions and turn them to good account. .. The
first step to take . . . is to make a thorough gmquiry into the clan
and town organisation throughout the province.** .
The accumulation of problems in the East, combined with many
reports similar to the one quoted above and the willingness of the
upper ranks of the administration led in 1927 to the appointment of
an anthropological officer in the South.”* Despite this the debate
went on in the Colonial Office about the value of anthropology.
Commenting on the Fiddian memorandum another Colonial office
administrator wrote in his minutes:
with regard to the anthropologist, I am inclined to sit upon the
fence . . . The anthropologist is presumably a man with a scien-
tific turn of mind. If he has not got the scientific turn of mind he
is no use as an investigator. It does not always follow that a man
of this kind will either fit in well with the administration or that
he will render immediate assistance to them.?®
His attitude is brought out quite clearly in his references to North-
cote Thomas who, says Flood :
was a recognised maniac in many ways. He wore sandals, even
in this country, lived on vegetables, and was generally a rum
person.?”
Flood goes on to explain that clearly residents did not want:
to have an object like that going about . . . partly because he was
calculated to bring a certain amount of discredit upon the white
man’s prestige.?®
Commenting on this issue, Tomlinson writes :
The need for further investigation makes me all the more inclined
to agree with Mr. Fiddian about the importance of anthropologi-

*Colonial Office, Correspondence, 1928, file no. 183, para. 9. Report by
W. E. Hunt, then Resident of Warri Province, dated 10.1.28.

**At this time also, local residents and all local administrative officers were
first asked to write “Intelligence Reports’” on the traditional institutions in
their areas. These reports were regularly produced and finally, by the
middle 1930s, they numbered in hundreds—199 in 1934 (see the Annual
Report of the Government of Nigeria for 1934, p. 8). These reports were
used in deciding on policies for the reorganisation of Native administration
in the Eastern Province.

*Colonial Office, Correspondence arising out of the Aba Commission

"5,8'50"' file no. 1003, Document F by Flood, dated 19.12.30.

id.

“*1bid.

136 EASTERN NIGERIA 192&1940

cal research. This does not necessarily mean that trained anthy,.
pologists should be brought in from the outside. There are plep
of officers already in the service who have received adequate ay,.
thropological training. The great thing is that their enquiries
should not be conducted in the spirit of antiquarian research, by
should be directed to those problems, i.e. to the problems presep,.
ted by native society as a living and changing organism, which
are of immediate practical importance to the Administrative
Officer. What is meant is that they should be followers of the
school of which such men as Professor Malinowski are the chief
exponents.?’
Governor Cameron was appointed in Nigeria at the height of the
debate, when the Recommendations of the Commission of Enquiry
were being discussed. Taking up the point made by Lord Passfield,
in his Despatch, Cameron writes :
The work of tracing out native institutions has been done in the
past, in both Nigeria and Tanganyika, very competently by ad-
ministrative officers without any special anthropological training.
The best use to which the anthropologist can be put in this con-
nexion, in my judgment, is to place him at headquarters where he
can study the reports rendered by officers engaged in the field on
this class of investigation and direct them and guide them as to
further avenues to be explored. For the most part the Anthro-
pologist attached to the Southern Provinces is being utilized in
this manner. . . *°
This debate appears to be the most thorough one that took place in
the Colonial office about anthropology. What emerges from it is that
in the post-Lugardian period there was general agreement that
knowledge of the native institutions was necessary for good admini-
stration. Disagreements were due to a split between those who
thought that local political officers with a minimum of anthropolo-
gical training could do the work just as well and those who believed
in employing professional anthropologists. Finally a compromise
was reached by increasing the anthropological training of all staff
and by the appointment of anthropological offiers in the North and
in the South.
Aside from the discussions in the Colonial Office itself, many
discussions took place in milieus interested in colonial administra-

1bid. Document T Minute by Tomlinson, dated 3.1.31.
"Colonial Office, Correspondence File no. 1056, 1931: letter from Governor
Cameron to Lord Passfield, dated 17.8.31.
HELEN LACKNER 137

. In 1934 Miss M. Perham gave a talk to the Royal Society of
nOIt: on Indirect Rule in Africa.’! In the discussion following the
talk the problem of anthropologists was raised and.similar points to
those we have seen were put forward by academics as well as by
administrators. Similarly in the pages gf the J.RAI and Man the
problem was discussed from the beginning of the century. We shall
return to this later, but would just mention that Man saw fit to print
in its pages Lord Lugard’s ““Address at the Reception to Dominions
Premiers and Delegates to the Imperial Conference” (10 October,
1930) entitled “Anthropology and Administration*2,

Lord Hailey’s ““African Survey”, first published in 1938, which
was intended as a guide on African affairs to all those concerned
with the administration of colonies and with trade, has a whole sec-
tion on ‘‘Studies in African Social life”’**. This is a survey of the
activities of anthropologists in Africa of the necessity for such
studies, and of the possibilities of anthropological training. Lord
Hailey maintains that professional anthropologists are necessary be-
cause they are best qualificd to make full-time lengthy and detailed
studies and he regrets the absence of direct support from Govern-
ments.

The administrative officer as an anthropological enquirer works

under certain disadvantages. His relations with Africans are apt

to be colourcd by the fact that he represents the government . . .

When . . . inquiries on specific subjects have to be undertaken . . .

the government officer with a training in anthropological methods

is likely to prove a successful investigator only provided that he is
allowed to devote sufficient time to the purpose. The professional
anthropologist should, however, be able to provide a more com-
plete picture of native society, and, in areas where native institu-
tions are least understood, he is likely to be of great assistance

in providing the government with the knowledge which must

form the basis of administrative policy. In general, it may be said

that governments are likely to derive the greatest advantage from
inquiries undertaken by anthropologists in association with their
own technical or administrative officers.%*
These ambiguities in the official section of opinion appear to have
carried on throughout the Colonial period. Anthropologists on the

“Journal of the Royal Society of Arts, vol. LXXXII, 1934.
“Man, vol. 30, 1930.

“Lord Hailey, An African Survey, London 1938, pp. 40-67.
“Ibid., pp. 47-8.
138 EASTERN NIGERIA 1920-]94,

other hand had a much firmer line on their relationship with g,
Administration; it is their position which we will examine ip the
next section.

Anthropologists from Administration to Academia

From the creation of the Royal Anthropological Institute until the
Sccond World War, anthropologists were interested in developing 5
closer relationship with Colonial Administrations. This we will see
in the rccords mentioned in the J.RAI and Man. After 1945 4
definite shift towards academic distance and away from involvemeng
in politico-administrative affairs took place’; this can be scen by
the absence of any articles on the connection with administration
and in a much more academic tone in book-reviews and other
articles.

We will now look in more detail at the evolution of attitude as it
is reflected in the J.RAI and in Man. In 1896 the British Associa-
tion passed the following resolution:

that it is of urgent importance to press upon the government the

necessity of establishing a Bureau of Ethnology for Great Britain,

wtich by collecting information with regard to the native races

within and on the borders of the Empire, will prove of immense

value to science and to the Government itsclf.**
This project failed for lack of financial support, but a few ycars
later (in 1908) it was taken up again with the collaboration of the
RAI and got as far as a deputation to the Prime Minister, Asquith.
A memorial was prescnted to the Prime Minister®” stressing that
administrators should have anthropological training, that anthro-
pology is of direct relevance to administration and all matters con-
cerning natives. In the discussion with the Prime Minister, great
emphasis was laid on the fact that anthropology is of great impor-
tance to traders who might, for lack of knowledge of local customs,
ruin their position, by behaving unsuitably or attempting to sell the
wrong things. The deputation quoted in this respect the example of
the Prussian Government who made a point of giving anthropologi-
cal education to its traders, at great expense.*® The main point was
to demonstrate the benefits to Government of using anthropolo-
gIsts

3Leclerc thinks that after the war, anthropologists were very vocal about
their relationship to administration. [ have found no evidence for this.

"Proceediggs of the British Association, 1896, quoted in J.RAI vol. 59,
1929, p. 38.

YJ.RAIT vol. 38, 1908, pp. 489-92.

*Man, vol. IX 1909, p. 857.
JELEN LACKNER 139
1t has long been felt by anthropologists that the study of anthro-
ology possesses not merely a scientific interest but has also great
ractical utility for the nation. . . From mere ignorance of local
habits and customs, travellers, missionaries and others not infre-
quently have provoked the natives instead of gaining their sym-
athy, and thus not only have nullified the results of costly ex-
peditions, but also have caused political difficulties and compli-
cations.*’
Indeed, from the beginning of the century onwards, the RAI was
emphasising at every opportunity the need for a closer relationship
with the government. The pages of its journal continuously reflect
this interest. In 1914 Sir R. Temple*® gave a lecture to probationers
of the Indian Civil Service, entitled ‘“The value of training in An-
thropology for the administrator™; it is general and not particularly
enlightening in terms of anthropology but was printed in Man.*'
Temple was in fact very active in trying to develop Anthropology
as an aid to administration. He was constantly encouraging the de-
velopment of teaching dcpartments and of Institutes; he chaired a
committee aimed at ‘‘devising practical measures for the organisa-
tion of anthropological teaching at the Universities . . . 7’42, At that
time there was already a move in favour of sctting up an “Imperial
School of Applied Anthropology’’. This was formulated at a con-
ference chaired by Lord Selborne and attended by representatives
of Government, University and Museum circles, at which the fol-
lowing resolution was passed :
That this Conference . . . is of the opinion that, in the highest
intercsts of thc Empire, it is necessary so to extend and complete
the organisation of the teaching of Anthropology at the Univer-
sitics of Great Britain, that those who are about to spend their
lives in the East or in parts of the Empire inhabited by non-
European races, shall at the outset of their careers possess, or
have the opportunity of acquiring a sound and accurate
knowledge of the habits, customs, social and religious ideas and
ideals of the Eastern and non-European races subject to His
Majesty the King-Emperor’*®,

J.RAI vol. 38, 1908, pp. 489-90.

*Sir R. Temple was very active over a period of years; some of his talks
?ggl activities are related in the J.RAI e.g. Man, vol. 14, 1914; vol. XXI,

‘'Man, vol. 14, 1914, item no. 19.

“*Man, vol. 21, 1921, p. 151.

*Ibid., p. 152.
140 EASTERN NIGERIA 1920\19‘10

This project was dropped in 1914 because of the War but taken
again after the War by Temple who in 1921 outlined in detaj) Wl;lap
should be done to set up this school. t

Throughout the 1920s and the 1930s, the yearly presidentia) Ad
dresses to the RAI reflect the concern on the part of Anthropologg,
to develop their subject of study to fit the demands of the admipjs.
tration of colonies. Many of these addresses refer precisely to the
problems involved in the relationship between Anthropologists apg
administrators. In 1929 Professor J. Myres spoke on “The science of
Man in the Service of the State”** in which he discusses the relatiop,.
ship of anthropology and the government, the attempts at setting yp
various anthropological institutions and the development of the
teaching of anthropology to Colonial Office staff. In 1934, the Rey.
E. W. Smith spoke on ‘“Anthropology and the Practical Man™+%; i
1944, Lord Hailey spoke of ‘The Role of Anthropology in Colonial
Development™** at the mecting celebrating the centenary of the
RAI

All the articles for the period up to 1945, including reviews, stress
in a very precise way a direct link between anthropological work and
administration of the Colonies. The question asked is “How useful is
this kind of work to Administration?”’ even when dealing with ac-
ademic topics or works; book reviews are written relating books to
the administrative context: for example the review by Lucy Mair of
Meek’s “Law and Authority in a Nigerian Tribe’ (1937)*7 first gives
a historical sketch of indirect rule in the East, and then looks at the
value of the book in terms of how the' administration can use the
village traditional system for the nomination of chiefs. The review
by Meek of S. Leith-Ross’s ‘‘African Women” in 1939*® first ex-
amines the importance of studying women in the Eastern Nigerian
context, in terms of the War, and picks out for attention in the book
items relating to westernisation, problems of education and the
church. The book is looked at in a purely practical way from the
point of view of administration and judged useful as such. Nothing
is said of its formal academic qualities which are in fact remarkable
by their absence. Similarly in 1943 Margaret Read’s review of
Margaret Green’s ‘Land tenure in an Ibo village’*® considers the

“J.RAI, vol. LIX, 1929, pp. 19-52.
“J.RAI, vol. LX1V, 1934.

‘“*Man, vol. 44, 1944.

‘"Man, vol. 37, 1937, item no. 226.
“Man, vol. 39, 1939, item no. 100.
““Man, vol. 43, item no. 29.
gEN LA CENER 141

ok from the point of view of its contribution to solving problems
<ial and economic change. . .

of sowr the war on the other hand the whole tone of discussion

Al es. Articles are concerned with anthropology as an academic
Chﬁ‘.lg t, 1here is a great interest in developing theory and reviews are
5‘,‘-‘{"; in terms of academic merit. For example P. Bohannan’s re-
"'.nw of M. Green’s “Ibo village Affairs’*® stresses the book’s valuc
v;can academic study, the quality of its anthropological analysis
:'hen in fact this study was written in the same spirit as S. Leith-
Ross’s, that is as an aid to administration, a study of women becausc
there was concern in the Administration about Women in Eastern
Nigeria after the Women’s War. .

A long article in 1949 ‘Anthropology and Colonial Affairs’®! is a
summary of the contributions by Evans-Pritchard and Firth to a
meeting at the RAIL The article gives an account of the Colonial
Social Science Research Council and how useful it can be to anthro-
pologists. Despitc statements like:

Anthropology is benefitting a great deal in some ways by its new

reactions to colonial affairs®?
the general tone is one that is revealed more by this statement :

in some academic circles, there is a fear lest the colonial tail wag

the anthropological dog—Ilest basic scientific problems be over-

looked in favour of those of more pressing practical interest>?.
The concern is no longer so much about anthropology helping colo-
nial administration, instead the emphasis is on developing theory
and becoming a full-scale academic subject. Another view on the
value of the CSSRC is given by Lucy Mair in 1950 who says of the
then Colonial Development and Welfare Fund created in 1940:

Some of the investigations that this fund has made possible have

been dictated by the personal interests of the workers, but others

have been carried out at the request of governments who believe
that they can utilize the results.’*
After this date, the problems of colonial administration hardly ap-
pear in the RAI’s publications and there are more and more articles
on theory; there is a feeling of wanting to forget the sordid past of
involvement in concrete problems. This has been done so success-
fully that today, people tend to assume that anthropology is totally

**Man, vol. 49, 1949, item no. 85.

**Man, vol. 49, 1949, item no. 179.

**Ibid., p. 138.

**Ibid., p. 138.

*L. Mair, Anthropology and Social Change, London 1969, p. 41.
142 EASTERN NIGERIA 192&19 4

unconnected with any concrete political activities.

Clearly this change of emphasis in Anthropology as well g the
present theoretical and other problems of the subject are relateq to
the historical changes that have taken place in the Colonial Woyjy
since the end of the Second World War.

Anthropological Work
Let us now see what anthropological work got done in Eastery
Nigeria, particularly as a consequence of Lord Passfield’s recop.
mendation that such work should be undertaken. Before 1930 there
had been only a very limited anthropological interest in Easterp
Nigeria; Basden, a missionary, had written a book *“Niger Ibos”
(1938) after spending 40 years in Iboland. The first Government
anthropologist Northcote Thomas in the first decade of the century
had written a long report on the Ibo. The bankruptcy of Indirect
Rule in the East, the Women’s War in 1929, and the recommen-
dations of the Commission of Inquiry supported by the Secretary of
State for the Colonies, all combined to encourage a great develop-
ment of anthropological studies in Eastern Nigeria; some of these
studies were by professional anthropologists, but most were by ad-
ministrators. These works none of which are by major anthropolo-
gists, are all functionalist studies of specific problems. The choicc of
problems dealt with can also be looked at in terms of the specific
difficulties faced by the colonial administration in that area at that
time. There are for example a large number of studies of land
tenure** over a period of 10 years. Of these four, three are by ad-
ministrative officers who have followed the advice of the Colonial
Office and developed a more profound interest in anthropology. The
main concern of thesc studies is to give a clear and complete picture
of land tenure systems, which would be of use in determining policy.
The other topic which is uncommonly emphasised is that of
women. Two women anthropologists (M. Green and S. Leith-Ross)
went to Iboland in the early 1930s to study the local women. This
was due to the interest in women taken by the administration fol-
lowing the Women’s War, when there was seen to be an urgent need
to analyse both Ibo women and Ibo society as seen by women.
The two volumes devoted by Northcote Thomas to topics other
than language are entitled ‘Law and Custom of the 1bo of the Asaba

*See: M. Green, Land Tenure in an Ibo Village, 1941; J. D. Field Sale of
Land in an Ibo Community, Nigeria, in Man, vol. 45, 1945. L. T. Chubb,
Ibo Land Tenure, 1947, a Report made for a committee chaired by Lord
Hailey; G. 1. Jones, Ibo Land Tenure, Africa, 1949.
pistricts, S. Nigeria” and{,aw and Custom of t,he lbo of the Awka
Nei ghbourhaod. S. Nigeria”. These are Thomas’s books on anthro-

Jogy, both of which have long sections on religion and on rituals
f:r a1l moments of life. These books are descriptive rather than
analytic. They do however describe the main moments gf life in the
area referred to and give an idea of the rules and regulations that are
applied t0 religion, marriage, dispute-settlements and various other
matters. One point of interest is that Northcote Thomas does men-
tion some people as being ‘“‘chiefs” or “kings” in his areas, and sug-
gests that they have positions of authority. This is relevant since it

ses the question whether his statements were taken into account
when the Warrant chief system was introduced in the area at about
the same time as his studies.

In a more general way his works are still in the tradition of pre-
functionalist evolutionist anthropology. The emphasis is on laws,
inheritance, land ownership, religion, rituals, etc., but he does not
consider kinship to be the basis of social organisation, as functional-
ists do. His remarks on kinship are brief and he is clearly less in-
terested in that than in any other aspects of his studies. He also
looks at his work in terms of western administrative concepts, and
there is evidence that he has paid great attention to collecting
material on matters that would be relevant to the administration.

Of the work in the 1930s which followed the Women’s War, the
outstanding authors are C. K. Meek, M. Green and S. Leith-Ross.
We shall examine their books in turn, emphasising only their main
concern.

C. K. Meek was an administrative officer who was transferred to
the South as anthropological officer in 1929. His book was published
in 1937 and its preoccupations are made quite clear mercly by its
tile: “Law and Authority in a Nigerian Tribe”. His introduction
starts with a description of the Women’s War and its role in shaking
the administration out of apathy. He explains the failure of Indirect
Rule through the absence of chiefs. His job as government anthro-
pologist was to assist in the investigations being carried out by local
administrators into:

the indigenous social and political organisation of the peoples of

South-Eastern Nigeria, with a view to setting up native Adminis-

trations which would be more in accordance with the institutions

and wishes of the people.*®
Meek had to leave Nigeria in 1932 for health reasons and wrote this

*C. K. Meek, Law and Authority in a Nigerian Tribe, 1937, p. xi.
144 EASTERN NIGERIA l920~1940

book feeling that his material :
might be of value to students of anthropology and sociology, ag
well as to Administrative, Judicial and Educational Officers of the
Colonial Service.*’
His study is directed :
towards ascertaining the general principles by which the Ibo
community governed themselves.®®
His understanding of anthropology is very much that of an adminjs.
trator and he says that the Government’s attitude towards anthro.
pological research has always been:
that it should serve as the handmaiden to administration by
throwing light on the history, relationships, organisation, and
thoughts of the people, and so providing data which would help
the Government to make the fullest use of Native institutions as
instruments of local administration.*®
His book does not reflect these interests. His first chapters are on
religion, and this because:
religion is . . . the handmaiden of the law . . . Among the Ibo,
religion and law are so closely interwoven that many of the most
powerful legal sanctions are derived directly from the gods*’
He finds the social and political structure *“‘closely interwoven’ with
law and authority :
the necessity of studying the social structure is proportionately
greater among peoples lacking a central form of government, as
their modes of regulating conduct are highly complex and by no
means obvious to a European observer.®!
In fact, in the chapters devoted to political and social structure his
description does centre on leadership, he is more interested in find-
ing out who dominates the operation of the system than in examin-
ing the system itself. His later chapters are about the kinds of
groupings that can be found among the Ibo, like title associations,
age-grade societies; in these also he is primarily concerned with their
development under European rule, and in the case of the title system
tells us that it is collapsing because of the new priorities that are
emerging. In the chapters on law, and the final ones, he merely
describes procedure.
His concluding chapter is called “‘Practical Conclusions” and by

*Ibid., p.

**Ibid., p.
*Ibid., p.
*Ibid., p.

-k-R-E-E-

“Ibid.,
HELEN LACKNER 145

‘his he means concrete advice to Govcmmept. He first {edeﬁnes

Indirect Rule and says that it should be possxbk? to apply it to de-

centralised societies such as the Ibo, but that it is more difficult
use there are no rulers.

This book can be regarded as very useful both for the anthro-

logist, who is given all the information he needs presented in a
functional framework, and for the administrator for whom this
emphasis is intended and who can then see hqvi{ he can use the
traditional social system in reorganising the administration.

The second book is S. Leith-Ross’s “African Women’’ (1939). This
is a study specifically of women, when as a consequence of the
women’s War, she and M. Green were given Leverhulme scholar-
ships to go and study Ibo women. S. Leith-Ross is more general and
Jess anthropological, surveying the position of women from an iso-
lated rural area to Port Harcourt. It is more a travel diary and a
collection of observations than an anthropological analysis. In this
sense it is quitc interesting insofar as she reports some of the re-
actions to the Women’s War that were mentioned to her. She also
describes some of the main rites de passage in life in the four areas
she has picked out, how the organisation of institutions like bride-
wealth, for example, change from being more “‘primitive’’ to being
more “westernised’’ depending on the area studied. She defines her
four types of women as—primitive in the absolutely non-westernised
area,—sophisticated and primitive women in the villages with mini-
mal regular contact with the administration,—women in transition
in the smaller towns, and sophisticated women in the large towns
(this categorisation is reminiscent of Redfield’s Folk-urban con-
tinuum). She also examines the problem of westernisation in towns,
of urbanisation, of the relationships bétween blacks and whites, the
role of missions, education, new crafts etc. On the whole it is an
interesting narrative; the main reproach one can make is the total
absence of analysis in the academic anthropological sense. The ap-
proach to the problems of Nigeria of that time are useful in the
sense that they reveal very clearly the attitude of an ‘‘enlightened
administrator”, paternalistic and extremely ethnocentric which most
likely reflected the author’s background and outlook as the widow
of an officer in Nigeria and the sister of another.

Margaret Green’s book on the other hand is a very typical anthro-
pological monograph. Though she did her fieldwork in the 1930s at
the same time as S. Leith-Ross, her book was only published in
1947. It is not specifically about women, but it does put considerable
emphasis on the réle of women, and on women’s organisations. The
146 EASTERN NIGERIA 192&1940

main point of the book is to provide an anthropological analys;s

a small village. She describes most of the institutions of the vinaof
and fits them into a structure, locates her small village withip tﬁe
village group, and analyses her material mainly in terms of loca]
kinship groups (unlike Meek); she sees the divisions withip the
village in terms of kinship, and looks closely at the social structy,
in terms of exogamy. Exogamy helps to explain how women cap p,
so well organised over a large area producing women’s organjs,.
tions relating both to the village of marriage and to the natal village,

Throughout her book we also find that she is looking for peop]e
who have special authority, to see how much authority they havye
and how it is determined and distributed. She is a functionalist iy
her approach and believes that “in any society institutions arise in
answer to needs’’*?. Therefore to establish indirect rule in the arej:

it is necessary not only to discover indigenous institutions but alsp

to understand the part they play in the society which has evolved
them.*
There is considerable stress on law and on dispute settlement with
detailed examples of cases and why they were not brought to the
Native Court but kept within the traditional system :

The Court was there but in point of fact the people of Umueke did

not use it. In all the time that I was in the village I only heard of

one case taken to it.**
This is an excellent ethnography of the Ibo and it is highly regarded
by structural-functionalists. It does throw light on the situation of
women and in its general clarity makes it a book that would be
appreciated by administrators in its emphasis of very topical ques-
tions: the type of authority structure, and the marked independence
and self-mindedness of women.

In the 1940s and 1950s many other anthropological works on the
Ibo were published, either studies of specific problems by adminis-
trators, or anthropologists, or general ethnographies likc that of D.
Forde and G. 1. Jones. Jones also wrote studies on the choice and
réle of chiefs in East Nigeria.

Colonialism and the Development of Anthropological Theory
It is clear from the way anthropology was introduced and later used
in South-Eastern Nigeria by the Colonial Administration that there

**M. Green, Ibo Village A ffairs, pp. 77 note 1.
®1bid., p. 71.
“Ibid., p. 104,
.. close relationship between anthropology and administration. It
s 3 s clear that the need for anthropologists arose from the in-
alsouc-tion of Indirect Rule as a form of government.

we have seen how the theory of the nature of Indirect Rule
evolved from Lugard’s position to one that defined it as self-admin-
istration by the people according to their traditional system, within
the limits permitted by the Colonial Government, that is, as long as
it did not come into any kind of conflict with the interests of the
colonial government. Let us look at some of the characteristics of
Indirect Rule to see how its theory rather than its practice neces-
sjtated an interest in anthropology.

Those who supported indirect rule can be identified as paternalis-
tic, europocentric ‘“humanitarian imperialists”. These feelings com-
bined to make a defence of Indirect Rule since it was supposed to
be a form of government that protected the natives by maintaining
their traditional, pre-colonial institutions. These institutions were
supported and encouraged as long as they were “good” (ie. by
Christian moral standards), and promoted the economic interests of
the colonisers. Indirect Rule was good because it was an opportunity
to teach the “‘natives’ how to govern, to show them what ‘‘proper”
(i.e. European style) governing methods were like; it also helped to
promote higher standards of civilisation, by preventing barbarous
practices (these were defined as practices unacceptable to Euro-
peans). But the basic point about Indirect Rule is that the colonisers
must be familiar with the ‘“‘native’s’ traditional political system. And
such knowledge is best acquired by anthropological methods. The
knowledge wanted is mainly about political organisation, ideology
and religion, all of which arc necessary in an attempt to use the
traditional system. The fact that the type of administration to be
studied is local administration (because at higher echelons, the
British operated the system themselves) explains the interest in the
social organisation of small groups, villages, or clans. . . ; the studies
wanted are empirical, descriptions of how things operated and how
are problems solved.

The kind of questions posed about native systems by apologists
of Indirect Rule relate to very small-scale social organisation, to be-
liefs in supernatural powers and to problems of authority. But it is
accepted by these writers that such questions cannot be answered
with any degree of reliability without knowledge of the principles be-
hind them. This emphasis on the mode of operation of traditional
institutions is very close to functionalism. The great enthusiasm for
Malinowski shown by people concerned with administration arises
148 EASTERN NIGERIA 192q_, 54

from his type of functionalism and his methodology i.e. hjg con
of concentrated long-term and detailed fieldwork. ept

Functionalist theory in social anthropology is the type of apajy..
of colonial communities that answers best the questions asked byyt?:
ideologues of Indirect Rule. The studies of Ibo social strucyy,
helped the administration by providing it with valuable informayjg,
about institutions that it needed to understand; what chiefs wey,
there and how much and what kind of power did they have? Hg,,
institutionalised and how close-knit were the women’s organisationg?

In the case of Nigeria it is possible that the problems created py
Indirect Rule in the North and in the South-East may have cqp.
tributed to the crisis of the 1960s of the Biafran secession. Biafry
could be seen as a continuation of the claim to self-determination of
a nation that was thwarted in its development since the arrival of the
British. Britain tried to integrate the East with the rest of Nigeria
when it had always been different and this integrationist policy con-
tinued under the neo-colonialist government which took over on the
“independence” of Nigeria. Further research would be essential to
turn this last remark into more than mere speculation.

It seems that the development of British social anthropology and
particularly of the functionalist theories that have characterised it
throughout the colonial period, are responses to British imperialism
and its particular form of colonial administration, Indirect Rule. To
demonstrate this, it would be necessary to compare British social
anthropology in the context of Indirect Rule with the French system
of direct rule of its colonies and the fact that French social science
devcloped a very different form of anthropology, (including structur-
alism) which have to be explained in terms of French colonial his-
tory and ideology. Functionalism should also be compared with
Amcrican cultural anthropology and Dutch anthropology, in terms
of their infra-structures and the particular colonial formations that
they may be concerned to justify and support.

There has recently been some attempt to do this, unfortunately not
by a Marxist. Gerard Leclerc in Anthropologie et Colonialisme
(1972) surveys social anthropology since its origins and relates it to
colonial history and suggests that functionalism arose because of the
demands of Indirect Rule for knowledge of this type, and that a
similar development did not take place in France because anthro-
pologists were independent of government which did not require
their services: therefore they had the opportunity of developing an
independent theory. He also surveys American cultural anthro-
pology and suggests that it differs from functionalism in its support
o | ACKNER 149
qral independence and its opposition to the imposition of
values on colonised societies.
spite the fact that it furthers most of the idez‘ts I ha\fe suggestgd
1 eclerc’s book is disappointing. It has an interesting analysis
here. roblems of ethnocentrism which he traces back into the 18th
- he also attempts to connect his work with present trends in
century, | g, : :
he anti-imperialist movement. Unfortunately his comparison be-
<cn the developments of British/French anthropology with Brit-
S,,'French colonialism is more a series of successive statements than
3 historical and dialectical analysis of thege phqnomena, gnd he
(herefore fails to prove his point. It is also distressing to notice that
despite his interests his frame of reference and his methodology re-
main bourgeois; in discussing anti-colonial movements, he does not
refer to the more radical of them, nor does he discuss their actual
politics; similarly his analysis throughout remains at the level of
culture, and even that is discussed without reference to infrastruc-
wure or to the reality of imperialism in the contemporary world. It
is however, worth reading because he does attempt to widen the
subject and include it within a more comprehensive framework.
The present crisis in social anthropology lends further support to
my hypothesis. The crisis has become worse at a time when colonies
have become “independent’ and there is no more need for colonial
administration, Indirect Rule and the anthropology that they
brought about. Structural functionalism is now redundant and neo-
colonialism is a form of imperialism which requires different infor-
mation and approaches. It is not clear whether the work of tradition-
al anthropologists is relevant. The United States has replaced Britain
and France as the main imperialist nation, their own cultural relativ-
ism (their leading anthropological theory previously) has developed
into evolutionism, a theory which provides a good basis for a high
level of interventionism under the guise of “civilising the natives”..
In Europe on the other hand anthropology is in a state of deep
crisis and has not vet found a new rdle for itself. In Britain the
theories that have followed structural functionalism are many and
inconclusive, none of them are as comprehensive, nor has any of
them been able to dominate the anthropological scene. In France,
there has been a diversification in anthropology, some branches
getting more sociological, while others tend towards philosophy.
Meanwhile the tendency remains for anthropologists to work for
and support the current form of imperialism, while at the same time
attempting a liberal concern for the welfare of the natives. To
counter this we require a Marxist analysis of pre-capitalist societies,

r c,ult
tern
150 EASTERN NIGERIA 19204940

following the lead of the French Marxist anthropologists, tq st
the changes that these societies have gone through during the coul?
nial period, and the nature of their present transitional stage Th.
should be followed by a careful study of the debate between

ists on the conflicting theories of the mature of developmen (;,
perhaps most importantly must a state go through the stage p”
capitalism or not?). At the practical level, these efforts shoylqg be
combined with a clear alignment on the side of anti-imperialist a4
anti-capitalist revolutionary struggles everywhere.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

A. E. Afigbo: Herbert Richmond Palmer and Indirect Rule in Eastep,
Nigeria, 1915-1928, in the Journal of the Historical Society of Nigeriq
vol. 3, no. 2, December 1965. '

N. Akpan, Epitaph to Indirect Rule, 1956.

J. C. Anene: Southern Nigeria in Transition, 1966.

W. Bagsc;)m and M. Herskovits: Continuity and Change in African Cultures,
1959.

G. T. Basden: Among the 1bos of Nigeria, 1921; also Niger lbos, 1938.

G. Gordon Brown and Bruce Hutt: Anthropology in Action, 1935.

R. L. Buell: The Native Problem in Africa, 1928.

A. C. Burns: History of Nigeria, 1929.

D. Cameron: Principles of Native Administration and their application,
1935; also Native Administration in Nigeria and Tanganyika, 1937.

L. T. Chubb: 150 Land Tenure, 2nd edition, 1961.

A. Cohen (Sir): British Policy in Changing Africa, 1959.

J. S. Coleman: Nigeria, Background to Nationalism, 1958.

Colonial Office: Correspondence files for years 1925-1940; Administrative
Reports for years 1929-1940; Sessional Papers and Minutes of the
Legislative and E xecutive Councils 1929-1940.

W. Crocker: Nigeria, a critique of British Colonial Administration, 1936.

M. CrSIWdelrS;tS 81‘he story of Nigeria, 1962; also West Africa under Colonidl
Rule, .

K. O. Dike: Trade and Politics in the Niger Delta, 1830-1885, 1956; also
100 Years of British Rule in Nigeria, 1851-1951, 1956.

K. Ezera: Constitutional Developments in Nigeria, 1964.

D. Forde and G. L. Jones: The Ibo and Ibibio speaking peoples of South-

Eastern Nigeria, 1950.

W. N. M. Geary: Nigeria Under British Rule, 1927,

W. G. A. O. Gore (Lord Harlech): African Politics in the High Commission
Territories, 1944; also British Policy and Administration in Tropical
Africa, 1941.

M. M. Green: Land Tenure in an lbo Village; also 1bo Village Affairs,
1941 and 1947 respectively.

A. H. M. Kirk-Greene ed.: The Principles of Native Administration in
Nigeria, 196S.

Lord Hailey: An African Survey, 1938; also Native Administration in
the British African Territories, Part I1I: West Africa, HM.S.0, 1951.

P. Harris: Local Government in Southern Nigeria, 1957.

G. L. Jones: Tbo Land Tenure in Africa, 1949; also Dual Organisation in Ibo
social structure, in Africa, 1949; also Report on the Position and Status
BN LACKNER 151

and Influence of chiefs and Natural rulers in the Eastern Region of

Nigeria, Enusu, 1956; also Trading States of the Oil Rivers, 1963.

Kroeber ed.: Anthropology today, 1953.

A- T lerc: Anthropologie et Colonialisme, Paris, 1972.

G. . The Dual Mandate in British Tropical Africa, 1922.

F. P. Mair: Studies in Applied Anthropology, 1957.

L. P linowski: Practical Anthropology, in 4frica, 1929.

B. M. K. Meek: Law and Authority in a Nigerian Tribe, 19317; also

C. C},anging Cultures of West Africa, 1948; also Land, Law and Customs
in the Colonies, 1946; also his work on Northern Nigeria.

w. R. Miller: Have we Failed in Nigeria? 1947; also Success in Nigeria?

" 1948.
[ F.llgiicolson: The Administration of Nigeria, 1900-1940, 1969.
g, Ottenberg: Improvement Associations among the Afikpo Ibo, in A frica,
" 71955; also Comments on Local Government in Afikpo division, in
Journal of African Administration, 1956.

M. Perham: Some Problems of Indirect Rule in Africa, in the Journal of
the Royal Society of Arts, 1934; also Native Administration in Nigeria,
1937.

S, Leith-Ross: African Women; also Beyond the Niger, 1951.

Royal Anthropological Institute: Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute for the years 1900-1950, and Man 1900-1950.

P. A. Talbot: Some Foreign influences in Nigeria, in Journal of the African
Saociety, 1924; The Peoples of Southern Nigeria, 4 volumes, 1926; also
Tribes of the Niger Delta, 1932,

W. Northcote-Thomas: Report on the Ibo-speaking Peoples of Nigeria, 6
volumes, 1913,

E. R. Wolf and J. G. Jorgensen: Anthropology on the Warpath in Thailand
in The New York Review of Books, 19 November, 1970.

PAX BRITANNICA AND THE SUDAN: S. F. NADEL
James C. Faris,

It should not be necessary, in 1972, to restate the contingent as well
as logical relationships of science to society—in both content and in
form, our science has served society.! This is generally the way it
always has been, always will be, and always should be. What we are
attempting to do here is to continue to re-examine the exact nature
of this functional relationship between science and society to see
precisely what the relationship between anthropology and imperial-
ism is, and to see why it appears the way it does.? My task consists
of detailing this in the theory and practice of S. F. Nadel—perhaps
one of the most clear examples from the previous generation of
social anthropology.

Let me make some introductory remarks, however, about an
enterprise of this sort. It seems that there are two major pitfalls in

'Cf. J. Stauder, “The Functions of Functionalism”, Paper delivered to the
Symposium Marx 11: Anthropology and Imperialism, American Anthro-
pological Association Annual Meeting, New York, November 1971, B.
Magubane, “A Critical Look at the Indices Used in the Study of Social
Change in Modern Africa’ in Current Anthropology, 12, 1971; J. Moore,
“Perspectives for a Partisan Anthropology™”, in Liberation, 16, 1971; P.
Newcomer, “Social Process: Critical Notes for a Method of Study”, Un-
published Ph.D. Thesis, 1972, University of Connecticut.

*We now have the beginning of some histories (cf. M. Harnis, The Rise of
Anthropological Theory, New York, 1968; J. Moore, op. cit.) and some
explicit epistemological statements (cf. D. Goddard, “Limits of British
Anthropgﬁagy” in New Left Review, 58, 1969; ). Banaj, ‘The Crisis of
British Anthropology’, in New Left Review, 64, 1970; G. Berthoud, “Social
Anthropology and Marxian Thought”, Paper delivered to the American
Anthropological Association Annual Meeting, San Diego, California, Nov-
154 S F NADEL AND THg Sup,
N

these types of analyses. One may be seen in the argumep th
anthropological scholarship is, by and large, scientifically adeq‘xatf
but it has just unwittingly (to be generous) served the wrong intey.
ests.® I think this view is altogether wrong. )

Our science as well as our politics must change if we are to unge,_
stand our past, transcend our present, and plan for the future. Heg,
tofore, the fact that some anthropologists may have been politically
liberal, or even left-leaning, is simply irrelevant. They may hgy,
even attempted to aid local oppressed peoples in various ways
but without an analysis of the generation of such oppression, very
little could come of their efforts. In fact, they probably acted tq
inhibit oppressed peoples from overtly attacking the colonial regime,
It is of course wrong to attribute insidious motives to the vagt
majority of anthropologists, but functionalism had its functiongt
quite apart from any conscious intentions of its proponents. If our
science doesn’t change with our politics, we can hardly be of much
intellectual help in struggles against various manifestations of imper.
ialism. Not only must the content and application of our science
change, but also our theory and methodology.®

The other pitfall I think rests in the possibility of a theoretical
renaissance without the benefit of practical politics—dialectical
materialism is a fascinating explanatory foundation in itself. But it
is a rational philosophy based in real life and life processes, and
thus it can hardly be worthwhile without first establishing the social
relations which enable it to fully function. Talking about things
rather than doing things will ultimately have a stultifying effect on
theory. With these two warnings in mind, let me return to Nadel—
a man whose efforts in anthropology hardly span twenty years, but
who left a vast legacy in field monographs, theoretical study, and
methodological comment.

L. The Task (or, what it was in aid of)
Nadel, perhaps more clearly than most others of his generation, well

ember 1970; P. Newcomer, op. cit.)

'Cf. K. Gough, “New Proposals for Anthropologists” in Current Anthro-

pology, 9, 1968; G. Berreman, “Is Anthropology Alive? Responsibility in

Social Anthropology”, ibid. 1 am assuming that no one would today still

argue that anthropology is simply irrelevant (cf. G. Berreman, ‘“‘Anemic

ggd Eégng;ic Analyses in Social Anthropology” in American Anthropologist,
, 1966,

*Cf. J. Stauder, op. cit.

*There were, of course some anthropologists whose sympathies were quite

in accord with the polical structure they served. In the files of the old

colonial research institutes are to be found examples of the most blatant

racism.
jaMES FARDS 155
derstood the unity of theory and practice. He constantly regarded
ub” " if as a practical, even applied, anthropologist, and all his field

- nsel
:':;;ewas at explicit government request. In his first book Nadel

“‘}}af,ﬁss been said that modern anthropology is destined to be of
reat assistance to colonial governments in providing the
gnowledge of the social structure of native groups upon which
a sound and harmonious Native Administration, as envisaged in
Indirect Rule, should be built. Let me say that I for one firmly
believe in the possibility of such cooperation betewen
anthropologist and administrator.®
He urged anthropological knowledge be put to use and chided those
anthropologists who kept aloof from doing so:
Wwhile certain anthropologists would remain aloof from these
practical questions, others consider it their right and duty to
‘apply’ anthropology in practice. I count myself among the
latter...‘pure’, value-free anthropology is an illusion.’
In every one of S. F. Nadel’s major works he stresses the unity of
theory and application. He was much more explicit about this than
many of his colleagues: ‘I do not mean merely than the anthro-
pologist should ‘diagnose and predict’ ”.,* for he was convinced of
the merits—and loyal to—the policy as well as the ideological
mission set the discipline:
..the right and duty of anthropologists to judge, criticise, and
add constructively to social development and political planning
of all kinds. I said ‘of all kinds’; for the application of anthro-
pology to problems of colonial policy is only one special aspect
of a wider issue.?
Nadel felt, as his employers already knew (after all, this is why
they hired him) that very likely “‘the blunders of the anthropologists
will be ‘better’ blunders’.*°
Both of his field monographs were explicitly planned to be of
practical value to colonial governments—A Black Byzantium (1942)
was introduced by Lugard, and The Nuba (1947) had a forward by
Maj. Gen. Sir Hubert Huddleston, Governor-General of the Sudan
—and both emphasised the value of close cooperation. Nadel was

'S. Nadel, 4 Black Byzantium, London, 1942, p. vi.

'S. Nadel, The Foundations of Social Anthropology, London, 1951, pp. 52-3.
See also page 3 of the same work.

‘Ibid., p. 55.

‘Ibid., p. 54.

"Ibid., p. 55.
156 S F NADEL AND THE SUby,

not just an anthropologist with a choice about cooperation, he w
hired to do specific jobs. Rockefeller money enabled the Ime,,fj
tional African Institute to send Nadel to Nigeria in 1932—whers ..
excellent work for them led to his being recommended to the Govey,
ment of the Sudan to help them with their “pressing problemg.
amongst the Nuba. Nadel arrived in the Sudan in 1938.

After the Nuba research, Nadel’s political biography continueg j,
1941 with an appointment to the British Military Administration j,
Eritrea as Secretary for Native Affairs—a job he apparently eye.
cuted with efficiency, for he was commended by the Commande;.
in-Chief of the Middle-Eastern Forces for outstanding services:

...applving anthropology to the administration of peoples of var.

ious origin and tradition, with all the understanding of

primitive mentality and appreciation of administrative problems

which he showed during his two years in the Nuba Mountains!?
With such excellent credentials, he later progressed through a Senior
Lectureship at the London School of Economics, a Readership at
Durham, and finally to Canberra, where apart from the Chair in
Anthropology at the Australian National University, he also became
Dean of the School of Pacific Research. In this post, Nadel died in
1956.

I would like to look in more detail at his actual field research—
the situation in which it was conducted, just how it was conducted,
and just how his work was concretely applied. I am personally most
familiar with his Nuba researches in what was the Anglo-Egyptian
Sudan, and shall focus on this principally.?®

Nadel was asked to work amongst the Nuba for several reasons.
The first of these stems from the direct grief they caused the Gov-
ernment. With no political hierarchy into which the Government
could easily plug Indirect Rule, how to effectively control some
300,000 people was a paramount problem. Military patrols were the
modus operandi until just two years before Nadel arrived.'* As

“S. Nadel, The Nuba, London, 1947, p. xi.

“Tbid., p. xii, emphasis mme. While in Eritrca, Nadel investigated land
tenure, among other things (S. Nadel, “Land Tenure on the Eritrean
Plateau™, in Africa, 16, 1946.) Research in the administrative archives and
military records relating to the area might reveal just why this knowledge
was needed.

“The ‘Nuba’ is the label given to the entire group (some one-third million
people) of relatively small autonomous distinct agricultural societies that
occupy the hills and mountains of central Kordofan Province, Sudan. While
culturally similar, these societies have no traditional political structures
beyond the village or village group level.

“The Nuba, p. 494.
AMES E ARIS 157
ddleston casually expresses the contact between the Government
H‘é the Nuba in his introduction to Nadel’s book, ‘‘contact...fre-
ntly culminated in a small military patrol directed now against

i hill and now against another™!® and punitive patrols were com-
On:n._.later to be, at least in one case, the result of Nadel's own
spplicd anthropology® |

Nadel’s principal guide linc, in fact, for field work amongst
certain of the Nuba societies (and not amongst others), was politico-
military expediency. He states that “tribes whose administration

resented imperative problems were considered before others™.'

Nadel’s assignment was quite specific, and the book “‘was prim-
arily planned to be of practical value to administrators and others™.**
The Government felt the Nuba were:

...being powerfully affected by the authority of the Government,

the forces of economics and the influence of science... Their

lives were still largely conditioned by superstitions and customs

imperfectly known to the administration...was the constructive

effect of the administration outweighing the destructive? Keen

officials, especially technical officials, were apt to override native

customs rather than make use of them.!®
A new policy phase had indeed opened in British imperialism, and
in the Sudan, Nadel was one of its local agents. He provided the
information necessary for the Administration to ‘make use of’ local
customs (this will be examined in more detail below). Overrniding
indigenous societies had become too dangerous and uneconomical
—controlling people with sociology was easier than controlling them
with troops, and ‘making use of’ their customs not only facilitated
Administration and kept them controlled, but under the policy of
Indirect Rule, it had the additional and very critical effect of keep-
ing them Nuba.

This latter factor is particularly important, for the Nuba are the
furthermost North of any of the pagan societies of the Sudan, and
were viewed by the British as an important buffer against the pro-
gressive move South of Islam. Missionary activity amongst the

“lbid., p. xi.

“Ibid., p. 355 n. This happencd in the hill group of Jebel Tullishi where
Nadel was instrumental in setting up a Native Court and anchoring Gov-
ernment-sponsored Chiefships. This court led to difficultics, and the Gov-
ernment, only two vears later, sent a military force to drive the Tullushi
_out of their mountain homes and settle them on the plain.

"The Nuba, p. 7.

"Ibid., p. xi.

"oc. cit.
158 S F NADEL AND THE 5, AN

Nuba had lagged behind that of other parts of the non-Myg;
Sudan, however—undoubtedly because of the difficulty in pacifyi:]
the Nuba—but the area and its people were of primary imponancC
to the Government in its policy of containing Islam and Ara} in.
fluence.? Sections of the Nuba Mountains were official ‘Closed pjg
tricts’—which meant that no Arabs could enter without explicit
permission. With the marked lack of success in missionary activity
this essentially meant any change was inhibited, making it, in 1,
overall, a far less costly and ultimately less dangerous operation =
The most conspicuous effect of this policy (and one must therefor,
speculate about the real reasons for the policy) was then to inhip;
any development at all. Portions of the eastern and southern Nub,
Mountains are essentially today as they were at the turn of the cep.
tury. The Government policy failed, however, and did not, in fact,
successfully inhibit the spread of Islam and Arabisation. But it
became the excuse for the lack of education and development. We
can better understand, then, why Nadel’s instructions were ‘‘that he
would study the economic and political organisation, their religious
beliefs and their psychological and social background”.?* He states,
in fact, that his conclusions “are intended to summarise the results
from the viewpoints of a common political administration, and the
common future of Nuba culture under the impact of Arab civilisa-
tion’’.*?

Although Nadel was supposed to aid the effort to curb Islam, he
regarded uncompromising Christian missionaries with as much sus-
picion as Muslim zealots. He could well see that missionaries of thc
fundamentalist sort were no asset to the task ahead, for they, as well
as the Arab faki “‘clash as much with the life as we, in the enlight-
ened West, know it, and with the fruits of our long evolution which
we now desire to share with the backward races of the world’’.?!
However more insidious Nadel found the threat of Islam, he clearly
saw its inevitability, and says,

True, we also insist on Nuba village schools {as opposed to the

*S. Hurreiz, Linguistic Diversity and Language Planning in the Sudan,
African Studies Seminar Paper No. 5, 1968, Sudan Research Unit, Univer-
sity of Khartoum.

M. Abdel-Rahim, The Development of British Policy in the Southern
Sudan 1899-1947, School of Extra-Mural Studies Publication, University of
Khartoum.

2The Nuba, p. xii.

“Ibid., p. 10.

“Ibid., p. 512. This is not the only example of Nadel as moralist—as will be
seen below, it was also at the base of his funotionalism.
guttab and khalwa—rural Koranic schools; it should also be
mentioned here that very few of these village schools were
actually established] meant to keep aloof from Arab m{iucnce,
or occasionally design romantically savage garbs for tribal
lice : but these efforts can hardly count for more than an odd
detour in an otherwise straight road.*
sval of Christianity, but the steadily encroaching Islam™.2®
we find a similar statement about Islam amongst the Nupe of west
Africa, and “here it is not the pagan religion which is the greatest
Yet Nadel did not appear to understand much of the syncretism
characterising Islam in the Nuba Mountains. In a discussion about
the adoption of Islam, he states *“‘often the motives behind this con-
version are stated naively’’?’ and quotes a discussion he had with a
Nuba man about rain magic:
[He] said to me once, during a discussion of rain magic, that he,
of course, did not believe in rain makers and rain sacrifices:
he knew that ‘rain came from Allah.” As there is a mission
working in this tribe, I asked if he meant the Mohammedan or
Christian God? He replied: ‘I mean the Allah of the Hakuma
[Government] and the police in Talodi’.?®
It seems to me this is a more poignant statement about the link of
svmbols to social relations than Nadel realised. It is anything but?
naive.

II. The Techniques (or how it was accomplished)

The general impression the casual reader gets from Nadel’s book is
that the Nuba are not very pleasant: *“‘from our description a Tul-
lishi society emerged fraught with tension and conflict™.® We find
out elsewhere, however, that the Tullishi had been repeatedly the
focus of military attracks and punitive patrols (and would be again,
thanks to Nadel; see above, note *). And he speaks of the *“dour,
reserved, and suspicious attitude of the Mesakin’ and of their “pes-
simistic, ncurotic mentality”,*! particularly in contrast to nearby

“Ibid., p. 487.

“S. Nadel, Nupe Religion, Glencoe, 1954, p. 231. This book, curiously
enough, deals only with pre-Islamic practices and rituals. Although my
paper concentrates on Nadel's research in the Sudan and on some of his
general theoretical contributions, similar analyses are needed of his field-
work in West Africa.

“'The Nuba, p. 488.

"Loc. cit.

*Ibid., p. 356.

*Ibid., p. 32In, p. 323n.

*1bid., p. 317.
160 S F NADEL AND THE SUDAY

Korongo, whom Nadel found friendlier. Here again, we must study
the book carefully to learn that: g
If the reserve and suspicion of the Mesakin were restricteq
their interaction with us, this might be explained by the fact
that the Mesakin, unlike the Korongo, had to suffer punitive
police action.3?
In contrasting the Tira and Moro societies, Nadel states, “Mq,
culture, compared with Tira, is also one in which individual violenc,
appears more unrestrained; obsession with magic fears greater; apqg
the emotional balance under stress more precarious’.®® Only elge.
where do we find that Islam had permiated Tira culture to a fa;
greater degree’* and that the Moro have always been troublesome
to the Government.

The principal reason the Nuba were thus so unpleasant to Nade]
is because he represented a hostile agency—in short, an enemy. He
was serving an administration that not only physically attacked local
societies, driving them from their homes, forcing migrations, im-
prisoning (and very frequently hanging) their men and women, and
he was an apologist and defender of that system. Nadel’s unsympa-
thetic comment on this oppression is revealing :

They may not have taken kindly to their enforced migration...

occasionally an unfortunate misunderstanding aggravated the

situation, as when the Tira were made to move down to a low
hillock of which their traditions spoke of as an unhealthy
disease-ridden site, which had once already been abandoned by
their ancestors.3®

If we turn to Nadel's fieldwork techniques, we find another rea-
son why the Nuba appeared so hostile. As a fieldworker, Nadel has
left a considerable legacy of method and technique that can hclp
us more clearly understand his role.?®

In an essay on the use of interviews, we find the basis of Nadel’s

to

*Ibid., p. 317n.

“Ibid., p. 265.

“Tbid., p. 238.

“Ibid., p. 6, emphasis mine.

**Among other things, Nadel was a pioneer in intelligence testing in British
social anthropology. He saw the goal of this to be able to arrange groups
on some type of scale that might measure relative superiority and inferiority
(S. Nadel, “The Application of Intelligence Tests in the Anthropological
Field” in F. C. Bartlett, et. al. (eds.), The Study of Society, London, 1939).
This was not just to be quantitative measures along a single existing scale,
but comparison on a new basis. The most recent statement of this in Britain
is to be found in the blatant racism of H. J. Eysenck (The 1.0. Argument!
London, 1971).
. oJationship with .indigenc?us pepples. It is c!ear he prefers ‘raw
savages’———hc cautions against using edugatcd mforrpants,“’ or edu-
cated people locally as researchers. Nothing suffices like the rigorous
inductive methodology of the European sc..nentxst—-and.ﬂle sophis-
ication of local people only “blurs their vnqw” and “dlSt.Ol'tS valu-
able information™.*> Nadel prefers instead, his own “bullying’ tech-
ique:
mc}qs a rule the most successful approach lies in stimulating the
informant cmotionally and thus overcoming his indolence or

his reluctance to discuss certain points... I have found it most

profitable to stimulate the emotionality of a few chief informants

to the extent of arousing almost violent disputes and controver-
sies...a ‘bullying’ technique of this type amounts to the

deliberate introduction of leading questions, a practice against

which fieldworkers are frequently warned. But the leading

question has its legitimate place in the anthropological, as in
other intcrviews, provided that it is handled carefully and, above
all, with full knowledge of its dangerous nature. The risks which
this technique involves are not negligible; wrongly applied, it

may lcad to complete misinformation.?

Of course Nadel only worried about the danger of misinformation—
he had access (at least in the Nuba Mountains) to a police squad*’
and appears to have been able to summon informants at will.*
However motivated, then, informants could only appear hostile, and
could not constitute a physical danger to Nadel. It is small wonder,
however, why they appeared so insolent.

In discussing field participation, Nadel suggcsts that some anthro-
pologists may involve themselves more fully, but stresses that it is
really not necessary to get too involved: ‘he may be admitted to
secret rites, yet disregard with impunity important ritual rules, such
as food taboos and submission to severe flogging in an initiation
ceremony’’.’* With this kind of contempt for local custom, it is not
surprising that Nadel urges that anthropologists ‘‘capitalise...on their
‘stranger value’ ”.** Nowhere in this essay on interviews, nor indeed
in his entire Nuba monograph, does Nadel mention the anthropolo-

“:i Nadel, “The Interview Technique in Social Anthropology” ibid., p. 322.
“Loc. cit.

“Tbid., pp. 322-23.

"“The Nuba, p. 347.

"The Nuba, p. 335.

““*“The Interview Technique”, p. 326.

“Loc. cit.
162 S F NADEL AND THE syp,

gist as friend, much less an ally in local struggles against colonjy,
oppression.

IIL. The Theory (or how it was justified)

As I stressed in the introductory remarks, theory and practice ca;,.
not, should not, and never have been separated. And as mentiop
functionalism has its functions; far from just a legacy which cffe..
tively blinded us from fully understanding and explaining sociy
relations (which it did), it was more importantly a necessary inte].
lectual tradition answering to the central questions facing imperig].
ism—control. And it did its job. Of course, as Asad*¢ has suggesteq,
most anthropologists were not conscious of the job they were doing,
and only operated as they had been taught—functionalism was the
guiding paradigm and the appropriate strategy for ‘normal sci-
ence’.** Some, however, understood its implications more clearly
than others, and their ruling class allegiance was more explicit.
S. F. Nadel, I'm afraid, belongs to this latter group.

As mentioned above, the unity of theory and practice in Nadel
is remarkable—and had it served different interests, we might cven
call it enviable. In the Nuba monograph, Nadel tells us:

This book fall to some extent in the category of ‘applied anthro-

pology’ : its primary purpose is to provide an anthropological

study which should prove helpful in the practical tasks of
government...But this is in now way a handbook : it aims at
much more than mere description—at analysis and causal
explanation; it deals with the different tribes and their changing
institutions, not as so many disconnected topics, but as steps in

a gradual, often comparative investigation.*®
It is, in fact, in his commitment to application that Nadel’s thcory
becomes comprehensible. A poignant summary of Nadel’s ultimate
resolution of theory and practice may be seen in what is perhaps
the last thing he ever wrote—the final paragraph of The Theory of
Social Structure.

...in employing the criteria of command over persons and benefits

I have introduced concepts connoting, if only implicitly, purposc

and utility, since command always mcans command for some

purpose. Earlier on, I justified this step by saying that these
criteria help to retain a degree of relevance in structural

“T. Asad, The Kababish Arabs, London, 1970, p. 10.

“T. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago, 1962.
““The Nuba, p. 8.
; AMES FARIS 163
analysis, 1 would now say that they help to retain, or provide,
the necessary linkage between the theory of social structure and
the social universe of purpose. You may call this an insurance
against a heuristic isolation which can be driven too far, or a
reminder that we live in societies where there are jobs to be
done.*’

From Nadel’s perspective, of course, the overriding job was con-

trol. His functionalism focused exactly where his application focus-

ed—on control and regulation. For those of you that have had to
suffer through The Theory of Social Structure as graduate students
as I had to, you may remember that items from his symbolic calcu-
lus became part of the everyday lexicon—c a [control over actions]
and c r b [control over rights and benefits], Nadel’s critical elements
in social structure, were a part of the heritage. And how could one
dispute it? It made such obviously good sense inasmuch as it
appearcd to describe well the situation in which we found ourselves.

But good scnse for whom? This was not the sort of question that

was tolerated (or even considecred) in my graduate student years.

Nadel’s theoretical model for the analysis of other societies was

derived from the task required by imperial nations. Control was

paramount in their concern with colonised peoples, and Nadel thus
argued that this was the natural state of affairs everywhere—the
paramount concern of all societies.

However appropriate and useful Nadel’s theory may have been
for regulating people, one of the reasons for this conference is
becausc the theory fails to tell us why societies are the way they
are, how they came to be that way (and not any other way), and in
what direction social evolution will go in the future. These are
theoretical as well as applied questions. I think it is first necessary
to see why functionalism, particularly as manifested in Nadel, is
inadequate as cxplanation. Its status epistomologically has been
reviewcd in several places, but I would like to look in more detail
at the implications of its logic.

Functionalism, with its rigorous commitment to empiricism, can
never be more than a description that does not transcend the facts
on which it is based. Defenders of the faith frequently state some-
thing like: “But you can’t deny that societies function and that it
is of paramount importance to their survival.”” Of course, but this
is precisely why it is useless as explanation—it is as trivial as it is
true. To explain all behaviour as functional (or dysfunctional) be-

“The Theory of Social Structure, London, 1957, pp. 158-9.
164 S F NADEL AND THE sy,

cause it must ultimately ensure survival is to turn effect apg con
sequence into cause.”® And since we have no test (i.c., we dop,
know very much about how societies functioned that didn's SUrvive)
it is spurious cause at best. ’

Without knowing something about why things come to be the Way
they are, to argue that they are functional explains nothing. Fyp,.
tionalism has no way of sorting out which ‘things’ are relevant and
which are not—everything must have a function—and so we get
weak discussions of core functions and primary functions, o
ultimate cause in psychology, morality, or species-specific predis.
positions. Of course ‘things’ do something (or did something), other.
wise they would not be here—but the questions of scientific rele.
vance (i.e., explanatory relevance) is why do they do it, and why do
they do it in this manner. Functionalism simply cannot cope with
any ‘why’ questions.

Functionalism usually ‘explains’ one institution or thing as being
causal to another, but when functionalists attempt to frace causal
chains and nexes, we either get the reduction to individual psy-
chology or pan-human predispositions, as mentioned above (i.e., all
men seek power;* or humans must self-regulate®!). Or we get the
familiar tautologies—the function of something is to do what it
does; or the somewhat more complex circularity—witchcraft exists
to channel anxieties, produced by structural disharmonies, brought
about by anxieties, produced by witchcraft.’? Where Nadel is not
circular, psvchological, or moralistic (see below), he is presented
with problems of relativity.

For Nadel, functionalism is predicated on “‘certain absolute rc-
quirements—the integration of societies and the survival of popula-
tions’’,>® for “without it, we could not legitimately speak of adjust-
ment of maladjustment, that is, invoke a criterion of adequacy.”

#«<Historically speaking. functional analysis is a modification of teleological
explanation, i.e., of explanation not bv reference to causes which ‘bring
about’ the event in question but by reference to ends which determine its
co%rsg.” C. Hempel, Aspects of Scientific Explanation, New York, 1963,
p. 303.

*’S. Nadel, “Social Control and Self Regulation™ in Social Forces, 31, 1953.

*Cf. E. Leach, Political System of Highland Burma, London, 1954,

*1S. Nadel, op. cit. (1953).

*S. Nadel, “Witchcraft in Four African Societies: An Essay in Compari-
son’” in American Anthropologist, 54, 1952. (Reprinted in S. Ottenberg
(ed.), Cultures and Societies of Africa, New York, 1960. Pagination in
references from this edition.)

*S. Nadel, The Foundations of Social Anthropology, London, 1951, p. 375.
As WE have seen, Nadelts relativism—his i.deas‘about “adjl{supent”
" _are based on assumptions of the pax Britannica, for why is it that
o raid on a D.C. post, a refusal to be recrurted into .forced public
works projects, or refusal to obey a Government chief, or to pay
taxes, i considered maladjustment? Whose survival are we talking
about? The criteria of adequacy which allows one to interpret a
strike or revolt against colonial rule as maladjustment seems rather
specific to one’s class allegiance.

Returning to the problem of cause, I've noted above that if you
examine carefully a functionalist, you will likely discover a moralist
or a psychologist. Thus Nadel focuses heavily on ‘self-regulation’
in his writings, and while in the Nuba Mountains gathered an in-
ordinate amount of data on witchcraft, suicide, individual aggres-
sion, and shamanism. This material was necessary to the mystifica-
tion that his job required—for illustrating that frustrations and
alienation have their origins in people’s heads. In his widely read
paper “Witchcraft in Four African Societies”,** Nadel begins with
the assumption that ‘“‘witchcraft beliefs are causally related to frus-
trations, anxieties or other mental stresses precisely as psychopatho-
logical symptoms are related to mental disturbances of this
nature’s®

There is another very practical aspect to the mystification in
psychological causes—for if people under drastic change and new
forms of oppression expressed their frustrations socially, it was
dangerous; but if they expressed them in neurotic tendencies, re-
pression, or suicide,’® it was much healthier for Europeans. It is
small wonder, then, that so much is made of these manifestations of
alienation, and the ways of dealing with them studied so carefully.
Witchcraft could not harm Europeans, but only local people, so far
better that the reaction to Europeans take this channel than a more
effective social form.

In spite of two ‘theoretical’ books and several related essays, a
major problem with Nadel is the incredible confusion about pro-
cess and explanation. Certainly the job of science is to explicate
processes. In so doing, however, we must assume that the world
changes in discoverable ways, and that the relationships and pro-

“The two Nuba societies discussed in this essay are the Mesakin and the
Korongo (see above). In this essay, however, we find no reference to the
differential treatment of the two societies at the hands of the Government
troops. For this sec S. Nadel The Nuba, p. 317 u.

*S. Nadel (1952), op. cit., p. 408.

“The Nuba, p. xiii.
166 S F NADEL AND THE SUDAN
cesses in it are not random, capricious, or unique, Wha ;
terest, then, is in fact change. The fundamentally re:actionals 1n.
acter of functionalism is exposed since it focuses on why thriy Cha.
not change, rather than why they do. Since to accept a worlnd 0
. . . ., tha
is always in change, constitutes a political challenge to the Soci t
supporting and sanctioning functionalism. 5o (00 docs it e, ety
an intellectual challenge to functionalism as explanation, T, 0
industrial capitalism as the natural state into which all other SOCieqj
would develop, and a natural state that would not funda;m-.,m‘,ﬂ(fS
change—also demanded that the history of its own evolutigp be
mystified (by positioning its origins in great men or great religions
or unique events, etc.) and its persistence guaranteed (by the para.
digms of functionalism).

Nadel’s view of explanation was that it is but complete descrip.
tion.” Thus, to understand the world was to observe it and describe
it. Theories were empirical and arrived at by inductive accumula.
tion of facts. This is an amazingly naive view for the times in which
he worked. We observe things, but the processes by which these
things came to be the way they are mus? be the products of theory.s
Nadel’s science was, however, committed to measuring rather than
theorising—since in the allegiance to inductive empiricism, the only
way in which he could reveal relationships was by correlating
facts.®

Nadel’s use of consequence as cause, effect as determinate, and
his psychological reductionism sufficed as explanation. And this, he
tells us, is simply complete description. Nadel’s theory, inasmuch
as it only generalises from the facts, is incapable of falsification.
Facts for Nadel exist not to disprove theories, but to statistically
verify them—a methodological mistake of a crippling kind in theory
and explanation.®®

¥S. Nadel (1951), op. cit., p. 199.
“Cf. P. Newcomer, op. cit. _
“As Marx reminds us, if the appearance of things coincided with their
essence, there would be no need for science at all (Capital, New York,
1967, Vol. 111, p. 817). Processes are seldom visible (cf. J. Faris, “Cognitive
Studies and Materialism”, Paper delivered to the Symposium Marx I:
Science History and Materialism, American Anthropological Assocration
Annual Meeting, New York, November 1971). No one has ever seen
biological evolution taking place—we see its consequences and products
speciation and some of its mechanisms (differential reproduction and
natural selection). But evolution is not a fact—it is a theory of how the
facts came to be the way they are. It is not a law, and it cannot be proved;
but it can easily be faksified—the hallmark of a well-constructed theory.
*Cf. J. Faris, “Concepts and Methodology in Social Process’, paper pre-
sented to the Symposium Marx I11: Critiques of Theory, American An-
167

FARIS
JAMES , : . s .
. tications of this are far-reaching. Nadel’s inductive em-

The m;prced him to view the world probabilistically—in quantita-
. icism owith causal relationships established by correlations based
(ive ch'rns eas of their function. If all relationships can then be statis-
on his lde fined and quantitatively determined, as in one of Nadel's
tically constructed about role systems, then any change must be
matr;%esas incremental, or quantitative. All qualitative distinctions
(reatthus be reduced to their quantitative specifications. Thus, for
;?gdd, class is simply a type of stratification, law is simply one type
of control custom, underdevelop.men.t is simply gua{ltltat}vel)r less
(han development, and local society is but a nation in microcosm.
et me look at these examples (all from Nadel) more closely.

Taking for example law: Nadel regards law as the codification
of custom—which is in turn the inculcation of self-regulation to
inhibit “‘individual learnings” and to “‘camalise human drives”.®
Law is, for Nadel, in essence written-down order. The reality in
history, as most of us know, however, is that law is opposed to
order.? Law is the product of state systems; it arose with the
breach of customary order—not by everyone, but by the exploiting
group, by the rising elite. Thus, the customary order no longer
applies to all persons—some have law instead (backed in every case
by force). This is, by any standard, a qualitatively different situation.
The codification of customary order (normally this operation in-
volves ignoring some customary order and introducing non-cust-
omary rules as well) is a transformation—to ‘legally’ insure the
status of one group vis-g-vis another. It is not just a matter of
writing down customs.

Nadel seems well aware, however, that some customs cannot
become laws. If law is to serve a ruling élite, then some traditional
customs (which in totality served the entire society and thereby in-
hibited stratification) must be dropped and others invented: ‘‘the
transformation of customs into laws...is of a more controversial
nature...the danger is obvious: it lies in the premature codification
of what is...a tentative adjustment”.®® Those customs Nadel par-
ticularly wished codified surround political structures—governing
structures that could be used in the colonial policies of Indirect

thropological Association Annual Meeting, Toronto, December 1972.

'S. Nadel (1953), op. cit., pp. 265-5. Note thet psychologism here—a charac-
teristic of most functionalists.

*“Cf. S. Diamond, “The Rule of Law Versus the Order of Custom”, in
Social Research, 38, 1971.

“The Nuba, pp. 509-10.
168 > F NADEL AND 1y SUDAy
Rule. The major problem was in finding these—and mgg; fr

the Government chief (who may or may not have been :q“efltly
from one of the priesthoods of the traditional acephaloyg ?"}“ed
was the focus of ‘codified custom’: *‘chieftainship ang lawocle‘Y)
then become reflections of each other, the chief the agent of , |
that is greater and more necessary than he..law and ch; ef@is l;w

. : . ' vralidi »84 , l
will thus attain their ulterior validity together.”'** Nadel saw that ¢
“government-sponsored” (government-enforced) chiefship requir N
law—that the traditional authority figures were simply diﬂ_er;:l
(though his lack of general theory prohibited him from seeing tha:
they were qualitatively different), and any attempt to simply direqy
‘make use of’ them was not possible. In discussing one such failyre
Nadel quotes an informant: '

..*‘our young men would never obey clan or family heads i,

political matters; they obey only the Meks and Sheikhs which

the Hakuma has appointed.” Unhappily for the anthropologist,

then, the scientifically sounder organisation may prove impracti-

cable, and indeed, unnecessary.®?

Nadel is lamenting here the fact that he couldn’t efficiently make use
of local custom. He simply did not, however, understand just what
is implied by a social system that has chiefs and political structures
—the qualitative distinction between such a society and one without
chiefs and structures to enforce legal codes. He did not understand
that traditional custom and law are not simple arithmetic expres-
sions of one¢ another.

Similarly, Nadel failed to understand that classless societies (the
local society) and class-based societies (the ‘nation’) are not quan-
titative expressions of each other. Societies with forms such as law.
money, and property (class-based societies) are systems with wholly
different implications from societies that are classless—societies
ordered by custom and producing for use-value. In a society where
everyone can have a pair of shoes, or a bicycle, or a car, or a plane
or a yacht, there is no reason to have to protect property with law.
We know, of course that in societies with plancs and yachts, law
is critically necessary to their maintenance because only a privileged
few can have them. But the functionalist ‘explanation’ (the explana-
tion which counts and which measures all change and differentials
in increments) for societies of this type would involve something

“The Nuba, p. 498 (emphasis mine). Here Nadel is much more poignantly
revealing and correct than he possibly wished to be.
®*The Nuba, pp. 498-9.
169
£s FARIS
fact that even though yachts are limited, if everyone just
g the
gbot pard (Or Saves more), he or she too may have.a vacht, Thus
W gifferences between the yacht owners and others is presented as
the santitative. There is stratification, of course (usually regar-
me Yngcessitated by technology, or some other external factor, such
ded fact that some people are just not as hard-working). But such
as 1% |anation doesn’t need class—it can stick to the empirical facts,
an 'e );ptransccnd them, and account for the situation with stratifica-
chcm Nadel did exactly that—he simply viewed the world as if
thcré were no disjunctions or qualitative differences between .s.ocie-
jes, epochs, or things. He was thus able to argue: “tradmgmal
Nuba morality is bounded by the small community: we want it to
embrace the whole tribe, the whole country. Why not teach just
t?"a‘f
tM;But as argued above, Nadel knew full well that some morals of
classless society had to be junked if local people were to participate
in class-based social organisation. His recommendation was to drop
these (and add law and chiefs)—then the Nuba and the governing
elite would differ only in degree! He urged:
The education of the Nuba, as of all primitive groups, should be
guided thus: let moral education take the form of a teaching
of tribal history, modified and weighed in accordance with
modern values. The principal tenets of social morality as we
visualise them, and as they are embodied in tribal structure
and the tribal past, are often the same; only their terms of
reference, the social range to which they refer, need reinterpreta-
tion.®®
Thus, any qualitative differences are obliterated, and everything is
more or less of everything else. Even Nadel, however, could not
find some features of his ideal class-based state in local society (and
here again we find Nadel the moralist), so these he attributes to
“universal moral tenets—the evilness of murder, respect for prop-
erty or marital rights’’.®°
The qualitative differences were simply too great for Nadel to
generate them from any simple quantitative accretion, and he had
thus to introduce into classless local societies a morality derived
from capitalism to complete his functional schema. With this, every

M

“Cf. P. Newcomer, “‘Social Class and Social Stratification”, paper delivered
to the Symposium Marx I11: Critiques of Theory, American Anthropologi-
cal Association Annual Meeting, Toronto, December 1972.

“The Nuba, p. 512.

*Ibid.. p. 512 (emphasis mine).

“Loc. cit.
170 S F NADEL AND THE SUDAN

difference between ‘them’ and ‘us’ is simply a quantitative expres.
sion: customary order is really law, society is really the state
underdevelopment is really development. '
Very little of what I have said is unique to Nadel,?® for his theory
and methodology is the legacy of most of us. But perhaps this s
changing. Certainly the people on whom this sort of theory wy;
applied are rising up to change it. I am glad to be able to say that
this even happened to Nadel at one point, for after a lecture ip
London, he tells us:
At the end of the talk a number of West African students in the
audience violently attacked me, all my fellow workers in that
field, and indeed the whole of anthropology. They accused us
of playing into the hands of reactionary administrators and of
lending the sanction of science to a policy meant to ‘keep the
African down’.™!
It is time that we lend ‘‘the sanction of science’ to eliminating
oppression, and one (but only one) way of doing this is t0 make
clear and attack the role of anthropology in creating, preserving,
and implementing ideologies of oppression.

“Cf. J. Fans, “Review: The Dialectics of Social Life (by Robert Murphy)”
in Science and Society, 36, 1972.
"S. Nadel, Anthropology & Modern Life, Canberra, 1953, p. 13.
ANTHROPOLOGY AND COLONIAL RULE: THE CASE OF
GODFREY WILSON AND THE RHODES-LIVINGSTONE
INSTITUTE, NORTHERN RHODESIA
Richard Brown

The problem of knowledge and power is, and always has

been, the problem of the relations of men of knowledge with

men of power.!
The relationship of anthropological knowledge to colonial power
has been the subject of much recent comment. Apart from two
highly critical articles in the New Left Review by Goddard and by
Banaji, Kathleen Gough and others have also been contributing to
a distinctly unfavourable image of the colonial anthropologist.?
This work seems to show that scholarly advance—or perhaps more
accurately, the advancement of scholars—requires a form of in-
tellectual parricide: each generation, it appears, must murder its
immediate ancestors. In this case not just the ideas, but also the
academic morality of the scholarly ancestors is assaulted when it is
claimed that the colonial anthropologist was simply the handmaiden
of imperialism. Van den Berghe writes of him as “strongly com-

‘?%\;;rlggé Mills, Power, Politics and People, ed. 1. L. Horowitz (New York,
‘D. Goddard “Limits of British Anthropology’”, New Left Review, S8
(November-December 1969); J. Banaji, “The Crisis of British Anthropo-
logy”, New Left Review, 64 (November-December 1970); K. Gough,
“World Revolution and the Science of Man’’, The Dissenting Academy, ed.
T. Roszak (Harmondsworth, 1969), 135; K. Gough, “Anthropology: Child
of Impenialism”, Monthly Review, Vol. 19, No. 11 (April 1968); J. R.
Hooker, “The Anthropologist’s Frontier: the last phase of African exploi-
tation”, Journal of Modern African Studies, 1 (1963); P. Worsley, “The
End of Anthropology?”’, paper for 6th World Congress of Sociology, 1966,
mimeo. A specific if ineffective attack on the Northern Rhodesian sociolo-
174 GODFREY WILSON AND Ty Ry

mitted to the preservation of the status quo, regarding the CONntineny
as a vast ethnographic Garden of Eden’ and suggests that jt ig onl
recently that anthropologists have become aware of change. Besideg
also allegedly harmonising with colonial rule and stressing only pg,.
mony in the societies he studied, the colonial anthropologist standg
accused of having deliberately adopted narrow horizons: he is sup.
posed to have studied only social units least touched by modery
influences and to have ignored the world-wide setting in which
modern influences nevertheless made themselves felt.?

However, it is to be doubted whether the contrast between the
dark colonial days and the enlightened present is so stark as thege
writings imply. Nor, because “‘colonial administration had an in.
herent need of cogent, objective information on the peoples over
which it ruled,”* should it be too readily assumed that anthropolo.
gists merely carried out mental labour for colonial administrators
or that the interests of the two groups necatly coincided. Readiness
to be an “applied anthropologist’” and to subscribe to a belief in
objective and value-ncutral social research did not necessarily mecan
tame submission to colonial aims as Gerald Berreman appears to
think,* but can also be seen as a method by which the colonial
anthropologist sought to disassociate himself from colonial aims
while preserving the freedom to carry out rescarch in colonial con-
ditions on subjects chosen by himself.® In any case, as the quotation
at the hecad of this paper suggests, the relationship between know-
ledge and power is an indirect one mediated by particular men and
particular institutions and is thus subject to some degree of in-
determinancy. It may therefore be of some interest to examine the
particularities of a single situation, not least since the extensive
literature on the subject of the attempt to apply anthropological
knowledge to colonial problems remains at a very general level and
has yet to be supported by case studies.

The case of Godfrey Wilson and the Rhodes-Livingstone Institute
is an interesting one since it illustrates the fundamental ambiguity
which lay at the heart of the relationship betwcen anthropology and
colonial rule. Furthermore, the RLI was the first institute of its

gical tradition was launched in B. Magubane’s “A Critical Look at Indices
used in the Study of Social Change in Colonial Africa”, Current Anthro-
pology, 12 (1971), pp. 419-430, being easily refuted by those attacked in the
following pages of the same issue.

'P. L. van den Berghe, Africa: Social Problems of Change & Conflict (San
Francisco, 1965), 2-5.

‘P. Anderson, “Components of the National Culture”, Student Power, eds.
A. Cockburn & R. Blackburn (Harmondsworth, 1969), 265.

*G. D. Berreman, “Is Anthropology Alive? Social Responsibility in Social
RI cH ARD BROWN 175
ind in the dependent empire and it served as a model in many
gspects for those that were later established after the second world

:var in east and west Africa and in the West Indies.” The academic

;nfluence of the RLI was also great. Wilson’s three successors as

director—Max Gluckman, Elizabeth Cglson, and Clyde Mitchell—

were not only greatly influenced by him and the worl.i he began
while at the institute, like him they achicved world-wide renown
as scholars. The remarkably high number of senior appointments

:n anthropology and sociology held by former research officers of

the RLI are further evidence of its academic influence.

The foundation of the RLI in 1937 was an isolated event, but it
was not wholly divorced from the gencral tendencies of the time
which were favouring attempts to rclate scientific knowledge to
social problems. After the First World War the focus of colonial
interest moved from the acquisition to the maintenance of control,
and the first stirrings about ‘development’ as a consciously-induced
policy began. Embodied in Lord Lugard’s The Dual Mandate in
British Tropical Africa (1922) and the French colonial minister
Albert Sarraut’s Mise en valeur des colonies francaises (1923), these
shifts in the nature of colonialism were accompanicd by the growth
of an anthropology which its practitioners claimed was of great
practical value. Within the discipline the crucial changes—associa-
ted with Radcliffe-Brown and Malinowski (both of whose first
major works were published in 1922)—were the substitution of
functional for evolutionary social theory and the stress on intensive
field-work. The new emphasis on the workings and maintenance of
social systems closely parallels the way in which, at much the same
time, L. B. Namier was revolutionising the study of 18th century
politics by leaving aside the traditional questions of chronological
development in favour of asking how the political system actually
worked in 1760. It was useless, Namier believed, to study the politi-
cal events of the period unless one first understood the structure in
which they occured. In a similar way, Malinowski claimed that
those concerned with devclopments in Africa must first understand
the workings of the societies with which they were in contact.®
Support for anthropology was thus sought on the basis of its utility,

Anthropology”, Current Anthropology (1968), 391-8.

°This argument is developed at length in the chapter by Wendy James.

'E. Chilver, “The Institutes of Social and Economic Research in the Afri-
can Colonies”, Journal of African Administration, 3 (1951) provides a use-
ful overview.

°L. B. Namier, The Structure of Politics at the Accession of George IlI
(London ,1929); B. Malinowski, “Practical Anthropology”, Africa, 2 (1929).
176 GODFREY WILSON AND THE g,
1

and this appeal found a response from within the specialiseq
overlapping circles which concerned themselves with colonial affajry
The formation of the International Institute of African Langyape,
and Cultures in 1926 was the result. The International African
Institute, as it was later to become, was established by represengs.
tives of scientific, missionary and official colonial bodies, with the
specific aim of “bringing about a closer association of scientifi
knowledge and research with practical affairs.”?® Its first chairmgay
was Lord Lugard, who—with Lord Hailey—was to be a key inte-
mediary between the men of knowledge and the men of power.
The utilitarian aims of the IAI werc to receive still wider pub.
licity in Hailey’s massive and influential African Survey, the idea
of which was first canvassed by Smuts in 1929, but which was not
published until 1938. The Survey is well-known for the support it
gave to research of all kinds, but there was a special advocacy of
anthropological research *‘because policies which do not take into
account the naturc of native socictics arc apt to provoke unforeseen
and unwelcome reactions.””** The importance of Hailey's support
is seen in the unusual distinction paid to him when he was acknow-
ledged by name in thc government white paper dealing with the
formation of a Colonial Rescarch Advisory Committee as part of
the 1940 Colonial Development and Welfarec Act. the first act o
make substantial government funds available for colonial research.'!
Nevertheless, the Colonial Secretarv, Malcolm MacDonald, was
cvidently in some fear of anthropologists. Discussing the composi-
tion of the new research committee, -of which Hailey had becn
invited to be chairman, MacDonald wrote: ‘I feel that 1 shall be
pressed...to include an anthropologist, but 1 gather that it will be
rather hard to find one who has not his own personal axe to grind,
and I am told that in any case anthropologists, as a class, are rather
difficult folk to deal with.”’*? In reply, Hailey stressed the need to
appoint one ‘“‘since there are many people, not themselves profes-
sional anthropologists, who will constantly make it their business to
remind you, that it is useless to provide for enquiry into the physical
sciences, unless you consider also the human elements to which the
result of these enquiries must be applied,”” After stating that hc

but

‘F. D. Lugard, “The International Institute of African Languages and Cul-
tures”, Africa, 1 (1928), 1-12.

"Lord Hailey, An African Survey (London, 1938), 40.

"Cmd. 6175 (1940), 1.

?Malcolm MacDonald to Lord Hailey, personal, 18 April, 1940, Rhodes
House, MSS Brit. Emp. 5.342.
glc.HARD BROWN 177
belicvcd some of the colonial governments would also‘ ‘be disappoin-
od if anthropology was omitted, Hailey went on, “But we must
:ecognise the limits within W‘thh support §hould be given to anthro-

ological studi.&s...[the]. aim is not primarily to encourage academic
study; it is Iimlteql to ghscovermg those things wl!lch our administra-
tion must know, if it is to make the best use of its resources for the
development of the pcople in the Colonies.”**

However, important though these mectropolitan developments
were, the RLI was not their direct product. Although the important
post-war research plans of the institute were to be largely funded
from C.D. & W., its formation in 1937 not only prcceded the act
by three years, but also cut across official thinking which at this
time tended to favour Hailey’s vicw that colonial research ought to
be centrally organised and conducted from Britain rather than from
local institutes situated in Africa.'* In these circumstances. while it
is true that the gencral climate favoured experiments in applied
rescarch, it was also the case that it would be difficult to get the
principle accepted that an institute should be founded in Northern
Rhodesia and difficult, too. to raise the necessary funds. Thus, un-
like the later institutes, which were part of a wide-ranging colonial
office policy to underpin its post-war development plans with social
research, the RLI struggled into existence as a result of a local
initiative, and morc despite than because of colonial office wishes.

The first suggestion came from Sir Hubert Winthrop Young at
the outset of his governorship of Northern Rhodesia in 1934 when
he proposed to the colonial sccretary that a Livingstone memorial
comprising a museum and a rescarch institutc should be established
to carry out research in ‘“‘archaeology, geology, and particularly an-
thropology.” Interestingly, sincc laymen still tended to think of
anthropology as the study of weird rites and obscene rituals, Young
continued, “Livingstone was himself so interested in thc habits and
customs of the peoples of Central Africa that it was thought that
emphasis should be laid on the sociological side of anthropology.”1°

Something of a poseur, Young thought of himself as a scholar
and the institutc scheme¢ probably appealed to his vanity and self-
importance.'™ The scheme was also seen to be an attempt to placate

“Hailey to MacDonald, [-] May 1940, Rhodes House, MSS Brit. Emp. s342.
“Hailey. Survey, 1624-29.
“"Minute by F. A. Stockdale, 15 August 1934, reporting conversation with

Young, CO 795,/72.
“aThis point was made to me by Dr. A. L. Richards at a seminar at the
Institutc of Commonwealth Studies, 30 November 1972,
178 GODFREY WILSON ANp Tig
Ry

the traders of Livingstone, where it was proposed to sitc ¢
tute, for the loss of business on the impending removal of
tory’s capital to Lusaka.’*®

Up to 1930 anthropological knowledge about Northern R
had accumulated in characteristically random fashion through th
activities of amateur enthusiasts who were ecither officials of the
British South Africa Company, who administered the territory,
missionaries.’** Professional study began with Audrey Richards 4 o
carried out field-work on the Bemba in 1930-31. and 1933.34 A
pupil of Malinowski’'s, she concentrated on problems of Nutrition
while also revealing the general outlines of the social and politjcy)
structure of the Bemba peoples. Further enquiry may show thy
interest in the value to the administration of her research played 4
part both in encouraging Young to propose the institute and ip
maintaining his government’s interest during the lengthy and painfy]
gestation of the scheme.**d

The three year delay from 1934 to 1937 in launching the pro.
posal was due to the obstruction of the colonial office. Both the
permanent officials and the colonial sccretary (Sir Philip CunlifTe-
Lister, later Lord Swinton) were lukewarm about the proposal,
doubting its value and fearing that undue burdens would be placed
on the finances of the local colonial governments of central Africa
in spite of Young’s own optimism about raising moncy from private
sources.'” Asked to make the value of his suggestion more explicit,
Young cxplained he had consulted with experts such as Julian Hux-
ley, Audrey Richards, J. H. Oldham and others, and that he was
guaranteed the support of the International African Institute by
Oldham, its administrative secretary. The main object of the re-
search would be “‘to assist towards the formulation of the correct
economic and administrative policy for the mixed African and non-

he ing;.

“bEllis Robins to D. O. Malcolm, 29 May 1937, C.O. 795/88; Professor M.
Gluckman to author, 8 December 1972.

“cAfter Livingstone in the previous century, the first work in this field which
deserves notice is C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane, The Great Plateau of
Northern Rhodesia (London, 1911): both authors werec employees of the
BSA Company. E. W. Smith (a celebrated missionary) and A. Dale (a
company servant) co-operated to produce The fla-speaking Peoples of
Northern Rhodesia (London, 1920), widely regarded as one of the finest non-
professional cthnographic studies of an African people. C. M. Doke’s
The Lambas of Northern Rhodesia (London, 1931) is not of the same quality.
but the author, a Baptist missionary, later became a Profcssor of African
languages.

"dHer first work, Hunger and Work in a Savage Tribe (London), 1932) pre-
ceded Young's proposal. The main study based on the Bemba, Land,
Labour and Diet in Northern Rhodesia was not published until 1939, after
the institute was already in being, but she reports that her earlier “Tribal
BIC HAm BROWN 179
. .an community”'?, and in another document. Young further
Af"ced its utilitarian object on the grounds that relations between
stres and black in central and southern Africa werce perhaps ‘‘the
wmtcﬁt problem in the Empire today™ and the institute “will help
5 o and my successors, and possibly other authorities, by providing
advice upon the potential economic and political future of

o two communities...””*® This led to an alarmed minute by an
assistant under sccretary of state suggesting that Young should
jioned ‘“‘against any statement...which might indicate that the

be caut! : :
conclusions of the Anthropologist would have material weight in

deciding large questions of policy.”*

None of Young’s arguments convinced the secretary of state who
continued to write scornful minutes on the subject and who, al-
though clearly against the proposal in principle, did not refuse his
support outright, but instead adopted the typical civil service tac-
tics of delay by insisting that no decision be taken before the results
of Hailey’s unofficial survey, which was then about to start in
earnest, were known.? Young was bitterly disappointed at being
so refused ‘‘something that would help me to do this difficult job™*!
and he would have bcen still more annoyed had he known that
Hailey protested at the excuse Young had been given, fearing it
“would tend to embarrass his relations with the administrators if
the Survey were to be used as a means by which their schemes
might be indefinitely held up.”"*?

One reason for the scepticism with which Young's proposal had
been received in official quarters was that Northern Rhodesia was
still considered a colonial backwater.?* Although acquired through
the agency of Rhodes’s British South Africa Company, it had es-
caped the notoricty of the violent encounters which had accom-
panied the company’s colonisation of Southern Rhodesia. Nor,

Government 1n Transition. The Babemba of North-Eastern Rhodesia™,
supplement to the Journal of the Royal African Society, 34 (1935), was
used administratively: letter to author, 26 January 1973.

“Minute by F. A. Stockdale, 15 August 1934; minutes by Cunliffe-Lister,
16, 23 August, 24 Scptember 1934; minute by J. A. Calder, 10 September
_1934; minute by E. Boyd, 11 September 1934, CO 795/72.

"Young, “‘Livingstone Memorial Institute”, encl. in Young to Cunliffe-Lister,
29 September 1934, CO 795/72.

"Young to Cunliffe-Lister, 29 September 1934, CO 795,72.

“Minute by W. C. B[ottomley], 7 November 1934, CO 795/72.

*Minute by Cunliffe-Lister, 7 November 1935; Cunliffe-Lister to Young,
13 November 1934, CO 795,72

“'Young to Sir J.Maffey, 21 November 1934, CO 795,75.

“*Minute by S. E. V. Luke, 2 July 1935, reporting conversation with Hailey,

_CO 795/172.
“I. Henderson, “The Origins of Nationalism in East and Central Africa:
180 GODFREY WILSON AND Ty RL
l

when the territory came under direct colonial office rule jj | 4
and the B.S.A. Company was relieved of administrative reg
sibility, were there sufficient settlers to provoke the attention the,
being given to policy problems in Kenya. The development of the
copperbelt shortly after the coming of colonial office rule leq ¢,
some privately expressed concern about the effects of the mines ¢,
African life as was shown by the publication of Modern Industry
and the African, an enquiry into copperbelt life on behalf of {p,
International Missionary Council which included recommendatiopg
about the value of anthropology to both missions and government,
but the colonial office seemed singularly unaware of the copperbele
significance. The explosion of anger by African miners in the strike
of May 1935, when six were killed by police action, led to Northern
Rhodesia being given unaccustomed promincnce in British news.
papers, and it began to be rcalised that the copperbelt presented
novel problems of industrialisation which were not to be found
elsewhere in British Africa.?® The 1935 riots, however, did little
immediately to forward Young'’s plans.

Young used his review of the copperbelt situation following the
riots to revive his scheme. He pointed out to the new colonial secre-
tary, Malcolm MacDonald, that the growth of industrialisation was
“beyond the experience of the local Administration” and that what
was needed was an institute ‘““for the express purpose of studying
this important problem, which cannot be thoroughly understood
nor handled by the Government without some such expert ad-
vice...”’*®* The permanent under-secretary’s minute merely noted.
“The Governor is obstinate about his anthropological institutc,”’*’
and the matter was left to drop. What made the difference was thc
arrival at the colonial office of W. Ormsby-Gore (later Lord Har-
lech), who made it clear that he approved of Young’s schemc and
wished the appeal for funds to go ahead even though the perman-
ent officials still counselled delay until the publication of Hailey’s
survey.”®* By now, Young had modified the original proposal to
make usc of *‘the coincidence of the Rhodes Jubilee [in 1940] with

the Zambian Case”, Journal of African History, 11 (1970), 596.

"‘gblMgél]e Davis, Modern Industry and the African (London, 1933), 375,

“*The Times, 28-31 May, 4 June 1935.

“*Young to Malcolm MacDonald, 29 August 1935, CO 795/78.

“‘Minute by J. L. M[affey], 24 September 1935, CO 795/78.

“*Minutes by Ormsby-Gore, 4 February, 5 April 1937; minute by J. A.

Calder, 26 January 1937; minute by G. J. F. T[omlinson], 27 January 1937,
CO 795/81.
e Livingstone centenary, and [it] is somewhat expanded to appeal
admirers of Rhodes as well as of Livingstone.”*® Whether this
tzdition had any bearing on Ormsby-Gore's decision is not known.
4 The public appeal for funds was issued on 30 June 1937,%° a few
days after an ordinance setting up the institute under a board of
rrustees had been passed by the Northern Rhodesia legislative coun-
cil.3' Young had used the opportunity of his presence in London
for the coronation of George VI to build up an impressive list of
signatories. Besides the colonial scecretary, the institute appeal was
signed by the archbishops of Canterbury and York and the modera-
tor of the Church of Scotland who headed the list; then followed
the president of the Royal Society and other prominent academics
concerned with Africa, representing the world of science; the three
central African governors and governor-general of Canada repre-
sented the dependent and independent parts of the Empire; while
the ubiquitous Lords Lugard and Hailey represented the unofficial
voice of the establishment on colonial matters. A discreet hint of
royal patronage was added to the appeal by the statement that the
Duke of Kent, who had recently visited Northern Rhodesia, ‘“has
full sympathy with this appeal and wishes it every success.” In
commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of the foundation of the
Rhodesias in 1890 and the centenary of the arrival of Livingstone
in Africa, the appeal balanced the widely different associations
evoked by the two names. The appeal stated that the institute was
intended :
as a contribution to the scientific efforts now being made in
various quarters to examine the effect upon native African
society of the impact of European civilisation, by the formation
in Africa itself of a centre where the problem of establishing
permanent and satisfactory relations between natives and non-
natives—a problem of urgent importance where, as in Northern
Rhodesia, mineral resources are being developed in the home
of a primitive community—may form the subject of special
study.??
If the reference to “‘permanent and satisfactory” relations between
black and white was intended to arouse the enthusiasm of the
settlers in Northern Rhodesia itself for the institute, it failed to do

“Young to Ormsby-Gore, § April 1937, CO 795/81.

*The Times, The Livingstone Mail et. al., 30 June 1937.

"Ordinance No. 1 of 1937, Supplement to the Northern Rhodesia Gazette,
29 June 1937.

*See note 30.
182 GODFREY WILSON AND 134 .

so. Throughout the 1930’s and indeed later, they saw thejr secus
. . . . ot u

not in science, but in wresting political power from the colon:
office, either directly through achieving minority self—gcove;-nm,millal
indirectly through amalgamation with Southern Rhodesia. The s°'
tler representatives in the legislative council thus gave the formaﬁ?'
of the institute a cool reception, seeing it as no more than e)(n
periment which they had no reason to oppose outright. DOUbt;
were expressed about the ability of the territory to continue makjj
contributions to its funds and there was concern that the researc},
officers should be properly supervised.** Leopold Moore, the senjq,
elected member and proprietor of the Livingstone Mail, joined the
board of trustees, but in an editorial objected to the ‘“sacerdoty
patronage” of the Institute, fearing the diversion of the enterprise
into “‘a means of disseminating religious propaganda as witness the
BBC.’3* Sir Stewart Gore-Browne, also a leading settler, emphat.
cally favoured scientific research of all kinds and his wife directly
assisted the research of Audrey Richards. Nevertheless, the excla-
mation reported to have been made at one of his meetings that “we
will not be governed by anthropologists’** and the view that the
institute was an example of government wastefulness at a time
when the territory should be “improving hospitals for the benefit
of the living’**® were more characteristic responses. But although
the support of the settlers was important, especially to Young whose
governorship was distinctive for the extent to which he sought to
win their confidence, the financial and research future for an insti-
tute depended much more upon the attitude of the governments
and the big business interests since it was they who were the power-
ful elements in the Northern Rhodesian equation of knowledge and
power. The territory’s African voice was as yet muted, while the
settlers, although vociferous, numbered only 15,000 by 1940.

In the early years of the institute non-governmental contributions
approximately equalled those of governments other than that of
Northern Rhodesia.?” The contributions from other governments
came, firstly, from the British east and central African territories,
who presumably took their lead from the secretary of state, and,
secondly, from Southern Rhodesia, free since 1923 to take an indec-

*Northern Rhodesia Legislative Council Debates, 28, cols. 16-38 (26 & 28
June 1937).

*Livingstone Mail, 30 June 1937, p. 4, col. 4.

“Journal of the Royal African Society, 34 (1935), 383.

*S. Gore-Browne, “The Relations of Black and White in Tropical Africa™
Livingstone Mail, 1 September 1937, p. §, ools. 4-5.
((CHARD BROWE 183
t line, but whom Young had carefully wooed on the grounds
pendfz'e institute could be ““a concrete application™ of the policy of
y -operation™ recently approved by the colonial secretary,
.t of view especially likely to appeal to a convinced amalgama-
%po.lst jike Huggins, the Southern Rhodesian prime minister.38
tlof?ilcre was virtually no response to the appeal from private in-
erests OF purely British ones, and the non-government contributors
:xere, predictably, the main capitalist concerns (and trusts associated
with them) with interests in Northern Rhodesia, such as the British
gouth Africa Company, the mining companies of Broken Hill and
the copperbelt, and the Rhodes and Beit trusts. Yet support for the
institute from these obvious sources was neither straight-forward
nor easily won—as an unkind minute in the colonial office put it:
«gjr H. Young is finding that it is easier to catch your white ele-
phant than to keep it."** The BSA Co., resident director in Salis-
bury had cabled to the company president in London: “very
doubtful as to necessity or practicability of project especially on
vague and expensive lines indicated.”*° In a following letter he also
indicated preferences for direct government-sponsored inquiry and
for natural rather than social science, as well as wondering why the
South African government and universities were left out of the
scheme.* The BSA Co. president, the formidable colonial office
lobbyist, Sir Dougal Malcolm, passed on these and his own doubts
about the institute in a letter to ‘““My dear Billy”’ (Ormsby-Gore),
wishing to know whether the colonial secretary had “any strong
feelings in the matter” before taking a decision about a company
contribution.*? In reply, Ormsby-Gore made it clear that he wished
Young’s appeal to succeed and hoped that the BSA Co. would
back it publicly since *“if one company starts, I feel sure the rest
will join in.”’‘®* Malcolm took the hint and the company advanced

. ‘cl Oscr co

"For example, in 1939 recurrent income was as follows:

Northern Rhodesia £1,000
Tanganyika 100
Kenya 50
Upganda 50
Nyasaland 50
Southern Rhodesia 200
Roan Antelope Mine 200
Nkana Mine 200
Mufulira Mine 200
Broken Hill Mine 50
Zambesi Sawmills 58-5
C. S. Knight 50

2,208-5

Director's Report . . . . 1938-9-40, p. 1.

*Young to Sir Herbert Stanley, Governor of S. Rhodesia, 30 August 1934
184 GODFREY WILSON gnp, -
-~

a £5,000 capital grant. Even so, the copper companieg

ther wooing before they agreed to back the scheme ’Le;ded fur.
annual contributions.*! Making

Among the measures taken to arouse the interest of 1y, c
companies was the circulation of a revealing letter fropm H°I?Der
The letter clearly attempted to dispel the scepticism fe balley,
companies about the value to government and business of an};hthe
pological inquiry. It noted the changes which had come gyq, Im’
subject and stressed the shift from antiquarian and physicyj ¢ ¢
cerns to social ones, while also subtly managing to combjpe v
impression of scientific respectability with practical value, He ar.
gued that anthropological study “is necessary if we are to base on
any sure foundation the improvement we are seeking to make in
African conditions, whether it take the form of increase in agricyl.
tural production, or the betterment of diet and living conditions, o
of health or of capacity to labour.” To these pragmatic argumen
designed to appeal to the business ethic he added a patriotic appey]
by pointing out that, “‘None of the African governments have at the
moment any post of anthropologist or the like. It is to my ming
characteristic, 1 refrain from adding discreditable, that the main
contribution to essential studies of this nature comes from Amer-
ica.”* Hailey was obviously referring to the Rockefeller founda-
tion’s support of the IAI and of its “Five-Year Plan of Research”
(1931) which trained many lecading figures in the subject (including
prominent Africans such as Jomo Kenyatta and Z. K. Matthews).
Hailey’s own work, the African Survey was being paid for by the
Carnegie Corporation, also an American foundation.

The big capitalist interests of Northern Rhodesia were, it is clear.
doubtful of the value of independently conducted social research
and yet were willing, after an initial show of reluctance, to contn-

and telegraphic reply, 17 September 1934, CO 795/72. Telegram, Stanley
to Young, 17 May 1937, CO 795/88.

“Minute by J. S. W. Flood, 28 September 1937, CO 795/88.

“Telegram, Ellis Robins to D. O. Malcolm, 27 May 1937, CO 795/88.

“'Robins to Malcolm, 29 May 1937, CO 795/ 88.

“Malcolm to Ormsby-Gore, 8 June 1937, CO 795/ 88.

“Ormsby-Gore to Malcolm, 25 June 1937, CO 795/88.

“Record of conversation, Young with Mr. Storke, a copper mine executive.
28 July 1937, who agreed to do ‘“his utmost, when he got back to induce
the Copper Companies to come into line with the B.S.A. Company and
Sir Robert Williams’ Companies, at least to the extent of offering some
financial assistance to the Institute for the next three years.” ZNA P2/1/1.

*“Hailey to Young, 17 June 1937. ZNA B1/4/MISC/6/1.
185

.. and this remained the pattern throughout the colonial
':“l;e reason for this perhaps lies in their wish to retain good
period: " the political authorities in London and Lusaka. In
, n? r research they were not hiring handmaidens, but were
paying Oform of hidden taxation by falling in with the expressed
paying af the colonial secretary and the governor of the territory
Wismiﬁ .they operated. In this way, they may well have hoped to
i W'huo](;ng the extremely favourable conditions under which the
heli %ro. and the copper companies existed in Northern Rhodesia.
,an'(he year ending 30 Septerrgbef 1937, merely by existin.g, tl3c
gsA Co. carned £300.000 (principally from copper royalties) in
Northern Rhodesia,'* while thc.freedom of action the mines t}}err.l-
selves enjoyed made observers liken the coppf:rbe:lt to a state \\:’lthm
1 state. This interpretation that business contributions were basnpally
a form of vohﬁm&r); ta]xatior; gaizcs1 syurpport fl;on': th;sezn’éordénary
ter in whic alcolm inform oung of the 0. dona-
::m only after making it clear that he had little faith in the inst.itutc
project, adding “Your appeal, supported as it is by very welgbty
authority including that of the Secretary of State for the Colonies,
is one to which the...Company, in view of its history and traditions,
would be very reluctant to return a negative reply”.*” Nor is it per-
haps without significance that at this time there was not only mount-
ing public criticism of the royalties arrangement in Northern Rho-
desia, but also their legal validity was being questioned—unsuccess-
fully—by Young himself in largely secret correspondence with the
colonial office.*®
Thus the institute came into being at a time when the underlying
climate of opinion favoured the attempt to use the new type of
anthropology for practical purposes. Nevertheless, those in posi-
tions of formal and informal power, whether in government or in
business were at the least divided about the proposal for a special-
1sed institute staffed by professional scientists who would not be
civil servants. It required Young’s persistence, a willing colonial
secretary, and Hailey’s strong advocacy to get the project going.
As a formally independent institution, the RLI was not controlled

“D. O. Malcolm, The British South Africa Company, 1889-1939, (London,
n.d.; privately printed), 56.

“Malcolm to Young, 12 July 1937, “Early History of the Institute” file. IAS.

“The British South Africa Company's Claims to Mineral Royalties in Nor-
thern Rhodesia (Lusaka: Govt. Pr., 1964), 26-28; P. Slinn, “‘Commercial
concessions and politics during the colonial period. The role of the British
South Africa Company in Northern Rhodesia 1890-1964", African Affairs,
70 (1971), 375-377.
186 GODFREY WILSON AND Ty R

directly as a government department, but by a board of trust
As might be expected in an essentially authoritarian colonia]
ture, the composition of the board gave the governor the predom;
ant voice. He was ex-officio president of the board of seven, a:d
nominated two further members. The remaining members were two
civil servants—the financial secretary and the provincial COmmyg.
sioner, southern province; and two settlers—the mayor of Livip,.
stone (where the RLI was situated until the move to Lusaka in 1953,
and the legco member for the Livingstone and western electory
area. The governor possessed a veto over all appointments.

A striking feature of the board of trustees of what was intendeq
to be a scientific institute was the complete absence of scientigts
from the ruling body unless the governor chose to fill either or both
of the nominated positions with scientists. In fact, he did not do so,
but it is of some interest that it was nearly always the governor
who took the more ‘scientific’ view in conflicts within the board of
trustees. In fact, the RLI was as a rule more favoured by govern-
ment house than by the secretariat. Why this should have been so,
is not immediately clear. Possibly governors enjoyed ruling in a
territory which had at least some pretensions to learning or perhaps
in the colonial situation, where the governor rules as well as reigns,
potential alternative sources of information are comforting addi-
tions to the chief secretary’s near-monopoly of information.

How far an institute devoted to social rather than natural science
would be able to operate both harmoniously and independently in
a colonial setting was something which would have to be worked
out in practice. There were no real precedents and, unlike the later
colonial institutes of social research, there was no local university
to which it could be attached and from which it could derive some
protection from colonial pressures. Much would clearly depend on
the choice of the first director. Here again the specialised lobby
which took an interest in colonial affairs played an important part.
When the institute had first been mooted in 1934, J. H. Oldham
had stressed the need for a first-rate appointment and mentioned
Godfrey Wilson as a possible choice.*® Three years later, both
Lugard and Hailey strongly recommended Wilson as a “‘Functional
Anthropologist,”*® and after the colonial office had been unable to
find out “anything to the discredit of Godfrey Wilson"’>'—who was

Stru.::

“Minute by G. J. F. Tlomlinson], reporting conversation with Oldham, 6
November 1934, CO 795/72.

*Young to Ormsby-Gore 24 May, 17 August 1937, CO 795/88.

"Telegram W. C. B[ottomley] to Young, 26 May 1937, CO 795, 88.
‘UCHARD BROWN 187
en in Tanganyika—the board of trustees at its first meeting, per-
ominously only after “‘considerable discussion™, agreed to his
intment.>? He was interviewed at a special meeting of the board
and accepted appointment from the beginning of May 1938.>% On
this occasion he apparently created the wrong impression by beating
the governor at chess,>* but more serious disagreements lay ahead
and were to lead to a more or less enforced resignation within three
ears. The nature of the conflicts throws considerable light on the
osition of the social scientist in a colonial situation.

Godfrey Baldwin Wilson (1908-1944) was the son of the noted
chakespearean scholar, John Dover Wilson.** At Oxford he read
classics and philosophy before developing an interest in anthro-
pology through his friendship with Monica Hunter, whom he mar-
ried in 1935. Together they studied in Malinowski’s influential
seminar at the LSE before doing fieldwork among the Nyakusa
in what was then Tanganyika. Monica Hunter’s Reaction to Con-
quest (1936), a study of the Pondo not only in their “tribal” setting,
but also as labourers on European farms and in the towns of South
Africa, has been singled out as a notable example of a diachronic
or historically-dimensioned study at a time when ahistorical and
static studies are said to have dominated the field.>® In fact, the
rejection of history by the functionalists was never as absolute as
is often implied, their attack being mainly directed at the ‘‘con-
jectural history”” of human institutions which offended against the
most elementary rules of historical scholarship.

Nevertheless a wide outlook, often alleged to have been absent
from colonial anthropology, was an outstanding characteristic of
Godfrey Wilson and was to inform all that he wrote before his
premature death. His refusal to see any significant differences be-
tween social anthropology, sociology, and history, and his deter-
mination to bring economic and administrative factors into his
analysis of central African society owed a good deal to Marx.**

haps

“Minutes, Ist meeting, 27 July 1937, IAS.

“Minutes, 2nd meeting, 3 September 1937; Wilson to Lane Poole (PC,
southern province), 6 September 1937, IAS A/16.

“Information kindly given in discussion by Professor Monica Wilson, 18
March 1971.

“See J. D. Wilson, Milestones on the Dover Road (London, 1969) and the
obituary notice by Max Gluckman in the first number of the Rhodes-
Livingstone Journal (1944).

“This breadth of view also informs her chapters in thc recent Oxford His-
ic;?g o)l‘g.s_"c;x)uh Africa, 2 vols, eds. M. Wilson and L. Thompson (Oxford,

“He described social anthropology and sociology as “two words for the
188 GODFREY WILSON
RL[

Indeed, The Analysis of Social Change, written jointly wit, hic .
and published posthumously in 1945, must be one of th;S Wi,
ambitious brief attempts to explain the overall processes of m
since the Communist Manifesto. However, although im
Marxism as an explanatory system, in particular in conp
the world slump, Wilson was a devout Christian and 3 Pacif
Moreover, he believed passionately in the possibility of an ghie..

. . . . . ODjJective
social science. This was to be attained, he belicved, by excludip
all judgements of a moral kind: ‘“‘Balanced judgement ang soba
sentiment belong to politics and philosophy, they do not belong ¢4
science, whose sole task consists in accurate description of events
together with dispassionate analysis of the actual forces that detey.
mine them.” He was aware of the problem of bias and selectivity
in the facts themselves, but believed the problem could be overcoma
by “‘practice and self-knowledge, and by the use of a properly
systematic and comparative technique.”*® Thus so far as knowledge
and power was concerned he believed, “The scientists must make it
their boast that both governments and oppositions can trust them
equally because they say nothing that they cannot prove, because
they are always pedestrian and never leave the facts. The men of
affairs must make it their boast that they allow the scientists per-
fect freedom in their researches and pay to their results when pub-
lished the attention which proven fact deserves.”’*®

These ideals were soon to come to grief amid the realities of
Northern Rhodesia at that time. Wilson came to the RLI with high
hopes of proving the beneficence of modern social anthropology,
for which he forsaw an extensive public role. Among the first of the
institute’s publications was an attempt to popularise the methods
of anthropology,” and an early suggestion to the trustces was a
scheme for associate membership by which amateur social en-
quirers would be trained by the institute staff in “modern techniques
of study which are at once simple in application and quickly illu-
minating,”®! but official reaction was predictable alarm at the pros-

Presseqd ge

ection wig,

same thing” in a letter to A. A. Smith (M.L.C.), 28 December 1938, TAS
“Plans for Urban Research File”. History and socioclogy were identical,
excsept ﬁgr minor details, wrote Wilson to C. E. Fripp, 13 August 1938,
T1AS 1/45.

*G. Wilson, ‘“The Rhodes-Livingstone Institute of Central African Studies’ -
The Cambridge Review, 14 January 1938, 172.

*G. Wilson, “Anthropology as a Public Service™”, Africa, 13 (1940), 47.
*G. Wilson and M. Hunter, The Study of African Society, Rhodes-Living-
stone Papers No. 2 (1939).

*Wilson to Young & encl, 22 June 1938, ZNA B1,/4/MISC/6/1.
gICHARD BROWN %
.t of amateur researchers coming into 'dir‘ect contact wi.. Afri-
. outside the master-servant relationship®>—Northern Rhodesia
caﬂ:his ime had been described by Young’s predecessor as so
at | lly stratificd that the Litunga of Barotseland was the only
rwﬁtan with whom a white man was supposed to shake hands.®
Af;h ¢ more scrious conflicts arose out of the form and methods of
wilson’s social rescarch. In conformity with his views on scientific
;ndependence, Wilson at once faced the trustees with the request
that he rather than. they should propose the research programme
for the institute. This was reluctantly agreed to, although two qf the
five trustecs present thought the board itself should make a list of
roblems from which the director should select, and there was a
gencral feeling on the board that the subject *“‘should be of somc
value to Government in assisting it to frame its native policy.””*

Far from secking out thc most remotc and uninflucnced African
society to study, as the stercotype of the colonial anthropologist
suggests, Wilson’s proposals went to the heart of the evolving
Northern Rhodesian social system. Admittedly, there was no sug-
gestion that the settlers themselves required direct investigation, but
he proposed that the institute should discover what was happening
in three types of situation concerning Africans:

(a) “in the new African society of...permanent and semi-perma-
nent residents in urban and industrial areas’ (according to official
policy at that time¢ such urbanisation ncither was nor would be
allowed to occur).

(b) to the “‘group that alternates rcgularly between urban and
rural areas.”

(c) to African society in the rural and ‘“‘especially the denuded
arcas.”’®?

The urban research he proposed to tacklc himself, while Max
Gluckman went to the rural area of Barotseland when a second
anthropologist was appointed in 1939. Wilson specified a wide range
of topics for investigation in the urban areas, including the nature
of African ambitions and aspirations in a white-dominated society.%®
This and other topics proposcd were sensitive issues in the eyes of

“Minutcs. 6th (wrongly typed as “Sth™”) mecting, 29 Junc 1938, IAS.

“L. H. Gann, A History of N. Rhodesia, (London, 1964) 282, refcrring to
mrcmarks by Sir Ronald Storrs.

Lane Poole, “‘Research Proposals by the Director”, 28 June 1938, recalling
mdlS.CUSSIOn at Wilson’s interview, 3 September 1937, ZNA B1/4/MISC/6/1.

Wilson, “Preliminary Plan of Research”, 30 May 1938, for consideration
“ll)g'. Jrustees at 6th meeting (29 June), IAS 1/45.

id.
190 GODFREY WILSON aAnp T
Ry

government, but they were also issues on which, especigyy ..
the riots of 1935, it might most have welcomed informaﬁoi Singe
of the problem as the government saw it was that Wilson haq’ Pan
it plain that he intended to carry out the investigations in th, ;“gde
areas by the same means as anthropologists had beep taug h’t an
apply in village society, by participant observation, and not iustlgo
consulting official records and statistics. Such Malinowskiap ﬁeldy
work methods raised the delicate question of relations wi the
mining companies, to whom more or less complete power gver lhei?
own labour compounds had been granted, and to whom the Ng,.
thern Rhodesia government rarely felt itself strong enough to g;.
tate. Nevertheless, the trustees brought themselves to approve ;).
son’s research programme subject to the proviso that he firg
occupy himself with some rural inquiry and did not pay the pre.
liminary visit to the copperbelt he had originally proposed “‘unj
this could be arranged conveniently”.*’

From the first, nervousness at the prospect of rescarch outside a
safe rural area was the prevailing view in the secretariat where
opinion also clearly feared that Wilson’s proposals would alarm
the mine authorities ‘‘who will be apprehensive lest the questionings
stir up discontent.’”’®® It was suggested to the governor that research
which would indicate whether the “prospects of re-establishing
Native Local Government are deteriorating or improving’’ would
be more valuable. This diversionary tactic was scotched, however,
apparently by the governor himself.®°

Administrators on the copperbelt were equally uneasy about the
suggested research, likewise arguing that though it was doubtless
important, it would upset the mines or could be done better at a
later date. The provincial commissioner suggested that Wilson
should be directed to begin on some other line of rail town “in
order that some report may be received of his personality, tact, and
methods before he comes to the copper belt.””?° In fact Wilson had
already made careful approaches to the mines,”* and the provincial

““Minutes, 6th meeting, 29 June 1938, 1AS.

®Secretariat minute, 13 June 1938, ZNA B1,/4,MISC/6/1.

“Minute by R. H. Hudson, 18 June 1938, reporting conversation with the
governor, ZNA B1/4/MISC/6/1.

““H. F. Cartmel-Robinson to Hudson, confidential, 30 June 1938. See alsc
minutes by the DC's at Mufulira, Ndola, Kitwe, and Luanshya, enclosed
in Cartmel-Robinson to Hudson, 8 August 1938, ZNA B1/4/MISC/6/1.

“"Wilson to Hon. S. Gore-Browne, 23 July 1938, IAS ‘Notes from Provincial
Commissioners” file; letter to general mine managers at Nkana Luanshya.
Mufulira, Nchanga, and Broken Hill, 19 August 1938, 1AS I. 30.
g PROWN 191

..ioner was clearly taken aback when two mine managers
commiss! ally agreed to permit Wilson to work in their compounds.
p “S'o?,ted, the PC now raised new objections, fearing, as he put
No® dauWilsbn “might introduce technical criticism [of new local
it, that t provisions] from the anthropologist’s view without con-
overnmen p . . Y . .

° 1aration Of practical difficulties or real knowledge of local con-
,.fj.er;ls » The new arrangements had only come about “after pro-
dine i ussion between people experienced in native affairs, both
longed disc -

. rural and urban arcas, and that any interference at the last
minute even by a tra{ned anthropologist might lead to tension or
indefinite procrastination.””* The most the PC felt able to recom-
mend was that Wilson be allowed to pay a short visit to the copper-
belt “to obtain a mental picture of industrial conditions without
doing any fieldwork.”** In other words, Wilson was to look at, but
not talk fo African miners!

It was in these circumstances that Wilson reluctantly agreed to
begin his urban research not on the Copperbelt, but in the African
locations of Broken Hill, Northern Rhodesia’s oldest mining town,
where lead and zinc had been mined since 1902. He still intended
to work on the copperbelt too, but after the outbreak of war the
two mines which had earlier given permission for research work on
their premises withdrew it and the PC informed him that the admin-
istration would allow no copperbelt research for the duration of the
war. According to Wilson, the Broken Hill mine general manager
“laughed at the nervousnecss of the Copperbelt authorities and
allowed rescarch to continue. However, 1940 saw strikes by first the
white and then the black miners. Seventeen of the latter were killed
by the military when violence broke out despite the generally
sophisticated industrial tactics emploved by the African strike
leaders, and Wilson was asked to suspend his research for a fort-
night. Shortly afterwards complaints that Wilson fraternised with
Africans during fieldwork—surely an indispensable part of the
method—Icd the Broken Hill authorities to withdraw all permis-
sion for research.™

Sir John Maybin, Young's successor as governor, intervened and
met the mine authorities in Wilson’s presence, but they refused to
alter their decision because, it was said, his “methods...might cause

"l(\ldalrstcmcé-’Robinson to Chief Secretary, 8 November 1938, ZNA Bl/4/
. /6/1.

"‘Cartmel-Robinson to Wilson, 15 November 1938, ZNA BI1,4,MISC/6/1.
"ggson, “Report on the position of the RLI”, 6 May 1940, IAS A. 25/ A.
192 GODFREY WILSON AND Thg RL

discontent and unrest besides undermining the African respect for
the European mineworkers.”’’* By this time the position of the
institute as a whole had been caught up in new controversies. Of itg
three scientific staff (an archaeologist, J. Desmond Clark, had been
appointed curator of the associated museum as well as secretary
of the institute) two were conscientious objectors and the third. May
Gluckman, was rumoured to be of doubtful political loyalty becayge
of left-wing views. A motion that the institute be closed was intrg.
duced in legco by the unofficial members, while the budget con.
mittee considered that the trustees should terminate the director’s
appointment.”™ Although the trustees, at the governor’s promp.
ing,*® agreed to keep the institute going on a reduced scale during
the war, it was made clear to Wilson at an emergency meeting of
the board “‘that his position as a conscicntious objector made it
undesirable that he should be allowed access to large bodics of
natives where an expression of his views might have a weakcning
influence on native morale and interfere with recruiting.”’’® In the
light of this opinion and the impasse over his industrial research.
Wilson offered his resignation and left the institute at the end of
April 1941, just three years after taking up his appointment.

His experiences were not merely personal for they also illustrate
thc underlying friction which tends to exist between men of powcer
and men of knowledge as well as highlighting the ambiguity of the
colonial anthropologist’s position in the colonial situation. Friction
arises because where those in authority require new social know-
ledge, they are also inclined to fear its implications. Anxiety 1s
aroused that they will be exposed in some way or that their auth-
ority will be undermined by an expert claiming esoteric knowledge:
defensively, doubt may be cast on the superiority of e¢xpert know-
ledge over everyday experience—all features which underlay the

"Confidential minutes of 14th meeting, 27 October 1940. (The trustees
held confidential and emergency meetings to discuss the position of the
institute and staff on 12 July, 22 September, and 27 October 1940. The
minutes of these meetings were not placed in the minute book held by thc
TAS, but copics of at least two of them survive: the 13th meecting (22
%gtember) in B1/4,MISC/6/1 and the 14th (27 October) in B1/4,MISC/

/3).

"Confidential minutes, 13th meeting, 22 September 1940 (sec previous notc).
Wilson to Governor (Sir John Maybin), 27 August 1940, B1/4/MISC/6/2.

""Chief Secretary to J. D. Clark, secretary-curator of the RLI and museum,
informing him of the legco motion, 25 September 1940; ‘““Budget Committee
Progress Report™, Item 25, 17 October 1940; Wilson to Maybin, 18, 27
July 1940. ZNA B1/4/MISC/6/1.

®"Minutc by C. G. S. Follows circulating the governor's views to trustces,
RICHARD BROWN 193

attitudes of the copperbelt PC extensively quoted above. Morcover,
the authorities may fear the effect of the research activity itself on
the human subjects over whom they rule. The more authoritarian
the system, the more these fears are likely to operate, as they so
clearly did in the case of Wilson’s urban research. The 1935 dis-
urbances pointed to the existence of serious social problems and
helped to establish a case for promoting detached scientific research
which would, it was thought, at the same time be useful. Yet the
very existence of the social problems made those in authority ner-
vous of having them independently investigated. The existence of a

roblem calls for study, but because there is a problem, study is
considered dangerous and likely to exacerbate the problem. Thus
on a later occasion, one administrator favoured -an anthropological
study of the Sala-Soli group in Northern Rhodesia “because they
had proved too resistant to authority in the past,”” but another ad-
ministrator doubted whether it would be cxpedient to send an
anthropologist to study them because “‘they were a group who had
proved so resistant to authority.’’®°

Colonial situations (but not only colonial situations) are prone to
produce ‘‘agitator”” theories of discontent. Where discontent is
recognised it is explained as the result of contamination of other-
wise contented subjects by outsiders, be they members of the colo-
nised group or fraternising anthropologists. Since it was the avowed
aim of the latter to explain phenomena like discontent by other
more structural regularities, and also to acquire their information
by face to face contact with the subject population, both the con-
clusions and the methods were suspect in the cyes of colonial ad-
ministrators. Furthermore, the colonial anthropologist in N. Rho-
desia was invariably a member of the dominant colour group in a
sharply stratified racial society, but his methods and inquiries in-
evitably took him outside the rigidly defined patterns of customary
behaviour. By so-called fraternisation with the subject group, the
anthropologist aroused the resentment of the dominant Europeans
who saw their norms being flouted by men who as temporary rather
than permanent residents were in any case distrusted.** Their in-

26 September 1939, ZNA B4/ MISC/6/1.
*Confidential minutes, 14th meeting, 27 October 1940 (Seec not 75).
“Minutes, 65th meeting, 9 December 1954, 1AS.

*This hostility was forcefully expressed in editorials in the Central African
Post, 10 and 17 April 1953, which led to a series of bitter exchanges
between anthropologists and the comparatively liberal editor, Dr. Alex-
ander Scott. See also the satirical and anonymous song “The Battle Hymn
of thc Rescarch Experts”, The Northern Rhodesia Journal, 3 (1956-59),
194 GODFREY WILSON AND Thp 5,
|

volvement in the daily life of a subject people. the outl
discipline, and the often venomous hostility with which they Wer
faced from white settlers, combined to help make the amhropoloe
gists on the whole identify with the Africans.*? Thus Sir R,
Welensky tells us—presumably using information from his gOVern!f
ment’s special branch files—that anthropologists were in 1953 excep,.
tions to Kenneth Kaunda’s “‘gcneral indictment of Europeapg»
because they “advised the people against federation and serveq a4
informers for Congress.”’%?

Although Wilson could not escape the colonial conditions of
Northern Rhodesia and in particular the consequences of the oyt.
break of the Second World War, this did not prevent his three years
as director from being fruitful. Apart from an important intellec.
tual legacy to his successors, his Broken Hill research, abruptly
terminated though it was, resulted in his Essay on the Economics of
Detribulisation in Northern Rhodesia, a pioneering study of urban-
isation processes in colonial Africa.®* Moreover, the work is marked
not only by good scholarship in the technical sense, but also by that
breadth of view and imaginative sympathy for the colonised to
which attention was drawn carlier. Ironically, it begins with a no
doubt sincere claim to be no more than a bare description of “the
actual social conditions and the inescapable tendencies which deter-
mine the possible limits of Government policy, as they determinc
those of all other forms of human behaviour in this present situa-
tion.”'?> In spite of this disclaimer, Wilson’s strongly humanist values
are clearly evident throughout the work which, for all its apparent
neutrality, is implicitly a passionate indictment of the Northern
Rhodesia of his day.

In the context of the current radical critique of colonial anthro-
pology, a most interesting feature of the work is the way that 1t
emphasises the essential inter-relationships both between the rural
and urban areas and between Northern Rhodesia and the world
cconomic system. Thus Wilson shows how a local circle of poverty
was kept in being by ‘“‘cheap and unskilled labour, disproportion
in the rural and urban populations, and a semi-primitive and un-

472: Dr. Andrew Roberts kindly drew my attention to this item.

**‘Besides thc debate in the Central African Post, see W. Watson's contribu-
tion, “The Social Background”, to the anti-federation book edited by C.
Leys and C. Pratt, 4 New Deal in Central Africa (London, 1960) and M.

Gluckman’s evidence to the Monckton Commission Report, Appendix VI,
Cmnd. 1151-1V (1960), 127-136.

“R. Welensky, Welensky's 4,000 Days (London, 1964), 55.

:'})n tho garts, Rhodes-Livingstone Papers, 5 & 6 (Livingstone, 1941, 1942).
‘Part I, 4.
QICHARD BROWN 195
ed peasant agriculture.””®® This situation is ascribed partly

presence of European skilled workers and farmers with
interests in preventing permanent urbanisation, African rural de-
velopment, African technical training, and African wage increases,
and partly by a world economy directed “rather to the production
of producers’ goods, high dividends—and guns, than to that of con-
sumers’ goods, high wages—and butter.”*” Furthermore the Econ-
omics of Detribalisation is no mere static survey, but is suffused
throughout with a sense of historic process arising from the occur-
rence of a central African “industrial revolution.” In fact, though
he shared much of the functionalist emphasis on social cohesion
and harmony as the product of equilibrium, another target of the
radical critique, his interest in social change made him equally
aware that disequilibrium, such as he identified in Northern Rho-
desia, was not merely maladjustment—it was the motor of perma-
nent change. The final words of his study are:

. . . in the structure of Northern Rhodesia (as of the world at

large ) radical social contradictions are evident today; and that,

in consequence, that structurc must be changed, in one way or

the other, so as to resolve them. This necessity is not a moral

necessity; it is objective and matecrial.®®
In short, Wilson attemptcd, consciously or unconsciously, a marri-
age of Marx and Malinowski, by attempting to deal within the same
frame of reference with both cohesion and change. These ideas
werce further developed in The Analysis of Social Change with its
fruitful ideas about extensions of scale. Where he differed from
Marx—though Marx himself was sometimes equivocal on the point
—was in believing that a ‘“moving equilibrium” of cven change,
which was also real change, was possible.

For bringing out the underlying nature of the social and economic
conflicts inside Northern Rhodesia resulting from the penetration
of a modern mining cconomy on a massive scale and, moreover,
relating thesc local factors to the world economy, Wilson was criti-
cised by some contemporarics.®® No doubt they were equally dis-
turbed by the fact that his findings were not confined to a small
coterie of scholars, but were extensively used in an influentially
critical and popular study of colonialism in Africa, Leonard
Barnes’s Soviet Light on the Colonies (1944).

ba]aflC
to the

“Ibid, 37.

¥Ibid, 54.

*Ibid, Part II, 82.

*M. H. R, “Godfrey Wilson” (obituary), 4frica, 14 (1944).
196 GODFREY WILSON AND Tig
1

In Northern Rhodesia, Wilson’s more permanent influence -
felt within the RLI. Although Audrey Richards was designateq as
his successor, she never took up the appointment, in part at least
because of the lack of scientific representation on the boarg
trustees,” and it was left to Max Gluckman, who had worked unge,
and admired Wilson, to keep the institute in being alone for the
remainder of the war. Besides continuing his research on the Lqy;
Gluckman spent a good deal of time preparing the seven yea,
research plan which got under way shortly after-the war ended »
The plan was to do much for the institute’s reputation in scientific
circles. Although in detail it was Gluckman’s, the plan owed a goog
deal to the general ideas set out by Wilson in 1940 for submission
to the proposed colonial research advisory committee.”> By em.
phasising the effects of industrialization and labour migration, the
plan helped to prevent the large number of first-rate empirical
studies which emerged in the nineteen-fiftics from being too paro-
chial, but the proposed co-operative volume on the central African
industrial revolution which would have done much to pull them all
together was unfortunately never written.

After Wilson’s vain attempt to make the institute a centre of
social engineering, it increasingly evolved as a scholarly outpost
of academic social anthropology which at this time was begin-
ning its expansion in British universities.?®* This evolution took
place partly because Gluckman prevented the institute from remain-
ing in the exposed and isolated situation of Wilson’s day by most
emphatically insisting—against the wishes of both the board of
trustees and the colonial office—on the need for research officers
to undcrtake their writing up as well as their preliminary training
in universities in Britain.*’His own move into British academic life
in 1947 helped to strengthen these links still further. The role of the
institute was also influenced by the fact that most of the research
officers who were appointed came to Northern Rhodesia not to
pursue a permanent carcer or scttle there. They were much more

“Audrey Richards to Sir John Maybin, 3 January 194! and Richards to
D. O. Malcolm, 12 January 1941, ZNA B1,/4/MISC/6/1.

“Max Gluckman. “The Seven Year Research Plan of the Rhodes-Living-
stone Institute”, Rhodes-Livingstone Journal, 4, (194S5), 1-32.

*Wilson ““Draft of Proposals...”, 3 March 1940, ZNA B1/4,MISC/6/1.

*"M. Banton, ed, The Relevance of Models for Social Anthropology, (Lon-
don, 1965), Introduction by Max Gluckman and Fred Eggan on the growth
of academic social anthropology in Britain.

*Minutes, 46th meeting, 10 June 1947; Agenda, Annexure A, for 47th mcet-
ing. 25 August 1947, IAS A1b(2)/ ABOa. The shortage of housing in post-war
Livingstone was also a factor in the decision.
RICHARD BROWN 197
concerned with obtaining a British doctorate and in .advancing the
sudy of social anthropology generally than in ministering to the
needs of the Northern Rhodesia government. For their part, gov-
emnment officers, if they did not ignore the institute altogether,
complained that what the anthropologists wrote and said was unin-
celligible or of little use in making day to day decisions.”® The RLI
answer was not to abandon fundamental research or discourage the
idiosyncrafic research interests of its officers, but to suggest that
the government should stop expecting help from the RLI and
appoint its own government anthropologists instead!®® This was
hardly the marriage of convenience between science and govern-
ment for which Young had striven twenty years earlier, but it was
a logical development of Wilson’s insistence on the need for scien-
tific independence. The government, however, did not accept the
suggestion that it should appoint its own experts and instead in
1956 the trustees, for the first time, brought in an outsider as
director, a colonial civil servant who had been a government an-
thropologist in Tanganyika. The era which had begun with Wilson
was over. Far from being an institute of colonial apologists, it had
developed as a surprisingly independent centre of learning and as a
means of outdoor academic relief for a tightly-knit group of soci-
ologically motivated men. Of the twelve anthropologists, apart from
Wilson, who held full appointments in the period up to 1956 no
less than eleven now hold professorial rank. The one exception is
a government anthropologist in Rhodesia, the only one of the group
not to obtain his doctorate on the basis of research carried out at
the institute (excluding Gluckman and Colson who already had this
qualification at the time of their appointment). Financed by colonial
governments and, more reluctantly, by the copper companies and
their associates, the institute was nevertheless the servant of neither.
Yet the Wilson episode and the later withdrawal of facilities for
research in a mine compound involving A. L. Epstein’s copperbelt
inquiry®’ are a clear reminder that the pursuit of knowledge at the
RLI did not occur in a vacuum. The full effects of this on the kind
of work done by the institute as well as its detailed history after
Wilson’s resignation must be worked out at greater length else-
where.

"‘I‘ASeSven-th Conference of Research Officers”, October 1953, mimeo., p. 22.

“J. C. Mitchell, “The Need for a Government Anthropologist”’, endl. in
Mitchell to Secretary for Native Affairs, 11 January 1954, with copies to
the SNA’s in Nyasaland and Southern Rhodesia, IAS C2/A9a.

“A. L. Epstein, Politics in an Urban African Community, (Manchester,
1958), xvii-xviii.
COLONIALISM AND THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION IN
FI1JI
John Clammer

The object of this paper is to examine some of the ways in which
colonialism or to be precise a colonial administration has succeeded
in interposing a ‘conscious model’ of its own creation between the
social reality and the ‘home-made’ or ‘conscious’ model of that
reality of a subject people.! The subject matter of this study is
Fijian society in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries
and some of the activities indulged in by the British colonial gov-
ernment during that period in their attempts to codify the custom-
ary practices of the Fijian people with a view to thereby more
effectively governing the native polity.

The effects of colonialism are pervasive, and by no means all of
them stem directly from the activities of the colonial administra-
tions. Planters, traders, missionaries and the editors of local news-
papers in the colonial tongue contribute equally to the formation
of a picture of the subject society in the eyes of those who see
themselves as its ‘natural rulers’. The discrepancies between the
colonial and native conceptions of the society in question may thus
be not only great but varied. I propose to examine the one point

*The notion of ‘conscious’ and ‘unconscious’ models is of course derived
from Lévi-Strauss. See C. Lévi-Strauss, ‘Social Structure’ in A. L. Kroeber,
(ed.) Anthropology Today, Chicago, 1953 and in C. Lévi-Strauss, Struc-
tural Anthropology, London, 1969.
200 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION 1y gy,

at which all these viewpoints converge, notably in the conceptualjs,
tion of the constituent units of Fijian social structure at q
supra-family level, in the determination of the economic and o,
activities properly associated with each of these units and with (e
significance of the alternative conceptualisations that have begp
offered in terms both of the practical issue of the governing of Fij;
and of the anthropological one of understanding Fijian social stryc.
ture.

I will thus begin with an examination of the ‘conscious mode’
of Fijian social structure created by the colonial government in the
late nineteenth century, abetted by the missionary and planter com.
munities. I will reconsider the reactions of Fijians to this feat of the
colonial imagination and the subsequent effects of this upon their
own perception of what constituted ‘traditional’ social organisation
when the new model was brought into conflict with the old ones,
I shall review some of the ways in which anthropologists have re-
acted to this situation whether by accepting or modifying the ‘offi-
cial’ version of Fijian social structure. Finally, I will attempt to
draw some picture of what may honestly be said to constitute tradi-
tional Fijian social organisations when all the imported and subse-
quently self-generated conscious models have been cast aside.

By social structure in this context I mean only the hierarchical
sequence of agnatic kin groups in their ascending order of inclu-
siveness which compose traditional Fijian society. I also mean
‘structure’ to include what might otherwise be called ‘organisation’.
i.c. the activities and attitudes associated with each level of or unit
in the social hierarchy and which is therefore part of its definition.

The native culture discovered in the Fiji Islands in the early nine-
teenth century by sandalwood traders and, after 1835, by Wesleyan
missionaries, was exceptionally diverse. The large number and
geographical spread of the islands composing the group and the
varied topography and geology of these habitats was in itself suffi-
cient to guarantee heterogeneity in economy and culture. To this
ecological basis must be added in particular the effect of long term
contacts with Tonga to the south-east and quite possibly other
island groups as well, including Samoa, the Ellices and Melanesia
to the west. The cultural differences between the Lau or eastern-
most group of islands within Fiji and the western high-islands is still
marked. Likewise there is still debate as to the number of dialects
spoken across the group. Depending on the precise definition of
dialects there may still be distinguished up to a hundred. localised
and often only locally intelligible speech forms. This situation was
JOHN CLAMMER 201

no doubt aggravated by and largely stems from the fragmentary,
factionalised and constantly warring society found by early Euro-
an settlers in the islands. While the situation was better on the
surface at the time of cession to the British Crown in 1874 the
onderlying problems opposing cultural unification of the group
still existed and to a great extent still exist to this day. It was the
first self-appointed task of the Colonial governors to bring ‘order’
to what appeared to them to be this intolerable chaos.

The motive however was not an anthropological one, but a prac-
tical one, or rather two closely related ones. The first was to under-
stand Fijian society in order to govern it more effectively by the
method of local ‘indirect rule’. The second was to resolve the diffi-
culties over land tenure which, in causing friction between white
planters and Fijians on the one hand and between different groups
of Fijians on the other, was the chief obstacle to the peaceful imple-
mentation of indirect rule.

It was not until the appointment of David Wilkinson as director
of the Lands Commission that, after fifteen vears of futile effort
directed towards codifying the native land tenure practices, and
recording the ownership of lands on this basis, that Wilkinson’s
original suggestion to the first permanent governor of Fiji was
implemented. Wilkinson’s suggestion, apparently forgotten by all
but himself, was that there was no point in simply registering
a piece of land as belonging to a member of a social unit identified
only by its geographical name if the nature of the units claiming
proprietary rights in land was not first established. The relation-
ships between the chiefs, who claimed to have the right to alienate
land, and the social groups with which they were associated, and
which often claimed other or contrary rights would also be clarified
once this was done. While Wilkinson was quite correct in his general
methodology he was unable to fulfil his theory in practice, because
(and the reason for this I will return to) of his inability to unam-
biguously define, even on the basis of his investigations, the exact
nature of the social units having land tenure rights.

It was as a solution to this problem that in 1912 one G. V. Max-
well was appointed Native Lands Commissioner, with the brief of
resolving once and for all the ‘inconsistencies’ which his predeces-
sors had inevitably found to characterise traditional Fijian social
structure and land tenure practices. In less than a year Maxwell
succeeded in producing an account of traditional social structure
which named the social units involved and defined their relation-
ships, Maxwell’s model was as follows:
202 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION IN fyy;

Vanua
j B

| | |
Yavusa Yavusa
| |

' | |
Matagqali Mataqali Matagqali
|

| | |
Tokatoka Tokatoka Tokatoka

The system was thus characterised as a simple agnatic descent
structure—the Yavusa being composed of direct descendants of a
divine ancestor figure, whose sons founded the component Mata.
qgali of each Yavusa. The Tokatoka are the minimal units having
rights to land and were formed by sons of the founders of Mara-
qali when population growth dictated further subdivision. All these
units are thus linked by kinship and by their subdivisional holding
of tribal lands.? Upon its presentation to the Fijian Legislative
Council this simple and hierarchical system was immediately en-
shrined as the ‘official’ doctrine of native social structure.

The Maxwell system is unambiguous, despite the severe difficul-
ties of the same order as those which taxed his predecesors,® yet
they were all resolved to Maxwell’s satisfaction in less than six
months of fieldwork. With the settiement of the nature of traditional
social structure to the satisfaction of the administration the first step
in the process we are examining was complete. The second is to
observe the native reaction to this instant codification of their tradi-
tional polity.

This reaction began immediately. Indeed there is evidence that it
began while the Commission was still collecting its evidence. It
rapidly became apparent that the natives regarded the Commission
as an impertinent inquisition which, while it could not legally be
ignored, could at least be rendered relatively harmless by a number
of means. One of these was to meet beforechand and for different
landholders to agree between themselves an account of land rights
which could be represented to the Commission as immemorially
sanctioned by tradition. An alternative was to invent social units
which had never existed. This latter option was a favourite, for with
a little forethought it was possible for the inhabitants of a district
to organise themselves on the basis of the Commission’s ideal struc-

*Council Paper 27 of 1914, p. 2. Fiji Legislative Council.
’igig.. pp. 34.
‘ibid.
JOHN CLAMMER 203

ture of Fijian society, thereby preventing upsets in the local status
quo and hurrying the Commission on its way without the crippling
expenses of having to support the Commissioner, his aides, scribes,
porters and the men from other villages in the district who had
come to give evidence.

Maxwell was aware that evasions were constant and that ‘evi-
dence’ presented to the Commission was often suspect, but he did
not connect this with any inadequacy in his model.> In order to
ensure the co-operation of the Chiefs in this project however, the
Governor of Fiji in 1914, Sir Bickham Sweet-Escott, issued in the
course of his address at the opening of the Council of Chiefs, a
restatement and confirmation of the Maxwellian and now official
administrative orthodoxy and a warning that failure to comply
with it would be viewed with great disfavour by the Government.®
The Government indeed possessed the ultimate threat—that it could
register as landless any social units failing to comply with the Lands
Commission’s requirements and criteria and the land of such groups
would automatically pass to the Crown if substantiated claim could
not be laid to it. The Governor went on to instruct the Chiefs to see
that preparatory meetings were held in all villages so that a uniform,
officially acceptable and Fiji-wide register of all land titles and
appropriate social groupings could rapidly be drawn up. This was
seen to be doubly important when it was realised by Maxwell that
‘the people are absolutely incapable of classifying themselves with-
out assistance’” and that many villages were not certain of the
groups to which they belonged and in some cases could not even
identify their ancestor or vu.® Thus a policy that had begun with the
first Governor of Fiji, Sir Arthur Gordon, was finally established in
all its detail. The hallmark of Gordon’s administration was his
belief that:

It is of the utmost importance to seize, if possible, the spirit in

which native institutions have been framed, and endeavour so

to work them as to develop to the utmost possible extent the
latent capacities of the people for management of their own
affairs without exciting their suspicion or destroying their
self-respect.®

Sibid.

*Fijian Council of Chiefs. Opening Address by Sir B. Sweet-Escott, 20 May,
1914. Extract translated in P. France, The Charter of the Land: Custom
and Colonisation in Fiji. London and Melbourne, 1969.

*‘Minute on C.§.0. 197/19. Central Archives of Fiji and the Western Pacific
High Commission.

*R. R. Nayacakalou, ‘Fijian Leadership in a situation of change’, unpub-
204 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION IN Fyj

The question to which we must shortly turn is how accurate thea
Colonial image of Fijian society was, what evidence there is for the
‘Maxwellian Model’ and what influence the official adoption of thig
system has had on the indigenous inhabitants.

But before doing this it is instructive to consider some of the
ways in which the Colonial orthodoxy has been exploited by anthro.
pologists and other commentators on Fijian society. 1 will initially
draw my illustrations from the works of two writers—W. R. Geddes
and G. K. Roth."* Thus Geddes argues that ““Despite their exposure
to alien influences the Fijians have retained their traditional social
structure to a remarkable extent.””'' He goes on to state that rights
to land ‘“‘are vested in their patrilineal clans’” and that many
islanders “‘have been criticising the traditional structure and arguing
for its abandonment on the grounds that it is hampering the econo-
mic advancement of the Fijians,'? while others have taken a con-
trary view. Geddes’s paper is not designed to take sides in this
dispute, but to ‘“‘describe the traditional structure, 10 analyse some
of the more important changes which have influenced it, and to
indicate what may be the effects upon it, and upon the cultural life
of the Fijians which it sustains, of further possible changes.”*
Geddes’s first assumption therefore is that Fijian social structure as
observable in the field today is in fact that ‘traditional’ structure.

Geddes’s second assumption is to argue that “Indeed, so neat
and essentially simple was the system that we are tempted to speak
of it as beautifully structured’,'! the operative words being ‘neat’,
‘essentially simple’ and ‘the system’. The assumption, in other
words, is of uniformity throughout the group and non-ambiguity
and uniformity of the form of and relations between higher and
lower order units of the structure within any one descent group.
Indeed he goes on to argue that “The logical consistency of the

lished Ph.D. thesis, University of London, 1963, pp. 71-72.

*Sir A. H. Gordon, ‘Paper on the System of Taxation in Force in Fiji, Read
before the Colonial Institute’, London, 1879, p. 178.

"W. R. Geddes, ‘Fijian Social Structure in a Period of Transition’, in
Anthropology in the South Seas, ed. J. D. Freeman and W. R. Geddes,
New Plymouth, 1959.

Also ‘Deuba: A Study of a Fijian Village’, Polynesian Soc. Memoir, 22,
Wellington, 1945, and ‘An Analysis of Culture Change in Fij’, unpub-
lished Ph.D. thesis, University of London, 1948.

G. K. Roth, ‘Native Administration in Fiji during the past 75 years’,
Occasional Paper, No. 10, Royal Anthropological Institute, London, 1951;
and Fijian Way of Life, Melbourne, 1953.

“"Geddes, 1959, p. 201.

“ibid., p. 201. My italics.

“ibid., p. 201. My italics.

“ibid., p. 202.
JOHN CLAMMER 205

structure as a whole was an important feature of the system™.!3
(Nowhere does Geddes rehearse his evidence for these categorical
statements.) This consistency furthermore was alleged to be “con-
ceptual, emotional and behavioural”.'®
Geddes goes on to describe Fijian social structure in terms of
kin terminology, sex and seniority distinctions and behavioural
norms governing relations between categories of kin. This leads
logically into a characterisation of the group structure, i.e., the
level of organisation with which I am concerned. Geddes’s synopsis
of the group structure, which may most instructively be comparcd
with that of Maxwell, is as follows:
By a corporate group we mean a group with a dcfined
membership, all the members of which share in common rights,
whether these be rights over property or rights to participate
in group activities and share in the rewards thereof. Every Fijian
belongs to a series of three such groups in addition to the
elementary group of the family. As with the family these groups
are patrilocal. The subsidiary groups within the larger have a
hierarchical order in respect of one another based upon the
principle of seniority of descent and persons belonging to them
because their fathers belonged. They are therefore agnatic groups.
In Fijian terminology they are called, in order of inclusiveness,
the Yavusa, the Mataqgali and the Itokatoka. We would describe
them as the maximal, the major and the minor agnatic groups.
[deally, the series comprises a single descent line. In such
case the mythology posits an original founder, who is known by
name. The groups of the second order, the Maraqali are
regarded as being founded by the sons of the founder of the
maximal group. The third order groups, the /tokatoka may also
in some instances be regarded as founded in the same way,
namely by the sons of the foundcr of the Matagali. . . . These
third order groups are important in daily life but they are
normally unimportant in the overall political and ccremonial
structure.!?
While Geddes concedes that only a few Yavusa in Fiji are of the
‘ideal’ type, in theory all Yavusa should possess its single ancestor
god, place of ongin, name, totem and common ownership of land,'®
although now many Mataqali have usurped these characteristics.

“ibid., p. 202. My italics.
“ibid., p. 202.

Yibid., p. 205.

®ibid., pp. 206-7.
206 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION IN Fyy
War, population pressure, internal disputes, role differentiation a4
a result of the impingements of a cash economy and the removy)
of old sanctions and occupational categories with the introduction
of Christianity have been the several causes of this. But on the other
hand the necessity for survival of maintaining group cohesion ip
the face of these same pressures when applied from outside “‘ex.
plains why the phratry structure was so consistently maintained.” o

Geddes continues by discussing the nature of Confederationg
(Matanitu) or groups of Yavusa, the descent versus the local prin-
ciple in the kin composition of villages, and the traditional and
changing functions of the units of the group structure. This latter,
which is relevant to my argument, Geddes diagrammatically repre-
sents as follows : °

Type of Minor Agnatic Group

Grouping or Patrilineage
(itokatoka)

Functions:

A

Numbers Small co-operative
tasks in farming,
house repairs, etc.

B

Political Leadership by
senior agnate

C

Religious

D

Ceremonial Contributory unit
in goods for
cercmonial

E

Proprietary

Rights

F

Obligations Mutual aid circle
of great intensity

®ibid., p. 207.

Major Agnatic Group

or Clan
(matagqali)

Task requiring large
numbers—fishing
parties.

Leadership by clan
chief (turaga ni
mataqali). Special
political role in
relation to yavusa
chief.

Guardianship by and
worship of clan god.

Unit in Ceremonial

Land tenure

Mutual aid circle
of considerable
intensity.

Maximal Agnatic
Group or Phratry
(yavusa)

House Building,
village site
maintenance, track
clearing, large fish
drives, elc.

Leadership by
phratrv chief
(turaga). Division
among clans of
subsidiary political
roles.

Guardianship by and
worship of phratry

god.

Validation and
co-ordination of
ceremonial by
constituent clans.

Mutual aid circlc of
less intensity.

“ibid., p. 214. Partial representation of Geddes’s diagram.
JOHN CLAMMER 207

While many of these functions, e.g.. those of rcligion, have dis-
appeared, the general format is held by Geddes to remain. One
point however, stands out in particular—the ascription to the
mataqali alone of proprictary rights over land. About this Geddes
says:

3fﬂ)c chief factor at present giving stability to the descent grouping

is the communal ownership of land, generally by the clan but

sometimes by the phratry if it is a single patrilineal group. There

is no individual ownership of the soil. Patrilineages may have

use of particular sections of the clan land, but they cannot

dispose of it either temporarily or permanently without clan

approval. Clan ownership is embodied in the law of the Colony.*?
Geddes goes on to claim that the communal system of work is tra-
ditional, and he contrasts this with individual enterprise,* and that
the ‘traditional’ system of mutual aid and obligations has been onc
of the greatest restraints on economic progress. We thus have here
a detailed exposition of the colonial dogma. We may divide this into
a set of assumptions, vis: i) that the present social structure is the
traditional one; ii) that social organisation is uniform geographically
and structurally; iii) that the group structure is as determined by
Maxwell; iv) that rights to land are or should be vested only in
matagali; and v) that the ‘communal system’ is the traditional
form of economic (or at least labour) organisation.

Geddes is a social anthropologist. To underline my contention
that he is not an isolated case in holding to these assumptions 1
will point briefly to some aspects of the work of my second example,
G. K. Roth. 1T will take onc principal example of his writings—his
paper *““‘Native Administration in Fiji During the past Seventy-Five
Years: A Successful Experiment in Indirect Rule™.* Roth notes
that the chiefs who ceded Fiji to Queen Victoria did so on the con-
dition that she ‘“‘govern them righteously and in accordancc with
native usages and customs’,’* and he traces thc failure of the
immediately pre-cession Thakombau government, which was domi-
nated by planting interests, to its incapacity on these very grounds.

The system of indirect government set up by the temporary
governor, Sir Hercules Robinson, can be represented diagrammatic-
ally as follows:

¥ibid., p. 216.

¥ibid., p. 217.

*Roth, 1951.

*ibid., p. 1 and ‘Parliamentary Paper in Continuation of H.L. 120 and Cd.
3763, Colonial Office, October, 1908.
208 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION IN FI3j

Responsibility for Lang
records, births, deaths,
Native regulations,

'Roko
(Provincial Chief)

(Council of

 fe _ {Mbuli
Egg:fafs;“ (Tikina or District Chief)

Detailed Administration
Rates, dues, social
statistics.

Turaga-Ni-Roko
(Village Headman)
Scribes Court officials Police
This system, which was assumed to mirror the political structurc of
native society, was cntrenched and extended by Sir Arthur Gordon
with his policy of governing Fiji in accordance with native prin-

ciples. So, says Roth :
How precisely he wrought these principles into a practical policy
acceptable to the Fijians is evident from a perusal of the code
of Native Regulations made under the Native Affairs Ordinance
which he enacted. This was the first code of Fijian custom set
down in writing after discussion by representatives from all parts
of the Colony and, generally speaking, the great body of custom
that it contains has been understood for generations; and so it
was not something new and thercfore suspect to the Fijians to
whom it was applied.?®

Thus again we have the claim that, within the administrative struc-

ture on this occasion, ‘‘the basis of the Native Regulations is native

custom.’’2°

Central amongst the claims made for ‘native custom’ by Gordon

was that “‘a system of government by councils of chiefs and elders

[had] been in ‘vigorous existence’ beforc the time of cession’. Roth

continues
It has been customary for them to meet to consider matters
rclating to custom, alliances, and discipline, and the innumerable
feuds attendant on their natural form of government in those
days. In conformity with his policy of encouraging the use of
native institutions whenever practicable the Governor gave
statutory authority to three such types of council. Their members
were thus enabled and required to take part in the system of
Fijian local government.’’?

Local Executive

“Roth, p. 2.
“ibid., p. 3.
JOHN CLAMMER 209

Most important amongst these councils was the Council of Chicfs.
Equally important was Gordon’s land law of 1880 which recognised,
according to Roth, “the force of custom which holds inseparably
the Fijian social unit and the land that it owns-in-common. Such
jand is as much a part of a Fijian’s entity as his name. ... ** Roth
goes on to repeat the orthodoxy relating to the names and propri-
etary rights of social units, and claims that the success, i.e. lon-
gevity, of Gordon’s policy is proof enough of its correctness.*® In
going on to review the prescnt day Native Administration Roth
concludes that *“‘the spirit of the undertakings given to the Fijians
by Sir Hercules Robinson will be found in the principal measures
that he initiated and in the Fijian Administration in its present
form.”*" Roth was for many ycars Assistant Colonial Secretary in
Fiji, and as such was in constant contact with the aspects of native
lifc that he speaks about.

The question which has quite clearly lain behind all the preceding
discussion is *how much substance can be given to the claims of the
colonial orthodoxy with respect to the aspects of Fijian society
which I have particularly mentioned?’ For the sake of clarity I will
reducc the ideology of the colonial orthodoxy to a series of proposi-
tions which may be sct out as follows:

1 Geographical and Structural Uniformity of Social Organisa-

tion.

2 Uniformity of Land Tenure practices, including rights over

alienation of land.
2.1 Unambiguous naturc and identification of the proprietary units
in land matters.

3 The traditional naturc of the Communal System.

4 The political structurc of indirect rule equates to a closc ap-

proximation of the indigenous political svstem.

4.1 The assumption that the traditional system of government was
through a series of chiefly councils.

What cvidence is there for these propositions?

I have alrcady cast some doubt upon the possibility of even
beginning to assumec that social organisation was uniform through-
out the Fiji group. ‘Family Resemblances’ certainly existed—for
this must be the justification for calling Fiji by a single name imply-

*ibid., p. 3. Also Sir A. Gordon, ‘Native Councils in Fiji, 1875-1880°, Con-
temporary Review, May, 1883.

“*Roth, p. 4.

“ibid., pp. 4-5.

“ibid., p. 9.
210 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION IN fy,

ing that it was in some sense an entity—but not uniformity. Tqy a
great extent this belief is less of an assumption than a prescription
which has its origins not with the colonial administration, but wig,
its forerunners—the Wesleyan missionaries. From the outset the
missionaries had wavered between regarding Fijian as a ‘general 3.
guage’ and as a collection of dialects.?! The problem had more thap
theoretical significance, for it became clear, once the work of Bible
translation was entered into, that either different versionswould have
to be made in each major dialect, or a lingua franca had to be
selected from amongst tongues of the many speech communitics,
The solution in part suggested itself, as Mbauan, the language of
the rising paramount Thakombau and his supporters, although very
localised geographically, was increasing in importance as a ‘diplo-
matic’ language in proportion to the waxing of Thakombau’s for-
tunes. The first extensive grammar of Fijian—that of the Rev. D.
Hazelwood—was in fact a grammar (and dictionary) of Mbauan,
and the existence of this work clinched the matter. The first com-
plete edition of the Bible in the vernacular also appeared in Mbauan
in 1847, and henceforth that dialect was considered the linguistic
vehicle for Christianity. The colonial administration thus inherited
a situation in which Mbauan was automatically accepted as thc
language of govcrnment, a situation which equally obscured the
essential differences between localities and the difficultics of com-
municating with people within those localities. The importance of
this lies not only in the difficulties created by settling upon a
medium of official communication alien.to the vast majority of the
population, but also in the anthropologically important considera-
tion that kin group terminology varied widely from dialect to dia-
lect. The Maxwellian System is Mbauan in its terminology, not
Fijian. Thus while the term matagali has become used generally
to refer to the middle-range functionally defined communities, the
term tokatoka is exclusively Mbauan, sub-mataqali units being
called variously kete in Ba, matani bure in Macuata and Ra, kau-
sivi in Bua, bati ni lovo in Cakaudrove and Lau, and by other
names elsewhere. The terminology has different implications in cach
case.

But to return to the main argument. From the diversity of Fijian
culture at the time of the first missionary contacts—for examplc

“Davies, J.. A Grammar of the Tahitian Dialect of the Polynesian Languagc,
Tahiti, 1823; and Cargill, D., Letter, 18th October, 1836. For discussion
and analysis, J. R. Clammer, Literacy and Social Change in Fiji, unpub-
lished D.Phil. thesis, University of Oxford, 1972.
JOHN CLAMMER 211

the marked differences between the Viti Levu hill peoples and the
coastal peoples of Mbau and elsewhere over such fundamentals as
the nature of their respective political systems which were still clear
in the late nineteenth century—it is apparent that no one ‘traditional’
system of political, social or proprietary organisation existed. The
inability of the various Lands Commissions to determine a land
tenure system on any unified principle is therefore entirely under-
standable although it escaped the colonial administration. Enough
has been said about the basic ‘uniformity versus diversity’ argu-
ment. We must turn now to some more detailed examples of the
differences between the colonial ‘conscious model’ and reality. 1
will take two specific issues since the land tenure problem itself has
been dealt with elsewhere.3? These issues are that of ‘Communalism’
in Fiji, and that of the functions of the social units in the social

structure.

Communalism

Was ‘Communalism’ as conceived by the colonial administration
‘traditional’, or did it indeed exist at all? The colonial ‘communal’
thesis falls into parts: the belief that land was owned in common
by a mataqgali and the belief that labour was organised communally
to work this land. There is no evidence for the former thesis: on the
contrary, traditional practice appears to have been that yavu or
house site land was owned by occupants of the house: that gele or
cultivated land was vested in the extended families which cultivated
it, subject (usually) to the payment of sevu or first fruits to the chief.
Veikau or forest land, while regarded as being the property of the
community (not necessarily a matagali) which defended it, was
de facto vested in the individuals who cultivated or exploited any
parts of it, again usually subject to sevu prestations. Families or
lineages disinherited by war or other misfortune could normally
obtain thesc same rights in a new area by seeking the protection of
its chief and presenting to him rabua (whales teeth).

Communal labour was equally never the normal organisation of
manpowcr, but was only employed for specific and limited purposes,
and always on a reciprocal basis. Communal labour on a house or
in cultivation never dissolved the individual ownership over the
property or _its fruits.>® Land could equally be granted, for example

“France, op. cit.

®As Dumont D’'Urville recognised as early as 1827: J. S. C. Dumont
D'Urville, Voyage de la corvette I’Astrolabe pendant les années 1826-29,
Histoire du Voyage, 1V, Paris, 1832. See also B. Thomson, ‘General Report
212 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION |y Fuy

on marriage or for services rendered in time of war, to individya|,
cither by a chief, or by another commoner individual. There iy ),
no evidence that there was a communal right to alienatc lang, ,
right which was often exercised by a chief on his or his communigyg
behalf once the idea has been put to the Fijians. The Native Regy.
lations nevertheless succeeded in enshrining the dogma of com.
munalism as a traditional form of organisation. Subsequent debatey
on the evils of communalism, either relating to its crippling effectg
on attempts to foster economic progress by way of individualisms3:
or in deploring its effects on the declining native population®’ were
thus at a further remove from reality. The dogma was indeed rein-
forced by European inability to comprehend the customs of lalu or
tribute and service to chiefs, kerekere or mutual appropriation of
property and solevu or feast giving, all of which were seen as as.
pects of the communal system, and therefore traditional, but also as
severe brakes on economic and moral progress.®*

Social Units

Closely related to these questions is that of the nature of social
units. The non-uniformity of terminology I have alrcady indicated.
but what of their functional uniformity? We must remember that
the colonial government assumed both. We have just seen that
propricty rights to lJand were ncver seen as being invested in the
mataqgalis as such since that land was not recogniscd as a com-
munally exploitable commodity.

There is also clear evidence that even if agreement over the term
matagali could be reached, there was no accord amongst Fijians
over what the term denoted.’” The government nevertheless insisted
that all land should be registered by matagalis. This was despitc
the clcar recording of individual ownership in Rewa by Thomson,*
and the discovery by the Wilkinson commission that in the Yasawas
land was held by individuals and for their immediate families, and
that in this case no connection at all was claimed between the
mataqali (or the yavusa) and the land.>* Wilkinson’s recommenda-

on the Rewa Province', Native Lands Commission.
“e.g. Sir Henry Jackson to the Colonial Office, 23 April, 1903.
“Report of the Commission Appointed to Inquire into the Decrease of the
Native Population, Suva, 1896.
“ibid., p. 6.
““Notes on the Proceedings of a Nalive Council’, Native Lands Commission,
22, 1876, pp. 50 and 53.
®*Thomson, op. cit.

*Final Report on Ba/Yasawa’, para. 107, C. S. O. 2987/97.
JOHN CLAMMER 213

tion that this method of recording land tenure was correct and
- raditional and should be adopted in lieu of matagali registration
was rejected on the grounds that it would be too expensive to ex-

and the Commission staff and in any case too time consuming.
wilkinson’s endeavours were not entirely wasted however, for al-
though by modern anthropological standards his recording of social
units and their associated terminology was crude, he nevertheless
succeeded in breaking down the ‘simple’ model of Fijian social
structure by identifying units (in Ba/Yasawa) which he called
kausivi, kete and lewe, or ‘septs’,** and similarly in Bua land hold-
ing units which he described as Co-brotherhood, Family and In-
dividual holdings which are subdivisions of kausivi.* Wilkinson’s
views were supported by Fijian opinion*? which also supported the
view that the very notion of ‘tribe’ was alien to many Fijians who
could not identify the social unit to which they belonged at a struc-
tural level higher than their village (koro) or even house-site.** The
whole situation was plunged into even greater confusion by Thom-
son’s conclusion that the yavusa was a sub-division of a matagali
with a structural status similar to or the same as the rokatoka.**
Fison, another ‘authority’ seems to have deduced that mataqalis
were families comprising koros (villages),* of which the yavusa was
again a minor division.*®

The remaining problem is to determine how this ‘colonial model’
is reflected ‘on the ground’ in contemporary Fiji. Its first manifesta-
tion may be seen in the collective activities required of villagers by
the Government and which include such tasks as house-building,
the maintaining of paths and preservation of the village site. Mod-
ern communalism is entirely the child of the Colonial administra-
tion. It is organised through the Government headman, who receives
his instructions where necessary from the Tikina administration. In
addition to the activities mentioned, land-cleaning for agricultural
purposes, taro planting, and the maintenance of water sources and
courses are common communal activities, the personnel of which

Yop. cit.

"“Final Report on Bua’, para. 3, C. S. O. 4903/02.

“Ratu Sevenaca Senioli to the Governor, 20 July, 1904, C. S. O. 3824/04.

";Iglé);es on the Proceedings of a Native Council’, Native Lands Commission,

“Reggrt of the Commission...into the Decrease of the Native Population,
p. 92.

“L. Fison, J.A.l., Vol. 10, p. 335. See discussion in R. W. Williamson, The
Socicsz:) asnsd Political Systems of Central Polynesia, Cambridge, 1924, Vol. 2,
pp. 50-5S.

“L. Fison, Land Tenure in Fiji, London, 1881, p. 9.
214 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION N FI)|
in a larger village may be divided on a ‘sectional’ basis into wq
parties which are not based on kinship. The Government headmay,
has legal sanctions which he can employ against individuals wp,,
refuse to co-operate in communal activities. In terms of the artjc,,.
lation of the social structure, Government ‘communalism’ has res.
ulted in the increasing eclipse of the kin-principle vis-a-vis the lg¢g
principle at the level of the village economy. This clearly runs cop.
trary to the most commonly encountered form of the ‘traditiong)’
economy, which was based on autonomous family units. Thus gz
Sahlins says of Moala:

The government-established political system, which tends to

favour village organisation of communal production, is en-

croaching upon the native system, which allowed local kin

groups (as well as families) greater autonomy. What is

happening in Moala and Fiji is, of course, but one instance of

a very general phenomenon, the integration of larger units of

native structure at the expense of smaller by dominant, outside

powers as a matter of convenience and effective administration.*’
Sahlins traces the virtual collapse of the ‘‘self-integrated kin group
economy”’ to this usurpation by the collectivity of the traditional
tasks of the family based units.*®

At the level of kin group terminology there has been a similar
eclipse of the varied terminological distinctions throughout Fiji in
favour of the officially sanctioned Maxwellian model, but only at
the official level. The ‘underground’ languages of the non-Mbauan/
official language groups continue to flourish amongst the differcnt
dialect groups in many instances. But this must be contrasted with
the phenomenon also encountered where, especially in South-Eas-
tern Vita Levu, the official dogma will be recounted to the investiga-
tor as traditional truth., Similarly land-tenure is often now seen as
reflected truthfully by the colonial model, and rights over land will
be claimed on the basis of mataqali membership, as when a person
has a right to cultivate land of the matagali into which he marries.
This also contrasts with the principle often expressed that land is
owned individually or by the extended family. Modern practice also
clashes with the Maxwellian model over the unity of structure and
functions of the rokatoka, which are still vague and diverse,*® and

M. D. Sahlins, Moala: Nature and Culture on a Fijian Island, Ann Arbor,
1962, p. 266.

Yibid., p. 267.

“'e.g. see ibid., pp. 223-225 and pp. 237-240.
py no means always even fulfil the minimal criterion of being com-
osed of members of a common stock. Much the same can be said
of the mataqali.

Thus ‘on the ground’ common patrilineal descent is not insisted
upon; there is often a failure to be able to name the founding
ancestor; the yavusa is not regarded as a group; members of villages
often have no idea of which mataqali they are supposed to belong
to. The forcing of traditional organisation has led not only to the
confusions I have mentioned which arise from the multitudinous
discrepancies between the ‘official’ and ‘practical’ models of Fijian
social structure, but also to such anomalies as villages being ‘eleva-
ted’ to the status of yavusas where one did not exist. Equally the
combination of tokatokas into mataqalis often reflects Government
policy and not actual (traditional) links between groups. Exceptions,
which are practically the rule, have thus become subordinated to the
concept of Fijian social organisation as a segmented lineage system
which, via the mechanism of patrilineal descent, proliferates accord-
ing to a symmetrical and logical pattern. Yet the ‘lineages’ are
often merely ‘stocks which do not originate from a common named
ancestor, descent has many of the features of a cognatic system,
arbitrary factors such as war or local residence patterns are often
responsible for group formation which should be based (according
to the model) on kin relations with the next higher order group,
and asymmetry is the rule in the ordering of the (often in fact
unattached) segments of a descent group. The unity of Fijian kin-
group organisation is what Sahlins, in a slightly different context,
calls a ‘structural deception’. Fijian group organisation is in essence
(and terminologically) not rigidly structured, but highly relativis-
tic.5°

In a more obviously practical context, i.e., in relation to present
economic development and the connection between this and the
racial situation in Fiji, the question of ‘traditionalism’ has more
than a merely academic interest. This can be seen in two specific
spheres—that of land ownership and/or leasing by members of the
Indian community and in that of ‘individualism’, or the problem
of whether or not and to what degree entrepreneurial activity in the
rural areas by galala (persons exempted from communal obliga-
tions) should be encouraged. We can agree that much that passes
for ‘tradition’ in matters of land tenure is not so, and yet it is the
sanctions of ‘tradition’ which are used by the Fijian Council of

*For a discussion of Moalan organisation see ibid., pp. 240 ff.
216 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION 1y y,

Chiefs and others to justify the status quo and to prevent Indian
from acquiring freehold or very long lease land, although in facsl
most of the land owned by the Fijian community is never useq by
them 3!

The long term economic results of the Colonial policy €Mmanatip
from Gordon have become quite the opposite of the effect intendey
The setting aside of a sacrosanct Fijians communal system hy,
aggravated economic discrepancies between the ethnic groups, |y
fact the Fijians were forced into a dependency upon their colonijg]
rulers and into a situation which while in ethos ‘conservative’, crys.
tallised in practice into an inflexibility incapable of exploiting even
the constructive aspects of the new communalism. The other side
of this coin can be seen in the constant debate as to the desirability
of ‘individualism’ in Fijian society in the colonial past and in the
colonial heritage of today. It must be remembered that Gordon
‘instituted’ the communal system not only because he believed it (o
be traditional, but also to allow the Fijians free economic (and
social) development within their own sector and specifically to pre-
vent men being taken off the native lands and employed as wage
labour on plantations. The chiefs supported Gordon in this, for they
feared that the extension of the plantation economy would destroy
the basis of Fijian social life and even prevent the Fijians from
deploying enough labour in their own fields to maintain their self-
sufficiency in food.*? Yet the Commission of inquiry into the de-
crease in the native population, which published its findings in 1896
identified ‘the communal system’ as one of the leading causes of the
decline of the Fijian population and the decay of cultural standards
generally.®*® No action was ever taken to rectify the Gordonian illu-
sion, largely because of Gordon’s (by then Lord Stanmore) defence
of his ‘system’ against subsequent attempts to tamper with it by
succeeding Governors, and his opinion carried much weight in the
Colonial Office and House of Lords.>* The result has been the in-
sulation of Fijian society against structural changes since the incep-
tion of the colonial era.

®For a discussion of this problem in a broader economic context, see E. K.

Fisk, The Political Economy of Independent Fiji, Wellington, 1970, esp.
38-39 and 72-73.

‘Councnl of Chiefs, Account of discussion passed from Wilkinson to Gor-

don, January 8, 1872, in Lord Stanmore (Sir A. Gordon), Fiji: Records

of i’;igvate & Public Life, 4 vols, privately printed, Edinburgh, 1897, vol. 3,
p.

131896, ‘keport’, pp. 6 fI.
“France, 1969, esp. pp. 157 ff. Also Debates, 29 September, 1911,
JOHN CLAMMER 217

The one half-hearted attempt to restore the balance in favour of
«ndividualism® has been the galala or exempted farmer system, but
even so the right to deny exemption still lies with the local com-
mune, and there are minimum conditions of income, standards of
agric.ultural practice and land area worked which must also be ful-
filled by a prospective galala. The conditions indeed are so strict
that the bias is strongly against the individualist and in favour of
the commune, and this is official administrative policy. There are
thus contradictions at more than one level between the ideals of
communalism and individualism. Such contradictions are height-
ened by the fact that in dichotomising the situation into Individual
(progressive) v. Traditional (stagnation) the alternative basis for co-
operative activities outside of the ‘official’ mataqali and tokatoka
units have been overlooked. As I have already suggested in practice
non-kin unit ‘communalism’ exists on the basis of /ala (duties per-
formed for a chief), need. friendship or simple economy. Yet such
‘kin-alternative’ organisation is not recognised in or by the ‘system’.
And such a state of affairs is likely to increase when it is remem-
bered that generally although land is registered on a maraqali and
tokatoka basis, the functions of those units which are alleged to
correspond with this fact, no longer or never did, obtain. The result
of colonial policy in economic terms has basically been to withdraw
economic incentives by giving the community too great a share of
the individual’s time and produce and in then being unable to solve
the problems that this has engendered within the context that colo-
nial administration created for itself. The situation is seen to be even
less fortunate when it is possible to show that in its origin it is partly
merely semantic and arises basically from the failure to see that
‘community’ does not equal ‘communalism’ in an economic sense.
It is certainly true that traditional Fijian society was communal,
but economically it was based on largely autonomous households
and not on ‘collectivist’ or ‘communistic’ production. Colonialism
in Fiji created for itself a web of errors in which the entire society
is now enmeshed.

It remains to conclude with some account of the way in which
tradition and the new order are perceived and how the relationships
between them are regarded. The willingness, in many cases, of the
Fijian people to present to the Lands Commission a neat and tailor-
made version of their land tenure system in accord with the pre-
conceptions and desires of the commissioners, we have already dis-
cussed. The attitude of the Chiefs appeared in the early years to be
equally flexible, Thus it was reported to Wilkinson, and through
218 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION [y ),

him to Gordon, that the Council of Chiefs unanimously agreeq that
all land was vested in the mataqali alone and that all land wag in.
alienable.®® As France quite rightly points out® this attitude wag a
complete reversal of earlier native policy, and indeed of some later
outspoken native leaders, one of whom explicitly suggested that th
units recorded by the Europeans were figments of their colonjg)
imaginations.%?

The units themselves were not the only things requiring double
vision on the part of the Fijians. Great difficulty was often experi.
enced in discovering the name of the vu (ancestor) of a desceny
group, but discovered it had to be, because the authorities had pro.-
nounced that every group had one.*® The shaky foundations of thig
belief have been further weakened by recognition of the fact that
the general Fijian origin legend—the Kaunitoni—is itself a fabrica-
tion and was first recorded as a result of a competition held by the
newspaper Na Mata in 1892 and was published as the authentic
legend, without reference to the fact that Williams, Waterhouse,
Hunt, Pritchard and others denied the existence of any Fijian
origin legend at all.>® Yet this legend has since been seen as authen-
tic, by Fijians and foreigners alike. Of equal significance is the fact
that Fijian genealogies are generally shallow in depth, subject to
changes that new historical and political conditions dictate, and
often merge with mythical tales. The insistence on the discovery
and existence of ancestor figures was thus ill-conceived, vet becausc
it was required, passed into the orthodoxy.

Even today many Fijians are ‘ignorant’ of the mataqali and
yavusa units to which they are supposed to belong.?® Yet “Whilst
in village life the system is ignored or evaded wherever possible, it
is, at the national level, lauded and defended as being at the very
foundation of Fijian social order.”®' The Council or Chiefs in par-
ticular has vigorously defended the system against proposed chan-
ges,®? especially as it is regarded as the chief bastion against Indian
encroachment on Fijian lands and privileges. The aristocracy of the

“‘Regulation 27 of the Native Regulation Council. Also in “Notes on the
Proceedings of a Native Council’, 1879, p. 77.

*France, 1969, p. 113.

“"C. S. O. 3824/04, 1904, Ratu Seniloli to the Govemnor.

“R. R. Nayacakalou, ‘Fijian Leadership in a situation of Change’, p. 72.

“For details see France 1969, pp. 34; and France, P., ‘The Kaunitoni
Migration: notes on the genesis of a Fijian tradition’, J. Pacific History,
1, 1966. Also see Sahlins, 1962, p. 14.

“Council Paper No. | of 1958, p. 212.

“France, 1969, p. 174.

*“Council Paper 29 of 1959.
JOHN CLAMMER 219

native society have thus come to perceive the colonial system as
immutable and immemorial tradition—so the commoner has little
option but to do likewise. The concious use of this new tradition
for political ends has been yet a further step. The eminent Fijian
jeader, Ratu Sir Lala Sukuna, thus often reiterated the Gordonian
position as enlightened and forward looking thinking,** despite its
obvious economic and (vis-a-vis the Indians) social shortcomings,
quite apart from the fact that the newly lauded ‘tradition’ was, in
the Sorelian sense, a myth.** The contradictions between the native
and official systems have not been recognised (at least publicly) by
those best placed to see them. The ‘way of the land’ has ceased to
be what Fijians were told to regard as such, and has become that
which the Fijians wish to regard as such, from the vital issues of
their social structure, down to beliefs as trivial as the conviction
that tobacco smoking is indigenous and not a habit introduced by
Europeans.®®

Colonialism has thus profoundly influenced the Fijians’ percep-
tion of their own traditional polity and its sustaining beliefs. But
from the initial imposition of a system based upon, but alien to, the
original traditional system, the dogma of ‘traditionalism’ has be-
come itself tradition, and as such is exploited by the present political
leaders of the Fijian community. The recent de-colonisation of Fiji
has been more apparent than real, for while the official demise of
colonialism has meant the rejection of its overt influence and appar-
atus, its mental creations have not vanished with them. The colonial
mentality has not disappeared from Fiji, but is now to be found
amongst the Fijian ruling class, and not the British one. While this
is, to say the least, unfortunate in Fiji's present precarious economic
and racial position, it is to some extent understandable when the
origins of the ‘syndrome’ are revealed. Fijian tradition has been
transformed by the Colonial regime, and since the late nineteenth
century Fijian society has been in the process of being transformed
itself to fit this new image of ‘traditionalism’, and this process is
not yet complete, and one hopes that it never will be. Colonialism
in Fiji has succeeded not only in physically ruling an alien people,
but in imposing its own ill though-out ideology or image of that
society, and so dominating them mentally, and that many anthro-

"e.g. Council Papers 10, of 1945, and 5 of 1952. See also, for European
Comment, Roth, 1951, esp. pp. 4 ff.

“G. Sorel, Reflections on Violence, London, 1970, speaks of political myth
in terms of “warmly coloured images™” which act as “springs to action".

®e.g. Sahlins, 1962, p. 4.
220 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION [y Fy
pologists have fallen into the trap of accepting the new image a5 ¢y,
old, and confusing both with the authentic. Yet recent ang wﬂe
conceived fieldwork in Fiji and the publications resulting®s have
been (almost inadvertently, for they have not been intendeq as
studies of colonial influence) analyses of facts which confront ever
Fijian with the lack of authenticity of his own social structure, but
which few recognise as such. But this too is understandable, for the
passage of colonialism has left not only the ruins of the old tragj.
tion, but also a shaky orthodoxy, the legitimacy of which is ques.
tioned only by those who are prepared to carry the dialogue betweep
the competing demands of traditionalism and modemity into the
post-colonial era.

®e.g. Sahlins, ibid.
ANTHROPOLOGY AND IMPERIAL ADMINISTRATION:
SIR ALFRED LYALL AND THE OFFICIAL USE OF
THEORIES OF SOCIAL CHANGE DEVELOPED
IN INDIA AFTER 1857
Roger Owen

Sir Henry Maine’s Ancient Law (1861) is often described as one of
the most significant contributions to the ‘early study of anthro-
pology. It was also one of the first works to combine an investiga-
tion of the nature of Indian society with general comments about
the pattern of all human social development. As Maine himself was
to write in his Village Communities in the East and the West (1871),
India was of enormous interest as ‘‘the great repository of verifiable
phenomena of ancient usage and ancient judicial thought™.! Mean-
while, in the interval between the publication of these two works
Maine had had first hand opportunity to pursue his study of India
during his time as Law Member of the Viceroy’s Council, when he
was always ready to underline the importance of ensuring that
official policy was informed by a sound knowledge of Indian society.

But the career of Henry Maine is only one of the many links
between India, anthropology and imperialism. Another, equally
important, is the stimulus given to British officials by the Revolt of
1857 to look more closely at the structure of Indian society in an
effort to discover how it was being changed by imperial rule. In
some cases the knowledge was put to direct use in framing govern-
ment policy. More rarely it was employed in an attempt to con-
struct a theory of Indian social development based on the methods
to be found in the works of the early anthropologists. It was no
accident that it was the decade which saw the publication of

Willage Communities in the East and the West, London 1871, p. 22.
224 SIR ALFRED LYALL IN 'NDI\

Ancient Law and J. P. McLennan’s Primitive Marriage, as we|| as
the founding of the Anthropological Association in 1863, which 4},
saw the first attempt at a “scientific’” study of Indian society,

A central figure in this two-fold process of using the study
society both as a guide to the formulation of policy and as the ray,
material for the development of theory was Sir Alfred Lyvall (1835.
1911). His importance lies in three related directions. First, not only
was he a close friend of Maine but he was also one of the first mey
to employ many of the ideas to be found in Ancient Law in a speg;.
fically Indian context. Second, Lyall was the author of a series of
articles, later collected together in one work, Asiatic Studies: Rel;-
gious and Social (First Serics, 1882), which were a serious, although
not very well sustained, attempt to analyse the structure of Indian
society. Third, as a result of Asiatic Studies, and also of the import-
ant posts he came to hold at the cnd of his Indian career, Lyall
becamec one of the most influential men within the Empire, some-
one whose advice was sought on many major issues. He was thus
in a position to make sure that his ideas did not go unregarded.

Unlike Maine, who is usually remembered as a writer on the
sociology of law rathcer than as an Imperial administrator, Lyall is
regarded first and foremost as an official who also happened to pro-
duce a few books. However, as I hope to show, his career is, among
other things, a good illustration of the misleading distinction between
writing and governing. I will begin with a description of his inves-
tigations into Indian religious and social organisation while on
service in the Central Provinces (1865-73) and in the Rajput States
(1874-78). There will then be a brief account of certain works
written by Lyall after his retirement in 1888 when he had an oppor-
tunity to return to his early studies of the development of Indian
society. Finally, I will conclude with an assessment of the influence
of Lyall’s thought on the policics pursued by the British in India
and elsewhere.

1. Lyall and the role of religion in the development of Indian
society

Alfred Lyall was born in 1835, the son of a well-to-do clergyman.?

He was educated at Eton and then at Haileybury, from where he

set out for Calcutta in November 1855. Once in India hc asked to

be sent to the North West Provinces. He was posted to a town not

‘For details of Lyall’s life, see Sir H.M. Durand, Life of Sir A. C. Lyall,
London 1913,
ROGER OWEN 225
far from Meecrut and within a little more than a year found himself
:n the thick of the fighting which marked the first stage of the sepoy
mutiny. It was the events of this period which first seem to have
aroused his interest in questions relating to the British government
of India. As he wrote home in 1859:
[ always find myself diverging into Indian politics, for 1 am
interested heart and soul in the affairs of the country, and am
always thinking of the probable future of our Empire and trying
to conceive it possible to civilise an enormous nation by the
mechanical process of the present times by establishing schools
and missionary societies. Also, having civilised them, and taught
them the advantages of liberty and the use of European sciences,
how are we going to kecp them under us, and to persuade them
that it is hoped for their own good that we keep all the high
offices of government.?
Such preoccupations were to continue for the rest of his life.
After writing this letter Lyall spent another six years in the North
West Provinces before being transferred to a district in the Central
Provinces in 1865. It was here that his interest in the effects of
British rule on Indian society took a more constructive form, when
he was forced to pursuc his habitual observation of Indian social
and religious organisation in a disciplined way as a result of the
need to contribute to, and later to edit, some of the first gazetteers,
those vast compendia of information about the geography and eth-
nography of each particular district under British control. Lyall
spent some years editing the Gazetteer of the Central Provinces,
sifting through the large amounts of data provided by the magis-
trates, collectors and others and trying to reduce it to manageable
proportions. Later, he was the sole editor of the Gazetteer for West

Berar, or the so-called Hyderabad Assigned District, which first
appeared in 1870.

It was the information collected and edited during these years
which formed the basis for much of Lyall’s thinking about the
development of Indian socicty. But before giving a brief analysis of
the major tenets of his thought it would be useful to say something
about the influence of Maine, McLennan and the other early an-
thropologists on his whole approach to the subject. As he freely
acknowledged, it was they who provided him with the methods by
which random observations could be ordered and by which different
social groups could be analysed.

‘Ibid., p. 89.
226 SIR ALFRED LYALL IN INpy,

To begin with, Lyall, like Maine and McLennan, was a firy,
believer in the utility of what was then known as the “comparatiy,
method”’, the basis of which consisted in the recognition of certajj
similarities between the political and social institutions of contep,.
porary ‘“primitive” peoples and those of the communities which
had existed in Europe many centuries before.* Given the prevailing
assumption that human progress could be seen as a linear movement
from ‘barbarism” to civilisation, it was then supposed that it wag
possible to undertake the systematic classification of different socije.
ties with the object of constructing a hypothetical sequence illus.
trating the historical development of mankind. Two implications
followed. One, just as Maine and McLennan regarded it as legiti-
mate to assume that you could learn much about Europe’s past by
looking at Asia’s present, Lyall believed that you could also use this
process in reverse and fill in certain gaps in India’s recent history
by studying developments in Europe many centuries beforc. Two,
the comparative method provided a means, not only of classifving
different societies in different parts of the world, but it also sug-
gested that it was possible to “‘rank’ different social groups within
India itself, according to the level of development they had reached.

Lyall’s second debt to the early anthropologists can be seen in
the way in which he used McLennan’s theories about the central
role played in a ‘“‘primitive’” society by the rules governing the
choice of marriage partner. For Lyall, the analysis of such rules
was basic to his efforts to understand the role of caste and clan in
Indian life and also to his attempts to explain the way in which
these institutions had developed.®

Finally, Lyall seems to have been greatly influenced by the idcas
of Maine and other Positivist thinkers that the belief system of a
particular society was moulded by its communal needs, and thus
that, as needs changed. so too did beliefs. In Maine’s words:

. . . the usages which a particular society are found to have

adopted in its infancy and its primitive seats are generally thosc

‘For the use of the comparative mesthod at this timec, see G. Lienhardt,
Social Anthropology, London 1964, ch. 1; E. E. Evans-Pritchard, Essays
in Social Anthropology, London 1962, ch. 1; and T. K. Pennman, A
Hundred Years of Anthropology, 2nd edn., London 1952, pp. 1524.
5Lyall’'s debt to McLennan can be seen clearly in his scction of the Berar
Gazetteer devoted to the study of local marriage in terms of McLennan's
concept of *‘exogamy”’, Gazetteer for the Hyderabad Assigned Districts,
commonly called Berar, Bombay 1870, pp. 187-9.
ROGER OWEN 227

which are best suited to promote its physical and moral
well-being. and if they are retained in their integrity until new
social wants have taught new practices, the upward march of
society is certain.®
Lyall also followed Maine in his assertion that, though men were
led to match beliefs with needs. they often did this without properly
knowing what they were doing.” Hence, although they observed
customs of obvious social utility they were incapable of understand-
ing why they did so, with the result that they were left to invent
false, superstitious reasons for their activity. In the words of J. W.
Burrow, Maine regarded man as “an incompetent sociologist’’.®
Lyall, on thec other hand, whose interest was mainly with Indian
religions and which, unlike Maine, he regarded as more than mere
“superstitions’ and central to the ordering of Indian society, some-
times changed the emphasis a little and was more ready to regard
man as “‘an incompetent scientist’.” As he saw it Man’s efforts to
come to terms with his horrible fecars of a dark, capricious universe
led him to personify or to deify natural forces and thus, of course,
to a completely “‘unscientific”’ approach to what was actually taking
place in nature. ‘“Here in India, more than any other part of the
world,”” he wrote in that section of the Berar Gazetteer devoted to
“Religion and Castes”’,
do men worship what they understand least, Not only do they
adore strange phenomena and incomprehensible forces—being
driven by incessant awe of the invisible power to propitiate every
unusual shape or striking natural object—but their pantheistic
piety lcads them to invest with a mysterious potentiality the
animals which are most useful to man, and even the implements
of his profitable trade.!®
It is now possible to return to Lyall’s own theories about Indian
society, based on the observations he made in the Central Pro-
vinces.!* One is of particular importance and lies at the root of al-
most all he was to write about India in the years which followed:

*Ancient Law, London 1861, p. 15.

‘Ibid., p. 16.

*Evolution and Society, Cambridge 1966, p. 167.

*This is also Burrow’'s phrase. /bid.

“Gazettcer of the Hyderabad Assigned Districts, pp. 189-190.

"Lyall's principle theories based on his Central Provinces experiences can
be found in three articles first published in the Fortnightly Review in 1872
and then republished in Asiatic Studies, 1st ser., London 1882, as “Religion
of an Indian Province” (ch. 1), “Our Religious Policy in India” (ch. B8)
and “The Recligious Situation in India” (ch. 9).
228 SIR ALFRED LYALL IN INpy,

his belief that Indian society had in-built divisive tendencies. Of
these by far the most important was religion, acting through (he
agency of caste. Using Max Miiller’s three-fold classification of th,
formation of Indian castes—ethnological, political, and professiong]
—he went on to add a fourth, the sectarian, “‘meaning the cayteg
which are produccd by differences of religion, by new gods, new
rites, new views, and new dogmas’.'? It was castes organized on thig
last, religious basis, with strict rules forbidding marriage or cvep
the sharing of food with outsiders which, according to Lyall, acted
constantly as a wedge upon Indian society, subjecting it to ““per-
petual morcellement’ by splitting existing groups into smaller sub.
groups and by creating more and more new divisions. Some of the
ways in which this process took place are described in the Berar
Gazetteer and in his article “‘Religion of an Indian Province”. One
which he mentions is that a man might break the matrimonial rules
of his caste and be forced to leave it. Later, in the course of time, he,
or perhaps his children, might draw together with others in a similar
position and a new sub-caste would be formed. Alternatively, the
excommunicated man might seek to vindicate himself by precach-
ing a new doctrine and so, by this method, gather a group of fol-
lowers around him. Another way in which, according to Lyall, new
castes were formed stemmed from the Hindu practice of setting up
tutelary deities without number who watched over the interests of
special classes and callings, and who were served by special rites
peculiar to their shrines. New deities of this type were constantly
being recruited from the ranks of hermits, ascetics, and even mcn
who had been known for one particular virtue in a worldly career.
After death a shrine would be established at their grave—they were
not cremated as other men—and, gradually, a group of peoplc
would collect round it, eventually forming a new caste of its own.
One of the most important effects of British rule, however, was
to diminish the vitality by which fresh secretarian divisions werc
constantly being created: and, according to Lyall, this tendency
was certain to increase as the years went by. As evidence for this
he was later to cite the introduction of new laws, for example the
Native Marriage Act as it had existed before amendment by Mainc
in the 1860s, which made illegitimate the children of people expclled
from their caste. By increasing the penalties for leaving a particular

**Religion of an Indian Province”, p. 5. For Miller’s analysis of the origins

22 caste, cf. his Chips from a German Workshop, London 1867, ii, pp. 319-
ROGER OWEN 229

caste, the law automatically increased the hold which it possessed
over its members and inhibited the formation of new sub-groups.!?
Again, more importantly, the British were engaged in the task of
transforming the whole Indian environment, with their trains which
reduced journeys to a fraction of their former length, their schools
where children could obtain a European education, their public
works, and their emphasis on law and order. This in turn was bound
to have far-reaching effects on Indian religious beliefs and social
organisations. It was not merely a question of the rational, sceptical,
questioning attitude of mind which the British had brought to India
and which, as Lyall asserted, had produced among the Indians “an
advanced party of those who are easily inculcated with the Vol-
tairian spirit, with contempt for irrational beliefs and for institutions
which seem absurd on the face of them’.!* But as a country’s reli-
gion was always so intimately connected with its political organisa-
tion, its system of laws, and its material condition, any radical
change in these latter would inevitably involve the former. “The
beliefs of the multitude,”” he wrote
are the reflections of their social and political history through
many generations. Now that the Hindus have been rescued by the
English out of a chronic state of anarchy, insecurity, lawlessness
and precarious exposure to the caprice of despots, they will
surely introduce, at least, some ideas of our rule, organised
purpose, and moral law, into their popular conceptions of the
ways of their gods towards man. It seems certain, at any rate,
that wider experience, nearer and more frequent intercourse with
the outside world, and the general education of modern life,
must soon raise even the masses above the mental level that can
credit contemporary miracles and incarnations, however they
may still hold to the prodigies of older tradition. And this will
be enough to sever the tap-root of a religion which now, like the
banyan tree which it venerates, strikes fresh roots from every
branch, discovers a new god under every mystery and wonder.'?
What was to replace the old beliefs? Here Lyall’'s answer is less
certain. Although he was sure that the small group of western-
educated Indians would give up religion altogether, there could be
no question of the great majority of the people abandoning their
traditional faiths. Just as he believed that higher education could
lead only to atheism,’® he was also convinced that the harsh nature

"“Sir Henry Maine"”, Law Quarterly Review, iv, 14 April 1888, p. 133.
'"““The Religious Situation in India”, p. 302,
230 SIR ALFRED LYALL |y IND)

of the Indian environment would always demand some
spiritual response from those who continued to live outside the |5,
towns.” One possibility he sometimes seems to have put fomafg
was that there might be a move up to the religious scale, thyg is
away from “‘naturalism’ towards “‘supernaturalism™. Evidence for
this comes from his assertion that British rule was leading to the epg
of “simple Paganism” and idolatry.” On the other hand, his accoyp,
of the religious situation in Berar, in which he attempts to classify
the beliefs of different groups in an ascending order from the wor.
ship of sticks and stones to that of ‘‘the supreme gods of Hip.
duism™,'? leaves the reader in doubt as to whether he supposed thay
all people could be expected to progress naturally from the “lower”
to the ‘“‘higher”’. Indeed, there is one passage in which he seems tg
be suggesting that any movement up the religious scale was inevit-
ably followed by a counter movement downwards. Describing the
founder of a sect called the Manshaus, he wrote:
Men of this temperament have constantly come forth in India,
who, by their creative intellectual originality, joined to a spiritual
kind of life, have stirred up great movements and aspirations in
Hinduism, and have founded sects which endure to this day: but
it has almost invariably happened that the later followers of such
a teacher have undone his work of moral reform. They have
fallen back on evidences of miraculous birth, upon signs and
wonders, and a superhuman translation from the world: so that
gradually the founder’s history becomes prodigious and
extra-natural, until his real doctrines sink into mystical secrets
known only to the initiated disciples, while the vulgar turn the
iconclast into a new idol.2°
What is more certain is that Lyall was convinced that any new
religious movement would spread very much more widely than in
the past. Previously, before the coming of the British, the political
confusion, the division of the sub-continent into separate states and
the difficulty of getting from one part of India to another had pre-
vented the growth and expansion of the numerous sects which had
kept springing up. Now however all that had changed, and the
barriers which had previously prevented such a movement from
gaining adherents from over a large area had almost totally dis-

kind of

**Religion of an Indian Province”’, pp. 28-9.

“Cf. his letter to his mother, 22 February 1856, Lyall Papers, India Officc
Library, MSS. Eur. F.132/2.

“Cf. his review article, “*Christianity and the Brahma Samaj” (n.d. 18737), a
copy of which is in Lyall Papers MSS. Eur. F.132/49.

"“‘Religion of an Indian Province”, p. 29.

*1bid., pp. 7-27.
nOGER OWEN 231

appeared.”’ Thus once again, so he believed, the effects of British
rule was to unify, to break dox:vn divisions, and perhaps ultimately
to produce the very thing which it had most to fear—a religious
movement incorporating the vast majority of the Hindu peoples.*

Lyall left the Central Provinces on leave in March 1873. Soon
after his return, 18 months later, he was made Home Secretary of
the Government of India, promotion which he felt he owed in part
to his articles on Indian religion.?* However his stay in Calcutta
was of only short duration for in 1874 he was posted to the Rajput
States as Agent to the Governor General, a kind of British Resident.
It was during his service in Rajputana that Lyall continued his
examination of Indian political and social development. The result
of his thinking can be found in two articles, ‘“The Rajput States of
India”?* and ‘““On the Formation of some Clans and Castes in
India’’?® which do much to provide an historical context for his
earlier theories about the rdle of religion in shaping the structure of
Indian society.

The article on the Rajput States provides a brief sketch of India’s
political development during the previous two or three centuries.
According to Lyall the Mughals had destroyed all the centres of
existing political power in those areas of North India which fell
under their direct control. Only Rajputana and one or two other
states had been able to resist Muslim pressure. Hence the British
had come upon a land without long-seated ruling dynasties or an
ancient aristocracy, and this was one of the reasons why they had
been able to conquer it without difficulty. Again, with the exception
of the Rajput States, all the dynasties and principalities which
existed in India in the 1870s had been established during the
chaotic conditions of the 18th century. The majority of them owed
their preservation to British rule without which they would certainly
have disappeared, being unfitted by their primitive institutions to
resist the professional armies of peoples like the Marattas and the
Pathans.

Lyall was anxious for political reasons that the British continue
their protection of these states. But in the case of Rajputana there
was also an additional reason: the fact that it provided a window

*Ibid., pp. 26-7.

*“The Religious Situation in India”, p. 301.

*Cf. Lyall.to Morley, 1873, in Durand, Life of Lyall, pp. 164-5.

*1bid., p. 162.

*First published in Edinburgh Review, July 1876. Republished in Asiatic
Studies, 1st ser., ch. 8.

*First published in Fortnightly Review, January 1877. Republished in
Asiatic Studies, 1st ser., ch. 7.
232 SIR ALFRED LYALL IN Inpj,

onto a system of political and social organization which had beep
superseded almost everywhere else in India. It is a description of
this system which forms the subject matter of *“On the Formation
of some Clans and Castes’. According to Lyall there was a perigg
in the history of all peoples, whether European or Asiatic, when the
dominant institution was that of the tribe. In India this period hag
not yet come to an end in areas like the Rajput States which were
never subject to strong government from outside. It followed that
an examination of the social institutions of Rajputana would revea]
‘the roots from which society has grown up all over India’’. What
were these institutions? Lyall believed that, in general, they ranged
themselves along two lines: those of kinship (clans) and those of
religion (caste). Both had much in common. In particular they were
each defined by certain basic rules about whom their members
could could not marry. These marriage rules were to be seen most
clearly in an institution Lyall calls the “pure clan”. All its members
believed themselves to be descended from one common ancestor,
all were subject to a tight system of rules which forbade marriage
either to certain members of their own family or to those outside
the clan. In McLennan’s phrase, they formed a large “circle of
affinity™.

Such clans, so Lyall believed, owed their origin to the success of
some chieftain in using his power to form a kinship group out of
some of the “irregular tribes”’ inhabiting Central India, which, lack-
ing a well-formulated system of rules or a common ancestor, were
neither ‘“‘pure clans’ of descent nor castes. Once formed there was
a tendency for such clans to move ‘“‘upwards”, as a result both of
success in war and also of the influence of Hindu laws which im-
posed more and more rigid rules on any group which managed to
maintain its social cohesion and its political power over a certain
period of time. But as in the case of castes “downward’ movement
was also possible. In Lyall’s view the very strict rules which distin-
guished the “pure clan” of descent were too rigid for a “good
working institution’, while the tendency for the leaders of such
groups to become an aristocracy, soon ‘‘shackled by luxurious
vices”, led to a decline in their warlike capacities. Hence, such clans
might find themselves pushed aside by “impure” clans pressing up-
ward from below. Then as time went on the newcomers would also
become more particular and more orthodox in their turn, as they
were exposed to “‘the increasing pressure of the Brahmanical atmo-
sphere” with its heavy emphasis on social regulation.

Castes, like clans, were also formed as the result of developments
ROGER OWEN 233

within tribal society. In the more settled areas, where the hold of
tribes over their members tended to dissolve, the separate family
groups would begin to take different occupations and to inhabit
different places.
Then the trade, or the profession, or the common ritual becomes
the bond of union instead of descent or political association;
and thus the mixed population of India may have re-arranged
itself into castes, propelled into those grooves of the archaic and
inveterate exclusiveness of primitive Asiatics regarding marriage
and food.?*
Once again the role of religion was all important, the result of the
influence of the Brahmins over the marriage law which, according
to Lyall, lay at the “‘foundation of society™. Yet powerful though it
was Brahmanism had never attempted any reform of tribal customs;
it had not acted to crush out the innumerable sects of heathendom,
as had Christianity in Europe after the fall of the Roman Empire,
or Islam in North India. Its rle was not that of an agent of change.
rather it ‘‘registered and confirmed” changes which had already
taken place. Thus when Lyvall speaks of religion as being the
“cement” of Indian society he does not mean that it imposed a
straightjacket on Indian social evolution; what he means is that it
provided the framework inside which that evolution could take
place. Once tribal groupings began to break down, it was the insti-
tutions of clans and castes, their structure determined by certain
religiously-sanctioned rules, which served as an alternative form of
social organisation. Again so pervasive was the influence of Brah-
manism that, as a group began to develop, its customs and senti-
ments, which may originally have been formed according to
“practical needs and experiments”, inevitably tended to harden into
laws. However you might choose to look at it, religion was the key
to the understanding of Indian society.

2. Lyall and the “arrested state” of Indian development

Lyall left the Rajput States in 1878 to take up the post of Foreign
Secretary of the Government of India. This was followed in 1882
by six years as Lieutenant-Governor of the North West Provinces,
and 1t was only after his retirement in 1888 that he seems to have
found time to continue his early studies of Indian social develop-
ment. In particular he returned to the problem, raised over and
over again in Asiatic Studies, of trying to explain how India had
come to be in what he believed was “an arrested state of develop-

**‘On the Formation of some Clans and Castes in India”, p. 177.
234 SIR ALFRED LYALL IN INpj,

ment’’.2? Why had the tribal groups of which it had once been
composed not gradually amalgamated and fused into larger politi.
cal entities inhabiting well-defined territories, as they had i,
Europe? What had kept Indian society as a “mere loose conglo.
meration of tribes, races, and castes”? Lyall’s provisional answer tq
these questions is to be found in a number of articles and in two
works of history, Rise and Expansion of British Dominion in Indi,
(London, 1894) and the chapter on ‘“The Moghul Empire’ which
he wrote for the Cambridge Modern History, Vol. V1. In brief, what
he believed was that India’s “backwardness’ was due to its failure
to develop the political institutions which in Europe had paved the
way for the emergence of a strong, stable nation-state by acting as
a counter-balancing force to the powerful centralising tendencies of
the monarchy. As he described the process:
In Asia a new kingdom is almost always founded by some able
leader with a genius for military organisation, who can raise and
command an effective army, which he employs not only to beat
rivals in the field but also to deal with all minor chiefships, to
disarm every kind of possible opposition within his borders. and
generally to level every barrier that might limit his personal
authority. But he who thus sweeps away all means of resistance
leaves himself no supports, for support implies capacity to resist;
and the very strength and keenness of the military instrument
that he has forged renders it doubly dangerous for his successor.
If the next ruler’s heart and hand fail him, there is no longer any
counterpoise to the overpowering weight of the sword in the
political balance, and the state of the dynasty is upset.?®
The Moghul Empire was a good illustration of this thesis. Founded
by soldiers of genius, it lasted only so long as there were men
strong and skilful enough to rule its wide dominions. Meanwhile no
alternative centres of political power could be allowed to develop.
The great towns of India never achieved any municipal autonomy.
Most of the nobles owed their position to the Emperor and could
be removed at will. The religious corps had little independent influ-
ence of their own. Finally the army was not a locally-recruited force
as in Europe, with men of all religions in its ranks, but consisted
almost entirely of Muslims, many of them foreign mercenaries

““My attention was drawn to this point by E. T. Stokes. Cf. his “The
Administrators and Historical Writing on India” in C. H. Philips ed.
Historians of India, Pakistan, and Ceylon, London 1961.

""“Rise3amé Expansion of British Dominion in India, Sth edn., London 1910,
pp. 321-2.
ROGER OWEN 235

whose loyalty could not always be relied on. In such a situation
there was nothing to prevent a collapse when the supreme authority

assed into “‘feeble hands’.?®

Wwithout political stability there could be no religious or social
stability either. Long dominion by foreigners arrested intellectual
development. It also kept the Hindus in a dislocated and dis-
organised condition, for their priesthood was never able to achieve
any great degree of mastery of the constant movement and change
in ritual and belief.*® But it was not just a question of the Muslims
disorganising Hinduism without substituting any strong religious
edifice of their own; the basic factor in the situation was the way
in which their presence had inhibited the development of strong
nation-states in the sub-continent. As Lyall had written in 1872, the
formation of nations “‘aids powerfully the concentration of religious
beliefs’”, by providing a framework inside which the stronger sects
gradually absorb the others.*’ Again, it assisted the formation of a
formal ecclesiastical organisation with a well-defined theology.**
Other aspects of India’s “‘arrested development” could also be ex-
plained in this way. Lacking the protection which a stable state
afforded, people were forced to create a system of social cohesion
for themselves out of caste and clan.*® Kinship ties refused to
narrow down to encompass simply the restricted family. Polytheism
persisted. Only with the coming of the British was progress possible.

3. The policy implication of Lyall’s analysis of Indian society

The various articles in Asiatic Studies (First Series), as well as
those written after his retirement contain a number of hints as to
the policy implications of Lyall’s analysis of Indian social develop-
ment. [t goes without saying that for him, as for every other English-
man, India’s numerous political and religious divisions were a
source of British strength. If the Mutiny had taught them one
lesson 1t was that anything which allowed the Indians to combine
was dangerous, while anything which kept them apart was to
Britain’s benefit. But in Lyall’s case his anxiety about the speed at
which the old barriers between different sections of society were
crumbling was accentuated by the conclusions he had drawn from

”'“’rhgzg.{gghul Empire”, Cambridge Modern History, Cambridge 1909, vi,

pp. 525-6.

"‘"‘Nlaztural Religion in India”, Rede Lecture, 17 June 1891, Cambridge 1891,
p- 12.

""The Religious Situation in India”, p. 292.

“Ibid., p. 292.

*:Sir Henry Maine™, p. 132,
236 SIR ALFRED LYALL IN Inpy,

his reading of De Tocqueville’s Ancien Régime and from his styg,
of the causes of the break-up of the Moghul Empire. In each j;,.
stance a great state had prepared the way for its own downfal] by
its passion for uniformity, which had led it to level out all smajje,
centres of local power upon which in other circumstances it Might
have relied for support.”* Lyall was too much of a realist to imagine
that the processes set in train by the British in India could be re.
versed. But he did urge that nothing be done to accelerate the
amalgamation of India’s many different political and religioys
groups. In the case of the Rajput States, for instance, the British
might well be about to destroy a central feature of their political
arrangements—the method by which the power of their chief was
balanced by that of “turbulent and reactionary nobles”’—in the
interest of helping the former to create a uniform institution over
his whole territory. This would be to begin the decay of an institu-
tion which had existed for many hundreds of years. It would be a
pity to see it destroyed before understanding how the void it would
leave was to be filled.®*. He was equally anxious about any policies
which might put an end to religious division. *‘Caste”, he observed,
might look ‘“‘unnecessary and burdensome”
. . . but these things will tumble quite fast enough without our
knocking out their keystones by premature legislation. It is
hardly in our interest to bring them down with a crash. We have
ourselves to overcome the rather superficial contempt which a
European naturally conceives for societies and habits of thought
different from those within the range of his ordinary experience;
but also to avoid distilling too much of the destructive spirit
into the minds of Young India, remembering that for English
and natives the object is how to preserve social continuity.*®
This in an Indian context was a classic statement of the conserva-
tive position, with its concern lest old social institutions be swept
away before new ones were created, with its accent on the need to
maintain difference rather than to attempt to create uniformity. As
such, it was a point of view which carried great weight, and its in-
fluence on official opinion was considerable. In the first place, in
the 1870s, it was used to counter the arguments of a number of
powerful administrators who maintained that concern for the fate
of traditional ways should never be allowed to provide an excuse

*CI. the letter to his mother, 11 July 1859, Lyall Papers, MSS, Eur. F.132/13.
®“The Rajput States of India”, pp. 225-7.
*“The Religious Situation in India”, pp. 302-3.
ROGER OWEN 237

for holding up the introduction of necessary reforms. One import-
ant exponent of this latter view was James Fitzjames Stephen (Law
Member of the Government of India, 1869-72) whose writings con-
tain a closely-reasoned defence of his efforts to create a new code
of law, regardless of the disruption it might cause within Indian
socicty. Indeed so long as it was not politically explosive he seems
to have welcomed such disruption, for it was only by destroying
the old ways, so he believed, that moral and material progress along
European lines could take place.?” A good example of this is his
attack on those who sought the preservation of the traditional
Indian village community. Such a community he argued might well
have existed for many centuries, but this only showed that India
had long been in a stagnant position, ‘‘unfavourable to the growth
of wealth, intelligence, political experience, and the moral and intel-
lectual changes which are implied in these processes”. And he went
on:
The condition of India for centuries past shows what village
communities are really worth. Nothing that deserves the name of
political institution at all can be ruder and less satisfactory in its
results. They are, in fact, a crude form of socialism, paralysing
the growth of individual energy and all its consequences. The
continuation of such a state of society is radically inconsistent
with the fundamental principles of our rule both in theory and
practice.?®
Lyvall, for his part, while agreeing with many of Stephen’s assump-
tions about the long term necessity of introducing such European
values as belief in law and order and unrestrained competition was
always ready to stress the dangers this posed to the British position
in the short run. All policies had to be judged in terms of their
possible effect on Indian society. Measures which had worked well
in Europe might have opposite effects in Asia. It was arguments of
this type which Lyall’s writings provided for those who wished to
oppose the influence of latter-day Benthamites like Stephen.
Secondly, in the early 1880s, Lyall used his theory of Indian
social development as the basis for a strategy by which the British
could maintain political security while at the same time introducing
a number of much-needed concessions to local opinion. His ideas
on the subject are spelled out in detail in an anonymous article,

Cf. Stephen’s chapter on law in Sir W. W. Hunter, Life of the Earl of
Mayo, London 187§, 11.
*Ibid., pp. 165-6.
238 SIR ALFRED LYALL N INDI4

“Government of the Indian Empire”, published in 1884.> Aftey 5
opening scction in which he outlined the main elements ip the
changing situation which then faced the British in India as a regyq
of such factors as the spread of western education, the emergenc,
of a new middle class in the cities and the activities of 3 hostile
press, he went on to state that the problem was one of steering ,
middle course between “innovation” and *“‘conservation”. Whilc it
was impossible for the government to stand still, while it was necey.
sary to make some concessions to the demands of western-educateq
Indians for a greater share in administration, it was vital that this
be accompanicd by a policy designed to strengthen the main pillars
upon which British rule was based. Of these, much the most im-
portant was the multiplicity of India’s divisions. ‘*At present the
240 millions of India are separated into social compartments by
differences of blood, caste, and religion; and they are also politically
intersected, to a material degree, by the native states.” However,
“as the old social prejudices decay, there is a tendency, already
perceptible among the leading classes, to a kind of political fusion,
to that gradual subsidence of gentile and religious distinctions that
ultimately produces the level of modemn society.”
In these circumstances and with these prospects, it is clear that
the Viceroy’s present policy of decentralisation and of discarding
class privileges is an appropriate adaptation of administrative
measurcs to change that must be recognised. The old inequality
and variety of laws, customs, and personal status parcelled mcn
out into groups, and did thus provide some sort of local
self-government, some distribution of authority. Now that these
sub-divisions are vanishing, it is in accordance with natural
cxpediency to substitute other administrative and territorial
groupings, and to prevent authority from being fixed and
concentrated in aristocratic bureaux as in Russia. Otherwise the
English dominion in India may drift towards that condition of
over-centralised isolation, with shallow foundations and
inadequate support which renders an Empire as top-heavy as an
over-built tower, and which is unquestionably an element of
political instability.
Other recommendations followed. It was important that men of
local influence were associated with British rule wherever possible.
Great care should be taken when it came to cfforts to reform insti-

“Edinburgh Review, clix, 325, January 1884, Attributed to Lyall by Durand,
Life of Lyall, p. 477.
ROGER OWEN 239

tutions which “no foreigners can be expected to understand
aocurately or exhaustively”. Finally, it should always be remem-
bered that it was in ““the content and confidence of the land-owning
class” that the government found its essential element of stability.

As for the practical application of this strategy it is first necessary
to look at Lyall’s own approach to the drafting of the three most
important bills passed during his term as Lieutenant-Governor of
the North West Provinces : the local-government bill, the Oudh rent
bill, and the bill to establish a provincial Legislative Council. Let us
consider them in turn.

The local-government bill owed its passage to an initiative by the
viceroy, Lord Ripon, whose general aim was to provide a political
outlet for the ambitions of the growing number of western-educated
Indians. One method by which he hoped to do this was to breathe
fresh life into thc existing machinery of local administration. In
two resolutions (30 September 1881 and 18 May 1882) he invited
the provincial governments to examine ways and means of raising
the numbers of non-official members on municipal and local boards
until they comprised at least two-thirds of the total membership.
It was also proposed that non-official members be elected wherever
possible. Lyall, for his part, was quite content to carry out these
proposals as they stood where they applied to the municipal boards
in the North West Provinces; but when it came to changes in the
composition of the boards in districts and sub-districts he made
strenuous efforts to limit their effect. In his first scheme all new
members of such boards were to be nominated rather than elected,
and it was only after pressure from the viceroy that he suggested
a compromise by which an electoral body of government nominees
was to choose who was to sit on the sub-district boards from among
their own number.*® A second dispute involved the question of
whether the district boards should have an official chairman, as
Lyall thought necessary, or a non-official one, as Ripon believed
was vital to his whole policy. Once again a compromise was
reached, by which the non-official members were to be allowed to
elect a chairman of their own choosing, provided at least three-
quarters of the board were present at that particular meeting. This
was something to which the viceroy agreed with the greatest reluc-
tance. As he wrote to Lyall on 8 May 1883, the official members
could always prevent such a move by staying away en bloc. Further-

“'{;ya:g toZRipon. 10 November, 12 December 1882, Lyall Papers, MSS. Eur.
132142,
240 SIR ALFRED LYALL IN jnpy,
more :
I must say that the introduction of such a provision renders th,
while proceeding little better than a sham. If the proposal
emanated from a person in whom I had less confidence than yqy
I should say that it was an claborately-prepared device for =~
taking away with one hand what was seemingly given with the
other.?
It has been pointed out that Lyall’s cautious approach to the vice.
roy’s proposals was in some measure justified by the disturbed con.
ditions in parts of his vast province, particular in Oudh.** But it is
also clear from the long correspondence between the men that
they were in fundamental disagreement about the whole purpose
of the reform. Whereas for Ripon, local self-government was to be
an instrument of political and popular education and a means by
which educated Indians were to be allowed to take a great step
forward in the management of their own affairs,*® for Lyall it
appeared very much more as a useful instrument of administrative
devolution and, as he wrote to the viceroy, a way of bringing men
of *‘position, influence, and character’ into district administration.
One aimed at a limited enfranchisement of the new middle class,
the other at associating the landed aristocracy with British rule.
What Ripon attempted to effect in accordance with his liberal prin-
ciples and his experience in Ireland, Lyall tried to modify in terms
of his conservative approach to problems of Indian social change.
The influence of Lyall’s analysis of developments in Indian
society can also be seen at work during the preparation of a bill
aimed at reforming the conditions of tenancy in Oudh. While he
was as convinced as Ripon that some measure was necessary (o
protect the peasants of this over-crowded area from what was often
an annual demand for increased rent and from the summary evic-
tion which might so easily follow, he was also anxious to ensure
that nothing was done to alienate the local land-owners, the taluk-
dars. For this reason great care was taken to ensure the agreement
of the talukdars at every stage and on a number of occasions Lyall
attempted to modify provisions in the draft bill in their interests."*
As a result the protection afforded the peasants was less than it
would otherwise have been. But this was justified by the fact that

“1bid.

“S. Gopal, The Viceroyalty of Lord Ripon 1880-1884, London 1953, p. 103.

“Ibid., pp. 84, 93.

“Cf. Lyall to Dufferin, 8 May 1886, Dufferin Papcrs, India Office Library,
MSS. Eur. F. 130/42A.
ROGER OWEN 241
ther were “important political considerations™ involved.'> As Lyall
wrote to Lord Dufferin, Ripon’s successor as viceroy:
There is no doubt at this moment that the talukdars, as a body,
still adhere to the old-fashioned notion that it is their duty and
their interest to submit to the clearly declared wishes of the
government so long as they can rely upon the government
treating them well and considering their interests. And it is, of
course, very expedient politically to give them no reasonable
grounds for abandoning this notion, especially since cven in
Lucknow a good many persons are already anxious to convince
the taludkars that their ideas are obsolete, and that the only way
of meeting the Government is by opposing it.*®
The third, and last, important measure passed in the North West
Provinces during Lyall’s governorship was the introduction of a
Legislative Council. Unlike the local-government reform and the
tenancy bill this was the result of his own initiative. But, like them,
he was rcady to justify it in the most direct political terms.
What is wanted in thesc provinces is to bring forward our
leading native gentlemen and to encourage them to take some
responsible share in the higher administration. They have been
rather kept in the background since the Mutiny. The events of
1857-59 left a lasting impression on the generation that saw and
suffered by them; and the higher classes became little accustomed
to comc forward in public affairs, or to show an independent
interest in politics as may be noticed (for example) among somc
of the prominent men in the Punjab. Any step towards drawing
out these classes and enlisting them in support of local
administration will to my mind be a measure of conservative
policy.*”
But Lyall’s strategy for strengthening the British position during
the process of rcform was not applied in the North West Provinces
alone. Elements of it are to be found in many of Lord Dufferin’s
policies, especially those aimed at encouraging the Princes, and at
a further decentralisation of the financial administration.*® Its influ-
ence can also be seen outside India in much of what Lord Cromer
attempted to do in Egypt. It was Cromer’s opinion that, “every

“Lvall to Dufferin, 2 Septcmber 1886, Dufferin Papers, MSS. Eur. F.130/
MSS. Eur. F.130/42A.

“Ibid., 8 May 1886, Dufferin Papers, MSS. Eur. F.130,42A.

Yitbid., 12 July 1885, Lyall Papers, MSS. Eur. F.132/46.

*“Cf. S. Gopal British Policy in India 1858-1905, Cambridge 1965, p. 156
aggssir A. C.5 Lyall, The Life of the Marquis of Dufferin and Ava, London
1905, 1, p. 154.
242 SIR ALFRED LYALL IN INDIA

European who occupies a high posmon in the East should study
Sir Alfred Lyall’s work™,*® and there is considerable evidence that
he, himself, often took Lyall as his guide.”® Like the author of
Asiatic Studies he was concerned to strengthen British rule by
strwsmg Egypt’s many internal divisions. Like him too he wag
anxious to incorporate the conservative classes, notably the rura]
land-owners, into the machinery of government. Finally, strategy
apart, it is likely that Cromer’s awareness of the dangers of popular
discontent arising from ignorant assaults on local traditions came
from his friendship with Lyall and his reading of Lyall’s works. As
he wrote of the Egyptian Ministry of the Interior in 1895, there is
no department in which “the zeal of the earnest reformer is more
to be deprecated. The habits and customs of an oriental pecople
must not be trifled with lightly.”’5?

Conclusion

Lyall’s whole working life is yet another illustration of the close
links which have always existed between anthropology and imperial
government. Several of these links have been described in what has
gone before. First, when the Rebellion of 1857 first drew attention
to the urgent need to study the changes which were being produced
in Indian society by British rule, it was the early anthropologists
who seemed to provide a method by which these changes could be
analysed. However, second, it was not merely a question of men like
Lyall borrowing ideas from academic writers like Maine and
McLennan; the process also worked the other way round. In the
days before ‘field’ work the anthropologist in England had to rely
almost exclusively on British officials for his information about
Asian societies. In Lyall’s own case, as he once pointed out in a
letter, Maine’s 1875 Rede lecture (on ““The Effects of Observation
of India on Modemn European Thought™) contained one or two
“leading’ ideas taken from his own ‘“‘Religion of an Indian Pro-
vince’’.* This was just one of a large number of borrowings of a
similar kind. Third, the fact that much of the early anthropological
writing about India was the work of British officials meant that it
often directly reflected what might be called the administrative

“Cf. my “The Influence of Lord Cromer’s Indian Experience on British
Pohcy in Egypt 1883-1907", St. Antony’s Papers No. 17, London 1965.

"szglild pp. 1234, The Earl of Cromer, Modem Egypt London 1908, i,
p n

““Annual Report for 1894, Parl. Papers 1895, cix, p. 12.
*Lyall to Barbara Lyall, 31 August 1875, Lyall Papers, MSS. Eur. F.132/16.
ROGER OWEN 243

int of view. In the case of Lyall and Maine for example it is in-
teresting that they should have stressed the institutional aspect of
custom in India rather than, as Tyler and Robertson-Smith might
have done, its ritual character.

Lastly, there is the whole question of the direct influence of
Lyall’s writing on British imperial policy. Reference has already
been made to the way in which his study of Indian society could be
used to make a powerful justification for Britain’s presence in India
by stressing the argument that it was only the arrival of the British
which allowed Indian society to emerge from its state of ‘‘arrested
development’’. Just as important is the point that his analysis also
pointed the way to a political strategy aimed at confronting many
of the problems faced by the Government of India in the last
quarter of the 19th century. Beyond this Lyall’s writings were also
important for the way in which they both reflected and then, in
turn, reinforced the fundamentally conservative position of the
British administration. The inherent conservatism of anthropolo-
gists’ policy recommendations has already been noted by a large
number of writers.>® In Lyall’s own case his detailed knowledge of
the social institutions to be found in the Central Provinces and in
the Rajput States led him continually to lay greater emphasis on the
disruptive nature of British-induced change and on the need to
preserve old forms than he would otherwise have done. At a time
when the reformers like Stephen seemed likely tc carry all before
them, Lyall was one of the most important men who pointed to the
danger of applying, wholesale, measures that could only be justified
because they had worked well in Europe. Legislation had also to
be judged in terms of its probable effect on India, and this could
only be done by starting from the position that Indian society was
governed by more than a mere collection of outworn, obscurantist
social ordinances; that it was not static and immutable as many
had supposed, but subject to its own laws of development like any
other. It is a measure of his influence that he was able to persuade
so many officials that this lesson, drawn from the study of Indian
society, should be taken seriously to heart.

“Cf. L. Mair, Anthropology and Social Change, London 1969, p. 2.
THE INDIGENQOUS CRITIQUE OF COLONIALISM:
A CASE STUDY
Roy Willis

|

What is now happening is the re-emergence of a dialogue between
Western and non-Western societies and cultures, a dialogue which
was brutally interrupted by the colonial period. We seek a deeper
understanding of what is called colonialism, and this search leads
to an increased awareness of the subtle dialectic between social
theory and practice, particularly in the special and interesting case
of the relation between anthropology and the colonial system. Here
is no simple matter of naive anthropologists unwittingly (for the
most part) serving the interests of metropolitan imperialism. Though
there was plenty of that too.! But before fieldwork was invented there
were anthropological giants about; and it was the grandiose anthro-
pologv of 19th century Britain which produced the essential legiti-
mizing mythos for the colonial enterprise. The renowned self-
confidence and unshakeably paternal authority of Britain’s colonial
administrators expressed a deep awareness of their country’s awe-
somely responsible position at the top of the social-evolutionary
ladder. Without Spencer, Tylor and Frazer there would have been
no Sanders of the River.

In the inter-war years, anthropologists got quietly on with their
job under the protective umbrella of the colonial system. The equi-

'Cf. Banaji, J. 1970 ‘“Anthropology in Crisis”, New Left Review, p. 64;

Goddard, D. 1969. “Limits of British Anthropology”, New Left Review,

iB; .Gou%g, 111(. 1968. “Anthropology: Child of Imperialism”, Monthly
eview, 19, 11.
246 THE FIPA OF TANZAN],

librium model of the functionalists fitted well with Lugardiap in-
direct rule to establish a neat division of labour. But I think it is trye
to say that anthropology during this period made little impact oy.
side the restricted bounds of its own discipline: the works of Maljp,.
owski, Radcliffe-Brown, Firth, Fortes and Evans-Pritchard were i
no way part of the intellectual furniture of cultivated folk in Britajp
as those of Spencer, Tylor and Frazer had been. It is also problen.
atic, a matter for investigation, how far the solid output of anthro.
pological monographs during the inter-war years was of practica]
assistance to colonial administrators. Indeed it is only recently, with
the virtual extinction of classical colonialism, that the substantial ad-
vances achieved by anthropologists during the colonial period in
human self-knowledge have begun to penetrate the consciousness of
non-anthropologists.? The analytic and synthesising labours of Lévi.
Strauss represent, I suspect, only the first wave of a massive resur-
gence of the primitive, mediated through the theoretical constructs
of social anthropology.

The case study offered here is intended primarily as a contribution
to the intellectual history of the small-scale societies who were on
the receiving end of colonialism. So far the literature of the “pro-
test’ of the colonised has dealt with armed revolt against the colo-
nisers, with the more devious expression of discontent in spirit pos-
session cults and independent churches, or with the rebellious
writings of Western-educated évolués.®> The case under discussion
differs from all these in containing a formal critique of Western colo-
nialism and what was perceived by a non-literate African people as
the value-system inherent in it. Properly to appreciate this critique,
it must first be placed in the context of the history, sociology and
basic values of the people concerned.

n
In the middle 1840s, about the time that Karl Marx, as a refugee in
Paris, was working on the crucial /1844 Manuscripts and writing the
Theses on Feuerbach, the people of Ufipa, in what is now south-
west Tanzania, were undergoing the ordeal of foreign occupation.
The Ngoni under Zwangendaba had invaded and conquered the
country about 1842. Before that Ufipa had been disturbed for many

*Thus, Evans-Pritchard’s study of the Azande, published in 1937, is just
beginning to make its mark for what it really is: a contribution of the
first importance to the comparative sociology of knowledge.

3See, for example, Protest and Power in Black Africa, eds. Robert 1. Rot-
berg and Ali A. Mazrui, O.U.P., 1970.
ROY WILLIS 247

years by internecine struggle between the related dynasties, called
Twa, which ruled the rival Fipa states of Nkansi and Lyangalile.
Fortunately for the Fipa, the Ngoni domination was relatively short-
jived. In the late 1840s, Zwangendaba died and in the disputes over
succession which followed, the Ngoni split into several factions
which almost immediately moved out of Ufipa to other parts of East
and Central Africa. The Twa in Nkansi and Lyangalile re-establish-
ed the structures of state power but they never fought one another
again. Instead the two countries devoted most of their energies to
economic progress and by the later 19th century had achieved a
high level of prosperity in relation to most other parts of East-
Central Africa. This condition obtained most particularly in Nkansi,
the larger and more populous northern state which also had the
advantage of lying across one of the main trans-continental trade
routes between the mineral-rich empire of Katanga and the East
African ports.* Between about 1860 until the definitive end of Twa
sovereignty with the establishment of a German force there in 1898,
Nkansi enjoyed a period of peace and affluence which contrasts
markedly with the turbulence and impoverishment suffered by Afri-
cans over a wide area during this same period. The contrast was
very apparent to the few European travellers through Ufipa during
this time. For Joseph Thomson, who stayed at the capital of Nkansi
in 1880, there was ‘‘no more peaceful race in all Central Africa’:

They are more of a purely agricultural race than any other tribe

I have seen. To the cultivation of their fields they devote them-

selves entirely. They never engage in war, although they will, of

course, defend themselves.®
The English Protestant missionary Edward Coode Hore reported
seeing ‘“‘vast fields” of many different food-crops when he visited the
Lake Tanganyika domain of Nkansi in the same year. When he left
his boat’s crew was ‘‘discontented at leaving the land of plenty”.*
Entering Lyangalile fourteen years later, one of the first Catholic
missionaries, Pére A. van Ost, noted :

As soon as one arrives in Ufipa one recognises in the crops an

‘It was in Nkansi that T did most of my field research in Ufipa, between
1962 and 1964 and again in 1966. In Lyangalile my work was confined
mainly to the collection of oral traditions. I wish to express my gratitude
to the Emslie Horniman Anthropological Scholarship Fund and to the
Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research for making this
work possible.

*Thomson, J., To the Central African Lakes and Back, 1881, I, p. 221.
““Voyage to the South End of Lake Tanganvika in 1880”, (unpublished
manuscript.)
248 THE FIPA OF TANZANy,

industrious people. The least patch of reasonably fertile land i

cultivated. . .7
This material abundance was the visible product of a specific socjy
order, a complex structure of institutional forms and cognitive pat-
terns, which must be grasped in outline before we can understapg
the Fipa perception of Western capitalism and colonialism. Techpq.
logically, Fipa agriculture reposed on a vigorous and sophisticateq
iron-working industry, which also supplied its military force with
hardware. A recent authority describes this industry as “the strong.
est in the Corridor region™.® The range of iron implements produceq
included, besides spears and arrow-heads, various Kinds of hoe,
large and small axes, scythes, chisels, wood-files, pincers, tongs and
nails. The Fipa are not shifting cultivators, like the majority of the
inhabitants of what Vansina calls “‘the savanna region”—the broad
belt of grassy upland stretching across Central Africa south of the
equatorial forests of the Congo.’ Instead, a shortage on the Fipa
plateau of trees (lopping and burning the branches of which fertilises
the gardens of the savanna cultivators) has led the Fipa to adopt a
method of compost fertilisation involving the construction of large
mounds called intzuumba. These mounds are themselves planted with
beans. The result, according to a former Director of Agriculture in
the Tanganyika Government, Mr. A. H. Kirby, *“is an interesting
example of the empirical use of green dressings for improving tilth
and adding nitrogen, and the symbiosis of a leguminous plant and
its nodule bacteria, also for increasing soil nitrogen™.!'°

Although there are no figures to back this up, there seems little
doubt that this method of agriculture gives a substantially higher
return in food products in relation to area of land cultivated than
the “slash and burn’ techniques of the savanna peoples, since the
Fipa have escaped from what must be a tedious necessity common
to these latter peoples of constantly changing village sites as nearby
land becomes exhausted. The Bemba, for example, change their
village sites every four or five vears.'' An important consequence of

“““Voyage au Rukwa’, Chronique Trimestrielle de la Société des Mission-
naires d’Afrigue (Péres Blancs), 64, October 1894, p. 613.

*Christopher St. John, writing in R. Gray and D. Birmingham (eds.),
Precolonial African Trade, 1970, 206. The “Corridor’ referred to is the
region between Lake Tanganyika and Lake Malawi. This writer is, how-
ever, wrong in implying in the same article that the Fipa iron industrv
died out during the colonial period. To my knowledge at least one well-
known smith was still in active production in 1964, and I heard of others.
*Vansina, J., Kingdoms of the Savanna, 1966.

*Official Memorandum dated March 14th, 1927.

“Richards, A. 1., Land, Labour and Diet in Northern Rhodesia, 1939, p. 19.
qOY WILLIS 249

this difference in productive techniques between the savanna peoples
and the Fipa is that the immobile Fipa village is, on average, two
and a half times the size of the average settlement in the adjacent
eastern savanna region—250 inhabitants against 100.'? These Fipa
settlements are tightly concentrated, with huts packed closely to-
gether. It is consistent with the differences in productive technique
and the status of the village in the savanna region and among the
Fipa, that whereas in the former region man’s dependence on wild
nature is emphasised in cosmological belicfs which assign the highest
mystical prestige to hunting,'* among the Fipa hunting is considered
a mundane activity of no special account and man, centrally organ-
ised in the village, is sccn as dominating the surrounding, peripheral
world of nature.

There is a further significant difference between the people of
Ufipa and the peoples of the Eastern savanna which must bc taken
into account when considering the Fipa view of man and his rela-
tion to naturc. Bemba villages consist of clusters of kin gathered
round one ambitious man who is the founder and headman, and
when he dies the village usually breaks up. Elsewhere small localised
lineages provide the core of settlements, with the lineage head also
being the village headman.'* Neither of these conditions apply to
the Fipa: there the headman is the elected representative of the
village residents, and it is he who is identified with the village rather
than vice versa, as among the Bemba. There is no lineage system
among the Fipa, and therefore no headmanship by right of descent,
nor any relation between descent groups and ownership of villages
or land. The Fipa village is an association of (theoretically) equal
individuals who, by right of residence, participate in the village’s
collective ownership of surrounding land. Rights and duties associ-
ated with communal labour apply equally to all residents.

This distinctively Fipa type of social organisation is consistent
with a view of man as a being who discovers or constructs himself
through interaction with his fellows in pursuance of the collective
purpose of human domination of nature. Fipa hold that it is through
practical activity aimed at changing or transforming the world that

'*The eastern savanna figure is taken from Vansina, op. cit., 28. Villages in
the western savanna are larger—between 150 and 200 or more inhabitants
(ibid.). The Fipa figure is based on a preliminary analysis of data from
more than a hundred settlements in central Ufipa, and probably errs on
the conservative side.

See Vansina, ibid.. p. 24. A particular example are the Lele as described
by Mary Douglas in African Worlds (ed. C. Daryll Forde), 1954, p. 1-26.

"Cf. Vansina, op. cit., p. 26-8.
250 THE FIPA OF TAy; ANIA

man constitutes himself, and that such activity is necessarily social
a function of the relation between the self and interacting others.
Such a world-view inevitably emphasises the primacy of verba] com.
munication as the ground of that mutual understanding which g the
basis of common action, and the concentrated settlements of ¢,
Fipa effectively meet this primary need. Thus, for about 30 yeays j,
the later 19th century, while their centrally controlled military force
held off the imperialisms of the Nyamwezi to the north and the
Bemba to the south, the people of Nkansi built an essentially
humanist society : in the sense that man saw himself as a being alone,
unmediated by any such time-transcending entity as a clan or line.
age, constructing himself in social interaction with his fellows, 3¢
part of the continuing process by which human society controlled
and dominated external nature. Such a world-view was itself the
outcome of a long and conflictful historical process, recorded for
Fipa themselves in their massive corpus of historical traditions. Its
cardinal discoveries are preserved in a large body of stories and
proverbs through which, in a still largely non-literate society, the
accumulated knowledge of the past is transmitted to the young. It
was this historically shaped and developed world-view, with its in-
stitutional basis and framework, that accounts for the pacific, order-
ly and industrious characteristics of the Fipa which so impressed
19th century European observers. Not that they had always been
so: in 1798 the Portuguese traveller Lacerda noted that the Fipa
settlers near Kazembe’s country in what is now north-west Zambia
were, like the Bemba, ‘““mortal enemies to, never sparing, the Caz-
embe’s people’.!’

By 1880, the Fipa had completely shed these aggressive and zeno-
phobic characteristics. Joseph Thomson’s characterisation of the
Fipa as pre-eminently peaceful and hard-working has been invoked
already. He was also under the impression—probably mistakenly—
that capital punishment was unknown in Ufipa: but the impression
is nonetheless signficant.'* E. C. Hore was particularly struck by the
suave, unruffled manner in which the Lake Tanganyika villagers re-

1*Lacerda, F. J. M., Journey to Cazembe in 1798, 1873, trans. R. F. Burton,
p. 99. Burton, after Lacerda, calls these people *‘“Mussucumas” and
evidently equates them with the Sukuma of the Lake Victoria region, who
speak a language closely akin to Nyamwezi. In fact the “Mussucumas”
are a people of the central plateau of Ufipa, whom the Fipa call aSukuma,
and their language is one of several main dialects of what is now generally
called ciFipa, the language of the Fipa, and which is grouped by linguists
with Bemba.

'*Thomson, op. cit., II, p. 222.
ROY WILLIS 251

acted to the sudden appearance in their midst of a complete stranger
such as himself, writing:

Here in Fipa more than anywhere else the people most wonder-

fully disguised their surprise on seeing me—one would think white

men were as common as black among some whom I knew had

never seen one before.!”
So far in fact from repelling foreigners, the society constructed by
the Fipa in the second half of the 19th century seems positively to
have welcomed them. Arab and Swahili traders from the East Afri-
can coast were known from the 1850s onward, according to oral
tradition, and the Nyamwezi traders traversed the country much
earlier on their way to Katanga.'* By the time of Thomson’s visit in
1880, a considerable number of Arabs and Swahilis had become
thoroughly integrated into the structure of Fipa society, as Thomson
attests.!* He was, however, almost certainly wrong in assuming that
the leader of this immigrant community, an Arab called ‘“Ng’oom-
besasi”’, ‘“the rich in cattle”, wielded disproportionate power in
Ufipa to the extent of having the legitimate ruler of Nkansi, the Twa
chief Nandi Kapuufi, “very much under his thumb’’.?° For ten years
later, in 1890, we find the same ‘“Ng’oombesasi’ (his real name was
Shinkambi Khamis?') being removed from the royal capital by
Kapuufi and transferred to the governorship of Kirando, a Lake
Tanganyika port on the very edge of Fipa territory.2?

The culturally instilled attitude to strangers current in Ufipa in the
later 19th century was that, no matter how bizarre their outward
appearance, they were people with whom business might profitably
be done—an attitude summed up in the proverb “Young man, don’t
hurt the black snake—it may bring forth an abundance of (edible)
black fish™.?* Ethnically the population of Ufipa was by this time
extremely diverse (as it remains to this day). From about the end of
the 17th century or the beginning of the 18th there appears to have
been a migration into Ufipa of small groups from the Zambian

'"Hore, op. cilt.

"Livingstone records meeting an old man in Tabora, central Tanzania, in
1872 who remembered as a small boy accompanying his father on a trading
ji?urnelys gl)lrough Ufipa to Katanga. (Livingstone, D., Last Journals, 1874

, P. .

“Ibid., p. 217-8.

**Thomson, ibid.

"'See the “History of Ufipa” written by Sir John Lamb in the Sumbawanga
District Book, c. 1927.

**Reported in Chroniques Trimestrielles, May 1890, p. 130.

”‘.;‘Unnbdurlneendo, utaci ucuum’ insoka induku, utamanyile cikulufyaal”
ikambaale”’.
252 THE FIPA OF TANZ Ay,

plateau and the south-eastern highlands of the Congo; one of ¢y,
earliest of these groups established the ritually important chiefs;
of Milansi in central Ufipa.** Other groups entered Ufipa from ),
north, coming from central and North-western Tanzania; this Categ.
ory included the ancestors of the politically dominant Twa chiefs of
Ufipa, who were quite probably of Tutsi origin. This long process of
immigration into Ufipa of heterogeneous alien elements, and thej;
absorption into Fipa socicty, was accelerated in the 19th century by
the turbulent conditions created first by the Ngoni depredations ip
Zambia and northern Malawi, and later by the imperialistic expan-
sion of the Bemba state to the south of Ufipa and the Nyamwez;
empires of Mirambo and Nyungu-ya-Mawe to the north.?* The very
violence attending these movements of refugee groups into Ufipa,
and the social disruption wrought in Ufipa by the Ngoni conquest
and occupation, may well have contributed to the shaping of the
peculiarly Fipa social order, based on the co-operation of self-acting
individuals joined in the collective enterprise of human domination
of external nature which emerged in the latter half of the 19th
century.

I
We come now to the encounter between Fipa society and culture
and Western colonialism, an encounter which may be said to have
begun with the first organised European missionary expedition into
Ufipa—that of the Société des Missionnaires d’Afrique (the White
Fathers), whose representatives were cntertained at the royal capital
of Nkansi by Nandi Kapuufi in 1886. As a result of this visit, this
missionary society set up its first station in Ufipa, at the Lake Tan-
ganyika port of Kirando, in 1888.?¢ Two years later the Anglo-
German Agreement of July 1890 assigned Ufipa, together with what
is now the rest of Tanzania, as a German sphere of influence. The
last nominally sovereign ruler of Nkansi, Nandi Msuulwa, commit-
ted suicide in 1898, after ‘‘seeing his authority pass almost entirely

“*See Willis, 1964, and the same author’s chapter on Fipa history in A.
Roberts (ed.) Tanzania Before 1900, Nairobi, 1968.

“*The destruction and terror wrought by Bemba slave-raiding forays into the
territory of the Mambwe and Lungu, whose territory borders Ufipa to the
south and south-west, is vividly described by several authorities including
V. Giraud, Les Lacs de I'Afrique Equatoriale: voyage exécuté de 1883 a
1885, Paris, 1890, p. 531 ff. On Mirambo and Nyungu-ya-Mawe and the
aggressive expansion of thesc two Nvamwezi chiefs see Aylward Shorter,
‘Nyungu-va-Mawe and the ‘“Empire of the Ruga-Rugas”,” Journal of
African History, IX, 2, 1968, p. 235-59.

**Vide Lechaptois, A., Au rives du Tanganyika, 1913, pp. 272-3.
ROY WILLIS 253

into the hands of Europeans™.*” Three days after the succession to
office of Msuulwa’s heir, Kapele, a German force entered the count-
try and took formal possession of it in the name of the Kaiser.*®

The interesting question is how this change in political sovereign-
ty, and the radical changes in the economic and ideological spheres
which accompanied colonial domination, were perceived by the
Fipa. We have seen that the social order which took definitive shape
in Ufipa after about 1850, predisposed the people to admit, and then
assimilate, foreign people and exotic ideas and products.®® There
was, however, that in the world-view of Western capitalism which
challenged the very basis of Fipa culture, which assumed the social
order to be built on the reciprocal interaction of autonomous human
beings. Fipa consciousness of the essential differences between the
world they knew in the later 19th century and the forces shaping
socicty and the individual under Western colonialism is expressed
in a myth in which old and new worlds are explicitly contrasted.
This myth, which I transcribed from Fipa informants during field
research in Ufipa, 1 have called “The Story of Kaswa” after the
principal actor in it.*°

The myth begins by introducing the central figure, the prophet
Kaswa, sitting with a group composed of ‘“‘elders” and “‘equals”.
The myth has already identified one of the fundamental contradic-
tions in Fipa society—that between the assumption of equality be-
tween the reciprocally interacting, autonomous individuals com-
posing the human community, and the arrogation of authority and
power by a minority of ‘“‘elders’. The resolution of this contradiction
is to be one of the main themes of the myth. But the position of
Kaswa is made clear only two lines later : it is solely to the “equals”
(aniina)*' that Kaswa addresses himself :

And, being scated, he speaks to these comrades saying . . .
—And what he says is patently mysterious, to the effect that *“*some-

“’Lechaptois, ibid., p. 685.

*Vide Lamb, op. cit.

“Thus, before the colonial period Ufipa had a flourishing weaving industry,
producing a warm and durable cloth. But as soon as European clothes
began to arrive in the country, the pcople of Ufipa, led by the chief
Kapele and his courtiers, began to wear the new style of clothing. Within
a few vears the indigenous industry was virtually extinct. (Chroniques
Trimesrielles, 1900, 87, pp. 401-2.)

*°A literal and a free translation of this extraordinary text, together with
the vernacular original, first appeared in “Kaswa: Oral Tradition of a
Fipa Prophet’’, published in Africa, July 1970, pp. 248-56.

8., unniina—variously meaning, according to context, ‘‘sibling of the same
sex”’, “fellow”, “friend”, “comrade”, etc.
254 THE FIPA OF TANZAN),

thing is coming, creeping, from the east—something with god.Jjk,
powers’”. These two lines gain their force not merely by reference
to a historical process—it was from the East coast, along the eggt.
west trade route, that European missionaries, explorers and armeg
expeditions penetrated into the East African interior—but algg
because they cvoke a proverb well known to Fipa, according 1o
which anything that can be formulated by the human mind, how-
ever improbable, will eventually come to pass.*?

The myth says that Kaswa’s hearers admit to having tried byt
failed to understand him, and so he goes on more explicitly:

There are coming monstrous inventors,

Bringing war, striking you unawares, relentlessly.

‘O you people, you are going to be robbed of your country—

You won’t even be allowed to cough’.

There follows, in the second part of the myth, an account by Kaswa
of the main changes in the structure of Fipa society which arc to
ensuc from colonial domination. The younger generation, breaking
away from the authority of their fathers, are not even present when
the old ones come to die. As for the Twa ruling dynasty, it will dis-
appear altogether.**

Kaswa goes on to characterise the changes in man’s perception of
himself and his relation to others which are to be introduced by
Western capitalism. Man becomes isolated from his fellows: he
cannot ‘‘see’’ them nor can he be himself ‘“‘seen’. The myth makes
Kaswa express this “disappearance’” of man as an autonomous but
reciprocally interacting social being by saying that ‘‘a person clothes
his whole body, even his eyes are clothed”. In this state men are un-
able to communicate meaningfully one with another:

Those born in that time are devoid of manners,

Incapable of civilised utterance.

As for material things, everything will be measured in money—even
natural products like grass and earth:

Everything becomes currency (ifyuuma)®*—grass and the very

earth itself.

In this alarmingly transformed world, the products of man’s social
labour take on a frightening life of their own, so that the motor-cars

**“"Caatakwa, cisuulwa, kwiisa”.

*This prophecy has been virtually realised: the Twa in Ufipa are now a
tiny and diminishing group with scarcely a trace of their old authority.
**This word refers to the pieces of unworked iron, each sufficient to make
a medium-sized hoe, which functioned as currency in Ufipa in the later
19th century. Cf. Marx (1964, p. 169): “Money . . . confounds and ex-

changes all things”.
ROY WILLIS 255

of the Europeans, the ‘‘monstrous inventors”’, have ‘‘protruding
eyes” (headlamps), while their anuses (exhaust pipes) exude fire.
Alienated and reified human labour has itself become a monstrous
force in this image of the prophet Kaswa.

In the third and final part of the myth, an attempt is made to re-
solve the tension generated by the juxtaposition of two incompatible
world-views. The narrative invokes the original unity of the Fipa
universe, in which man dominates the world of nature. Kaswa him-
self acts out this human role, which is shown as consisting in a com-
bination of action and intellectual control :

Then he arose and went all over the country,

Teaching people the names of every thing:

Mountains, rivers, trees, and so on.

Then Kaswa returns to the contradiction in the Fipa social order
between an ideal of human equality and the privileged position of
a minority of elders—the problem which had been posed in the be-
ginning of the narrative. In an almost brutal symbolisation of the
dissolution of bonds between the generations, he seizes the children’s
carrying-cloths—the pieces of goatskin or calico with which Fipa
mothers bind their infants to their backs:

Then he steals the carrying-cloths of the children,

And returning, he went to a place called Loss of Mind.**

Then he said: ‘You people:

I am going with these cloths of your children!’

There follows a vivid image which again recapitulates the structural
unity of the Fipa cosmos. Kaswa raises his hands ‘high towards
heaven” (‘“‘fi umw'iyulu’’)—then sinks into the ground. (In Fipa cos-
mology ‘‘sky” is conceived as analogous to the dominant intellect or
“head”, and to organised human society, in relation to “‘earth”,
which is analogous to both “wild nature’ and to the properly sub-
ordinate Jower body or ‘“loins’’.*¢)

The myth ends, no doubt appropriately, in an ambiguous manner,
for the resolution of the problem posed by the conjunction of Fipa

*Nkooswa n’llaango. There is said to be a place of this name in the unin-
habited bush in central Ufipa. The name may indicate that it was once a
cult centre involving spirit possession. But the name also fits into a pattern
running through the whole myth in which conscious human control of the
world is contrasted with a converse state in which the (real) products of
the human mind control man and annihilate his freedom and conscious-
ness.

*Cf. Willis, R. G., The head and the loins: Lévi-Strauss and Beyond (Man,
196:;7), II, p. 4); and Willis, “Pollution and Paradigms’” (Man, 1972, VII,
p. 3).
256 THE FIPA OF TANZAN;,

and Western cultures is a matter for the future. The people reacy to

the disappearance of Kaswa with reasoned and co-ordinated actiop -
They say: ‘Let’s dig and seize those cloths of our children !’
They found but a stone. . .

That is, Kaswa has gone for ever, and the Fipa are left alone wiip

their historical heritage and their present condition.

IV

Obviously not every non-literate society would or could have
produccd such a critiquc of modern Western culture as is contained
in the Kaswa myth. Thesc oddly familiar ideas could be generated
by the Fipa because their society and culture shares with the West a
scnse of having dcveloped, and as still developing, through time.
Such a historical consciousness has been lacking in many literate
civilisations and anthropological research has shown it to be lacking
in many, and perhaps most, non-litcrate societies. Another signifi-
cant and related feature of Fipa culture, that again recalls a charac-
teristic of Western civilisation, is that it sees itself as changing
through absorption of ncw people, ideas and products from outside.
From the particular conjunction of the Fipa geographical and eco-
logical situation, and their conflictful and often violent history up to
the middle of the 19th century, there emerged a peaceful, industri-
ous and orderly society devoted to the ““‘domestication™ of nature
and external humanity. But towards the end of the 19th century, the
Fipa came to realise that what they had caught in their net was a
monster—something, in their terms, at once sub- and super-human.

Evidently the rather close parallelism between Fipa and Western
world-views, a structural similarity which enabled the Fipa to ex-
press such oddly familiar ideas as those contained in the Kaswa
myth, poscs a problem of explanation. This is not the place to pur-
sue it.>* For us at this time the signficance of such testimonies as the
Kaswa myth, and of the social anthropology that was born out of
the colonial system, may well lie primarily on the light they, and it,
can shed on the dark aspects of our own social selves.

YFor a fuller statement of this problem see Man and Beast: a comparative
analysis of animal symbolism in three African societies (Willis, in press).
SOME REMARKS FROM THE THIRD WORLD ON
ANTHROPOLOGY AND COLONIALISM:
THE SUDAN
Abdel Ghaffar M, Ahmed

With the abolition of the slave trade, African Studies could no
longer be inspired by the economic motive. The experts in
African Studies therefore changed the content and direction of
their writings; they began to give accounts of African society
which were used to justify colonialism as a duty of civilisation.
Even the most flattering of these writings fell short of objectivity
and truth. This explains, I believe, the popularity and success
of anthropology as the main segment of African Studies.
(Kwame Nkrumah, quoted in D. Brokensha, Applied
Anthropology in English-Speaking Africa, 1966, p. 15.)
The first phase of contact between Europeans and Africans was
marked by the establishment of the slave trade on a large scale. The
second phase was dividing Africa between the dominant European
powers seeking the exploitation of the area. The goal announced by
these European powers when appealing for the help and support of
their masses was to establish law and order among the ‘savages’ and
to stop them from killing each other. “Now that he (the savage)
was no longer to be carried off to civilisation, it might be right that
civilisation should be carried to him.”! In this process the ways of
life and the systems of thought of the “‘natives” had to be studied
so that alternative ways of introducing civilisation to them, or intro-
ducing them to civilisation with the least possible cost, could be
found.

V. 2?3 Kieman, The Lords of Human Kind, London, 1969 (Pelican edition),
p. 213.
260 REMARKS FROM THE THIRD WORLp

Nkrumah, though he might not have becn fully justified, was say-
ing aloud what many other African nationalists werce thinking, It
was typical of much contemporary thought in new nations. ‘“Most
African intellectuals are at best indifferent to, or mildly tolerant of,
social anthropology, and frequently they have strong feelings of
hostility to the subject and its practitioners. This attitude is reflected
in the small number of Africans who study the subject; when Ken-
vatta, Azikiwe, or Busia were students of anthropology in the 1930s,
therc was a very different climate, and it was not thought strange or
inappropriate that they should concentrate on anthropology. But
today African anthropologists face a difficult time, with little under-
standing or cncouragement from their own society.”’?

Anthropologists arc regarded as reactionaries by thc majority of
thc African intellectuals; and hence statements to the cffect that
“most social anthropologists held and still hold radical or liberal
political views’* hardly find much sympathy among African intel-
lectuals. The basic argument of the African intellectual here is that
in the colonial period anthropological studies did not reflect the
libcral political ideals of their authors. While it remains true that
“in their personal capacity anthropologists, like cveryone else, have
a wide spectrum of political views. Some arc known ‘conscrvatives’;
others lean far to the ‘Icft’,”’* it has also been argued that ‘“‘classical
functionalism prevcented [liberal anthropologists] from effecting a
fruitful conjunction between their political commitments and their
sociological analysis.”® That is really what counts in this situation,
and therefore the attribution of “‘invidious political motives’’ to such
anthropologists cannot be dismissed as mistaken or unjust.

In this paper I shall make some remarks on the relation of anth-
ropology to colonial rule on the basis of the Sudan experience. 1
shall touch—though without drawing firm conclusions—on an issue
which is mostly neglected in anthropological analysis: the anthro-
pologist’s initial attitude towards the people he is studying. Such
attitudes arc mostly the products of thc anthropologist’'s own
socicty, and are the results of the judgement that arose from the

first contact between the colonial powers and the populations of the
colonies.

‘D. Brokensha, Applied Anthropology in English-Speaking Africa, 1966,
p. 16.

“T. Asad, The Kababish Arabs, London, 1970, p. 10.

'V. Turncr, (ed.) Colonialism in Africa 1870-1960, Cambridge, 1971, p. 1.
“T. Asad, op. cit., p. 19.
ABDEL GHAFFAR M AHMED 261

||

The case of the exploitation of African workers from former French
colonies that was to be investigated by the International Labour
Organisation—at the request of the United Nations Economic and
Social Council—during the first week of August 1972 led to many
comments which reflected the persistence of European attitudes
towards the population of their ex-colonies. (See, e.g., Newsweek,
August 14, 1972.) At the same time a comment on the issue, given
by a British anthropologist on BBC radio, elaborated on the defi-
nition of slavery giving comparative ethnographic material from a
number of societies studied by anthropologists.® His whole exer-
cise, by obscuring the meaning of slavery, amounted to an indirect
justification of the exploitation of African workers in Europe. This
shows how the anthropologist might use his knowledge to justify
certain attitudes held by his own society towards other people.

The whole issue has a long genealogyv. European attitudes to the
outside world in the imperial age had—and still have—a great
influence on the thinking of many European scholars in various
fields of knowledge. Kiernan gives an extensively documented ac-
count of some of these attitudes and how they developed and varied
considerably between the seventeenth and twentieth centuries. Some
basic ideas held by some Europeans about the “natives” who came
under their domination have remained in currency, e.g., that the
European is a superior human being in relation to the “native”
who is hardly human in every respect. On the basis of such ideas
a number of drastic measures taken against “natives’” were justified.
For example, “as the slave-trade grew and prospered, it suited
Europe to think of Africa so unmitigatedly barbarous that no
removal from it could worsen the lot of its inhabitants™.” The
assumption has aways been that since Europe is the home of civili-
zation it is the mission of the European—who makes this assump-
tion himself—to lead “barbarians” and “savages” in the rest of the
world towards “civilization”. By doing this the European, whether
a trader, an administrator, or a missionary, was trving to set a
course for the European exploitation of areas that came under his
power. In confirming this much of the literature on the people of
the colonies accounted for different customs and values that pro-
jected them as “‘not much better than animals™, or, at best second
rate human beings. Even in the fifties it was not unusual for a

‘This commentary on the news was given by Anthony Forge.
'V. G. Kiernan, op. cit,, p. 203.
262 REMARKS FROM THE THIRD WORLp

European child on meeting a black man in the street to rush “to
his mother’s arms [crying]: ‘Mama the nigger is going to eat me’.”®

Taking the Sudan case, many examples of such attitudes may be
cited. In forcing the population to do compulsory work that the
government felt necessary for its own purposes, a European admin-
istrator who played a major role in the establishment of the Anglo-
Egyptian Condominium justified the policy as follows: *‘ “The nigger
is a lazy beast’, said Sir Rudolph Slatin of the Sudan, ‘and must
be compelled to work—compelled by the government.” Asked how,
he replied: ‘With a stick’.” Another example is Churchill’s descrip-
tion of the Mahdists first published in 1899. While Gordon was
pictured as a leader of a civilizing mission, the Mahdi and his men
who led a revolution to free their land from Turkish rule were rep-
resented as a ‘“savage mob”. It must be admitted that Churchill,
albeit with an air of superiority. had something good to say of
the Mahdi: “It should not be forgotten that he put life and soul
into the hearts of his countrymen, and freed his native land of
foreigners. The poor miserable natives, eating only a handful of
grain, toiling half-naked and without hope, found a new, if terrible,
magnificence added to life. Within their humble breasts the spirit
of the Mahdi roused the fire of patriotism and religion.””*® Dignity
is assumed, by Europeans, to be normally a virtue of “civilized”
people in ordinary life and hence it is almost conventional to see
the native behaving in a dignified way only in defeat or at the
moment of his death. Describing the end of the Khalifa, Churchill
wrote that “Osman Sheikh-ed-Din was wounded, and as he was
carried away urged the Khalifa to save himself by flight; but the
latter, with a dramatic dignity sometimes denied to more civilized
warriors, refused.”"!

The attitudes of superiority embodied in such statements were
later expressed in an explicit way by one of the most able adminis-
trators in the British Empire , Sir Harold MacMichael. Discussing
anthropology and its relevance to administrators, especially when
it studied social structure, customs, beliefs and ways of thought of
the “races of mankind”, he said: “Some understanding of these
will be conceded to be an essential equipment of the administrator

‘fgggn qggted in Wallerstein, 1. (ed.) Social Change, the Colonial Situation,
, P- 78.

’V. G. Kiernan, op. cit., p. 24243,

“W. S. Churchill, Frontiers and Wars, His Four Early Books Covering

Ig;zb’fe agza Soldier and War Correspondent, London (Pelican edition),
1972, p. 162.
“W. S. Churchill, op. <it., p. 378.
ABDEL GHAFFAR M AHMED 263

responsible for the tutelage of primitive races whose mental pro-
cesses are not as ours. Between the mind of the educated European,
with its heritage of some centuries of occidental [?] and that of
the primitive savage a great gulf is fixed which the former can
bridge hardly and with patient study only.”*?

With these attitudes, developed over a period of time and firmly
held by administrators as well as missionaries,’® it is hard to see
how the anthropologist, who shared the administrator’s and mis-
sionary’s cuhture, could avoid the influence of such attitudes in his
work. What makes this influence more probable is that in all
situations it was the administrator or the missionary—or both—
who introduced the anthropologist to the people whom he wanted
to study, and acted as intermediary in the early stages of the study,
suggesting informants and giving advice and information. It is true
that “anthropologists are trained over almost as many years as
doctors to collect a certain kind of information as “participant
observers” which will enable them, whatever may be their personal
views, to present as objectively as the current level of their discip-
line’s development permits, a coherent picture of the sociocultural
system they have elected to spend some years of their lives in
studying, and of the kind of processes that go on in it.”** But it is
also true that the institutes that give the anthropologist his training
are influenced by ideas current in the society to which they belong.
It is these training institutes which are responsible for planting in
the minds of their students a number of questionable Euro-centric
assumptions as if they were accepted facts; e.g., that “It is a fact of
history that it was the European peoples who discoverd the others,
[...] and not vice versa.”!3

Such assumptions have affected the kind of terminology adopted
by anthropologists as well as the emphasis put on certain topics in
the field of their studies. It is unfortunate that up to the 1960s
European anthropologists found it convenient to use terms such
as ‘primitive’ that express their assumed superiority. It is hard to
see how a European anthropologist can escape being influenced by
ideas in his own society, and to insist that he can avoid this influ-
ence would be to minimise the importance of socialization empha-

“H. MacMiochael, Letter dated 10th Jan. 1929, No. C.S./17/M/! Financial
Secretary, S. G. Khartoum, GGC[296-99 File 18.D.7, Sudan Law Project,
University of Khartoum.

M. Forsberg, Land Beyond the Nile, New York, 1958.

V. Turner, op. cit,, p. 1.

L. Mair, Primitive Government, London, 1962, p. 1.
264 REMARKS FROM THE THIRD WORLp
sized by anthropology as a discipline.

411

“Social anthropology has never been merely an aid to enlightened
colonial administration, nor should it be viewed now as merely an
aid to development in new states.””'® The emphasis as it was put by
Lewis here confirms the fact that anthropology—beside other things
—was an aid to colonial administration. The feeling among intel-
lectuals of ex-colonies is that though it was not merely an aid to
colonial administration, it played—more than any other human
science—a major role in introducing to the administration the
people of the colonies and in showing ways by which their social
system could be controlled and hence exploited. It is true that
anthropologists were not policy makers. ‘“Anthropology had grown
under the wing of the colonial office in Britain, and academics were
restrained when dealing with overseas policy. Administrators re-
ceived training in anthropology, and had a fairly good idea of the
limitations on its practical use; they learned the local language and
kept close to people, so that much of what the anthropologist had
to say was not strange to them.”’!” The administrators by combining
their general knowledge with the anthropologist’s special knowledge
of specific peoples were able to develop their policy over time. But
it can be legitimately argued that anthropologists, being in such a
position, did at least indirectly contribute to policy making.

This association gave anthropology a conservative reputation and
in recent years has led to many debates among anthropologists
themselves when some of them tried to evaluate the influence of the
subject and the rdle of its practitioners during colonial rule. The
most recent of these was Sir Edward Evans-Pritchard’s angry letter
to The Times Literary Supplement dismissing Kluckhohn’s state-
ments regarding the positions held by British Anthropologists in the
Foreign Office.

Sir,—In going through some notebooks I find a quotation from

the late Clyde Kluckhohn’s widely circulated Mirror for Man

(1949). He says:

During the recent war applied anthropology blossomed. British
anthropologists held important posts in the Foreign Office,
the Admiralty, the British Information Service, the Wartime

"], Lewis, Comment on “Social Responsibilities Symposium™ in Current
Anthropolagy, vol 9, No. §, pp. 417-18.

"G. Cochrane, Development Anthropology, Oxford, 1971, pp. 4-5.

“The Times Literary Supplement, March 10, 1972.
ABDEL GHAFFAR M AHMED 265

Social Survey, and in the field. One man was political adviser
for the whole Middle East, another carried the main
administrative burden for the vast Anglo-Egyptian Sudan,
still another handled liaison problems in Kenya and Abyssinia.
This makes us look pretentious, stupid and vulgar, and T think it
should be stated, in case this should get into the history of our
subject, that it is, at any rate in my opinion, complete rubbish.
Who these people holding “‘important posts’ were I cannot
imagine. However, as I have sometimes been asked if I was
“‘political adviser for the whole Middle East” T have a right to
reject this imputation. I would wish to put it on record that T
was nothing of the kind—I was just an insignificant captain who
held no important position whatsocver. With regard to the
anthropologist who is supposed to have ‘“‘carried the main
administrative burden for the vast Anglo-Egyptian Sudan”, I
can only suppose that the late Professor Nadel is referred to.
In fact, he had nothing to do with administration of the Sudan.
For good measure I may well add that the statement (page 176)
that British anthropologists “created the principle of ‘indirect
rule’  is also nonsense. Who were they and how and when and
where did they do it?
E. E. EVANS-PRITCHARD
All Souls College, Oxford.
In spite of this the fact that anthropology had been a great help to
administrators was acknowledged by many of them, no matter
whether the anthropologist in the situation was appointed by the
colonial government or was working from a British University.'? In
the words of Sir Edward Evans-Pritchard himself writing two
decades earlier: ‘“The value of social anthropology to administra-
tion has been generally recognised from the beginning of the cen-
tury and both the Colonial Office and colonial governments have
shown an increasing interest in anthropological teaching and re-
search. For a good number of years past colonial cadets, before
taking up their appointments, have received, among other courses

YAn example of this is P. M. Larken’s statement when referring to Evans-
Pritchard’s work on the Zande:
With his knowledge for a guide, one can now form a just appreciation
of Zande action and reactions which might otherwise appear incompre-
hensible or even blameworthy. No doubt many people will, thanks to
him, escape unjust punishment, and receive a favourable response to their
often obscure requests.
My constant regret is that he did not make his visit many years earlier,
so that I could have had the chance to benefit from his teaching, for 1
should have been a far better D.C. if such good fortune had been mine.
(l..ark)en quoted in Singer and Street Zande Themes Oxford (1971 opening
page.
266 REMARKS FROM THE THIRD WORLp

of instruction, instruction in social anthropology at Oxford and
Cambridge, and more recently in London.””?° In fact not only did
administrators recognise the role of anthropology. but in a number
of cases, they suggested fields of study and produced lists of the
kinds of questions that ought to be asked, on the grounds that they
were best qualified to point to social problems of special relevance
to the stage of development of a particular colony. The colonial
governments, through lack of finances, could not afford the luxury
of supporting research on topics that did not contribute directly to
their main interest—maintenance of ‘law and order’.

Considering the Sudan situation, many intellectuals nowadays
connect the fact that most social anthropological studies were
focused on the southern region of the Sudan to colonial government
policy towards the south. But in my view this is a mistake, mainly
because the discussions and publications as well as the events of the
last twenty years have proved, beyond any doubt that the colonial
government lacked a consistent policy towards the South. To explain
why the northern Sudan did not have a fair share of anthropological
studies, when compared with the South, we have to consider a
number of points. First, it was financially difficult to support anthro-
pological studies. Secondly, since the main focus in the early stages
of the administration was on the maintenance of law and order, the
administrators in the north, most of whom were very competent and
highly qualified, thought that there was not a great deal that anthro-
pology could do there for them. Their own contribution in the field
of cultural history and social organisation of the people among
whom they worked laid the basis for the limited series of objectives
they had in mind.?* It is apparent that even when anthropologists,
who were willing to work in the area, appeared, they were directed
to places where the Government lacked information or did not
have enough or enough competent administrators — namely the
south (e.g. the Seligmans).

The development of anthropology and its increasing contribution
to the administration of other colonies gradually convinced the lead-
ing administrators in the Sudan Government that they should make
use of it. The value of anthropological research especially in rela-
tion to the administrative problem of the South was stressed. On

*E. E. Evans-Pritchard, Social Anthropology, London, 1951, p. 110.

*The large number of articles on history, beliefs, customs and values that
appeared in Sudan Notes and Records represent a major part of these
contributions. Some other major works include MacMichael’'s: 4 History
of the Arabs in the Sudan Tribes of Northern and Central Kordofan...etc.
ABDEL GHAFFAR M AHMED 267

this topic MacMichael’s letter to the Financial Secretary of the
Sudan Government on the 10th January 1929 concerning the em-
ployment of a trained anthropologist throws light on the relation
between anthropology and the colonial administration in the Sudan.
Here and subsequently, I quote, at length, from that letter:
When Professor Seligman proposed Mr. Evans-Pritchard’s visit
it was made a condition of the grant to the latter that he should
give the Sudan Government, within a reasonable time, a report
of his studies in a form suitable for the use of administrative
officials.
After stressing the importance of anthropology to the European
administration of ‘primitive’ peoples, MacMichael goes on to ex-
plain that “‘the administrative official is unavoidably handicapped
in the endeavour to study the cultural anthropology of the people
with whom he is in contact.”” This is attributed to a lack of the
necessary minimum of technical anthropological training required
to enable him to sift and co-ordinate his evidence or even, in the
first instance, to question the native intelligently with a view to the
collection of evidence itself
IMustration of the foregoing arguments and of the effects of the
lack of expert knowledge could without difficulty, I think, be
cited from the record of this Government’s administration of
the south, where grave errors have been all too often made
through ignorance of local beliefs and habits and insufficient
understanding of savage ways of thought, and there can be no
doubt but that our troubles with the Nuer, e.g., have been
intensified by our lack of knowledge of the social structure of
this people and the relative status of the various kinds of chiefs
and Kujurs.

[ feel strongly that, assuming officials ought to be encouraged
by every possible means to acquire a fuller and more intimate
knowledge of all that pertains to native modes of thought, their
efforts must be based upon scientific research which calls in the
first instance, for the services of a trained anthropologist. [
would urge that the Sudan Government provide the means for
the conduct of this research.

Two alternative decisions were possible:
(a) We might employ a staff of trained anthropologists to make
a complete comprehensive and elaborate anthropological survey
of the Sudan. Such anthropologists would be appointed for an
indefinite period and their work be comparable to that done by
the Geological Survey.
268 REMARKS FROM THE THIRD WORLD

(b) Alternatively we might employ a trained anthropologist
or a series of trained anthropologists for field-work, each for
a limited period and for a specific objective or objectives, on
the same lines as those on which we are engaging a language
expert.

I am personally strongly in favour of the adoption of the
latter alternative because it is not ultra-ambitious nor ultra-
expensive. I feel too that we should get practical results in a
shorter time and have more chance of avoiding the danger to
which one is always liable in dealing with the scientific expert,
viz: that he will sink the practical in the recondite and lapse
into over-elaboration.

The sum of my proposal is therefore that a properly qualified
man be employed as from next winter, on the same lines as
Mr. Evans-Pritchard, to study a given tribe or series of tribes.
It should certainly be a part of his terms of reference that he
should within a given time furnish the Government with a report
of the results of his fieldwork in the form of a monograph or
series of monographs couched in easily comprehensible terms
and dealing with those social and cultural aspects of the subjects
of his study a knowledge of which is essential to the adminis-
trator. He might be given as a guide a short questionnaire
covering these essential points, such as that which was drafted
for Mr. Evans-Pritchard in 1926 and to which, as illustrating
my arguments, I would draw particular attention.

The immediate field of study should probably be the Nuer.

It is possible that Mr. Evans-Pritchard himself is the right man,
and might be willing to undertake the work. The period of his
present engagement ends in April next and he will then wish to
spend some months in England collecting and preparing his
material. If he does not wish to return upon our terms, I am
certain that Professor Seligman, whom 1 consulted when last in
England, could suggest a suitable alternative.

The Appendix mentioned in MacMichael’s letter consisted of the

following questions :

1. Names of tribe.
(a) Used by the tnibe itself
(b Used by neighbouring tribes
(c) Used by the Arabs and the Govt.
2. Habitat and boundaries. Nature of country.
(Plains, hills, forest, swamps, rivers.)
3. Re!jaftions with neighbouring tribes, raiding, intermarriage, alliances,
trade.
4. Language. If possible give the first ten numerals and a few common
words such as fire, water, man, woman, child, sun, moon, etc.
etc. and names of all game animals.
(a) With which other tribes are they mutually intelligible?
ABDEL GHAFFAR M AHMED 269

(b) Can any relationship with other languages be traced?
c.g. Shilluk and Anuak are mutually intellibible. Shilluk and
Dinka are not mutually intelligible, but are related.
Divisions.
(a) Political e.g. chieftainship acting logether politically and in war.
(b) Social e.g., clans, totemic and otherwise tracing descent from
a common ancestor. Age grades.
6. Chiefs. Paramount and sub-chiefs. Political and religious chiefs,
such as rainmakers. Are these identical? What are their powers?
How appointed?
7. Numbers, as far as ascertainable of tribe and sub-sections.
How many villages?
8. Economic Life.
Pastoral or agricultural or both? Nomadism. What animals are
kept? Size of herds. What plants are cultivated. Hunting and
fishing. Crafts such as iron working, pottery and basket-making.
Are these professional? Carried on ‘by men or women?
9. Weapons used for war, hunting and fishing. Dress and ornaments.
10. Distinguishing customs relating to
(1) birth
(2) marriage
(3) death and burial
(4) inheritance
(5) circumcision
(6) naming
(7) initiation
11. Religious beliefs and specially cults, organisation of cults, secret
societies. ’ _
One cannot say whether Sir Edward Evans-Pritchard actually sup-

plied answers to these questions directly to the Sudan Government :
the fact is that they were available in the classic monographs on the
Nuer.

Other examples of how the relationship between anthropology
and administration, based on the same principles, continued could
be seen in Nadel's appointment to make a study of the Nuba and in
Arkell’s appointment as a government anthropologist.** It is right
to emphasisc the fact that anthropology was not ““merely an aid to
cnlightened colonial administration™ but such an emphasis is an
attempt to avoid the question about the extent and influence of that
aid. The Sudan case shows that the indirect role of anthropologists
—whether they were aware of it or not—was great; and that the
reactions of intcllectuals in the country towards the subject are
based on findings filling a large number of files in the Sudan Gover-
nment Archives.

At thc same time one would like to sec anthropology aiding
development in new states especially when the anthropologist in-

tn

2K 2918)() Hendcrson, The Making of the Modern Sudan, London, 1952,
pp. 79-80.
270 REMARKS FROM THE THIRD WORLD

volved is a ‘“‘native”. Since I have this attitude, I would like to make
it clear that I am not condemning the involvement of anthropolo-
gists with administration in the Sudan during the colonial period.
I am merely establishing and documenting this involvement. [
believe that no branch of social science can or should be neutral
and these anthropologists conform with my view. One feels that
they were doing what they thought was right and adopted the cur-
rent ideologies of their time. This invites a more systematic re-
valuation of their contribution seen within the context of the
colonial framework (similar to Magubane)?®* which this paper,
though condemning the ideology of colonialism, falls short of
making.

1V

To sum up, though my remarks might seem a little incoherent, 1
try to make the point that the cultural heritage, education and
socialisation of the anthropologist as a member of a human group
which has developcd certain images of ‘‘natives” must have carried
some of these images with him to the field. How much this influen-
ced his work is a different question; and the answer varies from one
individual to another, especially in relation to training and charac-
ter. By going into such questions I hope to cast some doubt on
issues taken for granted rather than to reach firm conclusions.

The only reference to the relations between anthropologists and
administrators in colonies appeared in bricf acknowledgements in
prefaces to anthropological monographs. The administrators on
their side stated their views on the subject through their own chan-
nels. After independcnce the intellectuals of new nations gained
access to state archives and so learned many things about the his-
tory of the subject and its practitioners. They took anthropologists
to be equally responsible for the inadequacies of development in
these countries during the period of colonial rule and thus became
hostile to them and to their subject.

“B. Magubane, “A Critical Look at Indices Used in the Study of Social
Change in Colonial Africa”, Current Anthropology, vol. 12, No. 4-5.
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY
Philip Marfleet

This short article will review the substantial contributions to the
debate over anthropology and colonialism. It will attempt to give
an initial orientation to the themes of the discussion, which will
provide a basis for the consideration of later contributions, and a
number of reference points for the literature cited as bibliography
throughout the book. ‘Substantial contributions’ include all those
dealing in whole or part with the anthropology/colonialism rela-
tionship as a specific and particular question.

Anthropologists have long been aware of a relationship between
their discipline and colonialism. Such an awareness was however
largely restricted to an acknowledgement of the colonial system as
simply part of the given order. Anthropologists may have been
aware, for cxample, of certain problems created by imperial admin-
istrations, but it is reasonable to suggest that by and large they were
uncritical of colonialism as a system, as constituting a problem in
itself. It is when colonialism came to be regarded in these terms that
the relationship with anthropology was brought into question.

In the late 1940s came a first isolated attack from Gregg and
Williams in their paper “The Dismal Science of Functionalism”
(1948). Although later described as ‘“‘frequently incorrect in fact
and ecthically entirely too wild and presumptuous” (by Marvin
Harris in his The Rise of Anthropological Theory, London 1968
p. 534), this article anticipated many later critical reviews especially
274 BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

of the British method. They saw the ‘dismal science’ consisting in
a perspective largely borrowed from the laissez-faire doctrines of
neo-classical economics. Its ‘primitive’ world was peopled with a
socially rational man motivated by self-interest to gratify the needs
generated by inborn physical mechanisms. But like the classical
economic analysis of capitalist society, such a perspectivc makes all
social interests appear right and good by definition. This individual-
ising bio-psychological analysis, argued Gregg and Williams, was
placed in a context which made the ‘primitive’ community function-
ally organised and perfectly integrated, and thus an unchangingly
proper and seemingly naturally just ‘organism’. The sterile func-
tionalism which articulated such a view was to be seen as merely
another apology for the status quo, for the social organisation of
capitalism, with its *‘depressions, imperialism, and war’’. The activi-
ties of anthropologists in the British colonial administration or in
the American military establishment, reflected the utility of anthro-
pological thcory in maintaining society as it is.

This type of radical and forceful attack upon the anthropological
establishment, here with a detailed, if patchy examination of func-
tionalist thecory was not to be repeated for nearly twenty years.

The next positive comment on the colonial relationship was made
by J. R. Hooker in “The Anthropologist’s Frontier; The Last
Phase of African Exploitation” (1963). This historical study des-
cribed the changing position of the anthropologist in relation to the
gradual breakdown of colonialism. Initially the hand-maiden of
colonial governments, the anthropologist found himself increasingly
in sympathy with African interests, and by the anti-colonial period
was even actively engaged against the administration. African sus-
picion of the discipline remained however and despite his personal
concern the anthropologist has found himself rejected. He has not
been able to overcome the stigma of involvement in a study seen
as so closely related to the colonial system.

Hooker’s article was closely followed by a paper from a Belgian
anthropologist Jaquet Maquet whose ‘Objectivity in Anthropology”
appeared in 1964. Maquet noted the irony of a situation in which
the anthropologist, seeing himself, as Hooker had noted, as liberal-
minded and sympathetic toward ‘primitive’ societies, was neverthe-
less responsible for the development of ideas ideologically useful to
the exploiting powers. Maquet located the anthropologist as not
merely a member of the dominant white ruling group, but as a
representative of its middle classes—those most completely involved
in the colonial system. This paper also contained one of the first of
PHILIP MARFLEET 275

many prophesics of the coming disintegration of anthropology.
With the disappearance of the ‘primitive’ world, and of the colonial
relationship, argued Maquet, anthropological subject matter would
be divided between history and sociology. Then at least a more
objective body of theory might be assembled.

At this stage it remains convenient to consider contributions to
the debate chronologically, and it is Worsley’s paper “The End of
Anthropology™ (1968) which comes under review. This article
made a more indirect criticism of the colonial relationship in the
course of an analysis of the theoretical state of the discipline, and
noted that the anthropologist had traditionally seen his concern as
with the ‘primitive’ world. But emergent social relationships in post-
colonial society are increasingly of the ‘modern’ type—a universal
society is in the making. Unhappily, the anthropological desire for
universalism is negated by sterile theoretical formalism and rela-
tivism. There must be a developmental, processual perspective
which will allow for the consideration of a world developing outside
the old imperial frame. For Worsley only a rapid reorientation to
dynamic study could provide an alternative to anthropology’s dis-
solution and fragmentation.

Claude Levi-Strauss in ‘“Anthropology: Its Achievements and
Future (1966) reinforccd Worsley's doubts. He saw the developing
world’s hostility toward anthropology as an understandable reaction
to a discipline which had been part of the appallingly violent pro-
cess of domination which established and maintained colonialism.
For ‘native’ cultures cver to view anthropology as legitimate, it
must undergo a transformation, to disengage itself from the colo-
nial system. It must become a study of society from the inside,
breaking down into a number of other disciplines. Anthropology
will survive in a changing world “by allowing itself to perish in
order to be born again in a new guise”.

Published in the same year (1966), Onwuachi and Wolfe's “The
Place of Anthropology in the Future of Africa” also noted the
rejection of anthropology in a continent where the old imperial
power relationships had been destroyed. Africa had once been
merely an extension of Europe; in now asserting its own identity
it rejected an anthropology which had not redefined its own per-
spective. As the science of man, anthropology should work within
the broadest context, yet the traditional, and now damaging interest
in small-scale societies was still dominant. Anthropology might
have a future in Africa, but only after a genuine and careful re-
organisation.
276 BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Isolated articles written over a period of threc years to 1966
may now be seen as elements in a pattern of criticism which was to
become more sharply defined, and to assume the proportions of a
major debate. Since 1968 there has been a growing interest in the
problcm of the colonial relationship: contributions have appearcd
more frequently, and have assumed a more intense and polemical
character. These more recent contributions may be conveniently
viewed in four groups—those constituting the radical American
critique, the British New Left critique, those of the African anthro-
pologists, and the general reviews by Firth and Leclerc.

The Amcrican Critique

The three initial papers of the American critique fall together by
virtue of their simultaneous appearance in the Current Anthro-
pology Social Responsibilities Symposium of 1968. Berreman’s Is
Anthropology Alive? is primarily concerned with the ethical posi-
tion of the American anthropologist. The continuing currency of
the myth of a value-free science he argues has lead the anthro-
pologist to allow the utilisation of his research material by those
whose interest is not for people but like the U.S. military establish-
ment and the CIA, for power. ‘Scicntific unaccountability’ has
mercly disengaged the anthropologist from his real moral respon-
sibility. This must be rcasserted. Although expressed in an intense
polemic against the American anthropological establishment, Berre-
man's position is, wc are warned from further to the Left, merely
“a modcl for seductive left-libcralism in the guise of a radical altcr-
native.” (Moore 1971. See below.)

Gjessing in ““The Social Responsibility of the Social Scientist”
expresses a concern for anthropology as having had a more general
relationship with Western colonialism. He notes the development of
the discipline as a response to certain imperial demands, and the
nature of its theory as being ideologically useful to the dominant
powers. Like Berreman he points out the dangers of acceptance of
the idea of scientific neutrality. He argues for a realisation of the
true nature of the anthropological perspective, especially of its Wes-
tern middle class orientation. The anthropologist Gjessing asserts
must be able to look outside this framework by asking questions
which may be subversive of the wider system. Primarily he must
define his overriding responsibility by making a real personal com-
mitment to the cause of the oppressed.

The third of these symposium papers—Kathleen Gough’s ‘‘New
Proposals for Anthropologists”—has the most critical and militant
tone. It locates anthropology as *“‘the child of Western imperialism”’,
a discipline which has interpreted the non-Western world in terms
PHILIP MARFLEET 2717

of the absolute values of capitalist society. The socialist states of the
developing world have largely been ignored, and the problems posed
by the growth of revolutionary struggles confronting Western, and
primarily American imperialism, left unattended. Yet these are
issues of the greatest importance. Anthropologists must make a
rapid reassessment of their personal positions in relation to the dis-
cipline. If not able to assert themselves in favour of their individual
moralities, they should first ask how they may free themselves from
the limitations imposed by their own system.

A related but later American criticism has come from John
Moore. His ‘‘Perspective for a Partisan Anthropology™ (1971) traces
the development of both British and American anthropology in
relation to the changing needs of the two imperialisms. The former
aided the colonial administration as well as providing the rationales
needed by an exploitative system. The latter, when involved in the
colonisation of Amerindian lands provided a similar set of settler
ideologies. Later during the neo-imperial period it has been expli-
citly tied to the capitalist ethic, and responsible for research into
the efficiency of the very techniques of exploitation. In an intensly
critical paper Moore argues for a truly revolutionary or ‘partisan’
anthropology to provide the only alternative for a discipline com-
plicit in exploitation and oppression. This genuinely radical per-
spective will contrast with the mere ‘liberalism’ of White, Harris and
Berreman.

This set of papers from the United States emphasised the imme-
diate and practical character of the anthropological relationship
with imperialism. The main concern was to assert the need for in-
dividual responsibility in the light not only of the discipline’s rela-
tionship with an exploitative system, but of its continuing involve-
ment in, for example, the Vietnam conflict. By contrast the British
critique put greatest emphasis upon theoretical and particularly ideo-
logical aspects of the relationship.

The British New Left Critique

The first of the British Contributions, Anderson’s “Components
Of the National Culture’ (1968) was an attempt to expose the ideo-
logical nature of the whole of British intellectual life under capital-
ism. In Britain, Anderson argued, the development of the total
social idea was proscribed by a ruling class careful to avoid the
possibility of social theory becoming subversion. The notion of
totality was displaced onto the colonial world, where the concept
of ‘the primitive’ could be elaborated within the classically totalis-
ing perspective of functionalism at no risk to the domestic political
scene. A flourishing, indeed ‘brilliant’ anthropology was allowed to
develop, which played the dual role of administrative advisor and
278 BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

ideologist for the imperial system. David Goddard’s “Limits of
British Anthropology” (1969) contained the most careful analysis
of the theoretical shortcomings of anthropology in relation to its
colonial setting. Goddard saw the relegation of human identity to
that of ‘the primitive’ to be related to a limited self-conscious
borrowing from the work of Durkheim, (and to a lesser extent from
Maine) which emphasised the rule-governed nature of society.
Applied in the oppressive colenial situation this resulted in a study
of social ‘things’—real of de facto aspects of behaviour—to the ex-
clusion of a consideration of the most important part of the Durk-
heimian heritage—its ‘metaphysical’ aspect. This emphasised the
analysis of phenomena into their constituent parts, and implied the
importance of an analysis of the non-normative elements of social
life—conflicts, interests, and the like. In ignoring this area of Durk-
heim’s work anthropology remained theoretically sterile, and un-
aware of the crudity of the system within which it developed.

“The Crisis of British Anthropology” by Jairus Banaji (1970)
suggested that during the post-war period anthropology has un-
successfully faced two problems. First, the development of a world
in which economic and national change and revolutionary struggle
make traditional subject matter and fieldwork less and less viable
bases for the formation of theory. Born out of imperialism the dis-
cipline cannot now adapt to an anti-imperial world. Second, faced
with the growth of structuralism as a partial alternative to stagnant
functionalist theory, anthropology has ignored the new scheme or
‘naturalised’ or ‘defused’ it. Now in crisis, functionalism is offered
but one solution, that of historical materialism with its theory of
‘social formations’. Marxist anthropologists must expose the cruelty
of the imperial system, and substitute new theory in conjunction
with real political practice on behalf of surviving ‘primitive’ groups.

The British New Left perspective has been phrased in less per-
sonal and immediate terms than the American critique. It has been
less wide-ranging, and less militant in tone, though it has utilised a
more recognisably Marxist form of analysis.

The African Anthropologists

The third group of most recent studies consists in two articles by
African anthropologists. These are not classified together by virtue
of the social origin of their authors, but in relation to the perspec-
tives adopted, which are critical of certain categories and assump-
tions which have been the planks of functionalist theory in Africa.

Mafeje’s “The Ideology of Tribalism’ (1971) notes that there has
often been no indigenous word for ‘tribe’, and that it has been the
colonial authorities, aided by the anthropologist, who have “crea-
PHILIP MARFLEET 279

ted” these entities. ‘Tribalism’ has an ideological basis, and it re-
flects the power of the European ruling class, or that of the new
African elite. It is merely a fiction in the false consciousness of
supposed tribesmen, it obscures the realities of exploitation and con-
trol, and as such is ideology in the original Marxist sense. The real
history of Africa will only be rewritten when the importance of
regional particularism, of culture, and of class formation, are asser-
ted against the imperialists’ mystifications ‘tribe’ and ‘tribalism’.

““A Critical Look at Indices Used in the Study of Social Change
in Colonial Africa” by Bernard Magubane (1971) is a detailed ex-
amination of the way in which anthropologists have misinterpreted
the true nature of ‘Westernisation’ or ‘modernisation’. The ruling
imperial powers attempted to obliterate the independent African
personality. In the urban situation, where the African was most
subject to the pressure to conform to petty European standards
(related to dress, education, occupation, and the like) the anthro-
pological study made him human only in so far as he approximated
to a set of status indices determined in relation to the values of the
dominant culture. A complex of status hierarchies was made to
overlie the reality of an extractive, two-class system. But the ideo-
logical complicity of the anthropologist could not complete the pro-
cess of eradication of the African identity, which has reasserted
itself to expose the crude nature of colonial sociology.

The two articles by Mafeje and Magubane have been among the
most interesting studies of the anthropology/colonialism relation-
ship. Each is concerned with the way in which one area of anthro-
pological theory has been related to a specific part of the colonial
system. Each makes an analysis in terms of the legitimacy that
functionalist categories have had for the subjected sector of colo-
nial society. An attempt has been made to expose ideology ‘from
the inside’. Hooker and Levi-Strauss among others had made an
appeal for such a form of analysis. It is worthwhile noting that of
all contributors to the recent debate only these two authors have
been in a position to draw on the indigenous African experience.

Firth & Leclerc

The final set of contributions are those most recently published.
By 1972 the issue had become one of real importance, and two
general statements appeared. Leclerc’s book Anthropologie et Colo-
nialisme pinpoints classic functionalism’s principle failing to have
been an inability to distinguish colonial reality as merely one among
others. The imperial system bred an uncomprehending, ideological
discipline. Certain trends in anthropology, notably American cul-
tural anthropology, supported in France by Griaule and others,
280 BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

stressed the importance of cultural relativism, and thus gave assis-
tance to the anti-colonial movement. But anthropology today is
still a mirror of existing colonial attitudes, and it has been rejected
both by Third World intellectuals and Western radicals. Even the
anthropology of a decolonised world, structuralism, is condemned
as being ideological. Anthropology is unable to escape its origins.
For Leclerc an anthropology more closely related to the founding
spirit of the Enlightenment—anti-colonial, liberating, and universal
—will provide a genuine alternative to today’s stigmatised discipline.

The first argued response to the radical critics of anthropology
has come from Raymond Firth, a leading figure of the British
school. His paper “The Sceptical Anthropologist? Social Anthro-
pology and Marxist Views on Society’ is partially devoted to a
response to the ‘gut-Marxists’ and others who have sought to ex-
pose the discipline as having supported an exploitative system.
Much of their criticism, claims Firth, is ‘a travesty’. ‘“Anthropology
is not the bastard of imperialism, but the legitimate child of the
Enlightenment.”” Anthropologists have sought to gain respect for
the peoples they have studied, and have often received appreciation
in response. They have recorded the disruptive effects of colonial-
ism, and examined the system itself as a social type. Conflict as well
as integration has been stressed, and cognitive as well as behaviou-
ral aspects of social life examined. Firth responds to Gough’s analy-
sis of the personal crisis faced by the contemporary anthropologist
by suggesting that the delineation of priorities is often difficult, and
that critics frequently simplify alternatives within complex situa-
tions.

Firth’s reaction to the radical attack, from a self-defined position
as ‘a liberal anthropologist of socialist interests’, relies upon asser-
tion rather than argument and example. So certainly do many of
the articles to which he responds.

Anderson, P., “Components of the National Culture”, New Lejt
Review, 50, 1968, pp. 3-57.

Anthropologie et Imperialisme: Symposium, in Les Temps Mod-
erne, 27, Dec. 1970-Jan. 1971, pp. 1061-1201.

Balandier, G., The Sociology of Black Africa, London, 1970.

Banaji, J., ““The Crisis of British Anthropology’’, New Left Review,
1970, pp. 71-85.

Batalla, G. B., “Conservative Thought in Applied Anthropology :
a critique”’, Human Organisation, 25, 2, 1966, pp. 89-92.

Berreman, G. D., “Is Anthropology Alive? Social Responsibility in
PHILIP MARFLEET 281

Anthropology”, Current Anthropology, 9, 1968, pp. 391-398.
Copans, J., “Pour une histoire et une sociologie des études Afri-
caines’’, Cahiers d’etudes Africaines, 11, 1971, pp. 422-47.
Firth, R., “The Sceptical Anthropologist? Social Anthropology and
Marxist Views on Society”, Inaugural Radcliffe-Brown Lecture
in Social Anthropology, 1972. (Pamphlet)—from the Proceed-
ings of the British Academy, Vol. LVIII, Oxford University

Press, London, 1972.

Gjessing, G., “The Social Responsibility of the Social Scientist™,
Current Anthropology, 9, 1968, pp. 397-402.

Goddard, D., “‘Limits of British Anthropology’’, New Left Review,
58, 1969, pp. 79-89.

~ Gough, K., ‘““New Proposals for Anthropologists”. Current Anthro-

pology, 9, 1968, pp. 403-407.

‘Gregg, D., Williams, E., “The Dismal Science of Functionalism™,
American Anthropologist, 50, 1948.

Harris, M., The Rise of Anthropological Theory, London 1968. .

Hooker, J. R., “The Anthropologist’s Frontier: The Last Phase of
African Exploitation’, Journal of Modern African Studies, 1,
1963, pp. 455-59.

Leclerc, G., Anthropologie et Colonialisme, Paris, 1972.

~ Lévi-Strauss, C., “Anthropology: Its Achievements and Future”, -
Current Anthropology, 7, 1966, pp. 124-7.

Mafeje, A., ‘“The Ideology of Tribalism™, Journal of Modern Afri-
can Studies, 9, 1971, pp. 253-261.

Magubane, B., “A Critical Look at Indices Used in the Study of
Social Change in Colonial Africa”, Current Anthropology, 12,
1971, pp. 419-430.

Maquet, J. J., “Obijectivity in Anthropology™, Current Anthro-
pology, S, 1964, pp. 47-58.

Manners, R. A., “Functionalism, Realpolitik & Anthropology in
Underdeveloped Areas”, in R. A. Manners & D. Kaplan (eds.),
Theory in Anthropology, Chicago, 1968.

Moore, J., “Perspective for a Partisan Anthropology”, Liberation,
Nov. 1971, pp. 34-43.

Onwuachi, P. C., Wolfe, A. W., “The Place of Anthropology in the
Future of Africa”, Human Organisation, 25, 1966, pp. 93-95.

Worsley, P., “The End of Anthropology?”, Paper for Sociology
and Social Anthropology Working Group, 6th World Congress
of Sociology, May 1966.
Index of Names

Figures in italics denote footnote
references.

Aba Riots: 126

Abdel-Rahim M : 158

Aborigines Protection Society : 80, 93
Abrahamian E: 110

AdamsClJ: 116, 118

American Anthropological Association

(AAA): 75

American Civil War: 80

Anderson P: 174, 277

Anthropological Association: 224

Anthropological Society of
London: 80

Applied Anthropology, Standing
Committee on: 84

Ardener E: 10

Arkell AJ: 269

Arkoun M: 116

Asad T: 37, 162

Asquith: 82, 138

Association of Social Anthropologists
of the British Commonwealth : 86

Azande, The: 45

Balandier G: 280

Banaj J: 710, 153, 173, 278
Bandyopadhay P : 26, 36
Banton M : 105

Barnes L: 195

Bartlett F C: 160

Basden G T: 142

Batalla G B: 280

Bausani A: /17

BeckerCH: 117

Beit A: 183

Bemba, The: 178, 248, et seq.
Van den Berghe P: 173
Berlin Conference 1885: 124
Bernal J D: 104

Berreman G: 154, 174, 276, 277
Berthoud G: 153

Biafran Nationalism: 123, 148
Bousquet G H: 107

Bowen H: 110

British Association: 82, 138
British Association for the

Advancement of Science: 81
British Museum : 81
British South Africa Company: 179
Broken Hill : 183, 191, 194
Burckhardt J: 117
Burrow J W: 227

CaetaniL: 117

CahenC: 110

Cameron (Governor): 136

Carnegie Foundation: 83, 184

Chamberlain J : 81, 98

Chilver E: 175

Clark ] D: 192

Clifford H(ugh): 126, 131, 134

Colonial Development & Welfare
Act 1940: 85,87,176

Colonial Research Committee of the
RAI: 86,176

Colonial Research Fund : 85

Colonial Social Science Research
Council : 74, 85. 95

Colson E: 175, 197

Cook M A: 111

Copans J: 10, 281

Cromer, Lord : 241-2

Crowder M: 129, 130

Cunliffe-Lister P: 178

CunnisonI: 19

CurtinP D: 103,117, 118

Cyrenaica: 49

Dahrendorf R: 73

Daniel N: 115, 116

Deighton HS: 116

Diamond S: 167

DokeCM: 178

Dufferin, Lord : 241, 2

Durkheim E : 25, 31, 32-33, 34, 38,
112,113,278

East African Institute: 94

Eggan F: 11, 14

Epstein AL: 197

Ethnographic Survey of Africa: 94

Ethnological Society of London : 80

Evans-Pritchard EE: 11, 12, 14, 25,
31, 37, 44, 45, 46, 48, 49, 93, 94_ 9§
105, 109, 246, 264

Eysenck HJ: 160

»
Fallers L A: 109

Faris J: 166, 170

Fiddian Mr: 133, 135

Fipa, The : 245 et seq.

Firth R: 10, 14,47, 72, 85, 94, 95, 246,
280

Folklore Society of Great Britain &
Ireland: 81

Ford Foundation: 74, 75

Fortes M : 12, 86, 89, 105, 108, 109, 246

Frank A G: 27

Frazer ] G: 245, 246

Fick J W: 117

Geddes W R : 204

King George VI: 181

Gibb HAR: 106, 110, 133

Gjessing G: 276

Gluckman M: 71, 14, 31, 33, 112,175,
189, 192, 196, 197

Gobineau, Count: 117

Goddard D: 153, 173, 278

Gollwitzer H: 116

Gordon A: 203

Gore-Browne S: 182

Gough K : 41,75, 154, 173, 276

Gouldsbury C: 178

Gregg D (with Williams E): 273

Green M: 140, 145

Griaule M: 25, 35, 279

GrierG: 131

von Grunebaum G E: 106, /15

Gulick J: 29

Haber & Haber: 30

Hailey, Lord : 65, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89,
92,98,99,137,176, 177,179, 181,
184, 185, 186

Harris M: 14, 153, 273, 277

Hazlewood Rev D: 210

Hempel C: 164

Henderson1: 179

Herskovits M : 60, 61

Hodgson M G S: 110

Hogbin1: 94

HoltPM: 117

Homans G: 13

Hooker JR: 173, 274

Hore E C: 247, 250

Huddlestone H: 155

Huggins Sir Godfrey (later Lord
Malvern): 183

Hunter M : 187

Hurgronje S: 30, 107,117

HurreizS: 158

Huxley J: 178

Ibos, The: 124
Imperial Bureau of Ethnology: 81, 82

Indian Civil Service: 139
Indirect Rule: 88, 91, 92, 99, 126,
127 et seq., 147 et seq.. 156, 157, 167
International African Institute: §1, 52,
54, 64
International Institute of African
Languages & Cultures: 83,176
International Missionary Council : 180

Jabarti: 110

James Mr: 133
Jaspin M A: 30
JorgensenJ G: 75,76

Kaberry P: 66

Kaffir Wars: 80
Kaunda K: i94
Kenyatta J(omo): 61, 184
KhaldunlIbn: 114
KiernanV G: 117, 261
Kikuyu, The: 62,63
Klejn L S: 28
Kluckhohn C: 264
Koronga, The: 165
KuhnT: 162

Lacerda FIM: 250

Lagos: 124

Lapidus I: 109

Larken P M: 265

Leach ER: 9, 31, 33, 37, 94, 164

Leclerc G: 10, 748, 279

Leith Ross §: 140, 145

Lévi-Strauss C: 13, 16, 25, 31, 33, 34,
38, 246, 275

Lewis B: 117

LewisIM: 10, 28, 264

Lewis O: 35

Litunga of Barotseland : 189

Livingstone: 177, 178

Lloyd P C: 105

Lozi, The: 196

Lugard, Lord F: 83, 89, 99, 124, 125,
127, 155, 175, 176, 181, 186

Lyall Sir A: 224

MacDonald M : 176, 180

MacMichael H: 262, 267

Macrae D G: 9

Mafeje A: 278

Magubane B: 153, 279, 270

Maine Sir H: 32, 223, 224, 225, 226,
227,228, 242, 2718

Mair L P: 74, 88, 91, 108, 140, 141

Malcolm D: 183, 185

Malinowski B: 9, 14, 25, 33, 43, 50-1,
33, 54, 56, 61, 63, 64, 66-9, 83, 84, 86,
89, 91, 93, 175, 190, 195, 246
Manding: 124

Manners R A: 281

Maquet J J: 27, 274, 275
Marx K: 166, 169, 187, 195, 246, 254
Mau-Mau, The: 62
Mawardi: 114

Maxwell G V: 201
Maybin J: 191

McLennan J P: 224, 225, 226, 227
Meek C R : 88, 93, 140, 143
Merton R: 13

Mesakin, The: 159, 165
Mitchell C: 175

Mitchell P E: 53, 5§, 60, 65
Montgomery Watt W: 110
Moore J: 153

Moore L: 182

Moro, The: 160

Miiller M : 227

Myrdal J: 35

Myres J: 140

Nadel SF: 11, 89, 153, et seq.
NamierLB: 17§

Needham R : 10, 33
Newcomer P: 153, 154, 166
New Left Review, The: 173
Ngoni, The: 246

Nicholson1 F: 128

Nkrumah K : 259, 260
Noldeke Th: 117

Northcote Thomas W: 133, 142
Northern Emirates: 130
Nuba, The: 153, et seq.

Oil Rivers Protectorate, The: 124

Oldham J H: 178, 186

Onwuachi P C & Wolfe (Pubrs): 275

Ormsby Gore W (Lord Harlech): 180,
181, 183

Ost, Pére A Van: 247

Ottenberg S: 164

OwenR: 19,1712

Panikkar K M: 104
Parry JM: 103
Parsons T: /3, 37, 109
Passfield Lord : 142
Perham M : 137
Peristiany P. J : 84
Proctor JH: 106

Radcliffe-Brown A R : 9, 14, 25, 32, 66,
83,89, 90, 93, 175, 246

Ranke L von: 117

Rattran R S: 130

Rhodes Livingstone Institute, The,
94, 174

Rhodes Livingstone Museum, The: 85

Read M(argaret): 84, 140

Renan E: 117

Richards A : 64, 65, 84, 86, 94, 178,
182, 196

Ridgway Lord : 82

Ripon Lord : 239, 240

Robertson-Smith : 243

Robinson H: 207

Rockefeller Foundation: 82, 184

Roth G K : 204, 207

Royal Anthropological Institute
(RAI): 80, 82, 141

Royal Niger Company: 124

Runciman W G: 9

Ruxton, Lieutenant Governor: 131

Sahlins M D: 214
Sala-Soli, The: 193
Sarraut A: 175

Sartre J-P : 14

Schacht J: 107

Schapera I: 66, 84
Selborme Lord: 139
Seligman C G: 267, 268
Sheane H: 178

Slinn P: 185

Smith E W: 140, 178
Smith M G: 73

Smuts J: 176

Social Science Research Council : 99
Soxz:lso.‘:zté des Missionnaires d’Afrique:
Southern RW: 115
Spencer H: 245, 246
Stauder J: 753, 154
Stephen J F: 237, 243
Stocking G : 80

Sukuna, Ratu Sir: 212, 219
SwartzM J: 12

Sweet E B: 203

Tabari: 110
Tanganyika: 197
Taymiyya Ibn: 114
Temple R : 82, 139
Thakombau: 210
Thomson G: 126
Thomson J : 247, 250, 251
Tira: 160

Tocqueville A de: 236
Tomlinson : 131
Trobriand Islands : 51
Tuden A: 12

Tullushi Jebel : 157, 159
TurnerVW: 12,15, 16
Tws, The: 247

Tylor: 243, 245, 246
Ufipa: 246, 251
US Government Foreign Areas
Research Coordination Group: 74
US Social Science Research
Council : 74

Vansina J: /3

Waardenburg J-J: 117, 118
Wagner G: 89

Warrant Chief system: 143
Welensky R : 194

Weber M: 26

Wellhausen J: 117
Wertheim WF: 118

White L: 277

Wilkinson D: 201

Williams E : 273

Wilson G B: 174, 186, 187, 188, 190,
191, 194, 195, 196, 197

WilsonJ D: 187

Wingate R : 82

Wolf ER: 75,76

Women’s War: 126, 132, 142

Worsley P: 9,77, 173, 275

Wright Mills C: 13, 37, 173

Ycixg'llg HW: 177,179, 180, 183, 185,

Zande, The: 44, 265
Notes on Contributors

Talal Asad MA Edinburgh, B Litt & D Phil Oxford is a lecturer
at the University of Hull. He has published a book and several papers
on the Kababish Arabs of Sudan and on political anthropology.

Abdel Ghaftar M Ahmed BA & MA Khartoum, Ph D Bergen
is a lecturer at the University of Khartoum. He has published
several papers on the Rufa‘a Arabs of Sudan.

Richard Brown MA Cambridge is a lecturer in African History
at the University of Sussex. He has published a number of articles
on the history of the Ndebele and on modern Rhodesia, and co-
edited with E T Stokes The Zambesian Past 1966.

Johm Clammer BA Lancaster, DipAnth & D Phil Oxford has
carried out field work in Fiji. He has published articles on
theoretical topics and is a lecturer at the University of Hull.

James Faris BS New Mexico & Ph D Cambridge is associate
professor at the University of Connecticut. He has published a

number of books and papers on his work in Newfoundland and on
the Nuba, Sudan.

Stephan Feuchtwang BA Oxford & MA London is a lecturer at
the School of Oriental & African Studies, London. Several articles
on his work in Chinese religion are in the press.

Peter Forster MA Econ Manchester is a lecturer at the University
of Hull. He has published papcrs on the sociology of religion.

Wendy James B Litt, MA & D Phil Oxford is lecturer in Social
Anthropology at Oxford. She has conducted field research in Port
Sudan and on the Sudan-Ethiopian border, particularly among the
Uduk speaking people on which she has published various articles
and a book is in preparation. She is co-editor with Ian Cunnison of
Essays in Sudan Ethnography 1972.

Helen Lackner BA London is working on the theory of economic
anthropology. She is interested in contemporary Middle Eastern
affairs and is a membcr of the Gulf Committee.

Philip Marfleet BA Hull is preparing for field work in the Middle
East. He is interested in political anthropology.

Roger Owen BA & D Phil Oxford is lecturer in the Recent
Economic History of the Middle East and Fellow of St Antony’s
College Oxford. He is the author of Cotton and the Egyptian
Economy, 1820-1914: a Study in Trade and Development & cditor
with Bob Sutcliffe of Studies in the Theory of Imperialism.

Roy Willis B Litt & D Phil Oxford is a lecturer in the Department
of Social Anthropology, Edinburgh. He is the author of The Fipa
and Related Peoples of South-W est Tanzania and North-East
Zambia (Ethnographic Survey of Africa) 1966, and several papers.

« @
from the introduction

We have been reminded time and again by anthropologists
of the ideas and ideals of the Enlightenment in which the
intellectual inspiration of anthropology is supposed to lie.
But anthropology is also rooted in an unequal power
cncounter between the West and Third World which goes
back to the emergence of bourgeois Europe, an encounter
in which colonialism is merely one historical moment.
It is this encounter that gives the West access to cultural
and historical information about the societies it has pro-
gressively dominated, and thus not only generates a certain

kind of universal understanding, but also re-enforces the

_inequalitics in capacity between the European and the non-
European worlds (and derivatively, between the Euro-
peanized elites and the ‘traditional’ masses in- the Third

World) . . .

‘The papers in this book analyse and document ways ..
in which anthropological thinking and practice have been

affected by British colonialism. They approach this topic
from different points of view and at different levels. Each
stands as an original contrlbunon to an argument which
1S only just beginning.

Ithaca Press: Londen y
Humanities Press: Atlaitic nghlands, N.J.

