THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST
Wendy James

Current criticisms of the social anthropology of the colonial period
acknowledge that more than a handful of individual anthropologists
were of liberal or even radical political outlook. But they usually
maintain that this fact is not relevant for analysis of the develop-
ment of the subject or its place in the colonial situation. The con-
text is represented as fostering an cssentially conservative subject,
shaped within the same political ideology as colonial domination
itself and bolstering its intcrests to such an extent that the percep-
tions and problems of even the liberal-radical practitioner were
falsely formulated. At best, it might be admitted, in the words for
example of Kathleen Gough, that

Anthropologists in those days seem to have played roles charac-

teristic of white liberals, sometimes of white liberal reformers,

in other spheres of our society...living closelv with native

peoples, they tended to take their part to try to protect them

against the worst forms of impcrialistic exploitation...

Applied anthropology came into being as a kind of social work
and community development effort for non-white peoples.!

Not much attention has been paid to the implications of this ad-
mission. The dissent indicated among anthropologists is not usually
considered important ecnough to qualify Gough’s picture of the
subject as the “child of Western imperialism”’.

But it can be argued that the appearance of a radical element

'K. Gough, “New Proposals for Anthropologists”, Current Anthropology,
Vol. 9. 1968, 403-7, at p. 403.
42 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RALUCTANT IMPERIALIST

among anthropologists is neither unimportant nor irrelevant; on the
contrary that it has been significant for the development of certain
aspects of the subject; and further, that the very existence of social
anthropology in the colonial period constituted a source of potential
radical criticism of the colonial order itself. The occurrence of liber-
al views within the subject was therefore not an accident; it was en-
tailed by the nature of anthropological research, which by definition
reaches out geographically, linguistically and philosophically beyond
the bounds of received western civilisation in search of alternative
modes of understanding and living. Of course a good deal of trite
and mediocre work has been produced in practice, and the promise
of the anthropological perspective has rarely been fulfilled. But the
critical questioning of the basis of social life implicit in anthropology
has remained at the heart of the subject, and its growth within wes-
tern culture during the colonial period necessarily constituted a
source of informed critical comment, since it was ideally based upon
experience of life on the reverse side of the colonial coin inaccessible
to most other members of the dominant society. The subject was
not spurned by the earlier generation of nationalist politicians; and
though the structures of Empire have now collapsed and cleared the
way for a more profound critical appraisal, a historical perspective
reminds us of some of the contradictory aspects of the place of
social anthropology in the colonial situation, the arguments it pro-
voked and the resistance it encountered from the very body of offi-
cial opinion and authority with which it is now sometimes assumed
to have lived in a cosy conspiracy; or at least a web of unspoken
understandings. As an individual, the anthropologist can often ap-
pear as a critic of colonial policy, of the philosophy of western
superiority upon which it was based and in terms of which it was
justified; and he was usually at odds with the various administrators,
missionaries, and other local Europeans he had dealings with. He
cannot often be seen unambiguously as a willing agent of colonial-
ism. But he was nevertheless dependent upon colonial authorities for
permission to carry out his studies, and sometimes for material sup-
port; and in the inter-war period at least, open political dissent was
scarcely possible within colonial society. An anthropologist who
turned out to be anything more than a mild social embarrassment
could scarcely have been tolerated; and thus, for anthropology to
continue at all, appearances of co-opecration had to be kept up.

The place of anthropology in the colonial situation was in fact
doubly ambivalent. On the one hand, as I have suggested, there was
an ambivalence in relation o official authority, for although anthro-
WENDY JAMES 43

ed worthy of support, its personnel and their act-
iv&?gy v:v;se Squu[;z?isonable; and on the other hand, in relation to the
growing nationalist and reyolutnonary movements, anthrqpology,
though initially regarded with sympa}hy, came to appear increas-
ingly conservative. This double ambivalence, in my opinion, ex-
plains why social anthropology has been the object of more suspi-
cion, accusation and blame from both _sxdes ot: .t.he deve]opm‘g
colonial situation than the low number ?f its practitioners and their
relatively small output would appear to justify. It would .also appear
to have had important effects on the growth of the .sub]ect, ax.ld‘xts
changing emphases. During the period of the twenties and thirties,
there was undoubtedly tension between officialdom and the expand-
ing subject of anthropology, making it natural for there to be a
strong svmpathy between the subject and the early development of
nationalism; but later, particularly after the Second World War, the
perspective of nationalist and revolutionary ideologies made anthro-
logy merely a conservative ally of colonial control, itself increas-
ingly liberal and progressive.

This essay draws attention in particular to the inter-war period.
The first part discusses social anthropology as the problem child of
the colonial encounter in Africa, the ways in which it constituted a
body of radical criticism and how this was necessarly tempered.
The second part considers the case of Malinowski’s arguments from
1929 onwards for the involvement of anthropology in the “‘chang-
ing” African scene, some effects of these arguments on the develop-
ment of the subject, and some responses to them from representa-
tives of both colonial officialdom and the new African nationalism.

|
What can ‘‘radical criticism’”’ mean in the context of colonial an-
thropology? Examples of explicit criticism will be considered in the
second part of this essay, but firstly the implicitly critical character
of much anthropological writing should be noted. A large propor-
tion of the anthropology of the inter-war period is clearly partisan;
in its choice of problems, and the very formulation of substantive
analysis, it is often defensive of the weaker societies and cultures;
of the sophistication of their language and thought, and of the
“rationality”” of primitive economics, politics, witchcraft, religion
and so on. This defensive position extended on occasion to matters
of native land rights, and treatment of migrant labourers in the new
industrial areas and under the law. This intellectual and moral de-
fence of the rights and dignity of peoples who had previously been
44 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST

regarded, under the evolutionary racist theories of the nineteenth
century armchair anthropologists, as scarcely human, was more
than an academic reaction to earlier theories: it was at the same
time a gut-reaction to the persistence of these ideas of cultural and
racial superiority among the colonial rulers, local white settlers, and
in popular opinion back at home. Although colonial anthropologists
could rarely be described as radicals in an active political sense,
which would have been almost impossible anyway, I believe that
much of their work was given direction by radicalism of a moral
kind.

For example, in the thirties the problem of witchcraft was discus-
sed a good deal in colonial circles: on the whole it was accepted that
natives possessed a different quality of mind, such that apparent
irrationalities could scarcely be dealt with reasonably, but only
through the application of laws against the practice or accusation of
sorcery or witchcraft (see the special number of Africa, 1935%). The
common assumptions of the practical men of the colonies, I would
judge, were fairly close to those of armchair anthropologists of a
previous generation, concerning the relative nature of thought
and rationality in primitive society. Evans-Pritchard’s argument in
Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic among the Azande (1937) was des-
igned at least in part as a criticism and a refutation of such theories:
and on another level, it could be seen as an answer to the prejudices
over native mentality commonly held by those with colonial exper-
ience, which must have been the despair of many fieldworkers. This
aspect of Evans-Pritchard’s work appears clearly in the following
quotations from an early Zande article, Sorcery and Native Opinion.
The article begins as follows :

It is important to understand native opinion about black magic,

not only for the anthropologist but also for the colonial

administrator and missionary, if they wish to show to the
peoples whom they govern and teach that they understand their
notions about right and wrong, The native does not so much
distrust European justice and education as he despairs of the
administrator and missionary ever understanding, or attempting
to understand, his point of view as expressed in laws and public
opinion. This despair springs largely from the handling by

Europeans of such matters as sorcery, with which both

missionaries and administrators frequently have to deal. The

native becomes convinced finally that the European is quite

*Africa VIII, No. 4, Oct., 1935.
45
WENDY JAMES
e of seeing the difference between right and wrong,
between the proper use of a cgltural weapon fully sanctioned
by public opinion, such as white magic, and a heinous gnd
cold blooded murder, such as the crime of black magic or
3
Afstz:c;r)c’:.areful and detailed ex.posi.tioP of this crucial moral d.is.-
tinction as seen by Azande, and its sngmfxcance for §ocnal and politi-
cal life, Evans-Pritchard concludes with suggestions as to .how
administrators might benefit from understanding such questions.
How far we may wonder could such hints be of much practical use
to administrators? In any case, they scarcely mask the strong tone
of criticism with which the article comes 1o a close:
In conclusion. we may address ourselves to those administrators
and missionaries and doctors whose lives are spent amongst
primitive peoples in Africa. If, as we think, a public opinion
which classes some types of magic definitely as base and
criminal, and others as virtuous and legal, whilst judging yet
others with an uncertain voice, exists and functions not only
amongst the Azande of the Nile-Uelle Divide but in many
other savage communities, it behoves Europeans to be discreet
in their dealing with it. Upon no other subject are Europeans
in the tropics generally so ignorant and in no other sphere of
native life is ignorance more likely to lead to infliction and
destruction of good institutions. Such activities as those which
we have described in this essay are, for reason which we have
set forward, more conformable to preservation than breach of
the peace, to conserve than subvert stable administration. We
may well leave the natives to decide between good and evil,
morality and immorality, right and wrong, crime and law.
Moreover, the European may well be advised to remember that
such acts of magic, the performance of which are public enough
to be brought to the notice of his office and to be proved to
have taken place, are little likely to be condemned by public
opinion as illegal or immoral. Lastly, we may all do well to
reflect that the mind sensitive to tales of sorcery reveals its own
crudeness, for it has often been shown that when two civilizations
come into contact the lesser is always accused of sorcery by
half-studied and ill-formed judgements of the greater.*
This is not a position of ultra-relativism, of which colonial anthro-

incapabl

‘E. E. Evans-Pritchard, “Sorcery and native opinion”, Africa IV, 1931,
22-55, at p. 22.
‘Ibid., pp. 54-55.
46 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST

pology has (sometimes with justification) been accused. The mora
rights of peoples living under colonial administration are defended
in terms of universal categories; and the right of the ruling com.
munity to a monopoly of moral judgement is sharply questioned.
The practical men, however approving they were in the abstract
of lending support to anthropological research, must often have been
puzzled and disappointed at what the anthropologists actually pro-
duced. They must even on occasion have been resentful of rebukes
such as those of Evans-Pritchard in the passages just quoted, where
the anthropologist thumbs his nose at the sacred civilising mission.
Without doubt a good deal of tension existed: and I consider that
some of the characteristic methods and theories of this period were
the outcome, not of conspiracy between scholars and officialdom,
but on the contrary, of compctition and intrigue between them. Im-
pressive claims had to be made by anthropologists for their subject.
Because their resources, duties and even rights were so uncertain,
and because their work was so often regarded as quaint (in back-
ward areas) or as unnecessary meddling (in central and significant
areas), anthropologists were frequently obliged to defend their act-
ivities. This could hardly be done on metaphysical grounds, or in
terms of a conviction of political or moral obligation; the lines of
defence were rather of a kind more likely to appeal to colonial
officialdom. This is partly why there was such an insistent claim by
anthropology to be a proper science; for the idea of science carries
great respectability. Science represented to the crude colonial mind
a great achievement of the modern west, and the idea of its applica-
tion to native peoples, as objects, was promising. (Interestingly en-
ough, literature in anthropology of the kind which I have suggested
is motivated by moral radicalism often emphasizes the scientific
character of native thought). Thus it was good tactics for anthro-
pologists to put forward the claim that their subject, at least the
modern variety, was a dispassionate, scientific and important study
of the variety of social forms, which deserved the respect and facili-
ties granted to other sciences, like tropical medicine or geology, and
like them had to be based on first-hand investigation. It was also
prudent for them to add that, of course, it was a study which could
yield valuable information for administrators and planners, who in-
deed would scarcely avoid serious mistakes without the benefit of
its expert advice. This double claim gave anthropologists the advan-
tage of being able to stress their practical value when approaching
potential sponsors, and nevertheless to resist requests for direct
assistance on the grounds that their subject was essentially an ab-
WENDY JAMES 4
from which practical men would have to draw their
own conclusions. The separation of t.he objective scientist from the
committed feeling man can thus'be viewed as Part of the §trategy of
colonial anthropologists in calmmg any suspicions qf their personal
motives which mighf damage their clal.ms ,for oﬁicu}l support and
facilities. The following passage from Firth’s conclusion to We, the
Tikopia (1936) illustrates some of the relevant f:mpha-scs of the time:

A last word may be said about one practical aspect of. anthro-

pological study. In revulsion frc_>m the mere fq]klonst attltude:
of antiquarian anthropology, science today is in danger of being
caught up by practical interests and made to serve them, to the
neglect of its own problems. Social anthropology should be
concerned with understanding how human beings behave in
social groups, not with trying to make them behave in any
particular way by assisting an administrative policy of a
proselytizing campaign to achieve its ends more easily. The
scientist gives generalizations regarding the nature of the
working of institutions; it is not his duty to affix ethical values
to them, nor by conniving at such an ethical evaluation to pave
the way for their modification. Missionary, government officer
and mine manager are free to use anthropological methods and
results in their own interests, but they have no right to demand
as a service that anthropology should become their handmaid.
Nor can the standards which they invoke—*civilization’,
‘Justice’, ‘the sanctity of human life’, ‘Christianity’, ‘freedom of
the individual’, ‘law and order’—be regarded as binding; the
claim of absolute validity that is usually made for them too often
springs from ignorance, from an emotional philanthropy, from
the lack of any clear analysis of the implications of the course
of action proposed, and from confusion with the universal of
what is in reality a set of moral ideas produced by particular
economic and social circumstances.

This is not to say that the scientist himself may not have his
own personal predilections based on his upbringing and social
environment, his temperamental disposition, his aesthetic values.
He may regard the culture of a primitive, half-naked set of
people in an island of the Solomons as a pleasant way of life,
giving expression to the individuality of its members in ways
alien to western civilization; he may regard it as something he
would like to see endure, and he may strive to preserve it in
the face of ignorance and prejudice, pointing out the probable
results of interference with ancient customs. This he does as a

stract science,
48 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST

man; his attitude is part of his personal equation to life, but it is
not implicit in his scientific study. The greatest need of the
social sciences today is for more refined methodology, as
objective and dispassionate as possible, in which, while the
assumptions due to the conditioning and personal interest of the
investigator must influence his findings, that bias shall be
consciously faced, the possibility of other initial assumptions be
realised and allowance be made for the implications of each in
the course of the analysis.®
But how successful were these pleas for acceptance and support on
the basis of the claim of anthropology to be trustworthily objective
and useful? Some doubt is thrown on the extent to which this argu-
ment carried much weight in a post-war article by Evans-Pritchard
on applied anthropology. His argument is defensive of pure re-
search, and very critical of the lack of interest on the official side:
Mr. Sol Tax remarks...that although he had spent some ten years
in research into the social anthropology of the Chiapas and
Guatemala Indians no one had ever asked his technical assis-
tance in solving the social problems of the region. Other
anthropologists have experienced the same thing. Professor
Seligman once told me that in all the years he had worked in
the Sudan or on Sudanese problems he was nevcr asked once for
his advice and that the only time he volunteered it in connection
with the rain-makers of the Nuba Hills, it was not taken.
During the fifteen years in which 1 worked on sociological
problems in the same region I was never once asked my advice
on any question at all.?
Evans-Pritchard ends with an appeal. The Colonial Office and Colo-
nial Governments should understand that:
Much as we would like to help them, with our present limited
resources research in social anthropology is only kept going and
certainly does not keep pace with the deterioration of the
primitive field, so that they cannot expect us to turn aside from
our scientific rescarch and teaching to investigate their practical
problems and advise on their policies. If they want qualified men
to assist them they must create posts in the colonies which will
attract them...Colonial administrations do not expect to have the
services of doctors, botanists, geologists and engineers without

‘E. S]¥37 Evans-Pnitchard, “Applied Anthropology”, Africa XVI, 1946, 92-8,
p. 97.
‘R. Firth, We the Tikopia, 2nd ed. 1957, pp. 487-88.
WwENDY JAMES 49
em appointments on their establishments. Why should
the services of anthropologists on different terms??
remains as to why anthropology had not been accep-
ted more wholeheartedly by the colonial authorities. Some irgdicat_ion
of the answer is implied in that part of Evans-Pnp:hard S artlcl.e
where he discusses his Libyan work. He contrgsts.hls pre-war posi-
tion in the Sudan with his position in Cyrenaica in tl}e. @rly.x.lme-
teen-forties, where he was a full member of the British Military
Administration, as Tribal Affairs Officer, with access to official
documents, and entitled to play a part in policy-making. The signi-
ficant featurc of this contrast between his status in the Sudan and
Libya lies perhaps in the fact that the Italians had recently been
ousted by the British when he was in Cyrenaica: and thus a critical
anthropological study of native affairs would reflect on the Italians,
rather than on his sponsoring authority. With such a conjunction of
interests bctween his sponsors and himself, it was possible for
Evans-Pritchard to write a book of unusually committed characters
The Sanusi of Cyrenaica (1949) in its treatment of an anti-colonialist
national movement and its clcarly anti-Fascist sympathies, is in it-
self an answer to naive radical criticisms of anthropology. In the
older colonies, the anthropologist was rarely so trusted as to have
access to archival materials and policy discussions which would be
necessary for a historically significant study. One may well ask
whether it would have becn realistic to expect anthropologists to
write books opcnly critical of any of the forms of colonial rule
under which they worked.

The contradictory positions assumed simultaneously by the colo-
nial anthropologist, that he is extremely useful to administration and
at the same time that he must be frce to pursue his specialist in-
terests, arise out of the profound paradox of the subject in relation
to its sponsoring authorities. Reclatively peaceful and progressive
colonial rule in the inter-war period was prepared to permit and
even encourage field-working anthropologists to carry out personal
investigations of a direct kind which had scarcely been possible pre-
viously, at least in the Old World. The *‘sociological” character of
their work increased steadily, and with it a greater awareness of the
relevance of the overall economic and political situation. The anth-
ropologist of this period, more than the missionary, and more than
the bush administrator, found himself speaking not only of, but for,
the local populations he knew well. He tended more than others to

giving th
they expect
The question

'1bid., p. 98.
50 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST

know the common man, and to bypass the local chiefs and digni.
taries. There was little possibility of a European traveller knowing
the people intimately in the pre-colonial period: contacts in the
nineteenth century for example, between the classic explorers and
the local populations of Africa, were usually with kings and chiefs,
or otherwise with servants and runaway slaves. The situation of a
lone European living for months or years in an ordinary village
without a retinue was only possible when benevolent colonial ad-
ministration was well-established. And yet the situation of such
study was often so demanding in personal as well as intellectual
terms that a commitment to something stronger than data-gathering
was surely required. The collection of facts from the grass-roots
level of society in the industrial West has frequently grown out of,
or resulted in, a radical orientation; and anthropological fieldwork
in the Malinowskian tradition shared this character to some extent
in relation to the colonial regimes. The colonial period thus para-
doxically opened the way for the creation of a body of literature
that itself reflected criticism upon the prevailing situation and the
political philosophy which justified it. I see, therefore, the colonial
anthropologist as a frustrated radical: and his claims t{o scientific
status, the separation of his work from any apparent moral or poli-
tical views, and the avowal of its practical usefulness, as largely
determined by the need to make a convincing bid for the survival
and expansion of his subject.

|
All these sides of the dilemma are clear in Malinowski’s efforts,
from the late nineteen twenties to the end of his life, to extend the
scope of scientific anthropology to embrace the study of social and
cultural change in Africa. Indeed his dilemma is more complex; for
wher~as 1n the early thirties, he was arguing that scientific study was
uninvolved and therefore of use to administration, his sympathies
for developing African nationalism sharpen with time and in his
later writings he comes to argue that scicntific research must be poli-
tically committed. Malinowski’s writings on Africa are not in them-
selves a major contribution to the subject; but he was a most influ-
ential teacher, and his interest in the expansion of social anthro-
pology into the area of modern African problems led to a large
number of studies in this field by his students. The significance of
his views is therefore greater than his actual published writings
might suggest, for it is implicit in the work of others, particularly in
the direction of “social change™ and so forth. However ‘“‘practical’’
51
WENDY JAMES

ini ‘vely useful these studies might claim to be, and
and admggrsxtsreﬁ;teigc some later studies of this type turned out to
h°‘”.§"§;s the radical sympathies of Malinowski and his undoubted
g::gilrc to shake up the placjd c_olon}al establishment which originally
pushed anthropology in thui dl’recnon. ) . .
An article of Malinowski’s in 1929 on Pracpcal anthropology
marked the beginning of a debate on the question of the usefulness
of anthropology, and a long series of defensive articles by anthro-
logists which continued until well after the war. Man)( were pub-
lished in Africa, journal of the International African Institute (foun-
ded 1926). One of the Institute’s main aims was “the closer associa-
tion of scientific knowledge and research with practical affairs”, and
a good deal of applied anthropology was encouraged and supported.
In spite of this supposed collusion of anthropology and practical
affairs, the tone of the debate which followed Malinowski’s initial
provocative contribution suggested underlying frictions. Malinow-
ski's own previous work had been on the “‘traditional’” community
of the Trobriand Islands in Melanesia, but in his 1929 article he is
staking out a much wider claim for the subject and its relevance.
He challenges the practical men who dismiss the subject, and recom-
mends it to their notice in terms they are likely to find acceptable.
He emphasises that it is politically unbiased, and thercfore scientific;
and highly useful and up-to-date, since it is concerned with chang-
ing conditions. The modern ‘“‘functional”’ type of anthropology is
contrasted in these terms with old-fashioned antiquarianism, of
whose usefulness the practical men were justifiably sceptical. I think
that by “functional” in this context Malinowski meant little more
than “sociological”, as against the approach of what he had referred
to elsewhere as the *“‘dusty museum-moth’’. He writes :
The Institute stands in the first place for the practical application
of scientific knowledge. It can reach on the one hand various
Colonial interests in their practical activities, while at the same
time has at its disposal the knowledge of theoretically trained
specialists.

I think that in the very combination of practical and theoretical
interests lies the proper task of the Institute. There is a gap
between the theoretical concerns of the anthropology of the
schools on the one hand, and practical interests on the other.

The gap must be bridged over, and in doing this the Institute
can make itself very useful.

*B. Malinowski, “Practical Anthropology”, Africa 11, 1929, 22-38.
52 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST

The practical man is inclined to pooh-pooh, ignore, and even to
resent any sort of encroachment of the anthropologist upon his
domain. On the other hand it is not always easy to advise the
colonial administrator or missionary just where to find the
anthropological information he requires. Now I think that the
gap is artificial and of great prejudice to either side. The practical
man should be asked to state his needs as regards knowledge
on savage law, economics, customs, and institutions; he would
then stimulate the scientific anthropologist to a most fruitful
line of research and thus receive information without which he
often gropes in the dark. The anthropologist, on the other hand,
must move towards a direct study of indigenous institutions as
they now exist and work. He must also become more concerned
in the anthropology of the changing African, and in the
anthropology of the contact of white and coloured, of European
culture and primitive tribal life...

It is then the thesis of this memorandum that there cxists an
anthropological No-man’s land; that in this are contained
studies of primitive economics, primitive jurisprudence, ques-
tions of land tenure, of indigenous financial systems and taxation,
a correct understanding of the principles of African indigenous
education, as well as wider problems of population, hygiene
and changing outlook. Scientific knowledge on all thesc
problems is more and more needed by all practical men in the
colonies. This knowledge could be supplied by men trained in
anthropological methods and possessing the anthropological
outlook, provided that they also acquire a direct interest in the
practical applications of their work, and a keencr sense of
present-day realities.®

Under the heading ““Scientific control of colonial administration’ he
continues:
By the constitution of the Institute all political issues are elimina-
ted from its activities. This can easily be done by concentrating
upon the study of the facts and processes which bear upon the
practical problems and leaving to statesmen (and journalists)
the final decision of how to apply the results.
There follows a general statement of support for the concept of in-
direct rule; but unless anyone should think that anthropologists are
pggtically biased in any way instcad of being objective scientists, he
adds:

‘Ibid., pp. 22-23.
53
WENDY JAMES

whether we adopt in our practical policy the principle of
direct or indirect control, it is clear that a fu}l ‘kn(?wledge of
indigenous culture in the subjects indicated is indispensable.
He then defends the . usefglng:ss of functional apthropologx '(as
against the earlier antiquarianism) for such que:,stlons as political
organisation, law, language, land tenure, economics, and the chang-
ing native. His article ends with a plea for assistance from the IAI
for promoting work in the “modern Functional School of Anthro-
po}lghgg following year, 1930, two replies appeared in Africa. The
first by Major Ruxton, formerly Lt. Governor of Southern Provinces,
Nigeria, was sympathetic to Malinowski’s claims, indeed strengthen-
ing them for applied anthropology:
As there is a distinction between the pure and the applied chem-
ist, so there should be one between the pure and applied
anthropologist. The latter cannot exist without the former, but
it is the latter who is required to advise on the practical work
of administration, and the Institute can do much to evolve him.
As the field of work of the pure anthropologist is that of
yesterday, so that of the applied anthropologist should be today,
preferably tomorrow.°
But the second reply from P. E. Mitchell then provincial commis-
sioner in Tanganyika, and later Governor of Kenya etc., was ex-
tremely sceptical of the usefulness of anthropology, unless the
subject could enable the “practical men™ of the colonies to carry
out their jobs better:
Professor Malinowski...writes...as an anthropologist, and he pro-
poses that the anthropologist shall record the facts and the
‘practical’ man draw his deductions therefrom. How many
anthropologists would agrec that a division into anthropologists
and practical men is satisfactory is open to doubt: but as I am
certainly not an anthropologist I hope that I may speak for the
practical man.

As Malinowski points out, anthropologists have largely occupied
themselves with the past, or at least with the passing; and they
have developed a technique of their own in recording and
discussing in particular the curious or quaint in primitive
societies. Thus if an inhabitant of a South Sea Island feels
obliged on some ceremonial occasion to eat his grandmother,

But

"F. H.zRuxton, “An anthropological no-man's land”, Africa I, 1930, 1-12,
at p. 2.
54 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIAL]ST

the anthropologist is attracted to examine and explain the
ancient custom which caused him to do so: the practical man,
on the other hand, tends to take more interest in the grand.
mother...

Practical men are concerned first with making secure life and
property and with the complex administrative arrangements
which modemn economic life demands and they are of all men
least likely to underrate the importance of accurate knowledge.
They certainly endorse the view that any organisation, for
example the Institute, which assists them to that knowledge,
must be of value in proportion to the efficiency of the service
that it renders, and invaluable if it reaches that point of efficiency
where the correctness of its statements of fact can be taken
for granted and be made generally known. But that is the
difficulty.t

He goes on to criticise the length of time taken by anthropologists
and missionaries for their work to be completed—it is often out of
date when it appears and has little bearing on the future; and the
minute detail of anthropological observations, which makes the
study of large areas out of the question. He compares the anthro-
pological specialist to the laboratory scientist, and asks where is the
general practitioner, who can tackle important and urgent problems
when needed.
As Malinowski implies, the anthropologist has in the past been
mainly interested in the ancient and the curious: he has
studiously pursued knowledge of primitive mankind, and has
occupied himself little, if at all, with the present and future.
His method has been built up to serve his purpose; his
technique is that of the laboratory and what he has been dis-
posed to call his field-work has been the field-work of a
collector for a museum. But now he is waking up to the splendid
prospects of service to mankind which the science to which he
has devoted himself holds out, and is casting round for the
means of applying to practical things the knowledge which he
possesses, or feels confident that he can acquire; and he stands
a little dismayed before a world which hurries past him and
seems to care little for the help which he can give.

Now it seems to me that the main difficulty lies in this, that the
anthropologist is disposed to look out at the busy world from
his laboratory window; and when he offers help, it is in terms

"P. E. Mitchell, “The anthropologist and the practical man: a reply and
a question”, Africa 111, 1930, 217-23, at pp. 217-18.
55
WBNDY JAMES
ory methods. He must learn to come down into thg
eet and join in the life which he desires to inﬂ}lence if he is
fgplay the part which he wishes to play, and which I am

confident he can play with great profit especially to all those

who are struggling with the complex problems of twentieth-

century colonisation in East Africa.'? -
He suggests there is a need for the trained ‘‘general practitioner”

as well as the laboratory spcciali§t; such men do exist., but not in an
organised body, or with organised training. In this category of
“general practitioner’”” Mitchell m.clpdes all the prachc?.l men of the
colonies: and not merely administrators and missionaries, but
traders and commercial men—in fact one presumes he means the
whole of the expatriate community, perhaps even the European
housewife. Mitchell certainly makes it clear what sort of use he
reckons ought to be made of social anthropology in the interests of
colonialism—but how many anthropologists of that time, let alone
now, would agree with him? In explaining what he means by a
general practitioner of social problems, he writes :
For example, the planter who is engaged in working out a practi-
cal and just relation between white employer and native
labourer is, in this sense, a general practitioner. By organising
these men, by helping them to realise the community of
interests which they have, but infrequently understand, by
mobilising them in fact, the Institute can perform a function of
the highest value...by harnessing in the service of our common
humanity those who are intimately concerned, because they
are a part of it, in the life of the countries in which they live.
This is to my mind the direction in which effort should be made
rather than the projection of the laboratory worker into the
field, into the turmoil of everyday life, into an atmosphere of
which he has had no experience and which he cannot be
expected to understand.
Social anthropology is dismissed as purposeless unless made to serve
the interests of practical colonialism :
In the relation of man with man and race with race; in those com-
plexities which we call ‘the State’ or ‘Government’; in the
many-sided economic life of our modern world; in all that goes
to make up the great problems of our time; in all this the
acquisition of knowledge is a well-developed science, but in its
pursuit we have rather overlooked the means of applying our

of laborat

Ibid., p. 220.
56 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST

knowledge when we have acquired it. As I see it, its acquisition
and application should be complementary branches of the same
activity. Obviously the latter is impossible without the former:
but the former if not followed by the latter is purposeless.

If anyone has had the patience to read this far, he will I hope
have reached the same conclusions as the writer, that the true
practical anthropology is that which devotes itself to enlisting
and organising, as the complement of the scientific worker,
those practical men, and there are many, who are ready to
serve the community in which they live; at times we shall have
urgent need of this specialist, but we must not, for that reason,
forget the family doctor.?

It is clear from Mitchell’s article what kind of anthropology the col-
onial establishment would like to have seen—a real tool of imperial-
ism. But anthropologists were not on the whole prepared to play this
part. Later in the same year (1930) Malinowski published a reply to
Mitchell in the same journal. In this he defends anthropology from
the suggested close co-operation with practical men; he argues its
essential requirement of independence as an objective science; and
to my mind at least, this claim stems from a refusal to side unam-
biguously with the colonial attitude. He starts by bemoaning the
mechanisation and over-rapid “progress’” of the modern world.
which is due to science. He admits that traditional anthropology
represented an escape from this, but grants that it has to change.
and become of use to the science of progress. He regrets this, how-
ever, and writes:
And now, after twenty years of anthropological work, I find my-
self, to my disgust, attempting to make the science of man into
as bad and dehumanising an agency to man as physics, chemistry,
and biology have been for the last century or so denaturalising
to nature. In short, I am attempting to make anthropology into
a real science, and science inevitably has to introduce uniformity
and rationalisation into the phenomena with which it deals.
So that is Malinowski’s opinion of the kind of anthropology that the
colonial establishment would like to see. But he goes on to explain
that of course anthropology will change: and that the new func-
tional method will be both scientific and of use to the practical man.
He complains that Mitchell’s criticisms are out of date, that they

“Ibid., p. 223.
“B. Malinowski, “The rationalization of anthropology and administration”,
Africa 111, 1930, 405-29, at p. 406.
WENDY JAMES >
ay apply to amiquarian.anthropology but not to the modern func-
may hool: and that Mitchell has attacked anthropology on imag-
-mna'l S:ound’sr-—for example the reference to eating grandmothers in
inary 70 ¥ eas, which Mitchell says should be called murder and
thelt with accordingly. Malinowski suggests that even such judge-
gf:ms are not alwa_ys unambiguous, and that right and justice may
not all be on one side: ‘ .
Fortunately or unfortunately, the custom, born in the imagination
of Mr. Mitchell, does not really exist, so the functional .
anthropologist need not concern himself very much about it.
But the practical man, who very often on equally imaginary
grounds cries ‘Murder’ and hangs a native, might thereby
provoke some other natives to retaliate and then we should
have a punitive expedition in which the ‘practical man’ himself
would act as the murderer. Mr. Mitchell’s example is imaginary,
but unfortunately I could quote numerous cases from the South
Seas in which the practical man, having ‘regretfully’ and
unintelligently violated native customs by the mere right of his
ignorance and moral zeal, has brought whole native tribes to
grief. Let Mr. Mitchell read the report of the Goaribari
massacres in New Guinea; the history of ‘black-birding’ in the
South Seas; or even the data referring to the repatnation of
the blackbirded Kanakas to the Melanesian homes; for that
matter, the antecedents of any of the numerous punitive
expeditions in the South Seas. Africa is not my special field,
but I have a vague idea that ‘punitive expeditions’, wholesale
massacres of natives by whites, strange retaliations in the names
of ‘justice’, ‘prestige’, and ‘the white man’s honour’ did also
occur in the Dark Continent, and that it is not only the coloured
African there who deserves the title of ‘murderer’, nor is it the
white European who should use such terms of abuse as marks
of his own racial superiority.??
The mounting intensity of Malinowski’s criticism finds more specific
expression in relation to the problems of land tenure, which Mitchell
suggested could not be dealt with realistically because of the length
of time a full anthropological survey would take. Malinowski re-
minds Mitchell of the method of science :
Precision, thoroughness and accuracy do not consist in a blind
and pedantic accumulation of useless evidence, but in a critical
selection of the relevant by crucial tests. It is this spirit of

“Ibid.. p. 411.
58 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPER]ALIST

relevancy as against mere accumulation, of critical selection

as against groping in the dark, that the scientific anthropologist
might bring to the assistance of the man who has a practical
interest in the control of human affairs.

My critic confidently affirms that ‘the only method which can
be called practicable is that of question and answer and daily
observation of the lives of the people’. Has this method, unaided
by any guiding theoretical principles, given such brilliant
results? In the matter of land tenure, for instance, do we know
this subject in a satisfactory manner in any part of Africa?
Why is it that such serious blunders in the framing of policy have
been made as the individualising of land tenure in Uganda,
which avowedly led to the greatest difficulties; or the haphazard
methods of dealing with this question in West Africa, which
brought into being committees and commissions, the results of
which could not even be published? Was the question of land
tenure studied in South Africa and a wise policy laid down by
the practical men who were settling and organising that
country? Let Mr. Mitchell look for the answer in the Report
of the Natives’ Land Commission, 1916.

And again, why is it that the fundamental principles of British
land policy in Africa have not been laid down in any consistent
manner? The decisions of the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council regarding the native rights to land are contradictory.

In Southern Rhodesia it was held that natives had really no
rights to their land whatever. On the other hand. in Nigeria the
Privy Council ruled that the rights in land were vested in the
natives. What is more important for the present argument,
however, is that the judgement was based on an admission of
ignorance, since it was held that ‘it was really a matter of
conjecture to say what the rights of the original ‘‘natives” were’.
Their Lordships’ decision further stated that :

‘The estimation of the rights of aboriginal tribes is always
inherently difficult. Some tribes are so low in the scale of social
organisation that their usage and conceptions of rights and
duties are not to be reconciled with the institutions or the legal
ideas of civilised society. Such a gulf cannot be bridged. It
would be idle to impute to such people some shadow of the
rights known to our law, and then to transmute it into the
substance of transferable rights of property as we know them’.

Hence the Judicial Committee plainly regard the question of
native land tenure as both beyond the scope of practicable
59
WENDY JAMES
ad below the dignity of legal recognition. O.n the
I maintain that there is no people ‘so low in the scale
f social organisation’ but have a perfectly well-defined system
Of land tenure. It is absurd to say that such a system ‘Caf“_“?t
ge reconciled with the institutions or ghe legal ideas of cwxhged
society’. To reconcile the two is precisely the task of Colonial
statesmanship.’® o ' , .
Malinowski also heaps criticism upon Mitchell’s .concepthn of there
being a community of interests between all practical men in the col-
Juding commercial men—which he invited the anthropo-

onies—inc _ : - ;
logist to join and to advise; he takes this to be the ‘‘central miscon-

ception” of Mitchell’s argument. . _
Why have these men not yet organised themselves nor achieved
any singularly constructive results? Let us look more closely at
the possibilities of team-work done by missionaries and settlers,
administrators and journalists, engineers and recruiters. And
here I should like to ask why does Mr. Mitchell not include
among them the native African, ‘savage’ and detribalised alike;
or the West Coast lawyer; or the black expert in yellow
journalism; and incidentally also the East Coast Indian? They
are also actors in the play; they also, no doubt, share in the
‘community of interests’. Why does the idea of harmonious
co-operation between them appear hardly plausible? Because
we know that these groups, far from having any ‘community’
of interests, are divided by profound, indeed irreconcilable,
differences. And why, again, is this the case? Because they have
deeply-rooted personal interests at stake, which cannot possibly
be brought into harmony with each other. And this is not because
of any lack of goodwill or of knowledge. The dissensions
involved far transcend any intellectual effort or emotional
adjustment; they cannot be bridged over by mere goodwill.

The whole life-work of, say, an economic exploiter on the one

hand and a missionary on the other, develops in either case
an entirely different type of bias in the individual. The one has
vested his capital, his life-interest, and his work in some venture,
which may fail or succeed according as to whether he can secure
an adequate supply of native labour. However much he may
sympathise with the natives, he is bound to have more sympathy
with his wife and children, with his dream of success and
constructive enterprise, with the belief, shared by industrialists

inquiry 2
contrary.,

“Ibid., pp. 414-5.
60 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIAL|ST

and financiers, that a maximum production of wealth is an
unqualified blessing for the world at large...

To speak of a ‘community of interests’ between the recruiter
and the missionary, or between the Indian trader ana the whitc
settler, is a travesty of facts. Above all, I doubt whether the
idea of ‘the planter who is engaged in working out a practical
and just relation between white employer and native labourer’
is not a sporadic phenomenon. On every question, whether it
be land tenure and native reservations or the political power
of tribal authorities, there must crop up deep-seated differences
of opinion, influenced, not merely by self-interest, greed, or
ruthless rapacity on the one side, and mawkish sentimentalism,
wrong-headed dogma, or false humanitarianism on the other;
but also by the fundamental assumptions as to what is good foi
the native and for the white man, and what is the aim of African
development. And these assumptions arc bound up with the very
existence of the several classes of African workers, classes
which, again, differ profoundly...'”

As though feeling that he might have gone too far, for these passa-
ges are surely very strong words for 1930, Malinowski then soberlv
insists on the responsibility of administrators for the decisions they
must take, although anthropologists can act in an advisory capacity.
He anxiously emphasises that there is overall agreement on this
question. But talk of economic exploiters, the land rights of natives
in Southern Rhodesia, criticism of the Buganda land tenure agrec-
ment and so on must be taken as serious evidence of political dis-
sent from colonial policies within the camp of social anthropology.
Malinowski’s position is further consolidated during the thirties.
He appears increasingly concerned with political realities, and less
with the need to put up a pleasing case to officialdom. Significantly,
the ideals of scientific integrity are evoked to justify the study of
vital and relevant problems of an economic, political and legal kind
in a review article of 1939. Malinowski is criticising the abstract
“culture trait” approach of Herskovits to problems of change, in
the latter’s book Acculturation (1938), and recommends instead
British methods. as laid out in Memorandum XV of the 1A,
which take political realities into account.
The contact anthropologist has to study the methods of
recruitment and the wage system, the effects of the Colour Bar
legislation and of the anomaious contracts of African labour, as

"1bid., pp. 421-22.
WENDY JAMES ol
well as of the Pags Laws: He must study these facts scienfiﬁcz_tlly,
objectively, and in relation to ;ach other. He need not in h1§
scientific work be conc?med with any partisan or even practical

:csues. But his study will reveal to him that for the present the

Furopeans are in a position to dictate the legal and economic

rerms. The conditions thus imposed are found to produce definite

effects. Thus, if he studies the budgets of a family dependent
on wages, he will find that the income does not really balance
with expenditure. Scientific field-work reveals that the wages
received by a mine labourer do not compensate the tribal
economy for the total loss caused by his absence. From this it
would be his duty to draw the conclusion that a system which
produces inevitable impoverishment in a native reserve must
lead through malnutrition, disorganization, and demoralization
to gradual demographic decay . . .

Those of us who advocate *‘practical anthropology” insist
only on the study of vital, relevant, and fundamental problems.
That such problems affect practical interests directly is not our
fault. That a question does not become less scientific because it
is vital and relevant will only be denied by one who imagines
that academic pursuits begin where reality ends. Professor
Herskovits has never laid himself open to such criticism in his
field-work or in his treatment of actual questions. It is therefore
both regrettable and incomprehensible that he chooses to attack
practical anthropology as a matter of method.'®

The increasingly political stand taken by Malinowski is an indica-

tion of his sympathy for the growing nationalist movements of

Africa. Jomo Kenyatta’s presence at Malinowski’s seminars in

London in the thirties, and Malinowski’s own visits to Africa, where

he called on several of his own students engaged in field-work, must

have opened his eyes to the explosive situation in what had been
peaceful anthropological territory. In his Introduction to Kenyatta’s

Facing Mount Kenya (1938) he touches on the dangers of totali-

tarianism; the current spread of political opinion in Africa; and the

question of whether the minority of agitators *“‘will be able to keep

a balanced and moderate view of economic, social and political

issues, or whether by ignoring them and treating them with con-

tempt we drive them into the open arms of world-wide Bolshevism”.

He mentions various events which are ‘‘uniting the world of

“B. Malinowski, “The present state of studies in culture contact: some
comments on an American approach”, Africa XII, 1939, pp. 27-47.
62 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST

coloured peoples against Western influence and above all againg;
Great Britain and the United States”, and introduces Kenyatta's
book on the Kikuyu people as a salutary eye-opener to the West :
Mr. Kenyatta has wisely refrained from using any such language
as appears in my last sentences. He presents the facts objectively,
and to a large extent without any passion or feeling. That some
of this is contained in his presentation of facts is a help and not
a hindrance. For if the present book does nothing more but to
help us to understand how Africans see through our pretences,
and how they assess the realities of the Dual Mandate, it will
be rendering a great service . . .!°
Whatever may be thought of Kenyatta’s book today, it is beyond
question that at that time he saw in social anthropology something
that could be turned to use as part of the growing nationalist chal-
lenge to colonial rule; and his book was regarded both in nationalist
and official colonial circles as a highly political document. In his
Preface, Kenyatta thanks among others *‘the members of the Kikuyu
Central Association, my comrades-in-arms of the past, present and
future” (the Mau-Mau rising was still to come) and goes on:
In the present work I have tried my best to record facts as I
know them, mainly through a lifetime of personal experience,
and have kept under very considerable restraint the sense of
political grievances which no progressive African can fail to
experience. My chief object is not to enter into controversial
discussion with those who have attempted, or are attempting, to
describe the same things from outside observation, but to let the
truth speak for itself. I know that there are many scientists and
general readers who will be disinterestedly glad of the opportunity
of hearing the Africans’ point of view, and to all such 1 am glad
to be of service. At the same time, I am well aware that I could
not do justice to the subject without offending those ‘professional
friends of the African’ who are prepared to maintain their
friendship for eternity as a sacred duty, provided only that the
African will continue to play the part of an ignorant savage so
that they can monopolise the office of interpreting his mind and
speaking for him. To such people, an African who writes a study
of this kind is encroaching on their preserves. He is a rabbit
turned poacher.
But the African is not blind. He can recognise these pretenders
to philanthropy, and in various parts of the continent he is

“B. Malinowski, “Introduction” to J. Kenyatta, Facing Mount Kenya, 1938,
PP X-Xi.
WENDY JAMES 63
waking up to the rqﬂisation that a .running river cannot be
dammed for ever without breaking its bounds. His power of
expression has been hampered, but it is breaking thfough. .and
will very soon sweep away the patronage and repression which
surround bim.*° :

In the body of the book the Kikuyu Qeoplf: are presented as a

ple who have suffered conquest, subjugation and loss of land;

for example: . .

Since the coming of the Europeans the warrior organisation has
been rendered powerless . . . the spirit of manhood in the youth
has been almost killed by the imposition of imperialistic rule
which restricts people from moving and functioning freely in
their own country. The European prides himself on having done
a great service to the Africans by stopping the ‘tribal warfares’
.. . But consider the difference between the method and motive
employed in the so-called savage tribal warfares, and those
employed in the modern warfare waged by the ‘civilised’ tribes
of Europe, and in which the Africans who have no part in the
quarrels are forced to fight . . . It would have been much better
for the Africans to continue with their old tribal warfare, which
they fought with pride and with the loss of a few warriors, rather
than receiving the so-called civilising missions which means the
subjugation of the African races to a perpetual state of serfdom.

In the old order of the African society, with all the evils that
are supposed to be connected with it, a man was a man, and as
such he had the rights of a man and liberty to exercise his will
and thought in a direction which suited his purposes as well as
those of his fellow-men; but today an African, no matter what
his station in life, is like a horse which moves only in the direction
that the rider pulls the rein. The harmony and stability of the
African’s mode of life, in political, social, religious and economic
organisations, was based on the land which was, and still is, the
soul of the people. The first step which the European civilising
missions took to disorganise the Africans in order to exploit
and oppress them, especially in South and East Africa, was to
take away the best African lands . . .*

Other writers who had been trained to some extent by Malinowski

were carrying out sociological investigations of a kind which re-

*J. Kenyatta, Facing Mount Kenya, 1938, pp. Xvii-xviii.
"1bid., pp. 211-13.
64 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIAL]SY

vealed the hard facts of survival and subsistence in rural areas of
Africa drained of manpower by the developing mining and indus.
trial towns. Audrey Richards’ Land, Labour and Diet in Northerp
Rhodesia (1939) is an outstanding example of this kind of work.
She also confronted the dilemma of why there was suspicion and
non-co-operation between anthropologists and officials, when the
work of anthropologists ought to be practically useful. She contri-
buted to the debate in Africa in 1944,2 with an article which surveys
the previous fifteen years in which there was supposedly a good deal
of development in practical anthropology, but in fact real co-opera-
tion and support from the authorities for the subject was disappoint-
ingly small. Among the positive achievements in the subject she
notes the change in focus away from primitive communities: ‘““Most
of Malinowski’s pupils, however worked among the larger African
tribes of the greatest political importance and where European
contact had been at its maximum.’’?® One might ask whether this
could be one of the reasons why the official attitude was so luke-
warm. Certainly, in giving the reasons why she judges that therc
had been only verv moderate success for the IAI programme of
closer association between research and practical affairs, reflected
in the small number of research posts and the difficulty of financing
research, she refers to suspicion of the social investigator. Both in
such work in Britain, and in Africa,
The protests do not come from the individual questioned, for
most people like to talk about themselves and to find that their
views are considered important . . . The criticisms in both cases
come from those in authority: the Mayor or the M.P. of the
English borough, the district commissioner or the missionary
in Africa. These probably fear disturbances of some kind or other
as the result of the investigation, and probably feel resentment at
a stranger making inquiries in an area over which they have
control.?!
In a footnote she points out that in South Africa, the Union Gov-
ernment as a wartime measure was refusing permission to anthro-
pologists to enter Native reserves. The article goes on to discuss the
personal misunderstandings and suspicions which dog an anthro-
pologist’s fieldwork, and diplomatically gives a reasonable explana-
tion of the (scientific) reasons why the anthropologist ‘““is bound to

“*A. L. Richards, “Practical anthropology in the lifetime of the International
African Institute”, Africa XIV, 1944, 289-301.

¥Ibid., p. 291.

*1bid., p. 293.
d a life which is very strange in the eyes of other EUFopeanS”’
lcaving the reputation of “‘dancing round a tom-tom in a loin-cloth”.
o all directed at officialdom; and ends with an implied appeal

;f)';lsgreatcf research support. For earlier in the article Audrey

Richards comment.cd th.at “It looks as though the anthropolggist
had becen advertising his goods, often rather clar&orously, in a
market in which there was little demand fpr them™’,?* and a§k§d
whv. The fundamental answer to her question surely would lie in
the‘gulf of serious mutual distrust bet\ivc.aen at least some brands of
social anthropology and the authorities responsible for “good
administration’”.

The debatc over the use of anthropology, conducted in the pages
of Africa for a couple of decades, does not appear to have led to
greater understanding. On the contrary, there was in some respects
a polarisation of opinion. For example, on the official side, in 1951
Sir Philip Mitchell was able to state his earlier misgivings about
anthropology in an even more slighting manner than he had done
over twenty years earlicr. In a review of Lord Hailey’'s Native
Administration in the British Territories in Africa, he writes of the
contribution of anthropology as follows:

It has always been a matter of particular difficulty in colonial

Africa to ensure that those who are responsibie for the initiation

of policy or legislation, or for important administrative action

or decisions (and in African conditions a heavy responsibility
may rest on very young shoulders) should be adequately
informed not only of past events and old customs, but of current
social, political and economic conditions, in their own country
and in others offering useful analogies or experience. There was,
especially during the nineteen twenties and thirties, a spate of
special reports and investigations; at one time, indeed, anthropo-
logists, asserting that they only were gifted with understanding,
busied themselves with enthusiasm about all the minutae (sic) of
obscure tribal and personal practices, especially if they were
agreeably associated with sex or flavoured with obscenity. There
resulted a large number of painstaking and often accurate
records of interesting habits and practices, of such length that
no one had time to read them and often, in any case, irrevelant,
by the time they became available, to the day to day business
of Government.?®

*1bid., p. 292.
“P. E. Mitchell, review of “Native administration in the British territories
in Africa”, J. African Administration II1, 1951, 55-65, at pp.56-57.
66 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIAL|sy

This clearly unfair jibe received a sober reply from Schapera 22
spelling out once more the case for the usefulness of anthropology
and suggesting co-operation on the ground between anthropologists
and administrators, but protectively retaining the right to invest;.
gate esoteric scientific problems. The terms of the debate were thyg
very close to what they had been for a generation: and this in itself
suggests that a fundamental opposition of interest, sympathy and
commitment between the camp of colonial officials, on the one
hand, and of social anthropologists on the other, had not been
overcome.

Indeed, Malinowski’s position had hardened even further. His
most powerful statements on the need for the work of the social
scientist to be politically involved appear in the collection of his
writings posthumously edited by Phyllis Kaberry under the title
The Dynamics of Culture Change: an Inquiry into Race Relations
in Africa (1945). There is a markedly more intense tone in these
later writings, partly perhaps a sign of increasing disaffection with
the apolitical, amoral natural science approach of those influenced
strongly by Radcliffe-Brown, and of a deepening personal radical
commitment. In the first chapter we read:

There is a moral obligation to every calling, even to that of a

scientific specialist. The duty of the anthropologist is to be a fair

and true interpreter of the Native . . . In reality, the historian of
the future will have to register that Europeans in the past
sometimes exterminated whole island peoples; that they
expropriated most of the patrimony of savage races; that they
introduced slavery in a specially cruel and pernicious form; and
that even if they abolished it later, they treated the expatriated

Negroes as outcasts and pariahs. . . .

The Native still needs help. The anthropologist who is unable
to perceive this, unable to register the tragic errors committed
at times with the best intentions, at times under the stress of dire
necessity, remains an antiquarian covered with academic dust
and in a fool’s paradise . . . Research in order to be of use must
be inspired by courage and purpose . . .

Shall we, therefore, mix politics with science? In one way,
decidedly ““‘yes” .. .28

*1. Schapera, “Anthropology and the administrator”, J. African Adminis-
tration I11, 1951, 128-35.
“*B. Malinowski, The Dynamics of Culture Change: an Inquiry into Race

Relations in Africa, 1945; edited, with a new Introduction , by P. Kaberry,
1961, pp. 3-4.
NDY JAMES 67

wWE
Malinowski develops his argument I:h:alt ix;] the comgxt of d{\f.ri.ca,
change is proceeding everywhere, there can be no division
wher;n the theoretical and the applied aspects of anthropology.
I}Jf:gnsists on the need for a broad prospe?tivc?: ‘ -
We are dealing with a sub]ecg matter which is in ﬂux.; ?he rapidity
of change confuses observation and confounds policies. The
growth of new unexpected forces and factors, such as {\fncan
nationalism and the development .of _autonomous Afrlcan
churches, poses difficulties of description and analysis a§‘well as
of policy. In this new work the theoretician and practitioner
must take account of wide issues of Western rule, economic as
well as imperial; they have to be acquainted with the rudiments
at least of economic, legal, and political theory and, with all this,
of anthropological method.?®
In the subsequent chapter he claims that *“‘the whole range of Euro-
pean influences, interests, good intention, and predatory drives must
become an essential part of the study of African culture change.”
It is not merely a question of considering local Europeans as part
of an integrated community with the Africans.
The treatment of the complex situation of change as one ‘well
integrated whole’ . . . ignores the whole dynamism of the
process . . . Above all, it obscures and distorts the only correct
conception of culture change in such areas: the fact that it is
the result of an impact of a higher, active culture upon a simpler,
more passive one.3°
The “contact’ situation is highly one-sided: in a list of its character-
istics in the fifth chapter of the collection, Malinowski notes that
Europeans have not given African people instruments of physical
power, “firearms, bombing planes, poison gas, and all that makes
effective defence or aggression possible”. Nor do ‘“we” give instru-
ments of political mastery; nor do we share with them the substance
of economic wealth and advantages. “Even when, under indirect
economic exploitation as in West Africa and Uganda, we allow the
Natives a share of profits, the full control of economic organization
remains in the hands of Western enterprise’.?* Nor do we admit
of social, political or even religious equality. On the whole we are
more generous with spiritual gifts, while withholding wealth, power
and independence. And now for the justification of his stand in
terms of science:

“Ibid., p. 9.
*Ibid., p. 15.
“Ibid., p. 57.
68 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIAL[sT

This argument may be mistaken by the superficial reader as an
outburst of pro-Natlve ranting. It is nothing of the sort. All this
is simply a statement of one of the most scientifically relevan
factors in culture change as it occurs in parts of Africa. To
ignore the fact that there is a selective giving on the part of the
Europeans makes for a distortion of evidence, and this is a sin
against science.??
It is true that Malinowski was afraid of extreme nationalism and
the political dangers of its spread, and was not committed to a
revolutionary position. But he sketches clearly in these later writ.
ings the essential features of the developing political situation,
makes plain his own sympathies, and justifies them in terms of the
scientist’s duty. The colour bar for example “has to be put on the
methodological map’, because of its theoretical importance in cul-
tural change.
Indeed, the sooner we speak quite freely and openly about it
and also with a complete scientific detachment, the better; for
the educated Africans are rapidly becoming aware of, and
exaggerating, the situation. The African is becoming an
anthropologist who turns our own weapons against us. He is
studving European aims, pretences, and all the real and
imaginary acts of injustice. Such an anthropology is no doubt
mutilated and misguided, full of counter-prejudices, and charged
with bitter hostility. It is often blind in its intransigence and
sweeping in its wholesale indictment. But it cannot be ignored
by the man of science; and it would be better if the practical
man did not treat it as a joke or as an insignificant and minor
excrescence. For on the whole it contains a great deal of truth,
and it foreshadows the formation of a public opinion, of a
national and racial feeling which, sooner or later, will have to
be taken into account by the practical contact agents.3?
And even more explicitly:
The various movements which have so far appeared have broken
down largely because the Natives are not yet ripe for national,
well-organized, collective action. By the time, however, when a
European power in control may become politically embarrassed
and when there is fertile ground for the combination of the
Natives from the Lakes to the Cape, such a collective body of
opinion may not be an irrelevant factor. The anthropologist

“Ibid., p. 58.
®Ibid., p. 59.
WENDY JAMES 69
should have as on¢ of his duties, not to act as a spy, still less as
an agent provocateur, but to study tl}e growing forces of Baqtu
hationalism; to insist as all those with knowledge and foresight
do, that an improvement in social and, above all, economic
co;lditions, constitutes the only way out of the ghfﬁcu]ty; and
that no price is too high to pay to prevent me\.utab.le disaster.®

Malinowski does not face the question of how ‘‘inevitable”’ d1§aster

can be prevented. In positive terms,.he merely suggests some liberal

reforms, and the need for the continuance of some elements from
the traditional past. On these points he could certainly be said to
stand close to official colonial policy and practice.

But I have quoted extensively from Malinowski and some of his
contemporaries and his pupils, in order to suggest that taken as a
whole, his views nevertheless constitute a point of view of greater
political perception and radical significance than might at first be
thought. Of course Malinowski was not trying to overthrow the
svstem. His students’ grants would have soon dried up if that were
the case. Of course his activities and writings, and those of his
colleagues, were contained within the total colonial situation; how
could it have been otherwise? But just as Malinowski himself
rejected the concept of the “culture contact” situation as an inte-
grated whole, we must reject the concept of the colonial situation
in the inter-war period as an integrated whole. We must recognise
that there were developing contradictions, not merely between the
administrators and their philosophy of just rule on the one hand,
and nascent nationalism and socialism on the other, but between
each of these and social anthropology, caught in the middle and
constrained from either side.

In the inter-war period, the main constraints were from colonial
authority itself. A historical view of the subject should therefore
give full weight to the ways in which social anthropology was a
vehicle for criticism of that authority.

Ibid., p. 61.

In the preparation of this article, I have been indebted both to discussions
at the Hull seminar and to helpful criticism from Natale Olwak Akolawin.
Maurice Freedman and Godfrey Lienhardt also kindly read and com-
mented on the manuscript.
