THE COLONIAL FORMATION OF BRITISH SOCIAL
ANTHROPOLOGY
Stephan Feuchtwang

Preliminaries: scope, plan and definitions

The subject of this paper is the relation between British anthro-
pologists and their sponsoring institutions. The objective of this
paper is to locate the effect on anthropological knowledge of the
social conditions of British anthropology as it became an institution,
the so-called discipline and profession of social anthropology. I
shall not be concerned with the history of social anthropology as a
history of knowledge and its production per se. I am not going to
produce a reading of the frames of reference of social anthropology
as part of an ideological practice within the complexity of practices
which constitute British society. I am concerned only with one rela-
tion in that complex, namely the relation between the material con-
ditions of that ideological apparatus which is social anthropology,
as it was formed historically and the knowledge produced in it.

The intentions of the anthropologists and their sponsors are be-
side the points I will make. I am looking for the effects of an institu-
tional formation, and of a large number of events. That the events
should have a combined effect is no reason to think either that it
was intended or that I must have direct recourse in explaining it to
its being intended.

The plan of this paper is to start from the present and first to
think out what are the inevitable effects of the type of sponsorship
sought and given for anthropological research, then to analyse the
match between anthropologists’ actions toward sponsors and the de-
72 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSORS

velopment of anthropological theory, methods and its objects of
study. The third and largest part will then recount a history of the
formation of the institution of social anthropology as a profession
and a discipline, and the concluding part will be a more informed
and precise argument of the fit between it and its sponsoring insti-
tutions, predominantly those of the British imperial state. From
this plan it should be apparent that I do not aim to be empirically
conclusive, but rather to put forward an informed argument as a
necessary step at the beginning of the neglected work of knowing
what social anthropology is and does, is not and does not do.*

By ‘the discipline’ I mean what I take to be the prominent char-
acteristic of British social anthropology, which I think is the
seeking of knowledge of total systems or structures from small-scale
social units by direct personal observation with as little participa-
tion as possible. The broken relation of someone who goes out
directly to experience the life of people quite other than himself
while at the same time preserving a distance and an ethic of non-
interference which maintains that otherness has its counterpart in a
theory of total social systems in small social units, to be understood
inductively but nevertheless involving reconstruction and isolation
from an encompassing system which is analytically ignored. I want
to dwell upon this distance, and amplify it, because I think it is the
point at which the relation of the discipline to its practical con-
ditions and sponsoring institutions is clearest.

By ‘the profession’ I mean the establishment of British social an-
thropology as university department and degree, where it is taught
as a mental discipline: the teaching of anthropology, writes Ray-
mond Firth, is more the implanting of a view and method than the
imparting of information, ethnographic detail and the ‘right’ theory.?

I want to note here that I will be concerned with that period par-
ticularly in which the classics of British social anthropology were

'Argumentative initiatives have already been made, it is true, in the New
Left Review, the first by David Goddard, ‘Limits of British Anthropology’
(NLR 58, 1969). While the first two paragraphs of his article, which statc
that anthropological studies in Britain grew up as part of the colonial
situation, are also my starting point, he follows them with a critique of
British structural-functionalism unrelated to its institutional conditions.
Like Jairus Banaji’s later article (‘Anthropology in crisis’, NLR 64, 1970),
his critique is made by contrasting British empiricist structuralism with
Lévi-Straussian structuralism.

’Raymond Firth, ‘Aims, methods and concepts in the teaching of social
anthropology’, in D. Mandelbaum (ed), The Teaching of Anthropology,
American Anthropological Association, Memorandum 94, 1963.
STEPHAN FEUCHTWANG 73

roduced which we still now, in London at Jeast, include in the first

ears of indoctrination to social anthropology, namely tt_ne late colo-
nial period. Some of the developments of anthropology in tl.le 1960s
included in the latter years of indoctrination have broken with some
of the characteristics of the anthropology produced in the late co}o-
pial period, but others, in which the one I have isolated are in-
cluded, are still maintained. Professor M. G. Smith in a seminar on
the history of British social anthropology at University College,
London, in 1971, talked of the break-up of colonial complacency,
and in it the demise of functionalism. How complecte, how radical,
is its demise? We still put priority on ‘community’ studies, on ‘exo-
tic’ societies, as he himself called them, and on ‘preliterate’ societies,
a term he also used for the subject matter of anthropology. These
terms, reserving structure from dynamics, repressing history into
code of myth or into moments of equilibrium, are derived from the
products of an anthropology formed as I shall argue in a complex
of colonial attitudes, and surviving reformed in neo-colonial

conditions.’®

1. Three ways in which research cannot help being efiected by its
SPONSOrS

We live in a political system in which research and teaching are
segregated from applied research, training, and government in insti-
tutions called ‘academic’, a segregation legitimated by an historic-
ally founded conventional idea of ‘academic freedom’. Social an-
thropological teaching and research is subject to this segregation
into academic and applied, so much so that the possibility of ‘pure’
research is a firm belief and the possibility of its use either ignored,
this ignorance being the ‘correct’ attitude, or clse denied.
(1) Nevertheless, anthropology is thought to be useful by some
agencies, apart from its use as a mental discipline (an ideology).
Many of the funds for social anthropological research are given for
its practical use in multi-disciplinary development projects in Mal-
aysia, for community development in Africa, for public security

*For present purposes what I mean by neo-colonial conditions is a global
system of nations in relations of economic dependence upon and actual or
potential militarv subordination to metropolitan nations, and which are to
a large extent successors to colonial rclations. The rulers of subordinate
nations in this system service these relations if they do not actively break
with them.- Most anthropological research is conducted through and
financed by them, or by the mctropolitan agencies of the metropolitan
nations, rarely if ever by the nations and movements which have broken
from these relations.
74 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSORS

and military intelligence in Thailand, for the training of district
officials in Papua New Guinea. Even supposing that much of the
data of this work is not published, going only into reports or data
banks access to which is restricted, it is still likely to be part of and
informed by the rest of its researchers’ contributions to social anthro-
pology and must also to some extnet help them form their ideas of
anthropology as a discipline which they simultaneously or in the
future will conduct and administer. And of the published work
which forms the discipline’s ethnographic groundwork we can ask,
with some certainty of its being a substantial question, how much
of it was done on commission, determined not by anthropology
alone but also by the demands of colonial and neo-colonial relations.
(2) On the other hand, contracted research has been distinguished
from academic research and the use of an academic name and place
of study for contracted resecarch called a breach of professional
ethics, especially while the research report is restricted and not
made freely available to the scientific community.* The Scarborough
and Hayter ear-marked government funds which financed so much
of area studies, including anthropological study, in Britain after the
second world war, and the Ford foundation which did the same in
the U.S., may have been provided with an idea of the national in-
terests, but the funds were administered by academics in the hope
that this would guarantee an impartial use of the funds for scientific
advancement. Is such a hope realistic?

Are there not, especially as funds begin to flow less easily, lists of
non-academic priorities such as those Lucy Mair mentions as having
existed for the Colonial Social Science Research Council® and which
are being worked out by the U.S. Social Science Research Council,*
possibly guided by the U.S. government Foreign Areas Research
Co-ordination Group?’ Do not the academic administrators direct
research toward topics and areas which they know or guess to be
favoured by their sponsors?

“This was the gist of many contributions to the discussions of Project
Camelot at the annual meeting of the American Anthropological Associa-
tion in 1966. I think I am justified in taking examples from U.S. post-war
anthropology because in the first place many British anthropologists at
some timeor other in the research areas themselves, or in Britain and the
U.S.A., are sponsored by U.S. agencies, secondly because I find many a
parallel in the present U.S. relations between profession and sponsors with
the British profession and its sponsors.

*Lucy Mair, ‘The social sciences in Africa South of the Sahara: the British
contribution’, Human Organisation, 19: 3, 1960.

*According to Dr. Jack Stauder, in a paper on ‘The “relevance” of anthro-
pology’ given to a Wenner-Gren Symposium, 1970,
STEPHAN FEUCHTWANG 75

Eric Wolf and Joseph Jorgensen, membqrs of the Amc?rimn An-
thropological Ass.ociat.ion’s Ethics Committee, found® in the ar-
rangements of university contracts for. counter-insurgency wc?r'k’ in
Thailand an ‘ambiguity of motive: is the government soliciting
social scientists or is the social science community soliciting govern-
ment?’ The Committee on African Studies, which included anthro-
pologists, in a report to its sponsor the Ford Foundation in 1958
wrote: ‘It seems to us most appropriate and desirable to encourage
Africanists individually and in their associations, to provide assist-
ance in professional consultation, in training for specific needs, in
designing research (my emphasis) so as to be useful to government
and business.” The American Anthropological Association itself, in
its Fellow Newsletter 8:1, January 1967, p. 7, reported that it was
setting up a committee for liaison between the Association and
government agencies ‘to suggest improvements in the use of anthro-
pology (my emphasis); to strengthen the relations between Govern-
ment and the profession; to visit agencies to discuss policies and
actions with respect to anthropological methods and data, employ-
ment, contracts, grants and fellowships.’*’

As we will see, this academic solicitation, seeking to be useful
especially to government, was true of British anthropology in its de-
velopment from the turn of the century. It is of coursc possible that
there be no disagreement between the professional anthropologists
and their sponsors and so no reason for any disavowal of the spon-
sors’ interests since they are the same as or compatible with those
freely accepted by the anthropologists. But then surely one is bound
to ask whether this arrangement was arrived at by means of anthro-
pological reasoning and work, and not by some other contingent
decision. And the answer is that it cannot possibly have been when
there is so little, almost no, work done by anthropologists on their
own governments’ and societies’ relations to the external societies
they choose to and are paid to study.'' In fact the only criteria for
such agreement that were mentioned in the past in Britain and at

“Presumptive evidence for an inquiry into a military-academic synapse . .’
one of whose links is between the FAR Group and the SSRC in the United
States is summarised in ‘The American Asian Studies Establishment’, in
Bulletin of Concerned Asian Scholars, 3: 3 and 4, 1971,

‘So they wrote in New York Review of Books, 19, Nov. 19, 1970, p. 27.
*as quoted in Stauder op. cit.

"*ibid.

"'Study of the relationship between them is not entirely absent from social
anthropology, but it is not social so much as cultural and is limited to the
phenomena of contact itself (culture contact in the past, ethnicity now)
not the social system of contact.
76 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSORg

present in the U.S. have been deliberately differentiated from ap.
thropological work as such and categorised as the ‘Ethical’, ‘per.
sonal’ and ‘common sense’ responsibilities towards the individuals
with whom they (we) have worked in the field and towards col-
leagues in the profession. A self-censorship, a limitation of the dis-
cipline, has been exercised. The discipline does not include analysis
of its sponsors and its relations to them.

A pure form of this self-censorship, in which no criteria, not even
ethical, are offered for the choice of sponsor and the use of research,
is the claim that it makes no difference who provides funds so long
as the researcher is allowed to conduct the research project he has
devised, so he claims, independently, nor is it of scientific or profes-
sional concern how the result is used so long as it is accessible to
professional colleagues. Such a purist concern, is questionable. Has
the discipline in fact developed under its own logic, independently?
I shall pose this question in the second part of this paper.

(3) If government funds, or the funds of government-supporting
agencies are used and foreign government permission to conduct in-
vestigations needed, then the work will be limited according to
government diplomatic policy. This in itself must impose contingent
limits upon the geographical distribution of ethnographic research,
as Kathleen Gough has pointed out.'? Future funds and future per-
mission for each anthropologist and his successors are determined,
furthermore, by whatever is the record of his or her research, pub-
lications and reputation in the sponsoring agencies’ sources of in-
formation. As Wolf and Jorgensen pointed out, academics in Thai-
land who collaborated in counter-insurgency work feared losing the
opportunity for further research if they refused. Of course it is pos-
sible to conduct research of one’s own and on the side do what
pleases sponsors, but the limits within which this can be done need
investigation. I am not satisfied with the obvious fact that there is
some leeway. Apart from prior geographical limitations there is the
restraint on publication of any analysis that might be taken as critic-
al of the sponsor or permission-giver. The professional demand for
publication would make it scnseless to do work that was not pub-
lishable. Any analysis is critical at least in the limited sense that it
distinguishes phenomena and representations—such as a particular
government policy or project, or an educational programme—from
the basis, and finds the consistency and contradiction in an historic-
al system or structure. It can easily be offensive. Has the choice to

*Kathleen Gough, ‘Anthropology: Child of Imperialism® Monthly Review,
April 1968.
STEPHAN FEUCHTWANG 7

grsue it regardless of tact and professional considerations often
been taken?

2. Has the discipline developed under its own logic? '

Take as a point of departure a paper by Peter Worsley entitled

«The End of Anthropology?’, given at the 6th World Coggr.css of
Sociology, May 1966. As an anthropologist and from within the
discipline and its theoretical foundations, he found, if I read hxm
correctly, that three major directions implied in those foundations
had been neglected.
(1) The development of theory of direction, or emergence, has
becn avoided. Worsley sees this as an ideological reaction: in avoid-
ing imperialist and racist notions of superiority anthropologists had
for half a century recourse instead to a combination of universalism
and relativism.

But this is also a change consistent, as I will argue in the next
part, with the changed character of late colonial relations. It was in
any casc not a change which came about through internal criticism
and reasoned rejection but by means of a process of discrediting the
scientific study of history and of causal explanation in social science
on tangential and external grounds.'® If evolutionary thought had
engendered the idcology for a reactionary and oppressive politics
and produced untenable theories of race and the mechanistic stages
of progress, this does not mean that a more rigorous approach could
not produce more adequate and tenable evolutionary theories and
theories of large-scale types or modes of social relation. Yet this is
what the founders of British social anthropology in their wholesale
rejection of all causal reasoning in anthropology would have us
belicve.

(2) Worsley points out what anthropology could have been doing
as a self-professed science of society whose subject-matter was the
variety of human or social tvpes. It could have been developing an
adequate comparative theory and typology starting with such types
as had already been developed. Instead, a surreptitious evolution-
ism, unworked and unquestioned except as a matter of fact, has
continued in the dualist vocabulary used to identify anthropology’s
subject-matter : primitive/modern, simple/complex. There has been
in British social anthropology no systematic inquiry into and trans-
formation of the concepts of social types such as the hunting-

"See R. Makarius’ introduction to the French edition of Morgan’s Ancient
Society (L. H. Morgan, La Cociété Archaique, 1971) pp xiv-xxvii, for a
description of this process.
78 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSQRg

gathering, the pastoral, the hydraulic, the feudal. Where there by
been comparison it has been regional or of types of a single instiy,.
tion (e.g. the family, marriage, descent) or a universal mechanigy,
(e.g. conflict), never of total social systems.

Totality has been stressed often enough, but never as that of ,

type of system, rather as that of a unique society or institution deg.
cribed. Possibly this was to some extent a consequence of the choice
of field out of contingent rather than for scientific reasons. Societieg
so chosen at least clustered regionally and so even if the choice of
people to study was not based on a typology and a comparative
theory, that still left regional variation as the grounds for descrip-
tive comparison.
(3) Worsley notes the absence of studies of numerically large and,
to the new state being formed, economically important regions of
the Sudan, one of the principle hunting grounds of British social
anthropology. Instead, minute ‘primitive’ populations were isolated
in study. Now, if we look at the data provided by historians, we
find that the social systems which anthropologists chose as units of
study were very often parts of much larger social systems, which
might just as well have been the unit of study in a science of social
types. A well known case in point is that of the Tallensi as part of
the Dagomba-Mamprusi-Mossi Tri-dominion and then afterwards,
of coursc as part of the British colonial system.'* I doubt that the
larger-scale system was rejected just because a system that size was
not amenable to direct observation. There are other ways of study-
ing a society than the observation of its entirety, indeed even field-
work observation in the British ethnographic tradition is used as the
basis for the description of much more than was actually observed.
The scale of the theory based upon observation and of the concepts
used in description is ncver in any event confined to that of the ob-
servations made. Why should the particular method of study, so-
called participant observation, have been so stressed and celebrated,
and the empiricist ideal—inducing social structure only from what
was known through the senses of the observer'*—have been given
such currency? Perhaps the method and its stress were and are con-
commitants of the study of societies as isolates, not a cause.

The poignant distance of the ficld-work relation, the distance of
the analyst from his own analysis, is conceivably part and parcel of

1See R. F. Stevenson, Population and Political Systems in Tropical Africa,
1968, chapter VL.

A. R. Radcliffe-Brown, ‘The concept of function’, in Structure and
Function in Primitive Society, 1951, p. 190.
srEPHAN FEUCHTWANG [

distance of the sponsors from that analysis. The distance kept
the een the people who are the subject-matter of social anthropol-
belf'and the production of social anthropology itself also fits the
og;d-work method. It fits the institutional definition of knowledge
e academic and it fits the sponsors’ imperial and neo-colonial re-
?:tions 1o the same people, as colonial subjects, to be kept in order,
ut to work and aided, at a distance. The anthropologist studies the
peasant, the hunter, the farmer, the labourer. He studies mainly the
[literate. Sometimes he studies the numerate entrepreneurs and the
iiterate minor officials and local notables, even small kingdoms and
their courts, but never the imperial, aiding, government-advising or
funding agency or boss of the local entreprencurs and local rulers.
Yet it is precisely in the opposite ratio that the readership of the
anthropologists’ work is ranged.

Literacy has been one of the main criteria of social classification
in anthropology and of what is central to its study: preliterate
peoples. It has another side in the development of anthropological
theory besides defining its subject-matter, and that is the lack of
challenge by its subjects, unable to read the finished work. Surely
this lack of challenge has encouraged notions of immutable and un-
conscious structures and left un-raised in social anthropology the
question and theory of the state of consciousness and of the internal
transformation of society and social production of its own know-
ledge.

3. The formation of British social anthropology

The method emploved in writing this history is to generalise from
official statements of major institutions of anthropological research,
teaching and funding and the writings of professors of anthropology
and notable colonial administrators who sponsored anthropologists.
I take these to be key instances of British social anthropology be-
cause of their co-ordinating functions or, in the case of the profes-
sors, their influence as teachers and administrators of social anthro-
pology.

The history of organised anthropology before the second world
war was one of very slow development, out of origins in humani-
tarian reform and political involvement, which were then set aside
and distinguished from a ‘purely’ scientific interest. This separation
manifested itself in the duality of the several appeals to government
for funds. They met with success only when the colonial govern-
ments were forced to engage in policies of major reform leading,
after the second world war, to the granting of formal political inde-
80 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPOI\‘SORS

pendence to colonies and to the establishment of social anthyq.
pology as a teaching profession in its own right for the first time i,
several universitics in Britain.

In a continuous line of successive institutions, the Royal Anthyq.
pological Institute (RAI) can be taken back, as George Stocking has
done,'® to the Aborigines Protection Society, founded in 1838 afiay
parliamentary hearings on the Kaffir wars. The RAD’s goals were tq
pursue an evangelism abroad that would administer the same
justice and civilisation in the colonies, as it did at home: ‘not tg
halt European colonisation overseas, but to change its character’,
It tended, however, in its history to move toward the study of abo.
rigines ‘in the purity of their race’ as ‘objects of interest in the natu.
ral history of man’ (as the Society’s Fourth Annual Report put it),
until members formed, in 1842, a separate body entirely for this
purpose, and called it the Ethnological Society of London. Through
a combination of medical-anatomical and linguistic-philological ap-
proaches its main objective of study was to trace the essential unity
of man.

To put them in a larger context, it must be noted that the Abo-
rigines Protcction Society and the Ethnological Society of London
were in line with one side, in the controversy in Britain reflecting
the two sides of the American Civil War. The other side stood, of
course, for the natural inferiority of the Negro race and its separatc
origin. Dissension on these lines, between those tracing a single
origin and those tracing several origins of human races, split the
Ethnological Socicty of London itself, and those with the multiple
origin theories that favoured slavery and natural aristocracy sepa-
rated from it and formed, in 1863, the Anthropological Society of
London.'” Its members conducted mainly physical anthropological
research, pioneering the measurement of physical types and their
classification, and advocated racist policies to colonial administra-
tors while, by contrast, the Ethnological Society of London main-
tained a ‘liberal political orientation’.

But in 1870 the two anthropological societies were reconciled into
the single Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland
(now the Royal Anthropological Institute) in which the postulates
of original unity and of Darwinian evolution were united with a re-

*George W. Stocking Jr., “‘What’s in a name? The origins of the Royal
Anthropological Institute (1937-71)’, Man 6: 3, 1971. All quotations in
this and the next two paragraphs are from Stocking’s article.

'"M. Banton, Race Relations, 1967, p. 34, cites its presidential address in
favour of slavery.
{{AN FEUCHTWANG 81
for the careful study of the differentiation of human types.
spect rejected in the 1840s the left hand of philanthropy, it (or-
‘Having - hropology in Britain) rejected in the 1860s the right
nhseof political racism. For the next two decades . . . the Anthro-
nase. | Institute stayed in the centre of the road. It took for gran-
pologier . ’ d the White Man’s Burden, but it was not
ted the British Empxr.e and the e Man; . vas
ctively concerned with either colonial policy or savage uplift.” (p.
386). It was dependent on its subscriptions for funds. But in the
1890s, as Stocking also notes, this changed. British organjsations of
anthropology began to petition government sponsorship, and 'began
a long history of attempts to make anthropology attractive to
British colonial administrations.'®

In 1896 the subsection for Ethnology (formed in 1846), of the
British Association for the Advancement of Science, with the An-
thropological Institute and the British Muscum petitioned govern-
ment for funds and facilities to found an Imperial Bureau of
Ethnology, modelled on the American Burecau of Ethnology,
the Dutch government’s policy of educating its East Indian ad-
ministrators in cthnology, the cthnological wealth of the Leyden
museum, and on the precedent of British Imperial ethnological
work already done in reports by colonial administrators and for
the Census of India. The aims of the Imperial Bureau were to
be two-fold, for science and for colonial administration. The scien-
tific aim, repeated into the present day, was archival, historical, and
an academic reason for focusing on small-scale social units and not
on large-scale systems, namely to record data from peoples vanish-
ing through contact with Europeans—the aborigines of Australia,
Oceania and the East Indies, the so-called tribals of India and
tribes of Africa, not the so-called civilisations of the Far East and
India, Malaya, Burma, Siam, the Middle East. The administrative
aim was to co-ordinate information on the subject peoples for the
preparation of colonial administrators so that they would not make
ancw the mistakes of the past. The only result of this petition was a
room in the British Museum for an ethnology section.

Another appeal by the Anthropological Institute, this time with
the Folklore Society of Great Britain and Ireland, was made in 1900
to Joseph Chamberlain, Secretary of State for the Colonies, for funds
to compile records of the customs of the native people of South
Africa who were, to everyone’s surprise, not disappearing under

SsTEP

"*The first part of this history is told by J. L. Myres, ‘Anthropology and the
State’, Presidential address to the Royal Anthropological Institute, JRH

1929.
82 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSORg

European contact after all, but whose social organisation wag
breaking up in an alarming way. The records would help in the
difficulties ‘of management by a European government’ to contrg]
the disruption of contact with knowledge of the pre-contact socia]
order. Chamberlain was unresponsive. But in 1908 there was some-
thing in the naturc of a delayed response to the 1896 appeal,
when Wingate invited Oxford and Cambridge anthropologists
to train administrators for his newly formed Sudan civil service,
In the same year and the next Ridgway, Cambridge professor
of anthropology and President of the Anthropological Institute, re-
newed the 1896 appeal for an Imperial Bureau of Ethnology, to be
housed in the Institute, and addressed it to the India and Colonial
Offices and then to Asquith the Prime Minister. The appeal'® was
signed by administrators, merchants, bankers, and shipowners. It
repeated, in substance, the two aims of the former appeal and
added a third, namely to make anthropometric surveys in order to
gauge physical improvement and deterioration. There was no con-
crete response to this appeal either. Anthropology was considered
important but not useful by the government. In 1914 there was an-
other minor success; the Australian government began the training
in ethnology of administrators of aborigines. In the same year a
Royal Commission on Higher Education heard Sir Richard Temple,
a fellow of the Royal Anthropological Institute and representative
of the Anthropological section of the British Association, recom-
mend the training of colonial service officials in anthropology,
more specifically in language and the knowledge of racial charac-
teristics—still apparently the two major concerns of anthropology.
For this purpose anthropology departments should be opened in
British universitics. War put an end to that hope. But British West
African colonial administrations had officials trained in anthropo-
logy (Meek, Rattray, Talbot) from 1920 onwards, to conduct sur-
veys and reports.

In 1921 Temple went ahead on his own initiative to organise
under RAI auspices a Joint Committee on Research and Teaching,
representing all anthropologists in British education, in order to
collect and publish anthropological information ‘for the use of the
Imperial services, teachers, misionaries and others’. Money for it
came from an appeal fund and a grant from the Rockefeller foun-
dation, not from the British Imperial government. Shortly after-
wards, within five years, teachers, missionaries and others, with the

'*Royal Anthropological Institute Documents AS6 and A10; 3.
STEPHAN FEUCHTWANG 83
rt of their universities and missionary societies all over Europe,
SUPPO" Jed also by the Rockefeller foundation, with in addition the
gmeaie, foundation, and some colonial governments, founded the
IntemZtiOﬁal Institute qf African Languages and Cultpres (IAID).
Not only did some colonial governments help to finance it, but Lord
Lugard, ex-governor of Nigeria, agreed to l?eqome head of its .[jlx-
ecutive Council, ‘and it is largely through his influence that Bnt.lsh
administrations in Africa have given such generous and unswerving
support to the Institute from the beginning.’*°
I think the founding of the IAI is a turning point in the attrac-
tiveness of anthropology to colonial administrators. It is important
to note the differences between its aims and those of the previous
anthropological projects, including Temple’s. The practical aims of
the latter were to support a simple one-sided, application of im-
rial rule in the situation of contact, whereas the IAI was founded,
among other things, to improve the education of natives ‘on modern
lines’ in the situation of contact,?' a more complex, two-sided, sup-
port of modern (i.e. imperial) rule. Indeed, some of its members may
have seen the IAD’s activities as a preparation for formal political
independence. And the anthropology of the IAI was different. In
1931 it made a five-year plan for itself, based on Malinowski’s
article, ‘Practical Anthropology’, published in its journal Africa
2:1, ‘to study the processes of change in a purely objective scien-
tific way.’?* Under this plan, studentships were given to colonial
administrators and to missionaries to take academic courses, many
of them under Malinowski at the London School of Economics, and
research fellowships to academic social scientists giving special em-
phasis to language studies and to culture contact and culture
change. Their research was to include direct observation—field-
work. A Readership had been created at the LSE for Malinowski
in 1923 and he chose for it the title social anthropology. In these
same years Radcliffe-Brown had taken up professorships created
for him at the university of Cape Town, and then in Sydney, and in
both he was much engaged in training administrators of the natives
and conducting projects in applied anthropology.
The functionalist anthropology of Malinowski and Radcliffe-
Brown was a wholesale break with the philological, evolutionist,
racialist, and historical (diffusionist) anthropology offered in Britain

“‘Rev. E. W. Smith, of the IAI and the RAI, in Memorandum XII of the
TIAI 1932.

ibid.

“ibid.
84 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONS()&S

until the 1920s. There are grounds for considering the turning poijp,
of the late 1920s as a move either toward an anthropology more
suited to colonial administrative need or else as a change which mey
with new colonial administrative needs more than the previoyg
anthropology could.

In his African Survey (pp. 54-61 of the 1957 edition), Lord
Hailey, a key link between colonial administration and the new ap.
thropology, identifies social anthropology with functional, practica]
and applied anthropology. He notes that it made a break with the
anthropology of origins and became a kind of knowledge more use.
ful to colonial administration in doing so. The Union of South
Africa from 1925 employed a staff of trained anthropologists in its
administration, and the use of anthropologists to conduct surveys
spread to other British African administrations besides those that
had already used and continued to use anthropological expertise.
Social anthropologists who were commissioned in the 1930s to con-
duct surveys or make reports, mentioned by Hailey, were 1. Scha-
pera in the High Commission Territories of South Africa, M. Read
in Nyasaland, A. 1. Richards in Northern Rhodesia and P. J. Peri-
stiany in Kenya.

Education of the colonial subjects and both sides of the pheno-
mena of ‘contact’ were thc main concerns of the Standing Commit-
tee on Applied Anthropology which the RAI constituted in 1937.
It was not government sponsored but intended, in its own words*’
to ‘study the problems of culture contact and the application of
anthropological knowledge to the government of subject races’ by
means of publication, representation to governments, and personal
contacts with officials. Man 1938 contains records of a number of
initiatives taken by the committee: a memorandum to the Austra-
lian Prime Minister that the inviolability of reservations be en-
forced; a deputation including Malinowski and Margaret Read to
the Secretary of State for the Colonies to draw attention to the need
for a better understanding of native opinion and the correct trans-
lation of new political institutions into the native words of the terri-
torics to be transferred to the Union of South Africa; a suggestion
that anthropological research might, among other things, ‘indicate
the persons who hold key positions in the community and whose
influence it would be important to enlist on the side of projected
reforms’ and reports on the use of anthropological study for edu-
cation in colonial development, to point out habits and prejudices

*in Man, 1937, Article 139.
sl'EPHAN FEUCHTWANG 85
might be obstacles to ‘hcalth programmes in Ea}st Afnca a}nd
a sense of citizenship and loyalty to quern institutions ‘on
standards of respect for obligation implicit in the native system’.
pot let us forget that thej modern institutions, the new political
. itutions, and the educational _programmes were al.l part of a
in> ernment of subject races’. This independent committee had no
gggk whatsoever with the contemporary nationalist movements in
:Le colonies, interested though anthropologists were in contact and
change, and sensitive to them as they should or must have been.

In the same year the committee sent a deputation to the Secretary
of State for the Colonies with a memorandum on “The place of an-
thropology in colonial studies’.?* In the same year, Lord Hailey,
from the administrative side, had written in African Survey, as cited
in the committee’s amemorandum: ‘The professional anthropolo-
gist’ should be ‘of great assistance in providing Government with
knowledge which must be the basis of administrative policy’. One
of the advantages to government of a professional anthropologist is,
the memorandum mentions, that in investigating such essential sub-
jects as native customary law and land tenure he will not be ob-
structed as would an investigator known to be connected with the
executive side of government. The memorandum suggested a Colo-
nial Research Fund (as had Lord Hailey) and the appointment of
between twelve and sixteen research fellows and six and eight lec-
turers in British universities, who would respectively spend half
their time in the colonial field and in training experts—the training,
it was stressed, to be general in the first instance, emphasising the
totality of social systems. The other half of their time was to be in
academia. Research institutes, such as the Rhodes-Livingstone
Museum founded two years before, should be established as re-
search bases in the colonies.

The Colonial Social Science Research Council (CSSRC) con-
stituted six years later under the Colonial Development and
Welfare Act of 1940 with special provisions for ‘the acquisition
of knowledge required for implementing projects of social or
economic development’,”® followed the recommendations of the
RAI committee closely. One of its standing committees was for
anthropology and sociology, its first secretary was Raymond Firth,
half of the Colonial Research Studies series written by its Colonial

to

*RAT document AS57.
*Forward by Lord Hailey to HMSO, A Review of Colonial Research 1940-
60, edited by Sir Charles Jeffries, 1964.
86 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONgqp,

Research Fellows and its members between 1944 and 19,
were by anthropologists, all of whom were later, if not then, teagy,.
ers of social anthropology and most of whom teach it now. Half 4
the CSSRC’s total allocation of funds went to the establismeny o
institutes in the colonial territories.

The President of the RAI in this crucial period of the institutiop,.
alisation of social anthropology, from the year following the depy,.
tation from the committee for applied anthropology to the formg.
tion of the Colonial Research Committee in 1942 which planned the
CSSRC and which included Lord Hailey and Audrey Richards, of
the TAI, was Radcliffe-Brown. His efforts, according to Fortes 2
laid the basis for the boom in anthropology which was part of the
general boom in natural and social science education arising out of
the experience of the second world war. His and Malinowski’s stu.
dents filled most of the teaching posts in the university departments
of anthropology that were created and expanded in Britain after the
war. The Association of Social Anthropologists of the British Com.-
monwealth, membership of which requires ‘normally both the hold-
ing of a teaching or research post in the Commonwealth and the
attainment of either a postgraduate degree (usually a doctorate) or
substantial publication’ was formed in 1946 with under twenty
members, and had grown by 1962 to more than one hundred and
fifty.?”

Whereas until the war social anthropology, that is British struc-
turalism and functionalism, had begun to flourish in certain colonial
conditions, the war itself seems to have generalised those conditions
cnough to have stimulated a qualitative leap into professionalisation
under state sponsorship. The war entailed a suddenly increased and
widespread need for the co-operation of colonial subjects beyond
the level required by colonial governments normally concerned to
save on the costs of administration. And as we know well it also en-
tailed as an aftermath the intensification of anti-colonial struggles
which forced the metropolitan government to adopt a new kind of
colonial policy, namely withdrawal from direct rule while endeav-
ouring to ensure co-operation after the retreat.

As a paternal ruler and pragmatic advisor to the British govern-
ment, Lord Hailey recognised the war to be a watershed in colonial
policy. During the war itself he wrote a confidential report (Native

*in the preface to M. Fortes (ed), Social Structure: papers in honour of A.
R. Radcliffe-Brown, 1949,

**'Max Gluckman and Fred Eggan (eds.) in The Relevance of models for
Social Anthropology, A.S.A. Monographs 1, 1965, pp. xi-xii.
STEPHAN FEUCHTWANG 87
. :-n and Political Development in British Tropical
Adrplﬂ .s;;a :: njnquiry he conducted in 1939-1940 for the Secretary
Afr mt)e The war, according to Hailey, saw the ascendancy of the
of Stad 'of two schools of thought. The first was the laissez faire
Secoﬁl of thought which had ‘little belief that self-government can
Sc,h (r) be realised in our African dependencies on any terms which
:,Viﬁ benefit their populations at large or will avoid prejudice to their
connection with Great Britain’ (p. 50). The second believed that
self-government would enhance the connection. Its ‘forces at home
and in the dependencies’ ‘will exert increasing pressure for the ex-
rension of political institutions making for self-government, and for
the fuller association of Africans with them. The strength of this
pressure is likely to be enhanced as the result of the war.” He had
already noted (p. 3) that at home, in Great Britain, ‘it had been
necessary for the State to come to the aid of under-privileged areas
or communities. It has become clear that in the Colonies the main-
tenancc of the doctrine that they should be independent of assis-
tance from the British Treasury would condemn some of them to
the permanent position of depressed areas.” ‘The government must
(it is generally felt) exercise a degree of intervention in both the
economic and social life of the nation which would not have been
accorded to it by an earlier generation. The influence of these ideas
has been increasingly felt in the interpretation which the general
public now places in its obligations towards the colonial dependen-
cies. It has been reflected in a concrete form in the passing of the
Colonial Development and Welfare Act of 1940.°
Lord Hailey was obviously central in the articulation of colonial
administration and professional anthropology. Writing from the
vantage point of 1944 he described colonial development as pass-
ing through three stages, the first being introduction of law and
order and creation of basic infrastructure for the economic develop-
ment (i.e. extraction) of natural resources, the second, which he
judged had then been reached, being one in which the colonial ad-
ministration is faced with the ‘problem of assisting the indigenous
communities to advance their social life and to better their standard
of living.’ This would lead to the next stage, which he envisaged as
the political advance of indigenous peoples. So his practical and
effective interest in anthropology coincided with his second stage of
colonial development. The anthropology which took his administra-

"Is.org Hailey, ‘The role of anthropology in colonial development’, Man 44:
, 1944,
88 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSORS

tive interest was not the study of human origins, it was the study of
how societies work.?* And the societies with which he thought 54
ministrators needed most help from anthropologists were not sog;.
eties where an easily understood and compatible system could pe
incorporated easily to colonial rule using native personnel. Thesge
we may note, were the ‘civilisations’ and ‘despotisms’ of the Eagt
given to another set of academic disciplines and institutions altogether
—namely, Oriental studies. Anthropology could help with another
kind of people and imperial problem, tribal peoples of India anq
Africa and the Pacific ‘where administrators encountered cultureg
which were to them of a novel type, and where they did not find
personnel of a class which they could readily associate with them.
selves in the formation of the legal administrative institutions of the
country’ (i.e. colony).*’

To sum up the story so far, then, organised anthropology when
finally established as a government sponsored profession was dom-
inantly social anthropology and it was institutionalised at a certain
distance from practical application of knowledge even as it had had
to be as an unsuccessful petitioner of imperial government. Administ-
rators were trained by but not the same as anthropologists. Anthro-
pologists made investigations useful to but not identified with ad-
ministration.

Lucy Mair, a student of Malinowski who worked on the African
Survey, has linked Indirect Rule closely with the pre-war
study of social anthropology in Africa: ‘As far as Africa is con-
cerned, it is mainly in colonies governed under the system of In-
direct Rule, where the economic policy is to encourage independent
native production, that the study of social anthropology receives
official encouragement.’*’ Indirect Rule is what Lord Hailey and
C. K. Meek, one of the Nigerian government trained in anthropol-
ogy, referred to as the use of native institutions and personnel for
local government. It is of great interest, then, to see what working
in this system meant to Lucy Mair. ‘To me,” she wrote, ‘the question
of primary intcrest is: How should we study an African society in

®ibid.

ibid. C. K. Meek wrote much the same about ‘the government’s attitude
towards anthropological research’, namely that it should provide ‘data
which would help the government to make the fullest use of native institu-
tions as instruments of local administration’—in his Law and Authority
in a Nigerian Tribe, 1937, p. xv.

"Lucy Mair (ed.), Methods of Study of Culture Contact in Africa, 1938,
(Memorandum XV to the IAI) p. 1.
SrEPHAN FEUCHTWARNG 89
jay down lines of policy which would be oriented not
rds some necessarily vague ulUma}e ideal, but towards the
toWwa" " "¢ specific problems of adaption which have arisen or
solution of SPp o 33 This attitud
may be expected to arise In the ncar future; " Ths attitude
owards the limitations of app}xefi anthropology®* is, if it was
-peral, of great significance. It is in sharp contrast to the anthro-
ology rejected as conjectural history by the fgngtnopahsts. with
its long-term 1nterest ar}d perspectives. And it is in apparent
contrast with the scientific amb1t19ns of Radclﬁe-Browq fqr a
natural science of society and with the global generalisations
made by Malinowski. Indeed, Malinowski himself criticized
Fortes for being too functionalist, functionalism having been work-
ed out as a method for studying one culture alone ‘which through
age-long historical development had rcached a state of well-
balanced cquilibrium,” whereas contact with Europeans meant dis-
equilibrium, and functionalism had to be applied in a more com-
plex form as ‘the search for the Common Measure’ determining
new emerging institutions in order to predict and advise on how they
might reach stability.** Nevertheless this was a short-term perspec-
tive, and governments did not want advice on long-term policy.
Translated into social science this comes out, in Gunter Wagner’s
words as accepting as given ‘the essentially rigid forces’ of change.*s
As for the kind and scale of social unit toward which interested ad-
ministrators would have drawn anthropologists Lord Hailey iden-
tified them, in the passage already cited, as ‘tribal peoples’. Lord
Lugard gives some more definitc indications of what this meant
methodologically in his preface to A Black Byzantium, 1942, by S.
Nadel, at that time a government anthropologist of the adminis-
tration of the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan. Lugard notes that Nadel’s
first object was to discriminate between the essential characteristics
of Nupe culture, and the variations from the typical pattern in a
‘heterogeneous society divided by gulfs of culture, ethnic extraction,
community and class’. This involved an examination of ‘the factors
of social cohesion upon which the claim of a community to rank as
a unit of sclf-government is based.” ‘Since it is the declared policy
of the British Government to help different units of native society

*ibid.

“She repeated this attitude in fuller form in 1956. ‘Applied Anthropology
and Development Policies’, British Journal of Sociology 7. 1956, reprinted

Jn her Anthropology and Social Change, LSE monographs 38, 1969,

:‘In Lucy Mair (ed.) 1938 p. xxxvi.

*The study of culture contact in its practical applications’ in Lucy Mair
(ed.), 1938, p. 105.
90 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITs SPONsols

to govern themselves in accordance with civilised canons of just
and of impartiality between rival claims . . . it goes without =,
how valuable such an objective study would be to the Adminiss;lr"g
tion. We find that, in fact, it has been utilized in conjunction Witk
the researches of District Officers’ (p. iv). Not only were the Nupe o
be known and kept as a division of sub-units of social cohesiop but
the Nupe themselves, in fact, were a sub-unit of Fulani overlordg;
supported by and mediating colonial British rule. The adminjsty,_
tion was not, of course, interested in the detailed study of the Nyp,
so much as in the lessons to be drawn for administration of t},
larger territory of which the Nupe constituted one division.

So anthropology was useful to colonial administration when, iy
showing how systems of stability and internal cohesion workeg
(functionalism), it showed them to be small scale tribal divisions of
systems. But the founders of functionalism had global perspec.
tives. Radcliffe-Brown’s presidential address on applied anthropol.
ogy to the Anthropology Section of the Australian and New
Zealand Association for the Advancement of Science in 1940 is re-
markable for its ambitious plan for anthropology to be the theoreti-
cal side of the social experiment which was imperialism. It also en-
visaged the end of imperialism: ‘Imperialism is the self-assumed
role of controller of other peoples. They will not let this continue
indefinitely. In the meantime, let this blind experiment become less
blind. Let it become experimental anthropology leading to better
knowledge of the control of society and social change in our own
societies.” But it was not as a science of social change that social
anthropology became famous. It was for its small scale, intensive,
timeless ethnographies. Although in his address Radcliffe-Brown de-
fined the task of social anthropology as the formulation of ‘the
general laws of the phenomena that we include under the term cul-
ture or civilisation’, the address itself in its references to social an-
thropological subject matter was restricted to ‘primitive peoples’,
and to references to his own work with African and Papuan tribes,
without any construction of social types (such as he could have
been building on the basis of Marx and Morgan). And although in
the same address he stresses social evolution, it is an evolution to-
wards more complex and higher-order systems. They are systems
of integration. Change is reduced to integration, The more encom-
passing level is that imposed by ‘Western administration’ in the
imperial experiment. Social evolution in this scheme is to be obser-
ved and modified by anthropologists, through the training of ad-
: rs and the advice to administrations, so that it becomes
mimstfatﬁ’ od process in which some evolve more than others, indeed
a cogt;g some evolve the others. . . . .
jn whi temporary article in Africa by Malinowski**—an expansion

A co@rlier one' on ‘Practical anthropology’, written after corres-
of ntg:nce and agreement with a former Licutenant-Governor of
thern Nigeria—1s also ambitious in its vision for the anthropolo-
>0 h not quite so visionary as Radcliffe-Brown’s. He too saw

s‘]‘BPHAN

i hou o o - . .
glsttfl:opolgbgy and administration coming together in the long-term
2':nntcrf:sts of the native: ‘One class of men who can and must or-

nise . . - who have to keep their ha.td.abo‘ve the chaos of conflic-
{ing opinions and the.turmoﬂ of conﬂlctnqg interests . . . are the ad-
ministrators. It is their professional and implicit duty to look after
the interests of the natives, who do not and cannot (my stress) share
in deciding about their own destinies, though, sooner or later, they
may have to be admitted to some joint councils. The greater his
capacity to foresee the course of events and frame the policies ac-
cordingly, the better he (i.e. the administrator) will acquit himself of
his task. And here, in the capacity for looking far ahead, know-
ledge, statesmanship, and research meet, and they ought to be made
to collaborate.” °. . . in Africa there is one element which is largely
deprived of voice and immature in its own judgment, that is, the
native.’ {pp. 432-4). Social anthropology was firmly to be identified
with a paternal authority. Such an identification with colonial ad-
ministration of course precludes any questioning of it. Lucy Mair
writes of Malinowski’s ‘pre-occupation with policy’ and of *his con-
viction that the main purpose of the study of social change was to
enable governments to control it.”*’ Some of the implications of this
stance are brought out in Malinowski’s Dynamics of Culture
Change, in a chapter on ‘Indirect Rule and its Scientific Planning’,
in which much of the ideology of present-day development policy
has its franker and more open precedent. Indirect Rule is welcomed
because it means ‘the maintenance of as much as is possible of the
Native authority instead of its destruction’ (pp. 138-9). The qualifi-
cation, ‘as much as is possible’, is presented as a matter of indis-
putable scientific judgment of an inevitable social evolution: ‘the
progressive adaption of native institutions to modern conditions.’
The problem for cultural anthropology, he writes, is of finding in

"‘1'['923 rationalisation of anthropology and administration’, Africa 3: 4,
In R, Frith (ed.), Man and Culture, 1957 p. 241.
92 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSQRg

the culture of the native compensations for the loss of his militar,
power, for the substitution of new for the old ‘sources of revenyg’
and for a new ‘pative capacity for legislation’, but here’s the ryp
‘leaving the ultimate control in the hands of Europeans.” It meapg
in addition, finding ways of avoiding certain new developments iy
the situation of contact, notable among which is the educated native
(who has found voice and judgment) who challenges the colonij)
right: the problem, that is, of ‘obviating those situations in which
an illiterate chief has to deal with an educated clerk, with educated
commoners, and upstart demagogues’ (p. 145). ‘The object is tg
create in Native authority a devoted and dependable ally, contro].
led, but strong, wealthy and satisfied’ (p. 147). Elsewhere he calls
this process a ‘complex experiment’ in ‘the gradual growth of col-
laboration’ (p. 141). But in later pages Malinowski makes it plain
that what he means by alliance and collaboration is assimilation to
what is unquestionably a supecrior mode of life: ‘If from the outset
it were possible to make quite clear in preaching the gospel of civi-
lisation, that no full identity can be reached: that what are being
given to Africans are new conditions of existence, better adapted to
their needs but always in harmony with European requirements, the
smaller would be the chances of a strong reaction and the formation
of ncw, potentially dangerous, nationalisms’ (p. 160). Such national-
isms are ‘sociologically unsound’.

Tutelage and trusteeship were then the slogans of imperial ideol-
ogy,*® and Malinowski’s chapter on Indirect Rule follows closely
the conclusions of Lord Hailey. The latter in a talk given to the
Royal Institute for International Affairs in December 1938°°, had
praised Indirect Rule not as an efficient means of administration
but as the most efficient educative instrument in the transition to
self-management at a local level. He reminded his audience of the
lessons to be learned from the experience of British rulc in what he
called ‘the East’, in particular the disruptive (i.e. nationalist) effects
of higher education for the colonial subjects, concluding: ‘Pru-
dence seems to lie . . . in securing the early association of educatced
Africans with our administrative institutions. If we do not do so,
there will inevitably arise a state of tension which, sooner or later,
we shall have to meet by large-scale political concessions. And in
that case, they will not necessarily be made either in the right way,

¥See for instance Lord Hailey's remarks on ‘the tutelary power’ in An
A frican Survey, 1938, p. 413.

*Published as ‘Some problems dealt with in the African Survey’ in Inter-
national A ffairs, March 1939,
sTEPHAN FEUCHTWANG 93

or to the right class, or with the best re§u]t for all the people con-
erned.” The concordapce o.f the two views of. the .anth.xopologlst
znd the administrator is plain, though the one is veiled in the lan-
guage of science, the other in the language of bourgeois paternal
rectitude. : :

Evolution for Malinowski was a matter of culture—forms of be-
paviour, ceremony and speech and the development of values
which he took to be absolute such as survival and, in his latest
work, freedom. For Radcliffe-Brown it was a matter of higher-
order systems of integration with a strong identification of system
with norms and jural order. Divisions in the terms of their science
are therefore cultural, customary or jural divisions, and change or
contradiction are matters of temporary maladjustment of values
and norms in a superior, and global system of civilisation or inte-
gration. To identify such divisions, and in this way, was of course
much more congruent with imperial administration than to identify
competition or contradiction between economic systems or between
total political and economic systems, only one of which was the im-
perial system. To have done the latter would have meant having to
choosc sides in the application of anthropology. In the former the
sides are there, there is still an us and a them. But the choice is
loaded with a moral and social justification in the favour of us, and
they are the ones divided.

Anthropology, as social anthropology, became important to ad-
ministration, colonial administration, in the context of retreat from
direct cocrcive rule and in the context of its direction of reforms
from above, after it had been involved in what it recognised to be
wasteful mistakes or when a need for a response from its subjects
arose and was in danger of being thwarted. It may have been direct-
ly after a rebellion and its suppression. In the second world war
these conditions were generalised. But perhaps the Aborigines Pro-
tection Society itself is the prototype, founded as the result of the
Kaffir Wars, and much later examples are the commissioning of
Evans-Pritchard to study the Nuecr after their rebellion and its sup-
pression, and Meek’s study after the women’s rebellion in Eastern
Nigeria.

The present professors of social anthropology, authors of texts
much used in teaching undergraduates its foundations, did the re-
search for them in the pre-war, war-time and immediate post-war
period. Social anthropology as a discipline was first formulated in
the mid ’twenties and became a fully formed profession in the late
‘forties. Thenceforth application of anthropology was less simple
94 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITs SPONSQRs

because imperial relations were no longer colonial, no longe,
single political system of administrative apparatuses, and it was g4
vocated less frankly and openly than it had been. Social anthy,.
pology was justified to a much more exclusive extent than jt hag
been as a study for its own sake.

But ‘theoretical’ studies are not, Lucy Mair has remarked*’ of p,
interest to ‘the practitioner of government’. The example she giye,
of a kind of theoretical study that is of interest to ‘administratjye
officers’ is “work of the type that can be described as ‘mapping’,
Under their (the Rhodes-Livingstone Institute and the East Africap
Institute) auspices what were unknown regions, from the sociolo.
gist’s point of view, have become areas with well-marked charac.
teristics, about which theoretical generalisation is both possible and
profitable, and into which administrative officers, if they wish cap
now venture with much better guidance than was available to their
predecessors.” This work, funded by a Colonial Research Grant,
was published serially as the Ethnographic Survey of Africa. It was
in fact the kind of work, survey work, undertaken by a number of
Colonial Research Fellows in the late ’forties with guidance from
colonial governments*'—Firth in West Africa and Malaya, Leach
in Sarawak, Richards in East Africa. And, although administered
by academics, the grants were nevertheless guided, as Lucy Mair
also notes** according to government policy priority lists, so that
rescarch institutes and applicants for Colonial Research Fellowships
‘know that a project which is on the priority list stands a better
chance of a grant than one which is not’.

Nevertheless, at the end of the second world war Evans-Pritchard
gave a talk on applied anthropology, published in 1946,** in which
he distinguished between scientific work and practical advice, the
first free of moral values, the second necessarily based on moral
values and common sense. Both Ian Hogbin'* and Lucy Mair*’

“Lugg Mair, ‘Social sciences in Africa South of the Sahara’, 1960, op. cit.

p. 98.

*'according to HMSO op. cit., p. 61: The second need (i.e. beside mainly
demographic data) which the Council (CSSRC) identified was that of
assessing priorities amongst the many urgent problems calling for investi-
gation. Here the Council felt that the best guidance was to be obtained
from the colonial governments themselves, from personal discussions with
colonial officials and by visits of members of the Council or other experts
to particular territories.” Such visits included those of A. I. Richards and
R. Firth, mentioned in the text.

“Lucy Mair, 1960, p. 98.

“*Applied Anthropology’, Africa, 16: 2, 1946.

“In Firth (ed.), Man and Culture op. cit., p. 253.

“In ‘Anthropology and the underdeveloped territories’, a lecture given in
sT
. e then upheld the same distinction, in which the anthro-
have 51:‘13 said to bring to maiters of policy-making and judgement,
po log}s :sm of a colonial policy specifically, no special knowledge
rcsponsibility other than that of an unusually well informed lay-

or

maE'{,ans.Pritchard urged the anthropologist to ‘restrict his research
to scientific problems’. ‘We study primitive societes . . . to gain 2
better understanding of ourselves’ anc! to Feach ‘a clearer under-
standing of the nature of hqma.q society in general’ (p. 93). He
argued, on the by now familiar lines of dual purpose, for know-
ledge itself and secondly for expert practical advice, that rgsearch
was urgent because of the disappearance of primitive societies and
that more teaching positions in universities and more technical ad-
visory positions in colonial governments be established for anthro-
plogists in order to consolidate the science and also for the ultimate
gain of administration which must depend on the advance of the
science. He himself had filled both the roles of researcher and ad-
visor and saw no incompatibility between the two reporting as ad-
visor (he was Tribal Affairs Officer in the British administration of
Cyreneica during the war) on ‘native problems’ and making sure
the natives got ‘a square deal’ ‘accommodated to administrative re-
quirements and imperial policy’ (p. 96).

Why is there no scientific incompatibility with accepting imperial
policy? Was there not, in 1946 and before, the possibility of an
analysis of the imperial system, an analysis which might turn out to
be the basis for criticism of the whole system as such? And why is
Evans-Pritchard still scientifically concerned chiefly with ‘the primi-
tive field’ (p. 98)? Is that a scientific category, a type of social
system? And if so, is it disappearing any faster than other kinds?
These questions which are a fundamental step to the statements by
which they justified their discipline and its practice, have hardly
been asked even today by the leading social anthropologists. ‘Primi-
tive societies’ were an administrative and perhaps a cultural fact
within the colonial system, unquestioned until their conversion into
‘new nations’ was imminent.

Such questions began to surface in 1949, when, as members of
the CSSRC, Evans-Pritchard and Firth contributed an article on
anthropology and colonial government to Man*¢. They discussed the
problems of ‘a science of which the objectives are still in process of

“1950, printed in her Anthropology and Social Change, op. cit., p. 40.
Article 179, Man, December, 1949.
96 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SFONsqp,

definition’, and they proposed ‘some division of function betwe
government anthropologists and those working in COHaborali(,n
with but not in the service of governments.’ They pointed to the the,,
retical interest of ‘colonial affairs as such’ and of the ‘rapid change:
of colonial societies which until then were ‘a special type of sociy)
order, in which external political dominance and ethnic sectiona];.
sation are marked features’. But, after this promising opening, they
summed up the subject at its largest as ‘the general processes of
Westernisation’, and with hopes that the change was towards de.
mocracy and meritocracy. From the war until very recently, how
litle has in fact been written on the colonial system in social ap.
thropology and how absent it is from its teaching syllabi is shown
elsewhere in this volume.

Common to all these writers on the use of anthropology seems to
have been a strict limitation of its practical analysis—in the size of
unit studied and the time-scale of prediction—in contrast with the
universalism of their theoretical generalisations and of their moral
attitudes. The intercsts of the subjects of their studies, to whom an-
thropologists often became attached enough to defend, were left to
personal ethics, to a humanitarian, universal morality (of which
only Malinowski tried to make a scientific principle) and to predic-
tions and recommendations on the short-term effects of colonial
policies. Thus they excluded from rational analysis the transforma-
tion of different kinds of social system, and the possibility that the
intercsts of their subjects and the reality of the social forces they
represented meant a total riddance of the sponsoring agencies of an-
thropology. The agents of change were given, not studied. The im-
perially transformed were studied as structures of ideas or relations
that were also empirically there, as natural facts. The contradiction
between studying change without studying the system of change it-
self was resolved by posing change as disintegration and its curc,
re-integration. Neither the subject ‘colonial affairs as such’, nor the
methods for its study were cultivated. Instead, the study of social
change was relegated to a second-class, impure realm. Applied an-
thropology was included if at all in the academic discipline as an
optional subject, and was thought to be less rigorous, and only in
applied anthropology was social change studied.

4. Conclusion

The rejection of history as a science, with the implicit assumption
that such a science must accept a determinist ideology, is, in the
history of anthropology, the moment in which the combination of
EPHAN FEUCHTWANG 97
into the original unity of man with the differentiation of
becomes a combination of the psychic unity of man
with the relativity of cultures and societies, more or less explicitly
.o 3 now unstudied evolutionary scheme. The new com-
cxpfessmg .o . . . . f
pination fits the nced§ of Br}tlsh colonial administration for a prag-
matic knowledge qf its subjects—how we can lfeep t:bcm working
so that they administer themsq:lves. without disrupting our rule.
Origins. history. evolupqn e_md diffusion qf cultu‘re are of no mt.erest
to administration until it is forced by its sgbpcts to recogoise a
history they are making for themselves despite it. But in that case
the administration wants a short-term solution. It wants to over-
come what, to it, is an obstruction of its own interest in an undis-
rupted order of its making and of the interests of competitive
strategy and exploitation of resources and manpower in which it
feels itself in the name of civilisation, trade, the balance of pay-
ments, and devclopment, to be, and in fact is, bound to act.

While British anthropology was still diffusionist, colonial ad-
ministration had to rcly on its own officers’ intelligence reports
among which were some made by government anthropologists.
Even so, government anthropologists and district officers before the
formulation of British social anthropology, although able to report
on language, custom, diet and disease as a series of topics in any
one culture, were less able to make social order as such intelligible.
Whenever the administration had been unable to use or were un-
successful in using a diplomatic, political, or legal handle which it
could recognise, to maintain order and the boundaries of its rule,
such serial and impressionistic reports must have been visibly de-
ficient, since it was the system of law, thc secret of order, which it
needed to know. An anthropology which could produce such
knowledge—and the pre-1950 pride of social anthropology was the
knowledge of the political systems and systems of kinship in which
societies with little or no central administrative handles were ordered
—did in fact replace diffusionist anthropology between the 1920s
and the 1940s.

The influence of social anthropology was probably directly prac-
tical only in the elements of survey information which it provided.
Its colonial formation was not in its success as a useful adjunct to
colonial administration as such, but in conforming to an approach
which seemed attractive and was no threat to it, or at least not to
the reformers and developers in it. To the more reactionary elements
in the colonies and in their administrations anthropologists were, no
doubt, dangerous intruders. To officials and officers of the colonial

inquiry
racial types
98 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSORS

services concerned with immediate action anthropologists wep,
woolly, impractical, utopian. But this need not mislcad us into thip.
ing that anthropology devcloped independently of colonial interegyg
It means that we must specify the colonial interests with which gy,
thropology was most closely identified : it supported the ideology of
the wclfare state in the depressed (for which read tribal) areas of the
colonies. If Lord Hailey was a typical, though promincnt, as well a5
formative sponsor of social anthropology we may see in his writings
onc way in which anthropology provided this support. His surveys
mediated the work of anthropologists to administrative officers. Ip
the war-time report already cited, he drew support from the exper-
tisc of sociologists and anthropologists as a generality, their warn.
ings against undcrestimating the strength of native custom and the
integrity of native social structure, in recommending the develop-
ment of native authoritics for local ‘sclf-government’. After the war
he published Native Administration in the British African Terri-
tories, (4 vols 1950-51, and a 5th in 1953 on the High Commussion
Territories), an expansion of the war-time survey, written ‘to meet
the nced fclt by officers of the African Administrations for infor-
mation rcgarding the practice followed in areas other than thosc
with which they are personally acquainted’. In these volumes social
anthropologists are his chicf refercnces for the African political and
property systems in all the territories surveyed.

The pre-condition for such problems of administration in which
anthropology was needcd is the wide-sprcad establishment of colo-
nial administration itsclf, which rcached its greatest gcographical
cxtent for Britain in thc vears of Joseph Chamberlain and his suc-
cessors, the point of greatest expansion being reached with the distri-
bution of ex-German empire in 1919.

This is the prima facie argument for the existence of an historical
relationship between British social anthropology and British colo-
nial administration in those problematic conditions of administra-
tion which I have specificd above. Evidence of a critical attitude
towards colonial administration being a common feature of social
anthropologists’ writing would not of itsclf contradict thc argument
put forward here, if it is truc that they rarely, if cver, amounted to
an analysis of the administration and of the imperialist system it-
self. Social anthropologists, I argue, did not analyse colonialism,
they reproduced the colonial divide in an inverted form as a colo-
nial ‘us’ intcrpreting or representing a colonized ‘them’. Criticism
commonly amounted to appeals to the given colonial administra-
tion for protection from too sudden change which would bring
about the disintegration of the social order anthropologically ana-
- G 29
STEPHA

1ysed. However well represented, however altruistically, it was done
wi direct rule in Africa was thc mould of British social anthro-

Inct 1t was itself a formalisation of policy at a high administra-
p.ozog])évcl of the British colonial apparatus by administrators
uv ugard and Hailcy) whose previous cxperience and modecl (both
¢ and positive) was the Indian empire. The first field work
founders of British social anthropology was not in Africa
cither, neverthcless t.heu' .advnce was sought mainly in A.fnca and
sponsorship for training given first and foremost for work in Africa.

Indirect rule gave to anthropologists small-scale cultural forma-
tions as units of study to be treatcd. as integratcd and complete
social systems. These units were studied on the one hand as facts
related immediatcly to universal humanity and on the other hand
as matters for reccommendations on short-term effects of colonial
policy. The intercsts of the subjects of the units, through which the
anthropologist might havc analysed himself and the system in
which he came to study them, werc instead treated as matters of
personal ethics or as identical in the long term with the European
colonial valucs of civilisation, modernity, justice, law and order.
Anthropologists never applied the test of rescarch to the practical
condition of rescarch.

It has been pointed out to me in discussion that it could not have
been otherwisc. There was no choice of doing otherwise. This is
true in the colonies only until the time an anti-colonial movement
developed. But in the metropolis this is not so. Long beforc the
period with which we are concerned, both political and theorctical
positions had bcen developed which could exposc the historical
limitations in which the colonics were held.

That anthropological research is uscd, has its application, is rc-
lated to practical action, was not denicd in the pre-war vears. In
the post-war dccades the regional administrations of the imperial
Systcm have been replaced by national governments and the high-
level, metropolitan impcrial apparatus by a Foreign and Common-
wealth Office, a Ministry for Overscas Development and a large
number of advisory missions. Social anthropology has become an
undergraduate, and will shortly become a sixth-form examination
syllabus, and anthropological rescarch is now funded in the main
by an internal government body the Social Science Research Coun-
cil. Though the imperial relations of dominance and dependence
remain, the political system has changed. Internal divisions of
the system have become national divisions. That anthropology has

necga tv
of the
100 THE DISCIPLINE AND ITS SPONSORS

a use is frcquently denied nowadays although the anthropological
research of the colonial era is the mainstay of the first years ¢
teaching. This denial is part of a generally held notion that jt
possible institutionally to pursue knowledge in abstraction. It js g
expression of a more developed institutionalisation of the distanc,
between knowledge and its use, maintained before the war but noy
expressing an even further removal from direct administration thay
the indirect rule of the ‘twenties, ’thirties and ’forties. It is manifegt
in the methodological pride of British social anthropology: field.
work, in which the derivation of knowledge from a practice is cele.
brated but that knowledge is rarely returned to or shared with the
observed in practice; in which the social scientist’s empathy with
his subject-matter is celebrated because the subject-matter is after
all of the same order as himself, but he must do his utmost to re-
press his presence.

The effect of the discipline as it has developed has been to
atomize and universalise the knowledge of total systems sought,
Real participant observation, the comparison of socio-economic
types. an historical science of social formation and of the transition
between types, and the study of imperialism as a system, these are
parts of a social science that could logically have been anthro-
pology, but have not been.
TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEAN
RULE
Talal Asad

I
In order to understand better the relationship between social anth-
ropology and colonialism, it is necessary to go beyond the bound-
arics of the discipline and of the particular epoch within which that
discipline acquired its distinctive character. The descriptive writings
of functional anthropology are largely devoted to Africa, are in
effect virtually synonymous with African sociology during the
twentieth century colonial period. But we need to see anthropology
as a holistic disciplinc nurtured within bourgeois society, having as
its object of study a variety of non-European societics which have
come under its economic, political and intellectual domination—
and thercforc as merely one such discipline among scveral (orien-
talism, indology, sinology, etc.). All these disciplines are rooted in
that complex historical encounter between the West and the Third
World which commenced about the 16th century: when capitalist
Europe began to emerge out of feudal Christendom; when the con-
quistadors who expelled the last of the Arabs from Christian Spain
went on to colonise the New World and also to bring about the
direct confrontation of ‘civilised’ Europe with ‘savage’ and ‘bar-
baric’ peoples;' when the Atlantic maritime states, by dominating
the world’s major scaways, inaugurated ‘the Vasco Da Gama epoch

"““The Americas were therefore the scene of the first true empires controlled
from Europe, and Western imperial theory originated in sixteenth-century
Spain.” P. D. Curun, (ed.) Imperialism, London, 1972, p. xiv. For further
information on this subject, see J. M. Parry, The Spanish Theory of Empire
in the Sixteenth Century, Cambridge, 1940,
104 TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEAN Ry,

of Asian history’;? when the conceptual revolution of Moderp,
science and technology helped to consolidate Europe’s world hege.
mony.? The bourgeois disciplines which study non-European SOC?e.
ties reflect the deep contradictions articulating this unequal hjg.
torical encounter, for ever since the Renaissance the West hyq
sought both to subordinate and devalue other societies, and at the
same time to find in them clues to its own humanity. Although
modern colonialism is merely one moment in that long encounter,
the way in which the objectified understanding of these modern
disciplines has been made possible by and acceptable to thap
moment needs to be considered far more seriously than it has.

The notes that follow constitute an attempt to examine some of
the political conclusions of functional anthropology (African stud-
ies) and of orientalism (Islamic studies) in order to explore the ways
in which the European historical experience of subordinate non-
European peoples has shaped its objectification of the latter. I hope
that such a comparison will make somewhat clearer the kind of
determination exerted by the structure of imperial power on the
understanding of European disciplines which focus on dominated
cultures. Such an attempt is not without its dangers for someone
who is trained in only one of these disciplines, but it must be made
if we are to go beyond simplistic assertions or denials about the
relationship between social anthropology and colonialism. I should
stress that I am not concerned with all the doctrines or conclusions
of functional anthropology—or for that matter of orientalism.

What I propose to do in the rest of. the paper i1s to concentrate
on two general images of the institutionalised relationship between
rulers and ruled, objectified by the functional anthropologist and
the Islamic orientalist. As we shall see, the images are very different,
for the first typically stresses consent and the other repression in the
institutionalised rclationship between rulers and ruled. After sketch-
ing in these two images, I shall go on to indicate significant omis-
sions and simplifications that characterise each of them, and follow
this up with some more general theoretical observations concerning
what they have in common. I shall then turn to the wider historical
location of the two disciplines which, so 1 shall argue in my con-
clusion, help us to understand some of the ideological roots and
consequences of these images.

*Cf. K. M. Panikkar, Asia and Western Dominance, London, 1959.
'Cf. J. D. Bemal, Science in History, London, 1965, especially Part 4.
ALAL ASAD 105
II
[ begin b characterising what I call the functional anthropologist’s
sow Of political domination. - . '
“I eneral, the structure of traditional African states is represen-
nE of balance of powers, reciprocal obligations and value

ted in terms OL ; .
consensus—as 10 the following passage by Fortes and Evans-Prit-

Ch;riélatively stable political system in Africa represents a balance
between divergent interests. In [centralised political systems]
it is a balance between different parts of the administrative
organisation. The forces that maintain the supremacy of the
paramount ruler are opposed by the forces that act as a check
on his powers; [...] A general principle of great importance is
contained in these arrangements, which has the effect of giving
every section and every major interest of the society direct or
indirect representation in the conduct of government [...]
Looked at from another angle, the government of an African
state consists in a balance between power and authority on the
one side and obligation and responsibility on the other [...] The
structure of an African state implies that kings and chiefs rule
by consent.*
Echoes of the same view are also found in a comparatively recent
paper by P. C. Llovd, “The Political Structure of African King-
doms’:
The political elite represent, to a greater or lesser degree, the
interest of the mass of the people. In African kingdoms perma-
nent opposition groups within the political elite are not found [...]
A vote is never taken on any major issue, but all concerned
voice their interests and the king, summing up. gives a
decision which reflects the general consensus.”
This, then is the functional anthropological image of political dom-
ination in the so-called tribal world: an emphasis on the integrated
character of the body politic, on the reciprocal rights and obliga-
tions between rulers and ruled, on the consensual basis of the ruler’s
political authority and administration, and on the inherent efficiency
of the traditional system of government in giving every legitimate
Interest its due representation.
The orientalist’s image of political domination in the historic

‘M. Fortes and E. E. Evans-Pritchard, (eds.), African Political Systems,
London, 1940, pp. 11-12.

‘M. Banton, (ed.), Political Systems and the Distribution of Power, London,
1965, p. 76 and pp. 79-80.
106 TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEA N Rupg

Islamic world is very different. Here there is a tendency to see th
characteristic relationship between rulers and their subjects in lermg
of force and repression on the one side, and of submission, ing;s.
ference, even cynicism on the other. The following brief quotayjgy,
from Gibb’s essay “Religion and Politics in Christianity and Islap,»
illustrates the kind of view I am thinking of:
... [the governor’s] administrative regulations and exactions g
land, industry and persons, and the processcs resorted to by
[their] officers were regarded as arbitrary and without authority
in themselves, and directed only to the furthering of their
private interests. In the eyes of the governed, official ‘justice’
was no justice. The only authoritative law is that of Islam;
everything else is merely temporary (and more or less forced)
accommodating to the whims of a changing constellation of
political overlords.*
A similar kind of image underlies the following remarks by von
Grunebaum:
As an executive officer, thc [Islamicl ruler is unrestricted. The
absoluteness of his power was never challenged. The Muslim
liked his rulers terror-inspiring, and it seems to have been bon
ton to profess oneself awestruck when ushered into his
presence [...1 [The medieval Muslim] is frequently impatient
with his rulers and thinks little of rioting, but on the whole he
is content to let his princes play their game.”
The same author, tracing the political theories of Muslim canonical
jurists writes:
So the requirements of legitimate power had to be redefined with
ever greater leniency, until the low had been rcached and the
theoretical dream [of a civitas dei] abandoncd. The believer
was thought under obligation to obey whosoever held sway, be
his power de jure or merely de facto. No matter how cvil a
tyrant the actual ruler, no matter how offensive his conduct,
the subject was bound to loyal obedience.
He then proceeds, with the aid of further quotations to characterise
what he calls “that disillusionment bordering on cynicism with
which the Oriental is still inclined to view the political life™.
The essential features of this image are to be found in the pion-

‘J. H. Proctor, (ed.). Islam and International Relations, London, 1965, p. 12.
‘G. E. Von Gruncbaum, Islam. Essays in the Nature and Growth of a
Cultural Tradition, London, 1955, pp. 25-6.

*G. E. Von Grunebaum, Medieval Islam, Chicago, 1946, p. 168.
107
’]‘ALAL ASAD
., works of orientalism at the turn of the last century—as in this
qnge by Snouck Hurgronje: ’
passas rulers paid no more attention to the edicts of the fugaha, the
nglLiialists in law, thap suited them; these }ast in their turn,
were less and Jess obliged. to take tl}e requirements of practice
into account. S0 long as they refraxqu from preaching revolt
directly or indirectly against tl}e political rulers, t'h§y werc
ajlowed to criticise the institutions of state and society as
bitterly as they liked. In fact, the works on [religious law] are
rull of disparaging judgements on conditions of ‘the present day’.
What is justice in the eyes of princes and judges is but
injustice and tyranny...Most taxes which are collected by the
government are illegal extortions...; the legally prescribed
revenue...is collected in an illegal manner and spent wrongly...
Muslim rulers, in the eyes of the fugaha, are not the vice regents
of the Prophet as the first four Caliphs had been, but wielders
of a material power which should only be submitted to out of
fear of still worse to follow, and because even a wrongful
order is at least better than complete disorder...[In fact in
Islamic history] the people obeyed their rulers as the wielders
of power, but they rcvered the ulama [learned men of religion]
as the teachers of truth and in troubled times took their lead
from them...In this way. the [religious] law, which in practicc
had to make ever greater concessions to the use and custom
of the people and the arbitrariness of their rulers, nevertheless
retained a considerable influence on the intellectual life of the
Muslims.?
So the orientalist’s image may be characterised briefly as follows:
an emphasis on the absolute power of the ruler, and the whimsical,
generally illegitimate nature of his demands; on the indifference or
involuntary submission on the part of the ruled; on a somewhat
irrational form of conflict in which sudden, irresponsible urges to
riot are met with violent repression; and, finally, an emphasis on the
overall inefficiency and corruption of political lifc.

I
The historical realities, of course, are more complicated than these
views, But the remarkable thing in both cascs is the direction in
which the simplification occurs.

‘Selected Works of C. Snouck Hurgronje, edited by G. H. Bousquet and
J. Schacht, Leiden, 1957. pp. 265 and 267.
108 TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEAN gy,
B

In Africa, a basic political reality since the end of the Nineteey
century was the pervasive presence of a massive colonial poe,
the military conquest of the continent by European capitalist cou;
tries, and the subsequent creation, definition and maintenance
the authority of innumerable African chiefs to facilitate the admip.
istration of empire.’® Everywhere Africans were subordinated in
varying degree, to the authority of European administrators. Apg
although according to functionalist doctrine “Every anthropologig,
writes of the people he works among as he finds them”,** the typicy)
description of local African structures totally ignored the politicg)
fact of European coercive power and the African chief’s ultimate
dependence on it.

For example Fortes’s The Dynamics of Clanship among the Tal-
lensi describes Tale political structure with only a few brief ambig-
uous references to British rule in the introduction and then again in
the final section of the final chapter. Yet in a paper published seven
years earlier (“Culture Contact as a Dynamic Process”) he had
noted that the local District Commissioner among the Tallensi was;

6 miles from a police station, and some 30 miles from a pcrma-

nent administrative headquarters. The political and legal

behaviour of the Tallensi, both commoner and chief, is as
strongly conditioned by the ever-felt presence of the District

Commissioner as by their own traditions{...] The District

Commissioner is in direct communication with the chiefs. To

them he gives his orders and states his opinions. They are the

organs by which he acts upon the rest of the community, and

conversely, by which the community reacts to him.*?
In spite of all this, Fortes had seen the District Commissioner essen-
tially as a “Contact Agent” between European and native cultures,
and not as the local representative of an imperial system. It was
this non-political perception of a profoundly political fact which
led him to assert that the District Commissioner was not regarded
‘““as an imposition upon the traditional constitution from without.
With all that he stands for, he is a corporate part of native life in
this area”.

One might suggest that, in spite of methodological statements to

"For a summary of these developments with special reference to East Africa
(including the southern Sudan) see chapter 11 of L. Mair's Primitive
Government, London, 1962.

L. Mair, op. cit., p. 31.

YMethods of Study of Culture Contact in Africa, International African
Institute Memorandum XV, London, 1938, pp. 634.
109
paLAL ASAD . .
rary functional anthrop.o}oglsls were reglly not analysing
liiical systems but writing .the ideologically loaded con-
: history of African states prior to the European conquest.
Stltutlonal irly help to explain the following remarks by the
. would certainly nelip P g ren y
This v of African Political Systems: “‘Several contributors have
odlwl:;cd the changes in the political systems they investigated
dcs-crﬁ have taken place as a result of European conquest and rule.
Whli do not emphasise this side of the subject it is because all con-
gj.;vutors are more interested in anthropological thar} ix} afiminis-
(rative problems”.'? One rcason why developments in indigenous
olitical structures due to European conquest and rule‘were seen as
«:administrative problems” by European zfnthropologlsts was that
real political forces ip all .thc?ir complexnt.y formed the primary
objects of administrative thinking and mampulatton' on the part of
European colonial officials. Yet the result of identifying the con-
stitutional ideology of ‘centralised” African politics with the struc-
tural reality meant not analysing the intrinsic contradictions of
wer and material interest—a form of analysis which could be
carried out only by starting from the basic reality of present colo-
nial domination.

Even when later anthropologists began to refer to the colonial
presence as part of the local structure they generally did so in such
a way as to obscure the systematic character of colonial domination
and to mask the fundamental contradictions of interest inherent in
the system of Indirect Rule.!* The role of new political-economic
forces brought about by European colonialism (labelled “Social
Change™) were usually not thought to be directly relevant to an
understanding of the dynamic of African political structures opera-
ting within the colonial system of Indirect Rule (labelled “Political
Anthropology”).

With regard to the orientalist’s view of typical Islamic political
rule there are several negative features [ want to point to. The first
1S that no serious attempt was made until relatively recently!® to

the COﬂt

:M. Fortes and E. E. Evans-Pritchard, op. cit., p. 1.

For example L. A. Fallers in his well-known study of the Basoga of
Uganda, Bantu Bureaucracy, (Cambridge, 1956) focuses on the way in
which “co-existence in a society of corporate lineages with political in-
stitutions of the state type [introduced by the colonial government] makes
for strain and instability” (p. 17)—an essentially Parsonian problem. He is
not concerned with the colonial system as such, but with role conflicts
inherent in the positions of African headman and civil-servant chief, and
European District officers.

“An example is I. Lapidus’s excellent monograph Muslim Cities in the Later
Middle Ages, Cambridge, Mass., 1967.
110 TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEAN RULE

explore in detail the process of mutual accommodation between
Islamic rulers and their subjects—as noted, surprisingly enough, ,
Gibb, who has been so ready elsewhere to project the orientaliy
image of Islamic rule:
We know, in fact, exceedingly little of the inner relations betweep
the government and the people... It can scarcely be doubted
that government, in its administrative aspect, was not merely
a set of forms imposed upon the people by the will of the
conqueror, but an organism intimatecly associated with the
structure of society and the character and ideas of the
governcd, and that there was a constant interplay between
governors and governed. It is necessary to clear the ground of
the misconceptions engendcred by the abuse of European terms
such as despotism and autocracy, and to submit all the
traditional organs and usages of government to rc-cxamination,
in order to bring out the underlying ideas and relations, and thc
principles which guided their working.!*
But something that we do know a little about is the populist tradi-
tion in Muslim societies as expressed in thc repeated popular re-
volts'™ deriving their legitimation from Islamic ideology, as well as
in the popular distrust of aristocratic institutions'® (which is by no
means the same thing as “oricntal cynicism in relation to political
life’’). Most oricntalists have tended to sec these revolts as evidence
of disorder and dccay rather than as the re-affirmation of a populist
tradition in Islamic politics.'> Why, instcad of emphasising disorder
and repression and explaining this by reference to an intrinsic flaw
in Islamic political thcory (usually invidiously contrasted with
Greek and Christian political theory) did oricntalists not attempt
to account for the continuing vitality of a populist tradition within
changing socio-economic circumstances? More important, why,

“H. A. R. Gibb and H. Bowen, Islumic Society and the West, Vol. 1, Part
1, London, 1950, p. 9.

'“Arab historiography from Taban to Jabarti is full of information on these
revolts. Useful summaries of revolts in the carly period of Islam are avail-
able in W. Montgomery Walt, Islam and the Integraiion of Society, Lon-
don. 1961. For a work on working-class organisation and rebellion in
medieval urban Islamic society, sce C. Cahen, Mouvement Populaires ci
Autonomisme Urbain dans I' Asie Musulmane du Moyen Age, Leiden, 1961.
But in both works there is little discussion of the dialectical relationship
between political-economic expcrience and ideological response—although
Montgomery Watt makes some attempt in that direction.

"This point s interestingly made by M. G. S. Hodgson, “Islam and Image™”,
in History of Religions, Vol. I, Winter, 1964,

"Scc E. Abrahamian. “The Crowd in Iranian Politics 1905-1953" (Past and
Present, no. 41, 1968) for an attempt at describing thc active rationality of
TALAL ASAD 1
eneralising about thc cssence of Islamic political rule, did
when glists not recognise that their textual sources represented the
Orlcr‘utlllar moral stance of a mobile class of religious literati-cum-
partl‘;ams with a nced for political orderliness in particular periods
Ir}crcrc:at social upheaval? Finally, why did oricntalists make no
Ottegmpt to analyse the way in which devcloping class relations
i’ithin Jlate medicval Islam were affected by 'its changing commer-
cial position vis-a-vis E}lropc and Asna.(es.pecnally under the impact
of Europcan mercantilism) and t}lc significance 9f suc.h devg:lop-
ments for relations between Islamic rulers and their subjects?*

v
Decspite the great diffcrences in the images I have becn talking
about, onc pre-disposition that both disciplines appear to have
shared is the reluctance to talk explicitly and systematically about
the implications of European development for the political systems
of non-European societics. There are other parallels also, in the
orientation of the two disciplines, to which I now turn.

The functional anthropologist stresscd consent and legitimacy as
important clements in the political systems of relatively small homo-
gencous ethnic groups in Africa whose history was assumed in most
cascs to be inaccessible, and which were seen and rcpresented as
intcgrated sysicms. In general he equated cmpirical work with field-
work, and therefore tendcd to define the theoretical boundaries of
the system undcr investigation in terms of practical fieldwork. His
interest in a-historical, ‘traditional’ systems (set within an imperial
framework which was taken for granted) lcd him to emphasise the
unifying function of common religious values and symbols, and of
‘agc-old’ custom and obligations in the relationship between tribal
rulers and ruled. Where the anthropologist was faced with availablc

political crowds in the modern Islamic world. (I am indebted to Peter
Worsley for this reference.) “While European journalists have invariably
portrayed oricntal crowds as ‘xenophobic mobs’ hurling insults and bricks
at Western embassies.” observes Abrahamian, “local conservatives have
frequenily denounced them as “social scum’ in the pay of the foreign hand,
and radicals have often stereotyped them as ‘the people’ in action. For all,
the crowd has been an abstraction, whether worthy of abusc, fear, praisc,
or even of humour, but not a subject of study.” (p. 184). It seems that
sometimes there is little to distinguish the attitudes of European journalists
from that of orientalists.

“Social and economic history of the Tslamic world is in its infancy (see
M. A. Cook (ed.). Studics in the Economic History of the Middle East,
London, 1970)—an indication of the extent to which idealist explanations
in tzrms of “the religious essence of Islam” have been in vogue among
oricntalists. This is not unrelated to the fact that orientalists have typically
worked on composed literary texts and not in archives. See also R. Owen's
112 TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEAN RULg

historical evidence relating to conqucst—as among the Zuly ang
Ngoni of southern Africa, or among the Fulani-Hausa of Northery
Nigeria—he was of course aware of the importance of force apg
repression in African political history. But the functionalist per.
spective made it difficult for him to absorb the full significance of
such events into his analysis and so they were generally seen as pre.
ludes to the establishment of integrated on-going African politicg)
systems which constituted his principal object of enquiry. It is com.
mon knowledge that this mode of analysis in social anthropology
derives from Durkheimian sociology, which never really developed
an adequate framework for understanding historical political pro.
cesses. The interesting thing is that for a long time the social anthro.
pologist writing about African political systems felt no need to
overcome these theoretical limitations. The role of force in the
maintenance of African systems of political domination (or of the
colonial system of which they were a part) received virtually no
systematic attention. The primary focus was usually on the juridi-
cal definition of rights and duties between the chief and his sub-
jects.?!

At this point it should bc noted that the orientalist’s image of
political rule in Islamic society covers a historical span of several
hundred years, from the middle ages (the so-called formative period
of Islam) until the eighteenth century—a period of economic devel-
opment and decline, of conquests and dynastic wars, and rule by
successive military elites, notably Mamluke and Ottoman. The
orientalist, concerned to present a relatively coherent picturc of
typical rule for such an epoch, could scarcely leave the element of
force unmentioned. But the interesting point is that the element of
force is not only mentioned, it is made the defining feature of the
total political picture, which is then sometimes contrasted with the

critical review of The Cambridge History of Islam in The Journal of Inter-
disciplinary History (in press).

“'This is also true of Gluckman, who is usually cited as being one of the first
anthropologists to have dealt directly with problems of force and conflict in
traditional African societies. Gluckman’s view of conflict has typically been
a junistic, legalistic one, whence his particular interest in “discrepant and
conflicting rules of succession” which he sees as the primary focus of tradi-
tional African rebellions” (See his Introduction to Order and Rebellion in
Tribal Africa, London, 1963). For this reason he fails to mrake an analytic
distinction between ‘popular’ armed uprisings and dynastic rivalries. The
question as to whether a particular internal military challenge against the
state's authority is rooted in (actual or potential) class consciousness is
more basic than the task of labelling it ‘rebellion’ or ‘revolution’. His failure
to appreciate this helps to explain why Gluckman paid no attention to the
question of African popular rebellions against European colonial rule.
TALAL ASAD 113
dly different character of political rule in Medieval Christen-
allegeC> ion being that since Islamic society lacked a t
(The suggestion being that since Islamic society lacked a true
om. stion of political authority, i.e., of political domination based
Congcral consent. it was inevitable that force should play such a
on 81 ole in the Tslamic political order).*
Cc{}-hc orientalist concerned to generalise was here faced with a
thcorctical problem with which the functioqal anthropologi.st hqs
not been much troubled. For the anthropologist reared on a-histori-
cal Durkheimian soc:ology, society .and po!lty were usually coter-
minous. The horizontal links of ‘tribal society’ were conveniently
definable in terms of the vertical links (whether hierarchical or seg-
mentary) of ‘tribal political organisation’. But for the orientalist
concerned with Islam there was hardly ever such a convergence
after the de facto break up of the Abbasid Empire. So in his desire
(o characterise a distinctive ‘Islamic societly’. on the basis of a con-
siderablec body of textual material relating to many eventful cen-
turies, he is led to adopt a partly functionalist perspective: for the
emphasis on the integrative role of Islam as a religion is reminiscent
of the social anthropologist’s treatment of the integrative function
of ‘tribal’ religious values in many African political systems. Isla-
mic history thus collapscs into an essentialist synchrony. for much
the same rcasons as African history does in the hands of the func-
tional anthropologist.

Since the orientalist is concerned by definition with ‘a society’ of
much complexity, hc must stress what may be called a form of
horizontal integration: the fact that Muslims seemed bound to-
gether, despite their subjection to different sccular rulers, by their
common loyalty to Islam as a religious system—an Islam which
was interpreted by, and indecd embodicd in, an ‘international’
community of learned men—the ulama, the sufi shaikhs and so
forth. This horizontal religious consensus is then opposed by the
orientalist to a vertical political dissensus, in which “everything elsc
1s merely temporary and more or less forced accommodation to the
whims of a changing constcllation of political overlords”. This con-
trast between an intcgrated Islamic society and a fragmented Isla-
mic polity has encouraged orientalists to oppose the supposedly
universal authority of the sharia (Islamic law) to the changing con-
stellation of political regimes and practices, often accompanied by

“See Gibb in Proctor (ed.), op. cit.
114 TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEA N RULE

violence—an opposition with which the medieval Muslim Writer
were themselves much preoccupied. In fact it may be argueq tha
insofar as the modern orientalists can be said to have an explicy
interpretive theory, this is largely quarried from the historicyy,
conditioned writings of the great medieval Muslim theorists—jy,
Khaldun, Mawardi, ibn Taymiyya. The result is a remarkable byy,.
ring between historical object and interpreting subject.

My suggestion here is that ultimately the functional anthropol,,.
gist and the orientalist were concerned with the same theoreticy]
question: what holds society together? How is order achieved o
destroyed? The former, viewing ‘tribal’ society as defined by (nor.
mative) polity, focussed on the consensual relations between Afri.
can rulers and ruled. The latter, viewing sharia-defincd society ag
fragmented by (secular) polity, focused on the repressive relations
between Islamic rulers and ruled.

\
I have been trying to argue that both functional anthropology and
orientalism, by selecting certain phenomena, by not asking certain
questions, by approaching history in a certain way, by taking the
problem of social order as their basic theoretical concern. tended to
project characteristic images of the political structure of the non-
European societies they studied. I am now going to suggest that the
historical formation of these European disciplines helps us under-
stand better why the selection and omission occured as thev did.

What I want to emphasise here is this: that in contrast to the
modem discipline of Islamic orientalism. functional anthropology
was born after the advent of European colonialism in the societics
studied—after, that is, the First World War when the Pax Britannica
had made intensive and long-term fieldwork a practicable proposi-
tion.

Tribal rulers could be viewed as representative partly because the
anthropologist in the field coming from a crisis-ridden Europe, ex-
perienced them as conforming to ‘traditional’ political norms (as
these had come to be underwritten by a paternalist colonial admin-
istration), Colonial ideology generally stressed the essential con-
tinuity, and therefore the integrity, of African political cultures
under colonial rule. The anthropologist, it may be argued, was pre-
pared to accept the total colonial system (while quarrelling with
particular colonial policies in relation to ‘his tribe’) because he was
impressed by its obvious success in maintaining itself and in secur-
ing an apparently benign form of local order within the ethnic
115

TALAL ASAD

he observed so intimately. He was concerned, as the Euro-
grovP dministrators for their own reasons were equally concerned,
pear amw&ﬁng subordinate African cultures, and was therefore
with ged to accept the colonial definition of African polities, and to
t definition in terms of consent. (Consider to what extent
this image has begun to b}'eak 40wn with decolonisation in the *60s.)
The point is that un}xke nineteenth century anthropo}ogy. the
objectification of functional anthropologists occured within the
context of routine colonialism, of an imperial structure of power
already established rather than one in process of vigorous expansion
:n which political force and contradiction are only too obvious.
Orientalism belongs to a different historical moment, and its
methods, assumptions and pre-occupations are rooted in the Euro-
n experience of Islam prior to the advent of Western colonialism
in the Middle East. Among the cultural forebears of the modern
orientalists were the medieval Christian polemicists who sought to
defend the values of Christendom against the threat of Islam.?
Although modern orientalists rarely engage in overt propaganda,
and have adopted a more secular and detached tone, they have still
been concerned to contrast Islamic society and civilisation with their
own, and to show in what the former has been lacking. In particular,
they have been concerned to cmphasise the absence of ‘liberty’,
‘progress’ and ‘humanism’ in classic Islamic societies, and in general
to relate the reasons for this alleged absence to the religious essence
of Islam.?¢ Thus in contrast to the social anthropologist whose in-
tention has often been to show that the rationality of African cul-
tures is comprehensible to (and thercfore capable of being accom-
modated by) the West, the orientalist has been far more occupied
with emphasising the basic irrationality of Islamic history.
Norman Daniel, in his valuable study /slam, Europe and Empire,

restate tha

“Sec N. Daniel, Islam and the West, The Making of an Image, Edinburgh,
1960; and R. W. Southern, Western Views of Islam in the Middle Ages,

_Cambridge, Mass., 1962.

“Thus the influential orientalist von Grunebaum: “It is cssential to realise
that Muslim oivilisation is a cultural entity that does not share our primary
aspirations. It is not vitally interested in analytical self-understanding, and
it is even less interested in the structural study of other cultures, cither as
an cnd in itself or as a means toward clearer understanding of its own
character and history. If this observation were to be valid merelv for con-
temporary Islam, onc might be inclined to connect it with the profoundly
disturbed state of Islam, which does not permit it 1o look beyond itself
unless forced to do so. But as it is valid for the past as well, one may
perhaps seek to oonnect it with the basic antihumanism of this civilisation,
that is, the determined refusal to accept man to any extent whatever as
the arbiter or the measure of things, and the tendency to be satisfied with
116 TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEAN Ry

(Edinburgh, 1966) has traced the European cxpcrience of Isia._
and especially of the aggressive Ottoman Empire of the sixteeny,
and seventeenth centuries—which helped to fashion its image of the
tyrannical Islamic polity in the nineteenth century. He suggests thay
the three most important elements in this experience were fear of
Turkish power, the absence of a Muslim gentry and the subordinae
position of Muslim women. “To the mind of aristocratic Europe™.
Daniel writes, “tyranny was common to all three—to the extcrna]
threat, to a polity internally servile and to an enslavement of
women. As time passed, there was increasing communication with
eastern countries and gradually, as the centres of power in the
world shifted, fear gave way to patronage”. (p. 11). But the image
of a tyrannical Ottoman structure, as Daniel gocs on to show,
remained unquestioned throughout the nineteenth century, and be-
came reinforced through the special notion of Islamic misrule —ip
the double sense of incfficient government and fiscal oppression
(both, he might have added, grave sins in the eyes of a sclf-con.
sciously progressive capitalist Europe).

It was towards the end of the nineteenth century on the eve of
massive imperial expansion, that the foundations of modern oricn-
lalism were laid.?® The literary, philological method of his study
(based on chronicles and treatises acquirced from Islamric countries
and deposited in Europecan libraries) meant that thc orientalist had
little need for direct contact with the people whose historical culture
he objectified, and no necessary interest in its continuity. In so far
as he addressed himself to the contemporary condition of Islamic
peoples, he saw in it a rcflection of his idealist vision of Islamic
history—rcpression, corruption and political decay.

Most members of the European middle classes beforc the First
World War viewed the imperialist ambitions of their governments
as natural and desirable.*" In keeping with these attitudes the opin-
ions that prevailed among them regarding prospective or recent
victims of colonial conqucst were usually highly unflattering. This

truth as the description of mental structures, or, in other words, with
psvchological truth.” Modern Islam, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1962, p. 40.
For an cxtremely intcresting response by a Muslim intellectual see Moham-
mcd Arkoun, “L’lIslam modernec vu par le professeur G. E. von Grune-
vaum” in Arabica, vol. x1, 1964.

“Cf. C. ). Adams, “Islamic Religion™” (Part I), in Middle East Studies Asso-
ciation Bulletin, vol. 4, no. 3, October 15, 1970, p. 3.

“Cf. H. Gollwitzer, Europe in the Age of Imperialism: 1880-1914, London,
1969. For a study of British public opinion in relation to events preceding
the British occupation of Egypt in 1882, see H. S. Deighton’s excellent
article, “The Impact on Egypt on Britain”, in P. M. Holt, (ed.), Political
TALAL ASAD 117

s as true of Asia as it was of Africa in the latter half of the nine-

h century.”” In this period, influential writers such as Ranke
teent . . .

d Burkehardt, Count Gobineau apd Benan. alth.ough. in d1§agree-
aﬂem on important matters, were significantly united in their con-
g;mptuous views of Islam.?® In this respect, their perspective was
not profoundly different from th'z.rt of the founders of modern orien-
ralism—e.g. Wellhausen and Noéldeke,”* Becker and Snouck Hur-
gronje.” It would have been surprising had it been othem{lsc.
[ eonc Caetani, an Italian aristocrat, was exceptional among orien-
ralists in condemning European colonial expansion into Islamic
countries.’* In his commitment to empire and the White Man’s
Burden, Snouck Hurgronje was far morc typical.*?

The orientalist’s image of repressive relations between Islamic
rulers and their subjects is thus rooted not only in the historic
Christian experience of aggressive Islam (an experience the West
had never had in relation to Africa),’® but more importantly in the
bourgeois European evaluation of ‘unprogressive’ and ‘fanatical’
Islam that required to be directly controlled for reasons of empire.

As recent rulers of vast Muslim populations, the imperialist rulers
could attempt to legitimise their own governing position with argu-
ments supplied by the orientalists: that Islamic rule has historically
been oppressive rule (colonial rule is by contrast humane), that
Islamic political theory recognises the legitimacy of the effective
de facto ruler (colonial rule is manifestly better than the corruption,
inefficiency and disorder of pre-colonial rule), that political domina-
tion in Muslim lands is typically external to the essential articula-
tion of Islamic social and religious life (therefore no radical damage
has been done to Islam by conquering it as its central political
tradition remains unbroken).®*

It is therefore at this ideological level, I would suggest, that the

_and Social Change in Modern Egypt, London, 1968,

“Cf. V. G. Kiermman. The Lords of Human Kind, London, 1969, and the
_documentary collection edited by P. D. Curtin, op. cit.

*Cf. J. W. Fuck, “Islam as an Historical Problem in European Historio-
graphy Since 1800” in B. Lewis and P. M. Holt, (eds.), Historians of the
_Middle East, London, 1962,

*J. W. Fiick, op. cit.

‘]Cgf6 2J .—J. Waardenburg, L'Islam dans le miroir de I'occident, The Hague,

1. W. Fiick, op. cit. For further details on Prince Caetani, see A. Bausani,
‘l‘gssl_:;mic Studies in Italy in the XIX-XX cc.” in East and West, vol. VIII,

"With respect to Holland’s colonial role in Indonesia, Snouck Hurgronje
wrote: “Il ne s’agit que d’eveiller une prise de conscience...considerant que
l'independence de la vie spirituelle et la libération de son développment de
118 TWO EUROPEAN IMAGES OF NON-EUROPEAN Ry

two objectifications of political rule again converge. For the orijey,.
talist’s construct, by focusing on a particular image of the Islam;.
tradition, and the anthropologist’s, by focusing on a particuly,
image of the African tradition, both helped to justify colonial dom,.
ination at particular moments in the power encounter between the
West and the Third World. No doubt, this ideological role was per.
formed by orientalism and by functional anthropology largely un.
wittingly. But the fact remains that by refusing to discuss the way,
in which bourgeois Europe had imposed its power and its own
conception of the just political order on African and Islamic
peoples, both disciplines were basically reassuring to the colonia)
ruling classes.

de toute pression matérielle est I'une des plus grandes bénédictions de notre
civilisation. Nous nous sentons pousses par un z¢le missionaire de |a
meilleure sorte afin de faire participer le monde musulman 24 oette satis-
faction.” This was what ultimately justified colonialism: “Notre domina-
tion doit se justifier par l'accession des indigénes a une civilisation plus
élevée. Ils doivent acquérir parmi les peuples sous notre direction la place
que méritent leurs qualités naturelles.”” Quoted in J.—J. Waardenburg,
op. cit., pp- 101 and. 102. See also W. F. Wertheim, “Counter-insurgency
research at the turn of the century—Snouck Hurgronje and the Acheh
War”, in Sociologische Gids, vol. XIX, September/December 1972, (I am
grateful to Ludowik Brunt for this last reference.)

“For a discussion about the various elements that went into the making of
European views about Africa at the end of the eighteenth century and the
first half of the nineteenth, see P. D. Curtin, The Image of Africa, London,
1965. According to Curtin this earlier image was on the whole far more
favourable than the one prevalent in the latter part of the nineteenth cen-
tury—i.c. on the eve of the Partition of Africa.

“The orientalist’s image is still very much alive and still rooted in a structurc
of sentiments remarkably akin to that displayed by the founders. (“Al-
though there are exceptions,” observes C. J. Adams in his survey article,
“in the cases of individuals or particular fields of study (Sufism, for ex-
ample, or Islamic Art and Architecture), to be sure, on the whole one is
struck with the negative tone—or if negative be too strong a word, with the
tone of personal disenchantment—that runs through the majority of [orien-
talist] writing about Muslim faith.” Op. cit., p. 3). I attribute this persis-
tence to the fact that despite profound changes in the world since the late
nineteenth century, the power encounter between the West and the Mus-
lim countries continues to express itself typically in the form of hostile con-
frontations (for reasons too involved to discuss here) and the methods and
techniques of orientalism as a discipline, with its basic reliance on philo-
logical analysis, remain unaffected. These facts and not mere ‘excellence’
account for the continuity noted by Adams: ‘““In fact, basic ninefeenth-
century Islamic scholarship was so competent and exhaustive that it has
intimidated many later scholars from at‘tem?ting re-examinations of funda-
mental issues. Much of what the pioneers of Islamology wrote has scarcely
been improved upon, not to say superseded; it has merely been transmitted
and continues to be the most authoritative scholarship we possess in many
fields.” (loc. cit.). Of how many other historical or social science disciplines
can such a statement be made?
Part 2: Case Studies
SOCIAL ANTHROPOLOGY AND INDIRECT RULE. THE
