i A0 FH Ll e e e =y , . ; T # LT M g ol e : TSI P TNy
; &

~
X ,

Anthropology
& the Colonial Encounter
Anthropology
& the Colomial

Encounter
Edited by Talal Asad

Ithaca Press: London
Humanities Press: Atlantic Highlands, N.J.
First edition printed & published
by Ithaca Press and Humanities
Press

Reprint 1975 by Ithaca Press
and Humanities Press

© The Authors 1973
Printed in The United States of America
ISBN 0-903729-00-8 Library Edition

ISBN 0-903729-01-6 Paperback Edition
U.S.A. ISBN 0-391-00391-7 Paperback edition
+

.+

Contents

21
23

4]
71
103

121
123

153

173

199

223

245

259

273
285

Talal Asad: Introduction

Part 1: General Studies

Peter Forster: A Review of the New Left Critique of Social
Anthropology

Wendy James: The Anthropologist as reluctant Imperialist
Stephan Feuchtwang: The Discipline and its Sponsors
Talal Asad: Two European Images of Non-European Rule

Part 2: Case Studies

Helen Lackner: Colonial Administration and Social
Anthropology : Eastern Nigeria 1920-1940

Jame$ Fans: Pax Britannica and the Sudan: S F Nadel
Richard Brown: Anthropology and Colonial Rule: Godfrey
Wilson and the Rhodes-Livingstone Institute, Northern
Rhodesia

John Clammer: Colonialism and the Perception of Tradition
in Fiji

Roger Owen: Imperial Policy and Theories of Social Change:
Sir Alfred Lyall in India

Roy Willis: An Indigenous Critique of Colonialism: The Fipa
of Tanzania

Abdel Ghaffar M Ahmed: Some Remarks from the Third
World on Anthropology and Colonialism. the Sudan

Philip Marfleet: Bibliographical Notes on the Debate
Index
INTRODUCTION
Talal Asad

British functional anthropology began to emerge as a distinctive
discipline shortly after the First World War through the efforts of
Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown, but it was not until after the
Second World War that it gained an assured academic status in the
universities. Compared with the two decades before the Second
World War an enormous quantity of anthropological writing was
published in the two decades after it. Within this brief period its
claim to academic respectability was virtually unchallenged. By
1961 a prominent sociologist could write that ‘‘social anthropology
is, among other things, a small but I think flourishing profession.
The subject, like social work and unlike sociology, has prestige’.*
A few years later a political scientist contrasted social anthropology
favourably with sociology, declaring that unlike the latter, but
like the other bona fide social sciences, social anthropology ‘‘had
built up a body of knowledge which cannot readily be described as
anything else”.?

Functional anthropology had barely secured its enviable academic
reputation when some serious misgivings began to make themselves
felt from within the established profession. In 1961, Leach claimed
that ‘“functionalist doctrine [has] ceased to carry conviction™.® Five
years later Worsley wrote his trenchant critique under the signifi-

'Donald G. Macrae, Ideology and Society, London, 1961, p. 36.

’\b’}?. Cis Runc;man, “Sociologese™ in Encounter, December, 1965, Vol. XXYV.
0. 6, p. 47.

‘E. R. Leach, Rethinking Anthropology, London, 1961, p. 1.
INTRODUCTION 10

cant title “The End of Anthropology?”’ By 1970 Needham was
arguing that social anthropology ‘“has no unitary and continuous
past so far as ideas are concerned”, ‘“Nor is there any such thing
as a rigorous and coherent body of theory proper to social anthro-
pology”. A vear later Ardener observed that, ‘“‘something has
already happened to British anthropology (and to international
anthropology in related ways such that for practical purposes text-
books which looked useful, no longer are; monographs which used
to appear exhaustive now seem selective; interpretations which once
looked full of insight now seem mechanical and lifeless”.?

The plausibility of the anthropological enterprise which seemed
so self-evident to all its practitioners a mere decade ago, is now no
longer quite so self-evident. A small minority, apart from the names
just mentioned, has begun to articulate its doubts in radical terms.*

What has happened to British social anthropology?

At the organisational level nothing very disturbing has happened.
On the contrary, the Association of Social Anthropologists
flourishes as never before; it holds annual academic conferences
whose proceedings are regularly published in handsome hardcover
and paperback editions. Monographs, articles and text-books by
writers calling themselves anthropologists appear in increasing
number. A prestigious series of annual lectures on social anthro-
pology has recently been launched under the auspices of the British
Academy. The subject is now taught in more university and college
departments than ever; the profession is even negotiating to intro-
duce it as a sixth-form ,option in schools. Seen in terms of its public
activity, there is no crisis in social anthropology.

On the whole, professional leaders of British anthropology are
not impressed by alarmist talk about crisis.” They would maintain,
if pressed, that as the older ideas of social anthropology became
exhausted, it was natural that one should turn to fresh sources of
supply.® So they prefer to talk of increasing specialisation, which

‘Rodney Needham, ‘“The Future of Social Anthropology: Disintegration
or Metamorphosis?™ in Anniversary Contributions 1o Anthropology :
Twelve Essays, Leiden, 1970, p. 36 and p. 37.

*Edwin Ardener, “The New Anthropology and its Critics” in Man N. S.
Vol. 6, No. 3, September 1971, p. 449.

*The most interesting of these include Banaji, “Crisis in British Anthro-
pology”, New Left Review, No. 64, 1970, Copans, “Pour une histoire et
une sociologie des études Africaines”, Cahiers des études Africaine, No. 43,
1971, and Leclerc, Anthropologie et Colonialisme, Paris, 1972.

‘See for example I. M. Lewis, Introduction to History and Social Anthro-
pology, London, 1968, p. xv.

*It is this line of reasoning that Firth adopts to explain and endorse the
TALAL ASAD 11

they see as a sign of the intellectual vitality of the profession.” And
more positively, they affirm that classic functionalist assumptions
are still viable.*?

Yet we would be well-advised not to be too easily persuaded by
such bland assurances. After all, it is a tendency of establishment
leaders to maintain at least the myth if not the reality of smooth
continuity. There can be no doubt that at the ideological level
something has indeed ‘‘already happened to British anthropology™
as Ardener put it, although this event is better seen as a disintegra-
tion of the Old Anthropology rather than as a crystallization of the
New.

There was a time when social anthropology could and did define
itself unambiguously as the study of primitive societies. ““The scope
of any science’, wrote Nadel shortly after the Second World War,
“‘is to obtain and extend knowledge. In social anthropology as it is
commonly understood we attempt to extend our knowledge of man
and society to ‘primitive’ communities, ‘simpler peoples’, or ‘pre-
literate societies’. . . If an anthropologist asks naively why, if we are
only interested in studying society writ large, we should turn to
primitive cultures rather than our own civilization ... the answer is
simply that our own society is not the only one, and its phenomena
not the same as those found, or apt to be found, in primitive
society’.!! Statements of this kind do not indicate a very sophisti-
cated concern for the definition of a problematic, but they reflected
an element of pragmatic truth, and it was this that gave social an-
thropology a practical plausibility. When Evans-Pritchard published
his well-known Introduction to Social Anthropology in 1951, it
seemed reasonably clear what the subject was about. “The social
anthropologist”, he explained, “studies primitive societies directly,
living among them for months or years, whereas sociological re-
search is usually from documents and largely statistical. The social
anthropologist studies societies as wholes—he studies their oecolo-
gies, their economics, their legal and political institutions, their
family and kinship organizations, their religions, their technologies,

recent anthropological interest in Marx, in his British Academy lecture
The Sceptical Anthropologist? Social Anthropology and Marxist Views on
Society, London, 1972,

*See for example the Introduction by Max Gluckman and Fred Eggan to
mlhc first four volumes in the ASA Monographs series.

See for example Social Science Research Council's Research in Social
uAmhrcu)o»logy, London, 1968.

S. F. Nadel, The Foundations of Social Anthropology. London, 1953, p. 2.
INTRODUCTION 12

their arts, etc., as parts of general social systems™.* The doctrines
and approaches that went by the name of functionalism thus gave
social anthropology an assured and coherent style.

Today by contrast even this coherence of style is absent. The
anthropologist now is someone who studies societies both ‘simple’
and ‘complex’; resorts to participant observation, statistical tech-
niques, historical archives and other literary sources; finds himself
intellectually closer to economists or political scientists or psycho-
analysts or structural linguists or animal behaviourists than he does
to other anthropologists. To describe this state of affairs in terms of
scholarly specialization is surely to indulge in mystification. The
‘cognate disciplines’ of politics, economics, etc., have been in exist-
ence from long before the classical functionalist phase of social
anthropology. The question that must be asked is, why was it only
comparatively recently that they have been discovered by anthro-
pologists? Why is it, for example, that in 1940 anthropologists could
write: ‘“We have not found that the theories of political philo-
sophers have helped us to understand the societies we have studied
and we consider them of little scientific value™;'* and in 1966: “We
consider that the time is ripe for a dialogue, if not for marriage be-
tween anthropology and the other disciplines concerned with com-
parative politics”.’* What made the time ripe? How was it that the
separate disciplines (economics, politics, jurisprudence, etc.) which
reflected the fragmented self-understanding of bourgeois society.
with its own historical contradictions, were ready to inspire anthro-
pology?

The answer 1 would suggest is to be sought in the fact that since
the Second World War, fundamental changes have occurred in the
world which social anthropology inhabits, changes which have
affected the object, the ideological support and the organisational
base of social anthropology itself. And in noting these changes we
remind ourselves that anthropology does not merely apprehend the
world in which it is located, but that the world also determines how
anthropology will apprehend it.

The attainment of political independence by colonial, especially
African countries in the late *S0s and the early ’60s accelerated the
trend, apparent since the war, of socio-economic change, involving

“E. E. Evans-Pritchard, Social Anthropology, London, 1951, p. 11.

“"M. Fortes and E. E. Evans-Pritchard, (eds.), African Political Systems,
London, 1940, p. 4.

“M. J. Swartz, V. W. Tumer, A. Tuden, (eds.), Political Anthropolagy,
Chicago, 1968, p. 9.
TALAL ASAD 13

these countries in the planned development of national networks of
communications, electrification and broadcasting; the promotion
of education and of rural improvement projects; the shift of
political power from ‘tribal’ leaders to the nationalistic bourgeoisie.
Mainly as a consequence of nationalist expectations, scholars
began to recover an indigenous history.'> Some nationalist writers
denounced the colonial connections of anthropology. Thus increas-
ingly the larger political-economic system thrust itself obtrusively
into thg anthropologist’s framework, as did the relevance of the
past, both colonial and pre-colonial. At another level, mounting
criticism of the functionalist tradition in American mainstream
sociology contributed indirectly towards the undermining of func-
tionalist doctrine in British social anthropology.!® Since it had never
adequately clarified the distinction between a totalising method (in!
which the formation of parts is explained with reference to a
developing structure of determinations) and cthnographic holism
(in which the different ‘institutions’ of a society are all described
and linked one to another);'” and since it had in general confused
structural determination with simultancity, concrete devclopments
in the world outside pushéd Turictional anthropology until it collap-
sed into micro-sociology. So it is that today most anthropologists
have choscn to re-orient themselves in relation to a multitude of
fragmentary problems—political, economic, domestic, cultic, etc.—
at a ‘small-scale’ level, and have found in this state of fragmenta-
tion their sense of intellectual direction provided for them by their
relevant ‘cognate discipline’. These changes in the object of study
and in the ideological supports of social anthropology might by
themselves have led to a disintegration of the discipline, but the
same post-war period witnessed a significant development in the
organisational base of social anthropology which saved it. In 1946

“Partly by challenging the functional anthropologist’s dogma that only
written records could provide a reliable basis for reconstructing history.
Cf. J. Vansina's Oral Tradition, a Study in Historical Methodvlogy, Lon-
don, 1965, originally published in French in 1961. The general tendency
of functional anthropology was to assimilate indigenous history lo the
category of myth—i.e. to view it in tecrms of instrumentality rather than of

Llruth in the classical non-pragmatist sensc.

"Leading sociologists in America,—e.g. Parsons, Mecrton, Homans—had al-
ways taken an active and sympathctic intercst in British social anthropo-
logy, and their wrilings in turn were a source of inspiration and support to
funotional anthropologists. The attack on American structural-functionalism
by such writers as R, Dahrendorf and C. Wright Mills was therefore bound

Lo affect the doctrinal self-confidence of British social anthropology.

"That this distinction remains unclear to many anthropotogists even today
1s apparcnt from the over-confident remarks of Levi-Strauss in his polemic
14 INTRODUCTION

the Association of Social Anthropologists of the British Common-
wealth (ASA) was founded with under 20 members; by 1962 the
membership had risen to over 150, “even though election to mem-
bership required normally both the holding of a teaching or a
research post in the Commonwealth and the attainment of either
a post-graduate degree (usually a doctorate) or substantial publica-
tions™.!® Once this base was in effective operation, social anthro-
pology as institutionalised practice could dispense with the doctrinal
specificity it had previously insisted on. Professional distinctiveness
could now be maintained through an established network of vested
interests—for which the ASA was a co-ordinating agency—rather
than by any particular doctrines or -methods. Anthropology was
now truly a ‘profession’.

Ironically, the same forces that were contributing to the ideo-
logical dissolution of classical functional anthropology had also
contributed to a strengthening of its organisational base. Thus
Fortes notes that during the Second World War in Britain, “econ-
omic, political and especially miltary necessities aroused a new and
lively public interest in the African and Asiatic dependencies of
Britain and her allies. The plans for post-war economic and social
development in these areas generated under pressure of war-time
experiences included big schemes of research in the natural and
social sciences. The boom in anthropological studies thus fore-
shadowed began after Radcliffe-Brown had retired from the Ox-
ford chair [in 1946]”.'° It was in the year of Radcliffe-Brown’s retire-
ment that the ASA was founded by scholars who were already
members of the long-established but far less exclusive Royal An-
thropological Institute. An exclusive ‘professional’ organisation was
clearly far better placed to exploit the new funding possibilities for
research in the changing power-pattern of the post-war world.

It is not a matter of dispute that social anthropology emerged as
a distinctive discipline at the beginning of the colonial era, that it

against Sartre: “It is possible that the requirement of ‘totalisation’ is a
great novelty to some historians, sociologists and psychologists. It has been
taken for granted by anthropologists ever since they learnt it from Mali-
nowski”. The Savage Mind, London, 1966, p. 250. What anthropologists
learnt from Malinowski was ethnographic holism, not the method of
totalisation.
®M. Ghickman and Fred Eggan, “Introduction” to The Relevance of Models
for Social Anthropology, London, 1965, p. xii. By 1968 the Association
had about 240 members (Social Science Research Council, Research in
Social Anthropology, London, 1968, p. 79.)

M. Fortes, (ed.) Social Structure, Oxford 1949, p. xiii.
TALAL ASAD 15

became a flourishing academic profession towards its close, or that
throughout this period its efforts were devoted to a description and
analysis—carried out by Europeans, for a European audience—of
non-European societies dominated by European power. And yet
there is a strange reluctance on the part of most professional anthro-
pologists to consider seriously the power structure within which
their discipline has taken shape. The typical attitude is well repre-
sented by the following passage from Victor Turner’s Introduction
to Volume Three of Colonialism in Africa 1870-1960, (Cambridge.
1971), in which the problem of the relationship between anthro-
pology and colonialism is trivialised and dismissed in the space of
two short paragraphs:
It used to be argued by officials of the ancien régime that anthro-
pologists, immersed as they were in the specificities of African
life, came to accept the structural perspective of their informants,
became their spokesmen, and by their words and works
impeded the efforts of district and provincial administrators to
govern cfficiently. Some were even accused by white settlers
and European civil servants of being ‘Reds’, ‘socialists’ and
‘anarchists’. It is now asseverated by African leaders and
administrators, down to the district level, that anthropologists
before independence were ‘apologists of colonialism’ and subtlc
agents of colonial supremacy who studied African customs
merely to provide the dominant whitc minority with information
damaging to native interests but normally opaque to white
investigation. Thus yesterday’s ‘socialist’ has become today’s
‘reactionary’. Sir Alan Burns (1957) and Frantz Fanon (1961) °
are improbably allied. ‘
It is true, of course, that in their personal capacity anthropolo-

. -—

gists, like everyonc else, have a wide spectrum of political
views. Some are known ‘conservatives’; others lean far to the
‘left”. But as professionals, anthropologists are trained, over
glmost as many years as doctors, to collect certain kinds of
information as ‘participant observers’ which will enable them,
whatever may be their personal views, to present as objectively
as the current level of their discipline’s development permits, a
coherent picture of the sociocultural system they have elected
to spend some years of their lives in studying, and of the kinds
of processes that go on in it. It is their ultimate duty to publish
tpexr findings and expose them, together with an exact descrip-
tion of the means by which they were obtained. to the
international public of their anthropological colleagues and

f

'
i

16 INTRODUCTION

beyond that to the ‘world of lcarning’. Eventually, news of their

work and analyses, through their own ‘popular’ writings or

through citations, résumés (not infrequently bowdlerised) and
digests by non-amhropologists seeps through to the general
t reading public. Time thus winnows their reports and rids them

| of much that is biased and ‘loaded’, There is no point in special

‘ﬁréiid‘mg or tendenfious argument; there are professional

standards against which all reports are measured, and, in the

end, the common sensc of the common man. (pp.1-2)

But to speak about ‘professional standards’ and the authority of
‘common sense’ is surely no less naive than are wild remarks about
anthropology being mercly the handmaiden of colonialism. There
are todav no clear-cut standards in anthropology. therc is only
a flourishing professional organisation; and thc common sense
of Western common man, himself an alienated and exploited
being, is hardly reliable as a critical test of anthropological know-
ledge. And yet the casy assurance of Tumer’s remarks is itself an
indication of the kind of commonsense world that the typical an-
thropologist still shares, and knows he shares, with those whom he
primarily addresses.

We have been reminded time and again by anthropologists
of the ideas and ideals of the Enlightenment in which the intellec-
tual mspuauon of anthropology is supposed to lie.?® But anthro-
pology is also rooted in an unequal power encounter_between the
West and Third World which goes back to the emergence of bour-
geois Europe, an cncounter in which colonialism is merely one
historical moment.?* 1t is this encounter that gives the West access
to cultural and historical information about the societies it has
progressively dominated, and thus not only gencrates a certain kind
of universal understanding, but also re-enforces the inequalities in
capacity between the European and the non-European worlds (and
derivatively, between the Europeanized clites and the ‘traditional’
masses in the Third World). We are today becoming increasingly
aware of the fact that information and understanding produced by
bourgeois disciplines like anthropology are acquired and used most
readily by those with the greatest capacity for exploitation. This
follows partly from the structure of research, but more especially

“See for cxample E. E. Evans-Pritchard, op. cit, M. Harris, The Rise of
Anthropological Theory, London, 1969, R. Firth, op. cit.

“'C. Levi-Strauss was one of the first anthropologists to note this important
" fact, although he has barely gone beyond noting it. See The Scope of An-
thropology, London, 1967, pp. 51-2. C
INTRODUCTION 17

from the way in which these disciplines objectify their knowledge.
It is because the powerful who support research expect the kind of
understanding which will ultimately confirm them in their world
that anthropology has not very easily turned to the production of
radically subversive forms of understanding. It is because anthro-|
pological understanding is overwhelmingly objectified in European
languages that it is most casily accommodated to the mode of life,
and hence to the rationality, of the world power which the West
represents.

We must begin from the fact that the basic reality which made
pre-war social anthropology a feasible and effective enterprise was
the power relationship between dominating (European) and domin-
ated (non-European) cultures. We then need to ask ourselves how
this relationship has affected the practical pre-conditions of social
anthropology; the uses to which its knowledge was put; the theo-
retical treatment of particular topics; the mode of perceiving and
objectifying alien societies; and the anthropologist’s claim of politi-
cal neutrality.

The colonial power structure made the object of anthropological
study accessible and safe—because of it sustained physical proxi-
mity between the observing European and the living non-European
became a practical possibility. It made possible the kind of human
intimacy on which anthropological fieldwork is based, but ensured (
that that intimacy should be one-sided and provisional. It is worth
noting that virtually no European anthropologist has been won -
over personally to the subordinated culture he has studied; although ,
countless non-Europeans, having come to the West to study its cul-
ture, have been captured by its values and assumptions, and also’
contributed to an understanding of it. !

The reason for this asymmetry is the dialectic of world power.
Anthropologists can claim to have contributed to the cultural
!:leritage of the societies they study by a sympathetic recording of
indigenous forms of life that would otherwise be lost to posterity.
But they have also contributed, sometimes indircctly, towards main-
taining the structure of power represented by the colonial system.
That such contributions were not in the final reckoning crucial for
the vast empire which received knowledge and provided patronage
does not mean that it was not critical for the small discipline which
offered knowledge and received that patronage. For the structure
of power certainly affected the theoretical choice and treatment of
what social anthropology objectified—more so in some matters
than in others. (We should in any case avoid the tendency found

18 INTRODUCTION

among some critics and defenders of social anthropology of speak-
ing as though the doctrines and analyses labelled ‘functionalism’
were parts of a highly integrated logical structure.) Its analyses—
of holistic politics most of all, of cosmological systems least of all
—were affected by a readiness to adapt to colonial ideology. At any
rate the general drift of anthropological understanding did not con-

‘stitute a basic challenge to the unequal world represented by. the

colonial system. Nor was the colonial system as such—within which
the social ob]octs studied were located—anafy_@ed by the social
anthropologist. To argue that the anthropo]"ogmt s expertise did not

..

that this expertise was malformed. For any ob]ect which is subor-
dinated and manipulated is partly the product of a power relation-
ship, and to ignore this fact is to miscomprehend the nature of that
object.

Clearly the anthropologist’s claim to political neutrality cannot
be separated from all that has been said so far. Thus the scientistic
definition of anthropology as a disinterested (objective, value-free)
study of ‘other cultures’ helped to mark off the anthropologist’s
enterprise from that of colonial Europeans (the trader, the mission-
ary, the administrator and other men of practical affairs); but did it
not also render him unable to envisage and argue for a radically
different political future for the subordinate people he studied and
thus serve to merge that enterprise in effect with that of dominant
status-quo Europeans? If the anthropologist sometimes endorsed or
condemned particular social changes affecting “his people”, did he,
in this ad hoc commitment, do any more or any less than many
colonial Europeans who accepted colonialism as a system? If he
was sometimes accusingly called ‘a Red’, ‘a socialist’ or ‘an anar-
chist’ by administrators and settlers, did this not merely reveal one
facet of the hysterically intolerant character of colonialism as a
system, with which he chosc nevertheless to live professionally at
peace?

I believe it is a mistake to view social anthropology in the colo-
nial era as primarily an aid to colonial administration, or as the
simple reflection of colonial ideology. I say this not because I sub-
scribe to the anthropological establishment’s comfortable view of
itself, but because bourgeois consciousness, of which social anthro-
pology is merely one fragment, has always contained within itself
profound contradictions and ambiguities—and therefore the poten-
tialities for transcending itself. For these contradictions to be ade-
quately apprehended it is essential to turn to the historical power
INTRODUCTION 19
relationship between the West and the Third World and to cxan!ine
the ways in which it has been dialectically linked to the practical
conditions, the working assumptions and the intellectual produoct
of all disciplines representing the European understanding of non-
European humanity. .

The papers that follow analyse and document ways in which anthro-
pological thinking and practice have been affected by British colo-
nialism, but they approach this topic from different points of view
and at different levels. All but Roger Owen’s were presented first at
a Seminar held in Hull in September 1972. Although each contribu-
tor has had the opportunity to revise his paper in the light of dis-
cussions that were held at the Seminar, no editorial attempt has
been made to impose any unity on them, or for that matter to en-
sure that together they represent a comprehensive coverage of the
problem. They stand as individual contributions to an argument
that is only just beginning, and in which as yet only a handful of
anthropologists are seriously interested. (It should be noted that in
over a quarter of a century since it was founded, the ASA has never
regarded colonialism as a topic worthy of a conference.)

The group which met wishes to thank the University of Hull for
providing funds and facilities for the Seminar. Most especially, we
wish to thank Ian Cunnison, Head of the Department of Sociology
and Social Anthropology at Hull, without whose active help and
constant encouragement the Seminar would probably not have
taken place. It was he who canvassed Anthropology Departments
in various Universities for possible contributors, and undertook
most of the organisational duties in preparation for the meeting.
March 1973
Part 1: General Studies
EMPIRICISM AND IMPERIALISM:
A REVIEW OF THE NEW LEFT CRITIQUE OF SOCIAL
ANTHROPOLOGY
Peter Forster

The question of the relationship betwcen anthropology and colo-
nialism has been raised in various quarters recently by various
writers who declare that they are approaching their subject from the
point of view of a left-wing political value-orientation. The differ-
ences in scope, origin and perspective of the various writers are
considerable, and some limitation on the subject-matter must be
imposed. Particular attention will here be focused on three different
sources, one British, one Current Anthropology Review Article, and
one French. The British source will be the articles that have
appeared in the New Left Review: Goddard', Banaji’, and, to a
lesser extent, Anderson®. The Current Anthropology source will be
the symposium on social responsibilities, with contribution from
Berreman', Gjessing®, and Gough®. The French source will be the
recently published book by Leclerc?, which deals explicitly with the

'D. Goddard, “Limits of British Anthropology”, New Left Revi
..('1 9g9)’ op. "’71%89. pology”, ft Review, No. 58
"J. Banaji, “The Crisis of British Anthropology”, New Left Review, No. 64
(1970), pp. 71-85, polosy /
E- Anderson, “Components of the National Culture”, New Left Review,
“SDt' d50 (1968) pp. 3-57. Reprinted in A. Cockburn and R. Blackburn,
196?) ent Power: Problems, Diagnosis, Action”, Harmondsworth, Penguin,
G B pg. 214-284.“Page references are to the reprint.
Anthr ei'rem,gn, Is Anthropology Alive? Social Responsibility in Social
'G G".°P‘? ogy , Current Anthropology, Vol. 9 (1968) pp. 391-396.
Anth Jessing. “The Social Responsibility of the Social Scientists”, Current
i Bropology, Vol. 9 (1968), pp. 397-402.

+ Lough, “New Proposals for Anthropologists”, Current Anthropology,
\

24 THE NEW LEFT CRITIQUE

question of the relationship between anthropology and colonialism
from the point of view of ‘critical’ anthropology; although appear-
ing in France, this latter work has as its prime focus of attention
the British school of anthropology. This list is far from exhaustive;
however, the positions adopted by the various writers here con-
sidered are sufficiently diverse and unfamiliar to mainstream British
social anthropology to make it worthwhile to examine their argu-
ments carefully. The basic unity of the critique revolves around
discussion of the colonial situation and the place of anthropology
within it. Sometimes the focus of attention is British imperialism
(Gjessing, Leclerc, Goddard, Banaji, Anderson), sometimes Ameri-
can neo-imperialism (Berreman, Gough). The stand taken may be
the theoretical limitations of classic anthropology (Leclerc, Ander-
son, Goddard, Banaji) or alternatively, a plea for social responsi-
bility, value-awareness, and politically relevant anthropological in-
vestigation (Berreman, Gjessing, Gough). Other source-material dis-
cussing the general question of anthropology and colonialism, or of
the future of anthropology, will be referred to in the text, and some
other writers mentioned may well wish to associate themselves with
the New Left; however, I have deliberately avoided an unfortunate
tendency characteristic of certain recent exercises in ‘critical’ or
‘radical’ sociology, of investigating the left-wing credentials of the
authors considered before considering their contributions as valid
statements of an argument.

The origins of the New Left cnitique of social anthropology are
fairly easy to discern. Politically and historically interest in this kind
of introspection stems from the dismemberment of colonial empires
which were previously the stamping ground of anthropologists; from
the sociological concomitants of ‘development’ in the Third World:
and more recently from the exposure of anthropological work
sponsored by the United States Central Intelligence Agency, and
the successful passing of a resolution about the Vietnam war at the
American Anthropological Association meeting in 1966. Theore-
tically, the critique forms part of a more general disillusionment
with functionalism (a characteristic of radical sociology t0o0); with
cmpiricism, sometimes within the framework of criticisms voiced
elsewhere about the lack of comparison in a supposedly compara-
tive science®, sometimes as part of a general critique of the lack of

Vol. 9 (1968), pp. 403-407.

'G. Leclerc, Anthropologie et Colonialisme, Paris, Fayard, 1972.

‘Sec particularly E. Leach, Rethinking Anthropology (title-essay), London,
Athlone Press, 1961, pp. 1-27.
PETER FORSTER 25

: -~ - £ a
thropological theory (Goddard, Bang]l), ar}d again, as part O
;:neralpodisillusionment with microscopic studies (Gjessing, Gough).
Goddard and Banaji both hold that British social anthropology has
suffered from over-concentration on normative and jural pheno-

mena; Goddard advocates a greater concern with the metaphysical
etements in Durkheim’s thought, while Banaji prefers a greater con-

——————

cern with Lévi-Straussian structural anthropology, considering that ;

its most fruitful aspects have been either ignored or “naturalised”
in British anthropology. Leclerc also, where he puts fqrward thf:ore.:-
tical proposals, suggests that anthropology should avou! fhe objecti-
fication characteristic of its colonial past, and is critical of.the
behaviourism and empiricism of British anthropology: he mentions
with approval writers such as Griaule®, for whom native cosmology
is not to be secen as a mere superstructure: interpretative analysis
is not to be made at the expense of indigenous interpretation. Fin-
ally, a common criticism voiced on both political and theoretical
grounds is that classical anthropology has either ignored or taken
insufficient account of the colonial situation. Thus Goddard criti-
cises British anthropology for speaking of *‘primitive’ rather than
“colonised’’ peoples, and for its lack of a total conception of the
colonial situation. Anderson is critical of Evans-Pritchard for his
lack of attention in The Nuer'® to the colonial situation while at the
same time approving of Leach (Political Systems of Highland
Burma'') for the incorporation of the colonial situation into his
analysis. Banaji, by contrast, regards Leach as equally culpable in
his lack of attention to the colonial situation. Leclerc suggests that
much British anthropology, especially applied anthropology, was
closely integrated with Indirect Rule. This he suggests prevented
classical anthropologists from seeing the colonial system as a politi-
cal and historical problem. The Current Anthropology symposium
here considered is more concerned with neo-imperialism than with
palaeo-imperialism; none the less, Gjessing particularly is critical of
the a-historical (Radcliffe-Brown) or anti-historical (Malinowski)
perspective of classical anthropology in the colonial situation, and
of the functionalist approach which tended to be reformist with
regard to the colonial administration.

Thus as can be expected from a list of issues raised by writers
grouped together as the ‘New Left’, both political and academic

M. Gnaule, Dicu d'Eau, Paris, Editions du Chene, 1948.
“E. E. Evans-Pritchard, The Nucr, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1940.
“%S}‘_each, Political Systems of Highland Burma, London, Athlone Press,
26 THE NEW LEFT CRITIQUE

issues are raised, the academic issues being primarily raised in the
authors by their political concerns. The academic issues will be the
main concern of this discussion, but the political proposals put for-
ward are suggested by some authors as binding on the anthropo-
logical community generally, and as inseparable from the academic
issues, and are too important to be ignored. I do not intend to speak
of the seriousness of purpose of those who espouse the political
views concerned, of the importance of the issues they raise, or of
the validity of the views they hold. The importance of the political
views held by the writers concerned will be taken to be the effect
of these on academic scholarship. This basically resolves itself
around three areas of concern: the question of a value-free social
anthropology and social science generally, and the role of the
anthropologist in society; the concept of relevance; and the concept
of commitment. These, in different ways, are the concern particu-
larly of the Current Anthropology Social Responsibilities Sym-
posium.

The question of value-freedom in social anthropology and the
role of the anthropologist in society are raised particularly by
Berreman and Gjessing, as a response generally to the literature on
responsibility in science, including the sociological literature, and
more specifically to the Vietnam resolution at the AAA, and to the
exposure of anthropological complicity with the CIA. Particularly
in the context of serious political issues of this nature, it is welcome
that the question of a value-free anthropology has been raised, as it
should be in all social science; but if the discussion of the issue is
to have any lasting value, a number of matters need to be clarified.
This is a useful exercise, as it can also be linked up with the general
question of the effect that palaeo-colonialism had on an anthropolo-
gist’s academic work. Many important issues are raised by the
whole question of what it means to be value-free; these have been
raised many times before by non-anthropologists, but a number of
common confusions remain. Thus, as far as I am aware, no social
scientist has ever suggested that the investigator of society should
have no value-commitments at all, and Weber strongly repudiated
such a suggestion. The issue of value-freedom unfortunately does
tend to submerge different issues which are easily separable. For
a start, the question of value-freedom is frequently confused with
the question of objectivity. In his critique of some tendencies in
radical sociology, Bandyopadhay'> emphasises the importance of

“P. Bandyopadhyay, “One Sociology or Many—some issuecs in Radical
Sociology”’, Sociological Review, Vol. 19 (1971), 5-29.
27
PETER FORSTER

.. distinction, indicating that left-wing ideology has re]eqted any
;ﬁ‘;'ggs’ffon of a value-free social scfience but has emphasxs?:i ltmhe
importance of objectivity. In a different context, Maquet*® has
raised the question of objectivity In specflﬁc reflatlon to social anthro-

logy. In the context of the present discussion, to affirm the value
of objectivity would presumably be to agree with the seriously
politically committed writers who plead for a relevant apth ropology.
If, for instance, Gough’s new proposals for anthmpologxst§ are to be
put into practice and thought to make a valuable contribution to
the advancement of socialist revolution, the findings must be objec-
tively valid. The same idea of objectivity would be even more
important to someone with the political commitment of Frank,
for instance, in the Current Anthropology discussion. If the politi-
callv committed and active anthropologist is to put his knowledge
to zfny use for the revolution, *“like the guerrilla doctor who treats
his wounded comrades”, what he has to say had better be true.
Likewise, only objectively valid information collected by the CIA
can be considered dangerous; if information available to the CIA is
not objectively valid, it can only work against the interests of its
neo-imperalist policies. Pseudo-subjectivity is a dangerous luxury
for radical anthropologists to engage in, and can be just as mis-
leading as pseudo-objectivity. To examine the limits of objectivity
in science is a very valuable exercise, but the end in view in this
exercise must be to enable the scientist to move from the less objec-
tive to the more objective. The issue has also been raised not in
relation to ‘‘objectivity’’ but in relation to “‘objectification” (Lec-
lerc, p. 196); I shall return to this in considering the theoretical
implications of the New Left critique.

A serious issue is raised by a concept which again arises out of
the issues surrounding the idea of a value-free social science,
namely the concept of relevance. Berreman and Gijessing both
suggest that anthropology today is in danger of becoming “irrele-
vant”, and also are heavily critical of the Ivory Tower. A number
of issues again need to be disentangled here, and a number of
questions need to be asked. Firstly if one accepts that anthropology
arose largely out of the needs of colonial administration, anthro-
pology will indeed suffer from a crisis of identity, now that the
colonial empires are dismembered. More generally, however, the ob-

"I. J. Maquet, “Objectivity in Anthropology’, Current Anthropology, Vol 5
(1964), pp. 47-55.

"A. G. Frank, Comment to Current Anthropology Social Responsibilties
Symbposium, Current Anthropology, Vol. 9 (1968), pp. 412414,

——
28 THE NEW LEFT CRITIQUE

vious question of relevance for what? suggests itself. Gough, to her
credit, is completely consistent in putting forward counter-proposals
to the activities sponsored by the CIA, drawing the anthropological
community’s attention to these, and declaring her own value-orien-
tation. There is a danger however, present throughout the Current
Anthropology symposium, of harnessing most or all anthropological
rescarch to immediate short-term aims rather than to development
of the discipline. and in consigning those who have fundamental
theoretical aims in view to the Ivory Tower. In the first place, future
generations of scholars might have cause to see research geared to
short-term aims as irrelevant, just as applied anthropology that
existed in the colonial situation is now thought to be irrelevant.
Anthropological research has usually been escteric, but esoteric
subjects can be of fundamental importance to the comprehensibility
of history and society and this to my mind has been one of the most
valuable distinctive contributions of anthropology to the social
sciences generallv. Do we for instance consign Gough’s work on
the Nayar and matrilineal kinship to the scrap-heap on the grounds
of ‘irrelevance’? Some of these issues are raised in the discussion to
the symposium. Klejn, a Soviet contributor, is critical of this
approach:
I agree completely with Gjessing when he holds that social an-
thropologists should approach the problems of the ‘rising
nations of the non-Western world’ with a view to satisfying
the requirements and interests of these nations themselves. 1
am worried, however, about the implication that we should
reduce the aims of social anthropology to such narrowly prag-
matic ones. Does this turn out to be the same as Malinowski’s
functionalism, but inside out—the same pragmatism, merely
diverted from the British colonial administration to the local
national interests? Of course, it would be much better to have
the ‘ten anthropologists’ continue the job of the ‘ten troops’;
but I think that to limit thus the aims of our science would
benefit neither the science nor the rising nations. General
theoretical research is important; we need to know the laws of
social life, the lessons of social history!s,
Lewis in the discussion is also heavily critical of the authors’ com-
ments on relevance?®:

“L. S. Klejn, Comment to Current Anthropology Social Responsibilities
Symposium, loc. cit., pp. 415-417.
*I. M. Lewis, Comment to Current Anthropology Social Responsibilities
Symposium, loc. cit., pp. 415417.
PETER FORSTER 29
1 disagree with Gijessing’s diagn.osis. that social at}th.ropology is
‘today in grave danger of becoming irrelevant’. This, indeed,
is the exact opposite of what Kathleen Gough’s gloomy assess-
ment of the strategic importance ascribed to anthropological
research in the United States would suggest...Social anthr0pqlogy
has never been merely an aid to enlightened colonial adminis-
tration, nor should it be viewed now as merely an aid to
development in new states. When anthropology ceases to have
anything of wider interest to say, it deserves to die.

Lewis here points to the crucial danger of over-cmphasis on rele-
vance. If it leads to nothing more than the reiteration of certain
views of society which anyone can hold whether he knows any
anthropology or not, there is no point in having any anthropology
at all. The issue of fundamental importance is surcly the develop-
ment of the discipline to further the comprehensibility of history
and society. In the past, it has frequently been conservatives who
have insisted on immediate relevance and immediate practical appli-
cability of the findings of scientists, while those of more radical
opinions have defended the value of fundamental academic defini-
tion of problems. In the current discussion of relevance, one often
finds these positions reversed.

The concept of relevance leads directly to the concept of com-
mitment, or partisanship. As with relevance, so with commitment,
the question ‘commitment to what?’ immediately springs to mind.
Are all social commitments acceptable, and if not, why not? In the
case of Berreman and Gjessing’s suggestions, notions of commit-
ment are expressed which could include any kind of social commit-
ment. In the discussion, Gulick quite reasonably remarks that'":

Consider those anthropologists, mentioned by Berreman, who are

working professionally for the United States government for

the primary purpose of facilitating the militaristic policies of

the United States in South-East Asia. They could quite logically

claim that they are being professionally responsible to society.

There is an underlying assumption throughout discussion of com-

mitment that political commitment can only be to left-wing ideo-

logy. This is surely absurd to anvone who has the slightest degree
of political awarcness and one could consign the perpetrators of
such a myth quite rightly to the Ivory Tower. The papers here con-
sidered show quite cnough disunity of commitment to the Left, let
alone anywhere else, to suggest anything other than that each an-

“J. Gulick, Comment to Current Anthropology Social Responsibilities Sym-
posium, loc. cit., p. 414.
30 THE NEW LEFT CRITIQUE

thropologist can and will choose his own barricades. The real issue
is the extent to which anthropologists have the right gua anthro-
pologists to make collective commitments, Appeals to truth, human-
ism, and similar generalised beliefs exclude some commitment but
accept most; the arguments for a more precise collective political
commitment on the part of the anthropological community generally
are not adequately presented in the Current Anthropology sym-
posium. Nor does it help the advancement of the discipline to make
declarations such as Haber and Haber’s ‘“We are not intellectuals
above it all who say the truth to whomever will listen or asks: we
are partisans™ 8, It is surely any academic’s right to engage in par-
tisanship, but it is surely also any academic institution’s right to
insist that its members engage in academic work. The call to sub-
ject all academic work to partisanship helps least of all those who
sincerely wish to be both scholars and partisans. Further problems
arise with partisanship when anthropological investigation in the
field is considered. If partisanship is carried on in the field, the
accessibility of fields of investigation for future scholars is placed
in jeopardy, and anthropology is in danger of being associated in
the minds of informants with a particular political and social com-
mitment. The well-known association of anthropology with colonial
administration is a good case in point; Jaspan, speaking of Hur-
gronje’s research in Sumatra, which was openly associated with
colonial ideology, warns that :
The consequences of partisan commitment almost seventy years
ago and at the opposite end of a large island are still to be felt,
and have a negative effect, on rapport formation by present
day ethnographers. This should, if nothing else, suggest to those
who tolerate or justify commitment its unpredicatable con-
sequences for other ethnographers and for the profession as a
whole*®.
At the same meeting at which the Vietnam resolution was passed,
the AAA expressed criticism of one form of ulterior commitment :
There...is good reason to believe that some anthropologists have
used their professional standing and the names of their academic
institutions as cloaks for the collection of intelligence informa-
tion and for intelligence operations?°.

*Quoted in A. G. Frank, op. cit., p. 413.

M. A. Jaspan, “Anthropology and Commitment to Political Causes”, An-
thropological Forum, Vol. 1 (1964), pp. 212-219.

“*‘Statement on Problems of Anthropological Research and Ethics by
Fellows of the Amcrican Anthropological Association”, American Anthro-
pologist, Vol. 69 (1967), p. 382.
1
PETER FORSTER 3

The implications of this criticism must be borne in mind for ot_hsr
forms of ulterior motive in the field. Quite apart from moral objec-
tions, ulterior use of the anthropologist’s position to support colo-
nialism or the CIA is dangerous for thp development of .the dis-
cipline. Still, the anthropologist committed to left-wing ideology
must also consider the implications of politically laudable ulterior
motives for the development of the discipline as well.

[ shall turn now to examine the New Left contribution to theo-
retical development of anthropology. One can state at the outset
that the contributions to this subject at any rate have the ultimate
welfare of the discipline in mind and arc more worthy of bcing
considered seriously by the profession as a whole. The argument
common to them all is that anthropology has suffered theoretically
from its association with colonialisni,” Theoréfical “critiques are
son and Leclerc. Anderson, Goddard and Banaji form a consistent
series of critiques and a number of themes reappear in them all.
The characteristic feature is the emphasis on the way in which
British society gave rise to a distinctively empirical Weltanschauung,
eliminating metaphysical elements, at the same time failing to artic-
ulate a conception of society as a totality. This criticism is voiced
notably in Anderson in relation to British intellectual life as a
whole. He stresses the lack of distinctive British sociology and the
lack of acceptance of Marxism in Britain. Anthropology, he sug-
gests, is a partial exception, and has been distinguished as a dis-
ciplinary tradition from sociology (in a way in which Durkheim,
for instance, was not interested). A holistic view, and a functionalist
framework, were adopted in the study of colonised peoples. This
was also a consensus model, in which even conflict could be seen as
producing ultimate cohesion (Gluckman). By excluding the colonial
administration from their field of investigation (a good instance
being Evans-Pritchard on the Nuer), and by so doing concentrating
on fairly safe subjects, British social anthropology during the colo-
nial period suffered theoretically. Only after the second World War,
and the crisis in the imperial system, was any theoretical advance
made, notably by Leach in Political Systems of Highland Burma.
Leach also stands outside the general empiricism of British aca-
demic life in his recognition of Lévi-Strauss and his use of struc-
tural analysis of myth. This development is characteristic of the
distinctive place of anthropology in the national culture:

Both traditional functionalism and the structuralism of Leach’s

later work arc anomalies for English empiricism. Anthropology

J
e —

32 THE NEW LEFT CRITIQUE

formed a deviant sector within English culture, because its
application was outside it. The exception here is a corollary of
the rule??.
This dogma of the New Left Review, the empiricism of British cul-
ture, is a feature pervading the general theoretical critique of social
“anthropology by both Goddard and Banaji. The focus of the criti-
que is different, but Goddard and Banaji both find British anthro-
pology just as culpable in its over-empiricism as are other aspects of
British intellectual life. British social anthropology is, if anything,
characteristic of British empiricism rather than deviant from it.
Goddard centres his critique on the notion of structure that British
social anthropology has worked wm deficient, he argues,
in being identified with the totality of empirically given social rela-
tionships in a tribal society. This highly empirical concept was easily
integrated into functionalism by Radcliffe-Brown; no investigation
was made of hidden relations, principles, or forms, or even of the
possibility of constructing models or theories to explain observed
\ phenomena. As part of the structural-functional framework, a
' general normative emphasis and particularly, a jural focus pre-
}vailed. The jural focus was derived from Maine, and notably from
: Durkheim’s Division of Labour in Society. It permeated the study
of all custom supported by binding sanctions, and notably, the study
of kinship. This approach, Goddard argues, has severe theoretical
limitations. There is an emphasis on normative facts, but there is
no recognition that normative facts may be shaped by covert, non-
normative “facts”, accessible only to critical analysis. Method and
theory completely converge. Durkheim was the main theoretical
inspiration for social anthropology in Britain, but his framework
was highly selectively adopted:
Durkheim’s rationalist, Cartesian mode of analysis of social phen-
omena, by reducing them to their constituent elements, was
interpreted uneasily as a ‘sociological positivism® and thus
made to correspond as nearly as possible to the methodological
conditions of traditional empiricism. The ‘metaphysical’
elements on Durkheim—society as a phenomenon sui generis,
the apparently outrageous analysis of religion—were quietly
suppressed or conveniently forgotten??,
Thus British empiricism expressed itself again in British social
anthropology, and the issues central to Durkheim’s preoccupations

**Anderson, op. cit.,, p. 268.
*Goddard, op. cit., p. 89.
33
PETER FORSTER

were dismissed or misunderstood. Such is Goddard’s explanation
for the pervasiveness of empiricism and fu.ncuonallsfn.l in British
social anthropology. The dogma of the esspntxally cmpiricist charac-
ter of British thought 1s aggin reasserted, in a yet stronger form, by
Banaji who concentrates his attention on post-wa; anthropp]qu,
whose roots he traces in the global revolution against coloma11§m
and in the growth of structural anthropology, the second reflecting
the first. Some of Goddard’s criticisms are reiterated, but the focus
of Banaji’s critique is primarily on the diachronic variant of func-
tionalism, scen particularly in the work of Leach and Needham,
and on the response in British social anthropology to the work of
Lévi-Strauss. The argument is not always casy to decode, as the
pages of Banaji’s article are bespattered with trendy structuralist
jargon, but the main strands can be seen as a continued critique of
over-cmpiricism and functionalism, which have continued to be
characteristic of post-war British social anthropology. Functionalism
was in fact a non-theory, a theory which arose out of the practice
of fieldwork, but the practice of fieldwork sometimes found func-
tionalism wanting, Leach’s work in Burma becing a notable case in
point. There was an anti-functionalist response within functionalism,
from Leach, foreshadowed by Gluckman’s response to Malinowski,
which still appealed to the idea of a self-stabilising system. This
stood in sharp contrast to Lévi-Strauss’s opposition to function-
alism, which concerned itself with the unconscious nature of collec-
tive phenomena and in this way broke sharply from empiricism.
There has been a response in Britain to Lévi-Strauss which can be
seen as the ‘‘naturalisation” of structuralism in accordance with
British empiricism. Here we see an argument which corresponds
closely to Goddard’s assessment of the British reaction to Durk-
heim. Leach, the main British expositor of Lévi-Strauss, none the
less took an over-empiricist model in both Pul Eliya and in Political
Systems of Highland Burma. He distinguished between actors’ con-
scious models and the empirical field so as to conform to the func-
tionalist distinction between rules and behaviour, but it never occur-
red to him that the anthropologist might perceive a different reality
transcending both of these. Needham, for his part, regretted the
over-empiricism and lack of theory in British anthropology, but
himself applied structuralism only to systems of prescriptive alli-
ance. Mythologiques was neglected, and Les Structures Elémentaires
de la Parenté was misunderstood either as a model or in its entirety.
Structuralism, however, Banaji admits, has an ambiguous relation
to history, and part of its limited impact on British anthropology
34 THE NEW LEFT CRITIQUE

is due to its own limitations. Its focus of attention is quite different
from that of functionalism:

Structuralism’s break with functional anthropology consisted in

a sharp and deliberate displacement of the entire axis of

comprehensmn from the phenomenal space of an immediate

intuitive encounter with the savage to the lj@ space of
pensée sauvage, established like any code, by the rigorous non-
intuitive procedures of science®,
Thus while providing a break from functionalism, structuralism was
uneven and distorted in its impact on British anthropology. British
empiricists have done the same to Lévi-Strauss as they have done in
the past to Durkheim.

Thus the critique of British social anthropology in the New Left
Review can be seen as part of a general critique of empiricist phil-
sophy which is seen as a characteristically British phenomenon. It
remains therefore to consider Leclerc, a French critic of British
social anthropology, who again stresses a critical, Marxist perspec-
tive. His approach centres on the relation betwen anthropology and
colonialism, present but peripheral to the British New Left, but the

\ key problem to Leclerc. Two issues stand out: first, and most im-
sportant the relatnonshlp betwen functionalism and colonialism;
second a critical view of the ‘objectification’ characteristics of
British social anthropology (to which structuralism, however, is not
regarded as the automatic answer). Leclerc suggests that function-
alist anthropology had no conception of colonialism as a sytem,
and points to the ambiguous use of ‘primitive’ in anthropological
work. In contrast to the Victorian evolutionists, who did have a
conception of colonialism (justifying it), classic functional anthro-
pologists saw colonialism in a neutral manner, as a specific form of
social change. There were schools of applied anthropology, but the
proponents of these supported Indirect Rule and hardly saw the
colonial system as a political and historical problem. No total
critique of colonial reality was provided, and functionalism was
unable to provide one. American cultural anthropology was more
anti-colonialist in its interests, and in the 1930-1950 period Ameri-
can anthropologists have been to some degree spokesmen for the
indigenous inhabitants of colonised societies. Ideas of cultural rela-
tivism could compete with colonial ideology.

On the question of objectification, Leclerc considers particularly

the reaction of the Third World to classical anthropology. The

*‘Banaji, op. cit., p. 82.
35

PETER FORSTER
i nt characteristic of classical anthropology
soveragnbec?:ctcm;e:ﬁstic of the African response, where objecti-
has not has been criticised. Ethnocentrism has been much more
gf%:;ﬁﬁ to eradicate than the post-Victorian ‘ an}hropologxsts
thought. The concepts of accult}lrauon an_d modgrmsanon ha\fe a.Jso
d for not having given sufficient weight to exploitation

een criticise 3
lz::m:l domination. Leclerc does not present any definite new pro-

als Tor anthropologists; he recognises the ambiguity of. the con-
cept of development, and the fact that some Marxists have
supported colonialism. In h_1s theoretical conc!usnons, howev?r, he
does give approval to the kind of anthropological work that is not
‘objectifying’. He gives approval to the work of Griaule, Oscar
Lewis and Jan Myrdal, but still stresses the importance of scientific
investigation. Thus objectification is not to be rejected by the rejec-
tion of objectivity; the difficulty of translation of cultures is recog-
nised as problematic, though Leclerc himself does not propose an
alternative solution.

Despite the diversity of conclusions in the work here reviewed, a
basic unity of concern of the writers here considered can be seen to
be the general relationship between anthropology and colonialism.
As one can expect, this is likely to be a concern of the intellectual
Left and it remains to assess the attention that the discipline as a
whole might pay to this critique. The whcle concept of develop-
ment is too ambiguous, from diverse standpoints, to enable one to
say retrospectively what anthropologists should have done about
the colonial situation. As far as the issues of relevance and com-
mitment are concerned, it can only be stated that the advocates of
such stances are putting forward a heavily empiricist view of social
anthropology. If anthropology is to be geared directly to practical
politics, the empirical conclusions are of major importance; struc-
turalism as well as classical anthropology would be ruled out by
such an emphasis on relevance and commitment. The British New
Left critique, in sharp contrast, takes empiricism as one of its main
targets of attack, and Banaji, at any rate, is favourable to structur-
alism. But although left-wing political value-orientations have led
to widely divergent views of anthropology, it remains true that
there are important issues to be raised about the relationship be-
tween social anthropology and the colonial situation, and the effect
that had on the content of discipline during the colonial period. It
can be argued that the colonial situation did make for a tendency
to concentrate on empirical studies, particularly in Britain where
the system of Indirect Rule was adopted. It might also be argued
36 THE NEW LEFT CRITIQUE

that the concern for the collection of unfamiliar ethnographic data
might have led some anthropologists to concentrate in their empiri-
cal studies on the traﬁ&z_al/clgments of the societies they investi-
gated (though the discipline itself has produced some sharp criticism
of this kind of approach**). There is considerable justification for
the view that functionalism and empiricism are closely related,
functionalism (particularly in anthropology) emerging as a non-
theory, as Goddard and Banaji both suggest. The use of the func-
tionalist framework produced a behaviourist, normative focus In
research reports, and by taking inadequate account of actor’s defi-
nitions of the situation (which may not coincide) ignored the basic
conflicts and power-relationships in society. The latter perspective,
while by no means confined to Marxists, is the perspective that a
Marxist would adopt. The issue of lack of comparison, lack of
theory, and over-empiricism in social anthropology has been raised
before, and a realisation of some of the issues here outlined might
be helpful for those who would like to see a more theoretical an-
thropology. None the less, if one examines certain trends in so-
called radical sociology, one should be wary of an over-contempt
for the empirical. Bandyopadhyay, criticising some of these tenden-
cies, points to one form which entertains:
The belief that sociology is not only non-objective, but cannot
even be empirical, since to treat the enquiry as an empirical
one is to accept some version of the correspondence theory of
truth and this would lead to one-dimensional analysis leaving
out the role of alternative visions or ‘utopias’ in changing social
relations. Sociology, if empirical, would be insufficiently
dialectic!2®
This position, associated notably with the Frankfurt school of soci-
ologists, excludes any kind of integration of theory and empirical
research : this latter problem being one that sociology has grappled
with from its beginnings, and is worthy of investigation in anthro-
pology too. If a non-empirical social science is one extreme position,
then empiricism is the other extreme. It can be seen that an empiri-
cist social science is likely to produce a functionalist perspective,

*'Sec paiiicularly J. C. Mitchell, “Theoretical Orientations in African Urban
Studics ” in M. Banton (Ed.): The Social Anthropology of Complex
Societies, London, Tavistock Publications, 1966; A. L. Epstcin, Politics in
an Urban African Community, Manchester U.P, 1958. M. Gluckman,
“Anthropological Problems arising from the African Industrial Revolution”

in A. Southall (Ed.): Social Change in Modern Africa, London, O.U.P.,
1961, pp. 67-83.

“Bandyopadhyay, op. cit., p. 6.
PETER FORSTER 37

empiricism and functionalism frequemly being components of the
actor’s conscious model of his own society. vaxqusly one can see
from Talcott Parsons that not all functionalism 1is empiricist, bgt
even here, as Mills** points out, one can see the easy coexistence in
American sociology of Grand Theory and Abstracted Empiricism.
Another aspect of functionalism is its a-or anti-historical ap-
proach and it is this particularly that made for some of the defi-
crencies in some anthropological work in the colonial situation: a
different matter it should be stressed from sweeping assertions
about ‘anthropologists ignoring the colonial situation’. As Evans-
Pritchard points out, social anthropology has an important part to
play in making the history of colonised territories more than just a
history of colonial rule in such territories.?” Social anthropology,
like social history and many branches of sociology has made a dis-
tinctive contribution to the study of society in its investigation of
those affected by the decisions of powerful men: in contrast to
history (as an Arts subject), economics. and political science, which
have generally been far more concerned with the study of the
powerful than with those affected by political decisions. Social an-
thropology has never regarded the colonised as ‘*‘irrelevant’” and
only the colonialists as ‘“‘relevant”: but if their comments on the
“irrelevance’” of microscopic studies are to be believed, some would
seem to prefer to concentrate on the study of colonial rule.
Fortunately there is a tendency in a number of monographs to
criticise the leading assumptions of functionalism and to adopt a
historical perspective. Leach in Political Systems of Highland
Burma questions a number of leading functionalist assumptions,
notably the equilibrium model, behaviourism, the assumption of
homogeneity, and the non-historical approach. Asad?® in The
Kababish Arabs is also critical of the equilibrium model and the
behaviourist approach, and regards consensus as problematic rather
than as given. It is true that studies of this kind are the product
uf empirical field-work, but this does not invalidate them, and they
are clearly integrated into the mainstream of social science. There
is no reason, as Banaji seems to suggest, to adopt a structuralist
paradigm merely because it is called social anthropology. The fact

*Mills, C. Wright, The Sociological Imagination, New York, Oxford Uni-
_versity Press, 1959.

“Evans-Pritchard, E. E. “Anthropology and History” in Essays in Social
_Anthropology, London, Faver and Faber, 1962, p. 64,

*T. Asad, The Kababish Arabs: Power, Authority and Consent in a Noma-
dic Tribe. London, Hurst, 1970.
38 THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AS RELUCTANT IMPERIALIST

that British scholars have directed their attention to the empirical
world and thus produced the most sophisticated corpus of social
anthropology does not invalidate their findings. If Durkheim and
Lévi-Strauss have been ‘naturalised’, there is no reason to suppose
that this is for the disadvantage of the discipline in its attempt to
make sense of aspects of the empirical world.
