COLONIAL ADMINISTRATION AND ANTHROPOLOGY
IN EASTERN NIGERIA: 1920-1940.

Helen Lackner

Any attempt to look at the role anthropologists could play at pres-
ent and in coming years should, it seems to me, start by analysing
the history and development of anthropology since its origin as a
separate discipline. Going back to the records of the 1930s and
1940s, it becomes clear that the concern of anthropology was then
to be of use, directly or indirectly, to the colonial administration;
that, therefore, anthropologists then saw their work as relevant to
the world they lived in. When we now read these books, many of
which are classics, we should be aware of the context in which they
were written and read them in this light.

I cannot pretend to cover this vast field, or to analyse the history
and the theory of anthropology; I merely wish to look in some de-
tail at a few problems and to suggest some directions towards which
further research could be directed. This is a very tentative and frag-
mentary attempt at examining the development of social anthro-
pology in Eastern Nigeria during a period of considerable political
agitation, which was also a time when British social anthropology
was expanding vastly in cooperation with the policies of the colo-
nial administration; anthropology was being accepted by colonial-
1sm and anthropologists were being emploved by the administration.

Within the theoretical and historical framework that is here
broadly outlined, this study may contribute a further element to-
wards explaining the emergence of Biafran Nationalism, by showing

‘A first draft of this paper was presented as a dissertation to London
University in 1971.
124 EASTERN NIGERIA 19)()_, %4

how the administrative system during the colonial period gyq
atically exacerbated all possible contradictions between the .. -
colonial structure of the South East and the forms of administral- )
imported from the North whose pre-colonial political system wasl(?“
contrast with that of the south; the hierarchical authoritarian Strul
ture of the North was the model for indirect rulc in the Ibg arey
which was acephalous and fragmented. These contradictions we,
systematically made worse throughout the Colonial period and con%
tinued under the neo-colonialist administration that took over afte,
“Independence” in 1960. It would be interesting to do more re.
search on this point. This might show how artificial ‘‘borderg»
created by imperialism and the forms of administration withj,
them have affected pre-colonial nations, either by “integrating”
them into wider frameworks (Biafra in Nigeria) or by splitting them
between many states, (Manding in West Africa); such problems
raised by colonial policies bring up the National question. It i
worth finding out what role, if any, was played by anthropological
studies in the determination of these policies.

The Creation of “Nigeria”.
The end of the legitimate slave trade (1807) in Nigeria meant very
radical changes in the trading pattern. The British continued to
trade with the same pecople, but the commodities were now palm-oil
and ivory. After 1886, the trade was monopolised by the Royal
Niger Company, which, after the 1885 Berlin Conference had ac-
knowledged Britain’s claim to the area, was given power by Britain
“to administer, make treaties, levy customs and trade in all terri-
tories in the basin of the Niger and its affluents™.? At that time, the
Delta was declared “The Qil Rivers Protectorate” (1885). Over the
next few vears, Britain extended her control over the area through
traders and the establishment of consuls; when, in 1893, the Protcc-
torate was cxtended to the hinterland, the whole area was renamed
the Niger Coast Protectorate and in 1900 it became the Protectorate
of Southern Nigeria. Meanwhile Lagos had been annexed as a
colony in 1861 and in 1906 was amalgamated with the South to be-
come the Colony and Protectorate of Southern Nigeria. The North
had in 1900 become the Protectorate of Northern Nigeria when the
British Government took over from the Royal Niger Company. In
1914 Lugard amalgamated the two areas to form the Colony and
Protectorate of Nigeria.

The way in which this country was formed was due far more to

*J. S. Coleman: Nigeria, Background to Nationalism, p. 41.
HELEN LACKNER -

| than (o interna.tl pressures. By ¥he time of a{llalgamation
exterPe  as an artificial entity with no internal cohesion on which
“ngcnaa unified state: the North was composed of centralised
to base Emirates whose organisation had given rise to Lugard’s
ISIa-mlct Rule and the South East was made up of the remnants of
[nd?cmcr decentralised trading Statcs whose very structures had
the Odesu'oyed by the British®. The areas had previously been ad-
l;b,ﬁrilstcred in different ways because British interests in the North
and the South were divergent. Most of the country had been taken
over during the Scramble: pressurc on Britain’s trade froxp Frgnge
and Germany tilted the balance in favour of those forces in Britain
who supported full-scale colonisation; this indicated the defeat of
those who belicved that trade was possible without neccssarily
being accompanicd by occupation and administration of territory.

Despite amalgamation the North and the South remained separ-
ate entities and were administered as distinct provinces; the unifi-
cation of administration was a slow and unthought process :

Although the broad principles of the native administration

system were slowly extended from the north to thc south, the

diffcrent policics and conceptions of colonial administration

which had evolved in cach of the two Protectorates during the

fourteen years of their separate cxistence continued to dominate

official thought and action®.

Previous to amalgamation more thought had been given to the
administration of the North than to that of the South. This mcant that
later, the higher ranks of the administration in the united Nigeria
werc dominated by officers whose main experience and allegiance
was to the North and who were unaware of thc fundamental differ-
ences between the North and the South. Such men decided on poli-
cies for the South and, not surprisingly thcy madc some decisions
which had unsatisfactory results.

What were the main events in British Nigeria between amalga-
mation and the Sccond World War?

The first Governor was Sir Frederick Lugard (1914-19) who in-
troduced to thc South a version of Indirect Rule modelled on that
operating in the North: Native Courts and Native Authorities were
introduced in the South in 1914 and 1916 respectively. Lugard
wanted to unify the administration of the country by creating the

“For an excellent account of the history of the Niger Delta in the pre-
British period, see K. O. Dike: Trade and Politics in the Niger Delta
1830-1885.

'J. 8. Coleman, ibid., p. 46.
126 EASTERN NIGERIA 19204 4

same institutions everywhere. Apart from the two just Mentiop

he immediately proceeded to investigate the possibilities for thew'
troduction of direct taxation in the South. This proved feasible".l‘
some parts, but seemed inadvisable in the East, because of wh;n
the Administration termed the *“‘backwardness” of the Ibo. l

The next Governor, Sir Hugh Clifford (1919-25) had a differey,
interpretation of “Indirect Rule” from Lugard’s and spent hjs time
consolidating institutions rather than introducing new ones. Dy
his term of office, the situation in the East was investigated, pe,
cause, at that time already, it secmed clearly unsatisfactory®, T,
report made many recommendations which at that time were poy
implemented but were returned to ten years later after the Womep'g
War. In 1925 Sir Graeme Thomson succeeded Clifford and withoy
much consultation, decided to extend direct taxation in the East i
the form of a poll tax to be levied on adult males. Assessment of
the population for tax was begun in 1927 and caused fewer distur.
bances than had been expected. However many precautions were
taken in 1928 when the tax was to be collected for the first time.
The Government had concentrations of troops and police every-
where in case of need. In fact that year the tax was collected with
little difficulty. But before the Government had found time to con-
gratulate itself on such a success, things went wrong.

In 1929, which was a bad year in many ways, the slump started
affecting the palm-oil prices, and thus the general standard of living
in the East. It was also becoming apparent to the people that the
introduction of taxation had brought few if any benefits, despite the
claims made by the Administration in their pre-taxation propa-
ganda. A rumour developed in the East that women were also to be
taxed and this was confirmed when one particular Warrant Chief
Okugo counted womcn and children when assessing his area. This
incident started off what came to be known as the “Women’s War’’
or the ““Aba Riots”, in which thousands of women in the East
fought the Administration®. They were primarily concerned with
the destruction of the Native Courts and the Warrant Chief system.

‘See the Reports by Grier and Tomlinson in 1922 and 1923 on Policy in the
Eastern Region.

*The most detailed published account of the Women’s War is in M. Perham,
Native Administration in Nigeria, pp. 206-220. The Report of the Second
Commission of Enquiry gives enormous amounts of detailed information
on what happened, how and why; it is by far the most comprehensive
document on the subject. “Report of the Commission of Enquiry appointed
to inquire into the disturbances in the Calabar and Owerri provinces,
December 1929, Sessional Paper no. 28 of 1930, Government of Nigeria.
HELEN LACKNER 2
foreign institutions which had been imposed on the area re-
otally of local traditions. The women protested against taxation
g“'dlcss fall in palm-oil prices. The war lasted almost three weeks
ang 3:: Government had to call in troops to bring it to an end. They
an and killed large numbers of women.
Shgrthis event considerably affected the Colonial Administration and
.« officials were thoroughly shocked by it. First, it was an indication
lt: the total failure of the policies they had adopted to administer
fhc area and thus demanded radical changes in outlook. Second, a
long-lasting revolt by thousands of WOMEN (anywhere) who more-
over were neither accompanied nor led by men was a totally un-
heard of and outrageous phenomenon for a colonial Government, a
male chauvinist institution par excellence; it therefore called for
urgent investigation to ensure that such an outrage be not repeated.
Two Commissions of Enquiry were set up to discover the causes of
the war and to make recommendations, the second of which
went thoroughly into the background of these events. The contra-
dictions which were brought to light by the Women’s War are di-
rectly relevant to the theme of this study: —the dogmatic introduc-
tion of Indirect Rule from the North into the area without any
previous attempt at either estimating its suitability or adapting it to
the specific conditions of the South-East;—the total ignorance of
the Ibo’s social, political and economic structures. The discovery of
all these failures induced the government to develop its interest in
anthropological studies. We shall first look at the problematic of

Indirect Rule and its development in Nigeria.

Indirect Rule
Indirect Rule as a form of colonial administration arose as an
answer to a combination of factors. The British were faced with the
problem of administering vast expanses of conquered territories
throughout the planet with little money (because London’s colonial
policy at that period refused to spend much on administration) and
few men. Added to this, their previous experience in India had been
in centralised societies, ruled more or less autocratically by princes.
Northern Nigeria fitted easily into the pattern since it was com-
posed of Islamic Emirates, with Emirs who had considerable
authority and a clear hierarchy: on the surface therefore local
social organisation secmed quite suited to Indirect Rulc. Having
conquered the Emirates, Lugard was well aware of this and it allow-
ed him to introduce Indirect Rule in Africa. He determined a policy
described as follows by Lord Hailey:
128 EASTERN NIGERIA 192&1940

On the one hand, the Emirs were given Letters of Appointmey,

which made it clear that they were not regarded as possessjy t

sovereign powers, and that they were to obey the laws of Niger;

“The policy of Government was that these Chiefs should govemla'

their people not as independent but dependent rulers.” 1In the

terms subsequently used, their status was to be that of Wakilg

Governors, cxercising only such jurisdiction as might be confe,.

red on them by law. On the other hand, when in 1903 the terr;.

tory was divided into 14 Provinces, the Residents in charge of
them werce told that their duty was to act as advisers to the

Emirs, not to usurp their functions.”

Lugard is regarded as the initiator of Indirect Rule or Native Ag.
ministration, and after Amalgamation in 1914 he imported it lock
stock and barrel to the South. This had disastrous effects to which
we will return. But let us now look at the controversy about
Lugard’s concept of Native Administration.

One of his most virulent critics says ‘‘one can sce that Lugard’s
idea of rule was simple autocratic rule from himself downwards™:
in his book Nicolson portrays a dictatorial ambitious man primarily
conccrned with his own political advancement, with little interest in
the welfarc of thos¢ whom he administered. He gives the impression
that what we know as Lugard’s Indirect Rule system, was nothing
more than a channel for his own decisions to be transmitted to the
people and implemented by them. Whatever the case may be,
Lugard’s ideas werc not followed precisely by his successors, and
while he saw Indirect Rule as a way to transmit orders through the
people’s traditional rulers, his successors saw it as the government
of colonial subjects through their own institutions. Lugard saw it as
a form of Local Government that would be a medium for the intro-
duction of radical changes in the society :

However, many of Lugard’s successors followed a policy of mini-

mal interference in the process of local government, preferring

to let the traditional political institutions develop along

their own lines rather than along lines laid down or suggested by

the European administrator. In its extreme forms such a policy

came close to a Protectorate or ‘Native States’ policy, whilst that
of Lugard, in its extreme forms, came close to Paternalism.

Lugard’s policy can be characterised as Interventionist Indirect

"Lord Hailey, Native Administration in the British African Territories,
Part III, West Africa, Nigeria, London, HM.S.0O. p. 48.

"1. l;’é_’Nicholson, The Administration of Nigeria 1900-1960, O.U.P. 1969,
p.
129

that of his successors, Non-Interventionist Rule.?

Rule. pat came to be known as Indirect Rule in Africa was the

fact ‘:f Colonial Administration first applied by the British in
sy§te‘r.’ There was 10 claborated set of principles to guide admini-
Nigeria- no “Guide to Indirect Rule”’; Indirect Rule usually de-
strators, as a policy from decisions taken empirically. Its practice
velop ded that it be “‘theorized” and we are now looking at the
deman f this form of administration as it was developed by its

. o
ldr‘;,?;lt(i)tgic))(ners. mainly servants of the Colonial Administration at all

jevels of the hierarchy. .
As seen by Lugard’s successors, Indirect Rule meant that:

the European colonial powers should govern their African sub-
jects through their own political institutions. Here it is very neces-
sary to emphasise that Indirect Rule, at least in theory, did not
mean government of African peoples through their chiefs. In
practicc, Indirect Rule laid heavy emphasis on the role of the
chief in the government of African peoples, even for those peoples
who traditionally did not have political as distinct from religious
leaders.*’
As it was first introduced in the North of Nigeria, Indirect Rule
was a very successful system of administration. This was due main-
ly to the already very hierarchised organisation of the Emirates
which were autocratic and were thus good vehicles for the adminis-
tration, as it thought it could add a new level at the top of the hier-
archy and the system would continuc to operate. However the
notion that Indirect Rule allowed the traditional system to develop
along its own lines is obviously a mystification. It was clearly im-
possible for thc colonial administration to use the native system
without distorting it, since any system operates to bring about certain
ends, and the aims of the British were clearly different from those
of the previous system; therefore the dynamic had been changed.
Administrators seemed to be unaware that the ‘“‘changes™ they de-
manded would inducc a thorough disruption of the original political
system and destroy its base. As Crowder put it:
The use of indigenous political institutions for the purposes of
local government was contingent on certain modifications to these
institutions. These modifications fell into two categories: modi-
fications of aspects of traditional Government that were repug-
nant to European ideas of what constituted good government;

*M. Crowder, West Africa Under Colonial Rule, London 1968, p. 169.
°1bid., p. 169.
130 EASTERN NIGERIA 192&194

and modifications that were designed to ensure the achievemey,
of the main purpose of colonial rule, the exploitation of the col
nised country. Examples of the former would be the abolitigp ofo '
human sacrifice or the abandonment of certain methods of treg_
ing criminals. Examples of the latter would be the introductioy,
of taxes, designed to stimulate production of cash crops for
export.''
It is precisely because the British Government’s aims and interesyg
were different from those of the traditional systems that they foypg
it necessary to impose basic changes in the traditional system. Djf.
ferent economic and political interests could not fail to change the
ideology of the ruling structure. This is very clear in cascs like that
of land tenure (in the traditional system there is no private owner.
ship of land, because ultimate ownership is the prerogative of the
ancestors, gods or whatever, whereas after British occupation, land
became just another object of investment). The ideological basis of
the traditional system has been destroyed. This has been put very
well by Rattray:
In introducing indirect rule into this country, we would thercfore
appear to be encouraging on the one hand an institution which
draws its inspiration and validity from the indigenous religious
beliefs, while on the other hand we are destroying the very foun-
dation upon which the structure we are striving to perpetuate
stands. Its shell and outward form might remain, but it would
seem too much to expect that its vital energy could survive such
a process.'?
Indirect rule was, within its own limits, quite successful in thc
Northern Emirates, because of the hicrarchical nature of the tradi-
tional system. But what happened in the South? As far as the
South-West is concerned, success was limited, due to the fact that:
Although fairly strong traditional authorities were in power in
that area, the kings (obas) were ultimatcly accountable to, if not
the mouthpieces for, councils of hereditary title holders and rep-
resentatives of societies. The idea of direct taxation was only
slowly and reluctantly accepted.'®
The real problems however appeared in the South-East. Unlike
the North, which previous to colonisation had been hierarchised and
centralised, the political organisation of the South-Eastern Ibo arca

"'Ibid., p. 169.

“R. S. Rattray, Ashanti Law and Constitution, London 1929, p. ix.
). S. Coleman, ibid., p. 51.
N LA CKNER 131
been decentralised and small scale. The village had been the
had unit, and political “‘authority” articulated through mass
P"m- s: chiefs and council elders occupied merely presidential
meet{l;is’ and were invested with no executive power. Other forms
‘mc? anisation such as age-grades, secret societics, and women'’s
Ofoon%sations could if necessary act to counter any decision.
OrThe, first steps towards the introduction of indirect rule in the
south-East had been the setting up of Native Courts in 1914 and
Native Authorities in 1916, these measures had been taken to put
Lugard’s principlcs into app.lication. These institutions bc?re no re-
lation to the traditional political system. Very early on, this form of
administration was scen to be an abysmal failure. Clifford, in 1919
-mmediately suggested that it be investigated. This investigation
produced the reports by Gricr and Tomlinson in 1922 and 1923,
summarised thus by Crowder:
Indirect Rule had been an almost total failure. Despite superficial
trappings, the area was in fact administered directly. The warrant
chiefs were cxceedingly unpopular with the people and were
backed up by little, if any, traditional authority. They were
generally corrupt. Worse still, the native courts, the main agen-
cies for British Administration, were deeply resented. The court
clerks and court messengers abused their positions of power so
blatantly that they wcre described in the report as ‘licensed
libertines’.'*
Despite the very early awareness of the failure of this system, and
the recommendations made by Grier and Tomlinson no steps were
taken. Among their recommendations were some relating to investi-
gation of traditional institutions but no changes were made and the
System was maintained. When in 1926, Governor Thomson decided
to introduce direct taxation into the area, those were the channels
used. Direct taxation was seen by Thomson in Lugardian terms:
‘without a tax therc can be no treasury and without a treasury no
rcal eventual measure of sclf rule’ (Lugard : The Dual Mandate)
.. . 1t must be clearly understood that the present proposals are
~ not primarily inspired by financial considerations.'®
In the same document Ruxton, the Lieutenant Governor of the
Southern Provinces says that the:
chief rcason for introducing taxation is an administrative one:
therc can be no true advance without direct taxation and no pro-

HE

"“M. Crowder, The Story of Nigeria, 1962, p. 231.
“Colonial Office, Correspondence, November 1926, file X811-.
132 EASTERN NIGERIA 192014,

gress in sclf-government without experience in controlling a¢ leg

a part of the revenue locally raised. Moreover, to tax 18 Provip %

and to leave 6 untaxed for no avowable reason must have a5 m(ies

effect on both the taxed and the untaxed.**
Thus the introduction of direct taxation was seen to be an essen.
tial concomitant of indirect rule, and in this case, it demonstrageg
the bankruptcy of the system. This was revealed by the Womep,
War, which was directed as much against the Native Courts and
Warrant Chiefs as against taxation as such.

It was only after 1930, that the problems of Indirect Rule in the
South were seriously faced by the colonial administration. The Re.
port of the Commission of Enquiry into the Aba Riots emphasiseg
the importance for government to be familiar with native instity.
tions. This was given official sanction when Lord Passfield, thep
Secretary of State for the Colonies, wrote:

The nced for further enquiry into the social organisation of the

inhabitants of the South-Eastern Provinces naturally suggests the

question to what extent the services of investigators trained in
anthropological science has been, and may still be profitably
employed . . . I propose to take steps to improve and increase

the amount of instruction in anthropology imparted to newly-

appointed administrative officers who are busily engaged in the

work of administration to carry out anthropological research of

great value.'’
It is now becoming clear how, in the understanding of top-level
administrators, the failure of Indirect Rule in South-Eastern Nigeria
was seen to be directly related to lack of knowledge of local con-
ditions and Ibo social Organisation. Lord Passfield’s recognition of
the use of anthropologists seems to be a good starting point for a
more careful look at the colonial government’s attitude towards an-
thropologists. We will later attempt to examine the dynamics of the
relationship between indirect rule and British School social anthro-

pology.

The Colonial Office’s View of Anthropology
Throughout the colonial period, the Colonial Office had a most am-

LIbid.

""Despatch from the Secretary of State for the Colonies to the officer ad-
ministering the Government of Nigeria regarding the Report of the Com-
mission of Inquiry into the Disturbances at Aba and other places in South-
Eastern Nigeria in November and December 1929, Cmd 3784, of 1931.
N LA CENER 133

s attitude towards anthropologists, at times wanting to hire
d at other times maintaining that the work could be done

them an . s . . e

B s well by political officers. They wavered in a similar manner

just am lue of anthropological work as such.

er the va > .

m;‘ the correspondence arising out of the Aba Commission Re-

r':m the whole issue of the employment of anthropologists was
thoroughly debated in the Colonial Office. The survey goes back to
the employment of Northcote Thomas and also discusses contem-
porary issues.

The memorandum on the employment of Northcote Thomas,
compared to the letters discussing the problem in 1930, shows that
the terms of the debate had not changed, even though the outcome
had. In the first decade of the century the Lugardian anti-anthro-

ologist faction won and the anthropologist was dismissed; in the
late 1920s at the time of post-Lugardian Indirect Rule, under the
influence of Clifford and more emphatically after the Aba Riots
Report and Lord Passfield’s despatch, anthropology was in high
regard.

iet us look at Northcote Thomas’s career: he was the first
government anthropologist ever to be appointed, first in Nigeria in
1906 then in Sierra Leone where he was transferred in 1913. He
wrote a six-volume ‘‘Report on the Ibo-speaking Peoples of
Nigeria” published in 1913. The first and fourth volumes deal with
“Law’’ in two Ibo areas, and the other volumes are concerned with
languages and proverbs.

In 1930 a memorandum on the employment of Northcote
Thomas was circulated in the Colonial Office by a Mr. Fiddian'®
who tells us that Northcote Thomas was appointed Government an-
thropologist in 1906 because it was felt that the information collec-
ted in a questionnaire sent to District officers was insufficient and it
was necessary to have it studied and elaborated by an expert.
Northcote Thomas spent three tours of service in the Ibo and Edo
areas. In 1912, when the termination of his appointment was con-
sidered Mr. James, who opposed this suggestion, sent a report
saying:

there was no question of the ultimate value of anthropological

work in connection with the problem of administering a country

biguo¥

“i(i:ldoniall Ooogﬁce, Correspondence arising out of the Aba Report, 1930-31,

e no. .

"Colonial Office, Ibid., Document E, Memorandum entitled “Appointment
of 3%11 Anthropologist to West Africa” by Mr. Fiddian, dated 16 December,
1930.
134 EASTERN NIGERIA ] 92@19 40

like this, but he feared it was sometimes difficult to avoid ove;.

looking the ultimate benefits in view of the apparently smal] re.

sults achieved in actual practice in the early years of such wor 2
The appointment was renewed, but when the question next capy,
up, it was handled by Lugard?®' who says in his report:

I am, generally speaking, inclined to think that researches into

native law and custom are best conducted by Political Officers

and I have found that in Northern Rhodesia there is no lack of
qualified officers who are deeply interested and quite capable of
reproducing their work in book form. . . #
Lugard then recommends the termination of Thomas’s appoint.
ment, and he is transferred to Sierra Leone. In the same memoran-
dum Fiddian writes about the next developments in the administra-
tion concerning anthropology.

Governor Clifford had initially shown more interest in the work-
ings of native institutions and had asked Grier and Tomlinson to
report on the state of Indirect Rule in the East from the point of
view of Native affairs. In 1923, Governor Clifford thought of :

forming an anthropology department on the grounds that con-

ditions in Nigeria were ‘changing so rapidly that many things of
great scientific value’ were vanishing. It was not, apparently, pri-
marily in Sir H. Clifford’s view, a matter of direct interest to the
administrative side. The Lieutenant-Governor, Southern Pro-
vinces, and the Acting Lieutenant-Governor, Northern Provinces,
expressed themsclves strongly in favour of encouraging ethno-
logical and anthropological research . . . (they were of the opin-
ion . . . that scientific study of tribal origins and institutions is
vital to successful administration, and that much valuable infor-
mation was being lost for the want of collating and sifting by an
expert hand.*
The plan for such a department was never implemented. There
were only however, reports such as Grier and Tomlinson’s on the
administration of the East and local Residents’ reports over the
period when the introduction of direct taxation was being planned.
These reports often emphasised the problem of the administration’s

*1bid.

*1G. Leclerc, Anthropologie et Colonialisme (1972). His interpretation is that
Lugard supports the employment of anthropologists (see pp. 48-52). This
book will be discussed further in the conclusion. It is to be noted however,
that Leclerc, who uses Nigeria as his most precise and frequent illustration,
appears to interpret many points differently from me.

"""Co:ionial Office, Ibid. Document E.

21bid,
Lgnorance of native affairs, as can be seen from the following report
OfI‘gg no record of any attempt having been made to enquire into
the native institutions and turn them to good account. .. The
first step to take . . . is to make a thorough gmquiry into the clan
and town organisation throughout the province.** .
The accumulation of problems in the East, combined with many
reports similar to the one quoted above and the willingness of the
upper ranks of the administration led in 1927 to the appointment of
an anthropological officer in the South.”* Despite this the debate
went on in the Colonial Office about the value of anthropology.
Commenting on the Fiddian memorandum another Colonial office
administrator wrote in his minutes:
with regard to the anthropologist, I am inclined to sit upon the
fence . . . The anthropologist is presumably a man with a scien-
tific turn of mind. If he has not got the scientific turn of mind he
is no use as an investigator. It does not always follow that a man
of this kind will either fit in well with the administration or that
he will render immediate assistance to them.?®
His attitude is brought out quite clearly in his references to North-
cote Thomas who, says Flood :
was a recognised maniac in many ways. He wore sandals, even
in this country, lived on vegetables, and was generally a rum
person.?”
Flood goes on to explain that clearly residents did not want:
to have an object like that going about . . . partly because he was
calculated to bring a certain amount of discredit upon the white
man’s prestige.?®
Commenting on this issue, Tomlinson writes :
The need for further investigation makes me all the more inclined
to agree with Mr. Fiddian about the importance of anthropologi-

*Colonial Office, Correspondence, 1928, file no. 183, para. 9. Report by
W. E. Hunt, then Resident of Warri Province, dated 10.1.28.

**At this time also, local residents and all local administrative officers were
first asked to write “Intelligence Reports’” on the traditional institutions in
their areas. These reports were regularly produced and finally, by the
middle 1930s, they numbered in hundreds—199 in 1934 (see the Annual
Report of the Government of Nigeria for 1934, p. 8). These reports were
used in deciding on policies for the reorganisation of Native administration
in the Eastern Province.

*Colonial Office, Correspondence arising out of the Aba Commission

"5,8'50"' file no. 1003, Document F by Flood, dated 19.12.30.

id.

“*1bid.

136 EASTERN NIGERIA 192&1940

cal research. This does not necessarily mean that trained anthy,.
pologists should be brought in from the outside. There are plep
of officers already in the service who have received adequate ay,.
thropological training. The great thing is that their enquiries
should not be conducted in the spirit of antiquarian research, by
should be directed to those problems, i.e. to the problems presep,.
ted by native society as a living and changing organism, which
are of immediate practical importance to the Administrative
Officer. What is meant is that they should be followers of the
school of which such men as Professor Malinowski are the chief
exponents.?’
Governor Cameron was appointed in Nigeria at the height of the
debate, when the Recommendations of the Commission of Enquiry
were being discussed. Taking up the point made by Lord Passfield,
in his Despatch, Cameron writes :
The work of tracing out native institutions has been done in the
past, in both Nigeria and Tanganyika, very competently by ad-
ministrative officers without any special anthropological training.
The best use to which the anthropologist can be put in this con-
nexion, in my judgment, is to place him at headquarters where he
can study the reports rendered by officers engaged in the field on
this class of investigation and direct them and guide them as to
further avenues to be explored. For the most part the Anthro-
pologist attached to the Southern Provinces is being utilized in
this manner. . . *°
This debate appears to be the most thorough one that took place in
the Colonial office about anthropology. What emerges from it is that
in the post-Lugardian period there was general agreement that
knowledge of the native institutions was necessary for good admini-
stration. Disagreements were due to a split between those who
thought that local political officers with a minimum of anthropolo-
gical training could do the work just as well and those who believed
in employing professional anthropologists. Finally a compromise
was reached by increasing the anthropological training of all staff
and by the appointment of anthropological offiers in the North and
in the South.
Aside from the discussions in the Colonial Office itself, many
discussions took place in milieus interested in colonial administra-

1bid. Document T Minute by Tomlinson, dated 3.1.31.
"Colonial Office, Correspondence File no. 1056, 1931: letter from Governor
Cameron to Lord Passfield, dated 17.8.31.
HELEN LACKNER 137

. In 1934 Miss M. Perham gave a talk to the Royal Society of
nOIt: on Indirect Rule in Africa.’! In the discussion following the
talk the problem of anthropologists was raised and.similar points to
those we have seen were put forward by academics as well as by
administrators. Similarly in the pages gf the J.RAI and Man the
problem was discussed from the beginning of the century. We shall
return to this later, but would just mention that Man saw fit to print
in its pages Lord Lugard’s ““Address at the Reception to Dominions
Premiers and Delegates to the Imperial Conference” (10 October,
1930) entitled “Anthropology and Administration*2,

Lord Hailey’s ““African Survey”, first published in 1938, which
was intended as a guide on African affairs to all those concerned
with the administration of colonies and with trade, has a whole sec-
tion on ‘‘Studies in African Social life”’**. This is a survey of the
activities of anthropologists in Africa of the necessity for such
studies, and of the possibilities of anthropological training. Lord
Hailey maintains that professional anthropologists are necessary be-
cause they are best qualificd to make full-time lengthy and detailed
studies and he regrets the absence of direct support from Govern-
ments.

The administrative officer as an anthropological enquirer works

under certain disadvantages. His relations with Africans are apt

to be colourcd by the fact that he represents the government . . .

When . . . inquiries on specific subjects have to be undertaken . . .

the government officer with a training in anthropological methods

is likely to prove a successful investigator only provided that he is
allowed to devote sufficient time to the purpose. The professional
anthropologist should, however, be able to provide a more com-
plete picture of native society, and, in areas where native institu-
tions are least understood, he is likely to be of great assistance

in providing the government with the knowledge which must

form the basis of administrative policy. In general, it may be said

that governments are likely to derive the greatest advantage from
inquiries undertaken by anthropologists in association with their
own technical or administrative officers.%*
These ambiguities in the official section of opinion appear to have
carried on throughout the Colonial period. Anthropologists on the

“Journal of the Royal Society of Arts, vol. LXXXII, 1934.
“Man, vol. 30, 1930.

“Lord Hailey, An African Survey, London 1938, pp. 40-67.
“Ibid., pp. 47-8.
138 EASTERN NIGERIA 1920-]94,

other hand had a much firmer line on their relationship with g,
Administration; it is their position which we will examine ip the
next section.

Anthropologists from Administration to Academia

From the creation of the Royal Anthropological Institute until the
Sccond World War, anthropologists were interested in developing 5
closer relationship with Colonial Administrations. This we will see
in the rccords mentioned in the J.RAI and Man. After 1945 4
definite shift towards academic distance and away from involvemeng
in politico-administrative affairs took place’; this can be scen by
the absence of any articles on the connection with administration
and in a much more academic tone in book-reviews and other
articles.

We will now look in more detail at the evolution of attitude as it
is reflected in the J.RAI and in Man. In 1896 the British Associa-
tion passed the following resolution:

that it is of urgent importance to press upon the government the

necessity of establishing a Bureau of Ethnology for Great Britain,

wtich by collecting information with regard to the native races

within and on the borders of the Empire, will prove of immense

value to science and to the Government itsclf.**
This project failed for lack of financial support, but a few ycars
later (in 1908) it was taken up again with the collaboration of the
RAI and got as far as a deputation to the Prime Minister, Asquith.
A memorial was prescnted to the Prime Minister®” stressing that
administrators should have anthropological training, that anthro-
pology is of direct relevance to administration and all matters con-
cerning natives. In the discussion with the Prime Minister, great
emphasis was laid on the fact that anthropology is of great impor-
tance to traders who might, for lack of knowledge of local customs,
ruin their position, by behaving unsuitably or attempting to sell the
wrong things. The deputation quoted in this respect the example of
the Prussian Government who made a point of giving anthropologi-
cal education to its traders, at great expense.*® The main point was
to demonstrate the benefits to Government of using anthropolo-
gIsts

3Leclerc thinks that after the war, anthropologists were very vocal about
their relationship to administration. [ have found no evidence for this.

"Proceediggs of the British Association, 1896, quoted in J.RAI vol. 59,
1929, p. 38.

YJ.RAIT vol. 38, 1908, pp. 489-92.

*Man, vol. IX 1909, p. 857.
JELEN LACKNER 139
1t has long been felt by anthropologists that the study of anthro-
ology possesses not merely a scientific interest but has also great
ractical utility for the nation. . . From mere ignorance of local
habits and customs, travellers, missionaries and others not infre-
quently have provoked the natives instead of gaining their sym-
athy, and thus not only have nullified the results of costly ex-
peditions, but also have caused political difficulties and compli-
cations.*’
Indeed, from the beginning of the century onwards, the RAI was
emphasising at every opportunity the need for a closer relationship
with the government. The pages of its journal continuously reflect
this interest. In 1914 Sir R. Temple*® gave a lecture to probationers
of the Indian Civil Service, entitled ‘“The value of training in An-
thropology for the administrator™; it is general and not particularly
enlightening in terms of anthropology but was printed in Man.*'
Temple was in fact very active in trying to develop Anthropology
as an aid to administration. He was constantly encouraging the de-
velopment of teaching dcpartments and of Institutes; he chaired a
committee aimed at ‘‘devising practical measures for the organisa-
tion of anthropological teaching at the Universities . . . 7’42, At that
time there was already a move in favour of sctting up an “Imperial
School of Applied Anthropology’’. This was formulated at a con-
ference chaired by Lord Selborne and attended by representatives
of Government, University and Museum circles, at which the fol-
lowing resolution was passed :
That this Conference . . . is of the opinion that, in the highest
intercsts of thc Empire, it is necessary so to extend and complete
the organisation of the teaching of Anthropology at the Univer-
sitics of Great Britain, that those who are about to spend their
lives in the East or in parts of the Empire inhabited by non-
European races, shall at the outset of their careers possess, or
have the opportunity of acquiring a sound and accurate
knowledge of the habits, customs, social and religious ideas and
ideals of the Eastern and non-European races subject to His
Majesty the King-Emperor’*®,

J.RAI vol. 38, 1908, pp. 489-90.

*Sir R. Temple was very active over a period of years; some of his talks
?ggl activities are related in the J.RAI e.g. Man, vol. 14, 1914; vol. XXI,

‘'Man, vol. 14, 1914, item no. 19.

“*Man, vol. 21, 1921, p. 151.

*Ibid., p. 152.
140 EASTERN NIGERIA 1920\19‘10

This project was dropped in 1914 because of the War but taken
again after the War by Temple who in 1921 outlined in detaj) Wl;lap
should be done to set up this school. t

Throughout the 1920s and the 1930s, the yearly presidentia) Ad
dresses to the RAI reflect the concern on the part of Anthropologg,
to develop their subject of study to fit the demands of the admipjs.
tration of colonies. Many of these addresses refer precisely to the
problems involved in the relationship between Anthropologists apg
administrators. In 1929 Professor J. Myres spoke on “The science of
Man in the Service of the State”** in which he discusses the relatiop,.
ship of anthropology and the government, the attempts at setting yp
various anthropological institutions and the development of the
teaching of anthropology to Colonial Office staff. In 1934, the Rey.
E. W. Smith spoke on ‘“Anthropology and the Practical Man™+%; i
1944, Lord Hailey spoke of ‘The Role of Anthropology in Colonial
Development™** at the mecting celebrating the centenary of the
RAI

All the articles for the period up to 1945, including reviews, stress
in a very precise way a direct link between anthropological work and
administration of the Colonies. The question asked is “How useful is
this kind of work to Administration?”’ even when dealing with ac-
ademic topics or works; book reviews are written relating books to
the administrative context: for example the review by Lucy Mair of
Meek’s “Law and Authority in a Nigerian Tribe’ (1937)*7 first gives
a historical sketch of indirect rule in the East, and then looks at the
value of the book in terms of how the' administration can use the
village traditional system for the nomination of chiefs. The review
by Meek of S. Leith-Ross’s ‘‘African Women” in 1939*® first ex-
amines the importance of studying women in the Eastern Nigerian
context, in terms of the War, and picks out for attention in the book
items relating to westernisation, problems of education and the
church. The book is looked at in a purely practical way from the
point of view of administration and judged useful as such. Nothing
is said of its formal academic qualities which are in fact remarkable
by their absence. Similarly in 1943 Margaret Read’s review of
Margaret Green’s ‘Land tenure in an Ibo village’*® considers the

“J.RAI, vol. LIX, 1929, pp. 19-52.
“J.RAI, vol. LX1V, 1934.

‘“*Man, vol. 44, 1944.

‘"Man, vol. 37, 1937, item no. 226.
“Man, vol. 39, 1939, item no. 100.
““Man, vol. 43, item no. 29.
gEN LA CENER 141

ok from the point of view of its contribution to solving problems
<ial and economic change. . .

of sowr the war on the other hand the whole tone of discussion

Al es. Articles are concerned with anthropology as an academic
Chﬁ‘.lg t, 1here is a great interest in developing theory and reviews are
5‘,‘-‘{"; in terms of academic merit. For example P. Bohannan’s re-
"'.nw of M. Green’s “Ibo village Affairs’*® stresses the book’s valuc
v;can academic study, the quality of its anthropological analysis
:'hen in fact this study was written in the same spirit as S. Leith-
Ross’s, that is as an aid to administration, a study of women becausc
there was concern in the Administration about Women in Eastern
Nigeria after the Women’s War. .

A long article in 1949 ‘Anthropology and Colonial Affairs’®! is a
summary of the contributions by Evans-Pritchard and Firth to a
meeting at the RAIL The article gives an account of the Colonial
Social Science Research Council and how useful it can be to anthro-
pologists. Despitc statements like:

Anthropology is benefitting a great deal in some ways by its new

reactions to colonial affairs®?
the general tone is one that is revealed more by this statement :

in some academic circles, there is a fear lest the colonial tail wag

the anthropological dog—Ilest basic scientific problems be over-

looked in favour of those of more pressing practical interest>?.
The concern is no longer so much about anthropology helping colo-
nial administration, instead the emphasis is on developing theory
and becoming a full-scale academic subject. Another view on the
value of the CSSRC is given by Lucy Mair in 1950 who says of the
then Colonial Development and Welfare Fund created in 1940:

Some of the investigations that this fund has made possible have

been dictated by the personal interests of the workers, but others

have been carried out at the request of governments who believe
that they can utilize the results.’*
After this date, the problems of colonial administration hardly ap-
pear in the RAI’s publications and there are more and more articles
on theory; there is a feeling of wanting to forget the sordid past of
involvement in concrete problems. This has been done so success-
fully that today, people tend to assume that anthropology is totally

**Man, vol. 49, 1949, item no. 85.

**Man, vol. 49, 1949, item no. 179.

**Ibid., p. 138.

**Ibid., p. 138.

*L. Mair, Anthropology and Social Change, London 1969, p. 41.
142 EASTERN NIGERIA 192&19 4

unconnected with any concrete political activities.

Clearly this change of emphasis in Anthropology as well g the
present theoretical and other problems of the subject are relateq to
the historical changes that have taken place in the Colonial Woyjy
since the end of the Second World War.

Anthropological Work
Let us now see what anthropological work got done in Eastery
Nigeria, particularly as a consequence of Lord Passfield’s recop.
mendation that such work should be undertaken. Before 1930 there
had been only a very limited anthropological interest in Easterp
Nigeria; Basden, a missionary, had written a book *“Niger Ibos”
(1938) after spending 40 years in Iboland. The first Government
anthropologist Northcote Thomas in the first decade of the century
had written a long report on the Ibo. The bankruptcy of Indirect
Rule in the East, the Women’s War in 1929, and the recommen-
dations of the Commission of Inquiry supported by the Secretary of
State for the Colonies, all combined to encourage a great develop-
ment of anthropological studies in Eastern Nigeria; some of these
studies were by professional anthropologists, but most were by ad-
ministrators. These works none of which are by major anthropolo-
gists, are all functionalist studies of specific problems. The choicc of
problems dealt with can also be looked at in terms of the specific
difficulties faced by the colonial administration in that area at that
time. There are for example a large number of studies of land
tenure** over a period of 10 years. Of these four, three are by ad-
ministrative officers who have followed the advice of the Colonial
Office and developed a more profound interest in anthropology. The
main concern of thesc studies is to give a clear and complete picture
of land tenure systems, which would be of use in determining policy.
The other topic which is uncommonly emphasised is that of
women. Two women anthropologists (M. Green and S. Leith-Ross)
went to Iboland in the early 1930s to study the local women. This
was due to the interest in women taken by the administration fol-
lowing the Women’s War, when there was seen to be an urgent need
to analyse both Ibo women and Ibo society as seen by women.
The two volumes devoted by Northcote Thomas to topics other
than language are entitled ‘Law and Custom of the 1bo of the Asaba

*See: M. Green, Land Tenure in an Ibo Village, 1941; J. D. Field Sale of
Land in an Ibo Community, Nigeria, in Man, vol. 45, 1945. L. T. Chubb,
Ibo Land Tenure, 1947, a Report made for a committee chaired by Lord
Hailey; G. 1. Jones, Ibo Land Tenure, Africa, 1949.
pistricts, S. Nigeria” and{,aw and Custom of t,he lbo of the Awka
Nei ghbourhaod. S. Nigeria”. These are Thomas’s books on anthro-

Jogy, both of which have long sections on religion and on rituals
f:r a1l moments of life. These books are descriptive rather than
analytic. They do however describe the main moments gf life in the
area referred to and give an idea of the rules and regulations that are
applied t0 religion, marriage, dispute-settlements and various other
matters. One point of interest is that Northcote Thomas does men-
tion some people as being ‘“‘chiefs” or “kings” in his areas, and sug-
gests that they have positions of authority. This is relevant since it

ses the question whether his statements were taken into account
when the Warrant chief system was introduced in the area at about
the same time as his studies.

In a more general way his works are still in the tradition of pre-
functionalist evolutionist anthropology. The emphasis is on laws,
inheritance, land ownership, religion, rituals, etc., but he does not
consider kinship to be the basis of social organisation, as functional-
ists do. His remarks on kinship are brief and he is clearly less in-
terested in that than in any other aspects of his studies. He also
looks at his work in terms of western administrative concepts, and
there is evidence that he has paid great attention to collecting
material on matters that would be relevant to the administration.

Of the work in the 1930s which followed the Women’s War, the
outstanding authors are C. K. Meek, M. Green and S. Leith-Ross.
We shall examine their books in turn, emphasising only their main
concern.

C. K. Meek was an administrative officer who was transferred to
the South as anthropological officer in 1929. His book was published
in 1937 and its preoccupations are made quite clear mercly by its
tile: “Law and Authority in a Nigerian Tribe”. His introduction
starts with a description of the Women’s War and its role in shaking
the administration out of apathy. He explains the failure of Indirect
Rule through the absence of chiefs. His job as government anthro-
pologist was to assist in the investigations being carried out by local
administrators into:

the indigenous social and political organisation of the peoples of

South-Eastern Nigeria, with a view to setting up native Adminis-

trations which would be more in accordance with the institutions

and wishes of the people.*®
Meek had to leave Nigeria in 1932 for health reasons and wrote this

*C. K. Meek, Law and Authority in a Nigerian Tribe, 1937, p. xi.
144 EASTERN NIGERIA l920~1940

book feeling that his material :
might be of value to students of anthropology and sociology, ag
well as to Administrative, Judicial and Educational Officers of the
Colonial Service.*’
His study is directed :
towards ascertaining the general principles by which the Ibo
community governed themselves.®®
His understanding of anthropology is very much that of an adminjs.
trator and he says that the Government’s attitude towards anthro.
pological research has always been:
that it should serve as the handmaiden to administration by
throwing light on the history, relationships, organisation, and
thoughts of the people, and so providing data which would help
the Government to make the fullest use of Native institutions as
instruments of local administration.*®
His book does not reflect these interests. His first chapters are on
religion, and this because:
religion is . . . the handmaiden of the law . . . Among the Ibo,
religion and law are so closely interwoven that many of the most
powerful legal sanctions are derived directly from the gods*’
He finds the social and political structure *“‘closely interwoven’ with
law and authority :
the necessity of studying the social structure is proportionately
greater among peoples lacking a central form of government, as
their modes of regulating conduct are highly complex and by no
means obvious to a European observer.®!
In fact, in the chapters devoted to political and social structure his
description does centre on leadership, he is more interested in find-
ing out who dominates the operation of the system than in examin-
ing the system itself. His later chapters are about the kinds of
groupings that can be found among the Ibo, like title associations,
age-grade societies; in these also he is primarily concerned with their
development under European rule, and in the case of the title system
tells us that it is collapsing because of the new priorities that are
emerging. In the chapters on law, and the final ones, he merely
describes procedure.
His concluding chapter is called “‘Practical Conclusions” and by

*Ibid., p.

**Ibid., p.
*Ibid., p.
*Ibid., p.

-k-R-E-E-

“Ibid.,
HELEN LACKNER 145

‘his he means concrete advice to Govcmmept. He first {edeﬁnes

Indirect Rule and says that it should be possxbk? to apply it to de-

centralised societies such as the Ibo, but that it is more difficult
use there are no rulers.

This book can be regarded as very useful both for the anthro-

logist, who is given all the information he needs presented in a
functional framework, and for the administrator for whom this
emphasis is intended and who can then see hqvi{ he can use the
traditional social system in reorganising the administration.

The second book is S. Leith-Ross’s “African Women’’ (1939). This
is a study specifically of women, when as a consequence of the
women’s War, she and M. Green were given Leverhulme scholar-
ships to go and study Ibo women. S. Leith-Ross is more general and
Jess anthropological, surveying the position of women from an iso-
lated rural area to Port Harcourt. It is more a travel diary and a
collection of observations than an anthropological analysis. In this
sense it is quitc interesting insofar as she reports some of the re-
actions to the Women’s War that were mentioned to her. She also
describes some of the main rites de passage in life in the four areas
she has picked out, how the organisation of institutions like bride-
wealth, for example, change from being more “‘primitive’’ to being
more “westernised’’ depending on the area studied. She defines her
four types of women as—primitive in the absolutely non-westernised
area,—sophisticated and primitive women in the villages with mini-
mal regular contact with the administration,—women in transition
in the smaller towns, and sophisticated women in the large towns
(this categorisation is reminiscent of Redfield’s Folk-urban con-
tinuum). She also examines the problem of westernisation in towns,
of urbanisation, of the relationships bétween blacks and whites, the
role of missions, education, new crafts etc. On the whole it is an
interesting narrative; the main reproach one can make is the total
absence of analysis in the academic anthropological sense. The ap-
proach to the problems of Nigeria of that time are useful in the
sense that they reveal very clearly the attitude of an ‘‘enlightened
administrator”, paternalistic and extremely ethnocentric which most
likely reflected the author’s background and outlook as the widow
of an officer in Nigeria and the sister of another.

Margaret Green’s book on the other hand is a very typical anthro-
pological monograph. Though she did her fieldwork in the 1930s at
the same time as S. Leith-Ross, her book was only published in
1947. It is not specifically about women, but it does put considerable
emphasis on the réle of women, and on women’s organisations. The
146 EASTERN NIGERIA 192&1940

main point of the book is to provide an anthropological analys;s

a small village. She describes most of the institutions of the vinaof
and fits them into a structure, locates her small village withip tﬁe
village group, and analyses her material mainly in terms of loca]
kinship groups (unlike Meek); she sees the divisions withip the
village in terms of kinship, and looks closely at the social structy,
in terms of exogamy. Exogamy helps to explain how women cap p,
so well organised over a large area producing women’s organjs,.
tions relating both to the village of marriage and to the natal village,

Throughout her book we also find that she is looking for peop]e
who have special authority, to see how much authority they havye
and how it is determined and distributed. She is a functionalist iy
her approach and believes that “in any society institutions arise in
answer to needs’’*?. Therefore to establish indirect rule in the arej:

it is necessary not only to discover indigenous institutions but alsp

to understand the part they play in the society which has evolved
them.*
There is considerable stress on law and on dispute settlement with
detailed examples of cases and why they were not brought to the
Native Court but kept within the traditional system :

The Court was there but in point of fact the people of Umueke did

not use it. In all the time that I was in the village I only heard of

one case taken to it.**
This is an excellent ethnography of the Ibo and it is highly regarded
by structural-functionalists. It does throw light on the situation of
women and in its general clarity makes it a book that would be
appreciated by administrators in its emphasis of very topical ques-
tions: the type of authority structure, and the marked independence
and self-mindedness of women.

In the 1940s and 1950s many other anthropological works on the
Ibo were published, either studies of specific problems by adminis-
trators, or anthropologists, or general ethnographies likc that of D.
Forde and G. 1. Jones. Jones also wrote studies on the choice and
réle of chiefs in East Nigeria.

Colonialism and the Development of Anthropological Theory
It is clear from the way anthropology was introduced and later used
in South-Eastern Nigeria by the Colonial Administration that there

**M. Green, Ibo Village A ffairs, pp. 77 note 1.
®1bid., p. 71.
“Ibid., p. 104,
.. close relationship between anthropology and administration. It
s 3 s clear that the need for anthropologists arose from the in-
alsouc-tion of Indirect Rule as a form of government.

we have seen how the theory of the nature of Indirect Rule
evolved from Lugard’s position to one that defined it as self-admin-
istration by the people according to their traditional system, within
the limits permitted by the Colonial Government, that is, as long as
it did not come into any kind of conflict with the interests of the
colonial government. Let us look at some of the characteristics of
Indirect Rule to see how its theory rather than its practice neces-
sjtated an interest in anthropology.

Those who supported indirect rule can be identified as paternalis-
tic, europocentric ‘“humanitarian imperialists”. These feelings com-
bined to make a defence of Indirect Rule since it was supposed to
be a form of government that protected the natives by maintaining
their traditional, pre-colonial institutions. These institutions were
supported and encouraged as long as they were “good” (ie. by
Christian moral standards), and promoted the economic interests of
the colonisers. Indirect Rule was good because it was an opportunity
to teach the “‘natives’ how to govern, to show them what ‘‘proper”
(i.e. European style) governing methods were like; it also helped to
promote higher standards of civilisation, by preventing barbarous
practices (these were defined as practices unacceptable to Euro-
peans). But the basic point about Indirect Rule is that the colonisers
must be familiar with the ‘“‘native’s’ traditional political system. And
such knowledge is best acquired by anthropological methods. The
knowledge wanted is mainly about political organisation, ideology
and religion, all of which arc necessary in an attempt to use the
traditional system. The fact that the type of administration to be
studied is local administration (because at higher echelons, the
British operated the system themselves) explains the interest in the
social organisation of small groups, villages, or clans. . . ; the studies
wanted are empirical, descriptions of how things operated and how
are problems solved.

The kind of questions posed about native systems by apologists
of Indirect Rule relate to very small-scale social organisation, to be-
liefs in supernatural powers and to problems of authority. But it is
accepted by these writers that such questions cannot be answered
with any degree of reliability without knowledge of the principles be-
hind them. This emphasis on the mode of operation of traditional
institutions is very close to functionalism. The great enthusiasm for
Malinowski shown by people concerned with administration arises
148 EASTERN NIGERIA 192q_, 54

from his type of functionalism and his methodology i.e. hjg con
of concentrated long-term and detailed fieldwork. ept

Functionalist theory in social anthropology is the type of apajy..
of colonial communities that answers best the questions asked byyt?:
ideologues of Indirect Rule. The studies of Ibo social strucyy,
helped the administration by providing it with valuable informayjg,
about institutions that it needed to understand; what chiefs wey,
there and how much and what kind of power did they have? Hg,,
institutionalised and how close-knit were the women’s organisationg?

In the case of Nigeria it is possible that the problems created py
Indirect Rule in the North and in the South-East may have cqp.
tributed to the crisis of the 1960s of the Biafran secession. Biafry
could be seen as a continuation of the claim to self-determination of
a nation that was thwarted in its development since the arrival of the
British. Britain tried to integrate the East with the rest of Nigeria
when it had always been different and this integrationist policy con-
tinued under the neo-colonialist government which took over on the
“independence” of Nigeria. Further research would be essential to
turn this last remark into more than mere speculation.

It seems that the development of British social anthropology and
particularly of the functionalist theories that have characterised it
throughout the colonial period, are responses to British imperialism
and its particular form of colonial administration, Indirect Rule. To
demonstrate this, it would be necessary to compare British social
anthropology in the context of Indirect Rule with the French system
of direct rule of its colonies and the fact that French social science
devcloped a very different form of anthropology, (including structur-
alism) which have to be explained in terms of French colonial his-
tory and ideology. Functionalism should also be compared with
Amcrican cultural anthropology and Dutch anthropology, in terms
of their infra-structures and the particular colonial formations that
they may be concerned to justify and support.

There has recently been some attempt to do this, unfortunately not
by a Marxist. Gerard Leclerc in Anthropologie et Colonialisme
(1972) surveys social anthropology since its origins and relates it to
colonial history and suggests that functionalism arose because of the
demands of Indirect Rule for knowledge of this type, and that a
similar development did not take place in France because anthro-
pologists were independent of government which did not require
their services: therefore they had the opportunity of developing an
independent theory. He also surveys American cultural anthro-
pology and suggests that it differs from functionalism in its support
o | ACKNER 149
qral independence and its opposition to the imposition of
values on colonised societies.
spite the fact that it furthers most of the idez‘ts I ha\fe suggestgd
1 eclerc’s book is disappointing. It has an interesting analysis
here. roblems of ethnocentrism which he traces back into the 18th
- he also attempts to connect his work with present trends in
century, | g, : :
he anti-imperialist movement. Unfortunately his comparison be-
<cn the developments of British/French anthropology with Brit-
S,,'French colonialism is more a series of successive statements than
3 historical and dialectical analysis of thege phqnomena, gnd he
(herefore fails to prove his point. It is also distressing to notice that
despite his interests his frame of reference and his methodology re-
main bourgeois; in discussing anti-colonial movements, he does not
refer to the more radical of them, nor does he discuss their actual
politics; similarly his analysis throughout remains at the level of
culture, and even that is discussed without reference to infrastruc-
wure or to the reality of imperialism in the contemporary world. It
is however, worth reading because he does attempt to widen the
subject and include it within a more comprehensive framework.
The present crisis in social anthropology lends further support to
my hypothesis. The crisis has become worse at a time when colonies
have become “independent’ and there is no more need for colonial
administration, Indirect Rule and the anthropology that they
brought about. Structural functionalism is now redundant and neo-
colonialism is a form of imperialism which requires different infor-
mation and approaches. It is not clear whether the work of tradition-
al anthropologists is relevant. The United States has replaced Britain
and France as the main imperialist nation, their own cultural relativ-
ism (their leading anthropological theory previously) has developed
into evolutionism, a theory which provides a good basis for a high
level of interventionism under the guise of “civilising the natives”..
In Europe on the other hand anthropology is in a state of deep
crisis and has not vet found a new rdle for itself. In Britain the
theories that have followed structural functionalism are many and
inconclusive, none of them are as comprehensive, nor has any of
them been able to dominate the anthropological scene. In France,
there has been a diversification in anthropology, some branches
getting more sociological, while others tend towards philosophy.
Meanwhile the tendency remains for anthropologists to work for
and support the current form of imperialism, while at the same time
attempting a liberal concern for the welfare of the natives. To
counter this we require a Marxist analysis of pre-capitalist societies,

r c,ult
tern
150 EASTERN NIGERIA 19204940

following the lead of the French Marxist anthropologists, tq st
the changes that these societies have gone through during the coul?
nial period, and the nature of their present transitional stage Th.
should be followed by a careful study of the debate between

ists on the conflicting theories of the mature of developmen (;,
perhaps most importantly must a state go through the stage p”
capitalism or not?). At the practical level, these efforts shoylqg be
combined with a clear alignment on the side of anti-imperialist a4
anti-capitalist revolutionary struggles everywhere.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

A. E. Afigbo: Herbert Richmond Palmer and Indirect Rule in Eastep,
Nigeria, 1915-1928, in the Journal of the Historical Society of Nigeriq
vol. 3, no. 2, December 1965. '

N. Akpan, Epitaph to Indirect Rule, 1956.

J. C. Anene: Southern Nigeria in Transition, 1966.

W. Bagsc;)m and M. Herskovits: Continuity and Change in African Cultures,
1959.

G. T. Basden: Among the 1bos of Nigeria, 1921; also Niger lbos, 1938.

G. Gordon Brown and Bruce Hutt: Anthropology in Action, 1935.

R. L. Buell: The Native Problem in Africa, 1928.

A. C. Burns: History of Nigeria, 1929.

D. Cameron: Principles of Native Administration and their application,
1935; also Native Administration in Nigeria and Tanganyika, 1937.

L. T. Chubb: 150 Land Tenure, 2nd edition, 1961.

A. Cohen (Sir): British Policy in Changing Africa, 1959.

J. S. Coleman: Nigeria, Background to Nationalism, 1958.

Colonial Office: Correspondence files for years 1925-1940; Administrative
Reports for years 1929-1940; Sessional Papers and Minutes of the
Legislative and E xecutive Councils 1929-1940.

W. Crocker: Nigeria, a critique of British Colonial Administration, 1936.

M. CrSIWdelrS;tS 81‘he story of Nigeria, 1962; also West Africa under Colonidl
Rule, .

K. O. Dike: Trade and Politics in the Niger Delta, 1830-1885, 1956; also
100 Years of British Rule in Nigeria, 1851-1951, 1956.

K. Ezera: Constitutional Developments in Nigeria, 1964.

D. Forde and G. L. Jones: The Ibo and Ibibio speaking peoples of South-

Eastern Nigeria, 1950.

W. N. M. Geary: Nigeria Under British Rule, 1927,

W. G. A. O. Gore (Lord Harlech): African Politics in the High Commission
Territories, 1944; also British Policy and Administration in Tropical
Africa, 1941.

M. M. Green: Land Tenure in an lbo Village; also 1bo Village Affairs,
1941 and 1947 respectively.

A. H. M. Kirk-Greene ed.: The Principles of Native Administration in
Nigeria, 196S.

Lord Hailey: An African Survey, 1938; also Native Administration in
the British African Territories, Part I1I: West Africa, HM.S.0, 1951.

P. Harris: Local Government in Southern Nigeria, 1957.

G. L. Jones: Tbo Land Tenure in Africa, 1949; also Dual Organisation in Ibo
social structure, in Africa, 1949; also Report on the Position and Status
BN LACKNER 151

and Influence of chiefs and Natural rulers in the Eastern Region of

Nigeria, Enusu, 1956; also Trading States of the Oil Rivers, 1963.

Kroeber ed.: Anthropology today, 1953.

A- T lerc: Anthropologie et Colonialisme, Paris, 1972.

G. . The Dual Mandate in British Tropical Africa, 1922.

F. P. Mair: Studies in Applied Anthropology, 1957.

L. P linowski: Practical Anthropology, in 4frica, 1929.

B. M. K. Meek: Law and Authority in a Nigerian Tribe, 19317; also

C. C},anging Cultures of West Africa, 1948; also Land, Law and Customs
in the Colonies, 1946; also his work on Northern Nigeria.

w. R. Miller: Have we Failed in Nigeria? 1947; also Success in Nigeria?

" 1948.
[ F.llgiicolson: The Administration of Nigeria, 1900-1940, 1969.
g, Ottenberg: Improvement Associations among the Afikpo Ibo, in A frica,
" 71955; also Comments on Local Government in Afikpo division, in
Journal of African Administration, 1956.

M. Perham: Some Problems of Indirect Rule in Africa, in the Journal of
the Royal Society of Arts, 1934; also Native Administration in Nigeria,
1937.

S, Leith-Ross: African Women; also Beyond the Niger, 1951.

Royal Anthropological Institute: Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute for the years 1900-1950, and Man 1900-1950.

P. A. Talbot: Some Foreign influences in Nigeria, in Journal of the African
Saociety, 1924; The Peoples of Southern Nigeria, 4 volumes, 1926; also
Tribes of the Niger Delta, 1932,

W. Northcote-Thomas: Report on the Ibo-speaking Peoples of Nigeria, 6
volumes, 1913,

E. R. Wolf and J. G. Jorgensen: Anthropology on the Warpath in Thailand
in The New York Review of Books, 19 November, 1970.

PAX BRITANNICA AND THE SUDAN: S. F. NADEL
James C. Faris,

It should not be necessary, in 1972, to restate the contingent as well
as logical relationships of science to society—in both content and in
form, our science has served society.! This is generally the way it
always has been, always will be, and always should be. What we are
attempting to do here is to continue to re-examine the exact nature
of this functional relationship between science and society to see
precisely what the relationship between anthropology and imperial-
ism is, and to see why it appears the way it does.? My task consists
of detailing this in the theory and practice of S. F. Nadel—perhaps
one of the most clear examples from the previous generation of
social anthropology.

Let me make some introductory remarks, however, about an
enterprise of this sort. It seems that there are two major pitfalls in

'Cf. J. Stauder, “The Functions of Functionalism”, Paper delivered to the
Symposium Marx 11: Anthropology and Imperialism, American Anthro-
pological Association Annual Meeting, New York, November 1971, B.
Magubane, “A Critical Look at the Indices Used in the Study of Social
Change in Modern Africa’ in Current Anthropology, 12, 1971; J. Moore,
“Perspectives for a Partisan Anthropology™”, in Liberation, 16, 1971; P.
Newcomer, “Social Process: Critical Notes for a Method of Study”, Un-
published Ph.D. Thesis, 1972, University of Connecticut.

*We now have the beginning of some histories (cf. M. Harnis, The Rise of
Anthropological Theory, New York, 1968; J. Moore, op. cit.) and some
explicit epistemological statements (cf. D. Goddard, “Limits of British
Anthropgﬁagy” in New Left Review, 58, 1969; ). Banaj, ‘The Crisis of
British Anthropology’, in New Left Review, 64, 1970; G. Berthoud, “Social
Anthropology and Marxian Thought”, Paper delivered to the American
Anthropological Association Annual Meeting, San Diego, California, Nov-
154 S F NADEL AND THg Sup,
N

these types of analyses. One may be seen in the argumep th
anthropological scholarship is, by and large, scientifically adeq‘xatf
but it has just unwittingly (to be generous) served the wrong intey.
ests.® I think this view is altogether wrong. )

Our science as well as our politics must change if we are to unge,_
stand our past, transcend our present, and plan for the future. Heg,
tofore, the fact that some anthropologists may have been politically
liberal, or even left-leaning, is simply irrelevant. They may hgy,
even attempted to aid local oppressed peoples in various ways
but without an analysis of the generation of such oppression, very
little could come of their efforts. In fact, they probably acted tq
inhibit oppressed peoples from overtly attacking the colonial regime,
It is of course wrong to attribute insidious motives to the vagt
majority of anthropologists, but functionalism had its functiongt
quite apart from any conscious intentions of its proponents. If our
science doesn’t change with our politics, we can hardly be of much
intellectual help in struggles against various manifestations of imper.
ialism. Not only must the content and application of our science
change, but also our theory and methodology.®

The other pitfall I think rests in the possibility of a theoretical
renaissance without the benefit of practical politics—dialectical
materialism is a fascinating explanatory foundation in itself. But it
is a rational philosophy based in real life and life processes, and
thus it can hardly be worthwhile without first establishing the social
relations which enable it to fully function. Talking about things
rather than doing things will ultimately have a stultifying effect on
theory. With these two warnings in mind, let me return to Nadel—
a man whose efforts in anthropology hardly span twenty years, but
who left a vast legacy in field monographs, theoretical study, and
methodological comment.

L. The Task (or, what it was in aid of)
Nadel, perhaps more clearly than most others of his generation, well

ember 1970; P. Newcomer, op. cit.)

'Cf. K. Gough, “New Proposals for Anthropologists” in Current Anthro-

pology, 9, 1968; G. Berreman, “Is Anthropology Alive? Responsibility in

Social Anthropology”, ibid. 1 am assuming that no one would today still

argue that anthropology is simply irrelevant (cf. G. Berreman, ‘“‘Anemic

ggd Eégng;ic Analyses in Social Anthropology” in American Anthropologist,
, 1966,

*Cf. J. Stauder, op. cit.

*There were, of course some anthropologists whose sympathies were quite

in accord with the polical structure they served. In the files of the old

colonial research institutes are to be found examples of the most blatant

racism.
jaMES FARDS 155
derstood the unity of theory and practice. He constantly regarded
ub” " if as a practical, even applied, anthropologist, and all his field

- nsel
:':;;ewas at explicit government request. In his first book Nadel

“‘}}af,ﬁss been said that modern anthropology is destined to be of
reat assistance to colonial governments in providing the
gnowledge of the social structure of native groups upon which
a sound and harmonious Native Administration, as envisaged in
Indirect Rule, should be built. Let me say that I for one firmly
believe in the possibility of such cooperation betewen
anthropologist and administrator.®
He urged anthropological knowledge be put to use and chided those
anthropologists who kept aloof from doing so:
Wwhile certain anthropologists would remain aloof from these
practical questions, others consider it their right and duty to
‘apply’ anthropology in practice. I count myself among the
latter...‘pure’, value-free anthropology is an illusion.’
In every one of S. F. Nadel’s major works he stresses the unity of
theory and application. He was much more explicit about this than
many of his colleagues: ‘I do not mean merely than the anthro-
pologist should ‘diagnose and predict’ ”.,* for he was convinced of
the merits—and loyal to—the policy as well as the ideological
mission set the discipline:
..the right and duty of anthropologists to judge, criticise, and
add constructively to social development and political planning
of all kinds. I said ‘of all kinds’; for the application of anthro-
pology to problems of colonial policy is only one special aspect
of a wider issue.?
Nadel felt, as his employers already knew (after all, this is why
they hired him) that very likely “‘the blunders of the anthropologists
will be ‘better’ blunders’.*°
Both of his field monographs were explicitly planned to be of
practical value to colonial governments—A Black Byzantium (1942)
was introduced by Lugard, and The Nuba (1947) had a forward by
Maj. Gen. Sir Hubert Huddleston, Governor-General of the Sudan
—and both emphasised the value of close cooperation. Nadel was

'S. Nadel, 4 Black Byzantium, London, 1942, p. vi.

'S. Nadel, The Foundations of Social Anthropology, London, 1951, pp. 52-3.
See also page 3 of the same work.

‘Ibid., p. 55.

‘Ibid., p. 54.

"Ibid., p. 55.
156 S F NADEL AND THE SUby,

not just an anthropologist with a choice about cooperation, he w
hired to do specific jobs. Rockefeller money enabled the Ime,,fj
tional African Institute to send Nadel to Nigeria in 1932—whers ..
excellent work for them led to his being recommended to the Govey,
ment of the Sudan to help them with their “pressing problemg.
amongst the Nuba. Nadel arrived in the Sudan in 1938.

After the Nuba research, Nadel’s political biography continueg j,
1941 with an appointment to the British Military Administration j,
Eritrea as Secretary for Native Affairs—a job he apparently eye.
cuted with efficiency, for he was commended by the Commande;.
in-Chief of the Middle-Eastern Forces for outstanding services:

...applving anthropology to the administration of peoples of var.

ious origin and tradition, with all the understanding of

primitive mentality and appreciation of administrative problems

which he showed during his two years in the Nuba Mountains!?
With such excellent credentials, he later progressed through a Senior
Lectureship at the London School of Economics, a Readership at
Durham, and finally to Canberra, where apart from the Chair in
Anthropology at the Australian National University, he also became
Dean of the School of Pacific Research. In this post, Nadel died in
1956.

I would like to look in more detail at his actual field research—
the situation in which it was conducted, just how it was conducted,
and just how his work was concretely applied. I am personally most
familiar with his Nuba researches in what was the Anglo-Egyptian
Sudan, and shall focus on this principally.?®

Nadel was asked to work amongst the Nuba for several reasons.
The first of these stems from the direct grief they caused the Gov-
ernment. With no political hierarchy into which the Government
could easily plug Indirect Rule, how to effectively control some
300,000 people was a paramount problem. Military patrols were the
modus operandi until just two years before Nadel arrived.'* As

“S. Nadel, The Nuba, London, 1947, p. xi.

“Tbid., p. xii, emphasis mme. While in Eritrca, Nadel investigated land
tenure, among other things (S. Nadel, “Land Tenure on the Eritrean
Plateau™, in Africa, 16, 1946.) Research in the administrative archives and
military records relating to the area might reveal just why this knowledge
was needed.

“The ‘Nuba’ is the label given to the entire group (some one-third million
people) of relatively small autonomous distinct agricultural societies that
occupy the hills and mountains of central Kordofan Province, Sudan. While
culturally similar, these societies have no traditional political structures
beyond the village or village group level.

“The Nuba, p. 494.
AMES E ARIS 157
ddleston casually expresses the contact between the Government
H‘é the Nuba in his introduction to Nadel’s book, ‘‘contact...fre-
ntly culminated in a small military patrol directed now against

i hill and now against another™!® and punitive patrols were com-
On:n._.later to be, at least in one case, the result of Nadel's own
spplicd anthropology® |

Nadel’s principal guide linc, in fact, for field work amongst
certain of the Nuba societies (and not amongst others), was politico-
military expediency. He states that “tribes whose administration

resented imperative problems were considered before others™.'

Nadel’s assignment was quite specific, and the book “‘was prim-
arily planned to be of practical value to administrators and others™.**
The Government felt the Nuba were:

...being powerfully affected by the authority of the Government,

the forces of economics and the influence of science... Their

lives were still largely conditioned by superstitions and customs

imperfectly known to the administration...was the constructive

effect of the administration outweighing the destructive? Keen

officials, especially technical officials, were apt to override native

customs rather than make use of them.!®
A new policy phase had indeed opened in British imperialism, and
in the Sudan, Nadel was one of its local agents. He provided the
information necessary for the Administration to ‘make use of’ local
customs (this will be examined in more detail below). Overrniding
indigenous societies had become too dangerous and uneconomical
—controlling people with sociology was easier than controlling them
with troops, and ‘making use of’ their customs not only facilitated
Administration and kept them controlled, but under the policy of
Indirect Rule, it had the additional and very critical effect of keep-
ing them Nuba.

This latter factor is particularly important, for the Nuba are the
furthermost North of any of the pagan societies of the Sudan, and
were viewed by the British as an important buffer against the pro-
gressive move South of Islam. Missionary activity amongst the

“lbid., p. xi.

“Ibid., p. 355 n. This happencd in the hill group of Jebel Tullishi where
Nadel was instrumental in setting up a Native Court and anchoring Gov-
ernment-sponsored Chiefships. This court led to difficultics, and the Gov-
ernment, only two vears later, sent a military force to drive the Tullushi
_out of their mountain homes and settle them on the plain.

"The Nuba, p. 7.

"Ibid., p. xi.

"oc. cit.
158 S F NADEL AND THE 5, AN

Nuba had lagged behind that of other parts of the non-Myg;
Sudan, however—undoubtedly because of the difficulty in pacifyi:]
the Nuba—but the area and its people were of primary imponancC
to the Government in its policy of containing Islam and Ara} in.
fluence.? Sections of the Nuba Mountains were official ‘Closed pjg
tricts’—which meant that no Arabs could enter without explicit
permission. With the marked lack of success in missionary activity
this essentially meant any change was inhibited, making it, in 1,
overall, a far less costly and ultimately less dangerous operation =
The most conspicuous effect of this policy (and one must therefor,
speculate about the real reasons for the policy) was then to inhip;
any development at all. Portions of the eastern and southern Nub,
Mountains are essentially today as they were at the turn of the cep.
tury. The Government policy failed, however, and did not, in fact,
successfully inhibit the spread of Islam and Arabisation. But it
became the excuse for the lack of education and development. We
can better understand, then, why Nadel’s instructions were ‘‘that he
would study the economic and political organisation, their religious
beliefs and their psychological and social background”.?* He states,
in fact, that his conclusions “are intended to summarise the results
from the viewpoints of a common political administration, and the
common future of Nuba culture under the impact of Arab civilisa-
tion’’.*?

Although Nadel was supposed to aid the effort to curb Islam, he
regarded uncompromising Christian missionaries with as much sus-
picion as Muslim zealots. He could well see that missionaries of thc
fundamentalist sort were no asset to the task ahead, for they, as well
as the Arab faki “‘clash as much with the life as we, in the enlight-
ened West, know it, and with the fruits of our long evolution which
we now desire to share with the backward races of the world’’.?!
However more insidious Nadel found the threat of Islam, he clearly
saw its inevitability, and says,

True, we also insist on Nuba village schools {as opposed to the

*S. Hurreiz, Linguistic Diversity and Language Planning in the Sudan,
African Studies Seminar Paper No. 5, 1968, Sudan Research Unit, Univer-
sity of Khartoum.

M. Abdel-Rahim, The Development of British Policy in the Southern
Sudan 1899-1947, School of Extra-Mural Studies Publication, University of
Khartoum.

2The Nuba, p. xii.

“Ibid., p. 10.

“Ibid., p. 512. This is not the only example of Nadel as moralist—as will be
seen below, it was also at the base of his funotionalism.
guttab and khalwa—rural Koranic schools; it should also be
mentioned here that very few of these village schools were
actually established] meant to keep aloof from Arab m{iucnce,
or occasionally design romantically savage garbs for tribal
lice : but these efforts can hardly count for more than an odd
detour in an otherwise straight road.*
sval of Christianity, but the steadily encroaching Islam™.2®
we find a similar statement about Islam amongst the Nupe of west
Africa, and “here it is not the pagan religion which is the greatest
Yet Nadel did not appear to understand much of the syncretism
characterising Islam in the Nuba Mountains. In a discussion about
the adoption of Islam, he states *“‘often the motives behind this con-
version are stated naively’’?’ and quotes a discussion he had with a
Nuba man about rain magic:
[He] said to me once, during a discussion of rain magic, that he,
of course, did not believe in rain makers and rain sacrifices:
he knew that ‘rain came from Allah.” As there is a mission
working in this tribe, I asked if he meant the Mohammedan or
Christian God? He replied: ‘I mean the Allah of the Hakuma
[Government] and the police in Talodi’.?®
It seems to me this is a more poignant statement about the link of
svmbols to social relations than Nadel realised. It is anything but?
naive.

II. The Techniques (or how it was accomplished)

The general impression the casual reader gets from Nadel’s book is
that the Nuba are not very pleasant: *“‘from our description a Tul-
lishi society emerged fraught with tension and conflict™.® We find
out elsewhere, however, that the Tullishi had been repeatedly the
focus of military attracks and punitive patrols (and would be again,
thanks to Nadel; see above, note *). And he speaks of the *“dour,
reserved, and suspicious attitude of the Mesakin’ and of their “pes-
simistic, ncurotic mentality”,*! particularly in contrast to nearby

“Ibid., p. 487.

“S. Nadel, Nupe Religion, Glencoe, 1954, p. 231. This book, curiously
enough, deals only with pre-Islamic practices and rituals. Although my
paper concentrates on Nadel's research in the Sudan and on some of his
general theoretical contributions, similar analyses are needed of his field-
work in West Africa.

“'The Nuba, p. 488.

"Loc. cit.

*Ibid., p. 356.

*Ibid., p. 32In, p. 323n.

*1bid., p. 317.
160 S F NADEL AND THE SUDAY

Korongo, whom Nadel found friendlier. Here again, we must study
the book carefully to learn that: g
If the reserve and suspicion of the Mesakin were restricteq
their interaction with us, this might be explained by the fact
that the Mesakin, unlike the Korongo, had to suffer punitive
police action.3?
In contrasting the Tira and Moro societies, Nadel states, “Mq,
culture, compared with Tira, is also one in which individual violenc,
appears more unrestrained; obsession with magic fears greater; apqg
the emotional balance under stress more precarious’.®® Only elge.
where do we find that Islam had permiated Tira culture to a fa;
greater degree’* and that the Moro have always been troublesome
to the Government.

The principal reason the Nuba were thus so unpleasant to Nade]
is because he represented a hostile agency—in short, an enemy. He
was serving an administration that not only physically attacked local
societies, driving them from their homes, forcing migrations, im-
prisoning (and very frequently hanging) their men and women, and
he was an apologist and defender of that system. Nadel’s unsympa-
thetic comment on this oppression is revealing :

They may not have taken kindly to their enforced migration...

occasionally an unfortunate misunderstanding aggravated the

situation, as when the Tira were made to move down to a low
hillock of which their traditions spoke of as an unhealthy
disease-ridden site, which had once already been abandoned by
their ancestors.3®

If we turn to Nadel's fieldwork techniques, we find another rea-
son why the Nuba appeared so hostile. As a fieldworker, Nadel has
left a considerable legacy of method and technique that can hclp
us more clearly understand his role.?®

In an essay on the use of interviews, we find the basis of Nadel’s

to

*Ibid., p. 317n.

“Ibid., p. 265.

“Tbid., p. 238.

“Ibid., p. 6, emphasis mine.

**Among other things, Nadel was a pioneer in intelligence testing in British
social anthropology. He saw the goal of this to be able to arrange groups
on some type of scale that might measure relative superiority and inferiority
(S. Nadel, “The Application of Intelligence Tests in the Anthropological
Field” in F. C. Bartlett, et. al. (eds.), The Study of Society, London, 1939).
This was not just to be quantitative measures along a single existing scale,
but comparison on a new basis. The most recent statement of this in Britain
is to be found in the blatant racism of H. J. Eysenck (The 1.0. Argument!
London, 1971).
. oJationship with .indigenc?us pepples. It is c!ear he prefers ‘raw
savages’———hc cautions against using edugatcd mforrpants,“’ or edu-
cated people locally as researchers. Nothing suffices like the rigorous
inductive methodology of the European sc..nentxst—-and.ﬂle sophis-
ication of local people only “blurs their vnqw” and “dlSt.Ol'tS valu-
able information™.*> Nadel prefers instead, his own “bullying’ tech-
ique:
mc}qs a rule the most successful approach lies in stimulating the
informant cmotionally and thus overcoming his indolence or

his reluctance to discuss certain points... I have found it most

profitable to stimulate the emotionality of a few chief informants

to the extent of arousing almost violent disputes and controver-
sies...a ‘bullying’ technique of this type amounts to the

deliberate introduction of leading questions, a practice against

which fieldworkers are frequently warned. But the leading

question has its legitimate place in the anthropological, as in
other intcrviews, provided that it is handled carefully and, above
all, with full knowledge of its dangerous nature. The risks which
this technique involves are not negligible; wrongly applied, it

may lcad to complete misinformation.?

Of course Nadel only worried about the danger of misinformation—
he had access (at least in the Nuba Mountains) to a police squad*’
and appears to have been able to summon informants at will.*
However motivated, then, informants could only appear hostile, and
could not constitute a physical danger to Nadel. It is small wonder,
however, why they appeared so insolent.

In discussing field participation, Nadel suggcsts that some anthro-
pologists may involve themselves more fully, but stresses that it is
really not necessary to get too involved: ‘he may be admitted to
secret rites, yet disregard with impunity important ritual rules, such
as food taboos and submission to severe flogging in an initiation
ceremony’’.’* With this kind of contempt for local custom, it is not
surprising that Nadel urges that anthropologists ‘‘capitalise...on their
‘stranger value’ ”.** Nowhere in this essay on interviews, nor indeed
in his entire Nuba monograph, does Nadel mention the anthropolo-

“:i Nadel, “The Interview Technique in Social Anthropology” ibid., p. 322.
“Loc. cit.

“Tbid., pp. 322-23.

"“The Nuba, p. 347.

"The Nuba, p. 335.

““*“The Interview Technique”, p. 326.

“Loc. cit.
162 S F NADEL AND THE syp,

gist as friend, much less an ally in local struggles against colonjy,
oppression.

IIL. The Theory (or how it was justified)

As I stressed in the introductory remarks, theory and practice ca;,.
not, should not, and never have been separated. And as mentiop
functionalism has its functions; far from just a legacy which cffe..
tively blinded us from fully understanding and explaining sociy
relations (which it did), it was more importantly a necessary inte].
lectual tradition answering to the central questions facing imperig].
ism—control. And it did its job. Of course, as Asad*¢ has suggesteq,
most anthropologists were not conscious of the job they were doing,
and only operated as they had been taught—functionalism was the
guiding paradigm and the appropriate strategy for ‘normal sci-
ence’.** Some, however, understood its implications more clearly
than others, and their ruling class allegiance was more explicit.
S. F. Nadel, I'm afraid, belongs to this latter group.

As mentioned above, the unity of theory and practice in Nadel
is remarkable—and had it served different interests, we might cven
call it enviable. In the Nuba monograph, Nadel tells us:

This book fall to some extent in the category of ‘applied anthro-

pology’ : its primary purpose is to provide an anthropological

study which should prove helpful in the practical tasks of
government...But this is in now way a handbook : it aims at
much more than mere description—at analysis and causal
explanation; it deals with the different tribes and their changing
institutions, not as so many disconnected topics, but as steps in

a gradual, often comparative investigation.*®
It is, in fact, in his commitment to application that Nadel’s thcory
becomes comprehensible. A poignant summary of Nadel’s ultimate
resolution of theory and practice may be seen in what is perhaps
the last thing he ever wrote—the final paragraph of The Theory of
Social Structure.

...in employing the criteria of command over persons and benefits

I have introduced concepts connoting, if only implicitly, purposc

and utility, since command always mcans command for some

purpose. Earlier on, I justified this step by saying that these
criteria help to retain a degree of relevance in structural

“T. Asad, The Kababish Arabs, London, 1970, p. 10.

“T. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago, 1962.
““The Nuba, p. 8.
; AMES FARIS 163
analysis, 1 would now say that they help to retain, or provide,
the necessary linkage between the theory of social structure and
the social universe of purpose. You may call this an insurance
against a heuristic isolation which can be driven too far, or a
reminder that we live in societies where there are jobs to be
done.*’

From Nadel’s perspective, of course, the overriding job was con-

trol. His functionalism focused exactly where his application focus-

ed—on control and regulation. For those of you that have had to
suffer through The Theory of Social Structure as graduate students
as I had to, you may remember that items from his symbolic calcu-
lus became part of the everyday lexicon—c a [control over actions]
and c r b [control over rights and benefits], Nadel’s critical elements
in social structure, were a part of the heritage. And how could one
dispute it? It made such obviously good sense inasmuch as it
appearcd to describe well the situation in which we found ourselves.

But good scnse for whom? This was not the sort of question that

was tolerated (or even considecred) in my graduate student years.

Nadel’s theoretical model for the analysis of other societies was

derived from the task required by imperial nations. Control was

paramount in their concern with colonised peoples, and Nadel thus
argued that this was the natural state of affairs everywhere—the
paramount concern of all societies.

However appropriate and useful Nadel’s theory may have been
for regulating people, one of the reasons for this conference is
becausc the theory fails to tell us why societies are the way they
are, how they came to be that way (and not any other way), and in
what direction social evolution will go in the future. These are
theoretical as well as applied questions. I think it is first necessary
to see why functionalism, particularly as manifested in Nadel, is
inadequate as cxplanation. Its status epistomologically has been
reviewcd in several places, but I would like to look in more detail
at the implications of its logic.

Functionalism, with its rigorous commitment to empiricism, can
never be more than a description that does not transcend the facts
on which it is based. Defenders of the faith frequently state some-
thing like: “But you can’t deny that societies function and that it
is of paramount importance to their survival.”” Of course, but this
is precisely why it is useless as explanation—it is as trivial as it is
true. To explain all behaviour as functional (or dysfunctional) be-

“The Theory of Social Structure, London, 1957, pp. 158-9.
164 S F NADEL AND THE sy,

cause it must ultimately ensure survival is to turn effect apg con
sequence into cause.”® And since we have no test (i.c., we dop,
know very much about how societies functioned that didn's SUrvive)
it is spurious cause at best. ’

Without knowing something about why things come to be the Way
they are, to argue that they are functional explains nothing. Fyp,.
tionalism has no way of sorting out which ‘things’ are relevant and
which are not—everything must have a function—and so we get
weak discussions of core functions and primary functions, o
ultimate cause in psychology, morality, or species-specific predis.
positions. Of course ‘things’ do something (or did something), other.
wise they would not be here—but the questions of scientific rele.
vance (i.e., explanatory relevance) is why do they do it, and why do
they do it in this manner. Functionalism simply cannot cope with
any ‘why’ questions.

Functionalism usually ‘explains’ one institution or thing as being
causal to another, but when functionalists attempt to frace causal
chains and nexes, we either get the reduction to individual psy-
chology or pan-human predispositions, as mentioned above (i.e., all
men seek power;* or humans must self-regulate®!). Or we get the
familiar tautologies—the function of something is to do what it
does; or the somewhat more complex circularity—witchcraft exists
to channel anxieties, produced by structural disharmonies, brought
about by anxieties, produced by witchcraft.’? Where Nadel is not
circular, psvchological, or moralistic (see below), he is presented
with problems of relativity.

For Nadel, functionalism is predicated on “‘certain absolute rc-
quirements—the integration of societies and the survival of popula-
tions’’,>® for “without it, we could not legitimately speak of adjust-
ment of maladjustment, that is, invoke a criterion of adequacy.”

#«<Historically speaking. functional analysis is a modification of teleological
explanation, i.e., of explanation not bv reference to causes which ‘bring
about’ the event in question but by reference to ends which determine its
co%rsg.” C. Hempel, Aspects of Scientific Explanation, New York, 1963,
p. 303.

*’S. Nadel, “Social Control and Self Regulation™ in Social Forces, 31, 1953.

*Cf. E. Leach, Political System of Highland Burma, London, 1954,

*1S. Nadel, op. cit. (1953).

*S. Nadel, “Witchcraft in Four African Societies: An Essay in Compari-
son’” in American Anthropologist, 54, 1952. (Reprinted in S. Ottenberg
(ed.), Cultures and Societies of Africa, New York, 1960. Pagination in
references from this edition.)

*S. Nadel, The Foundations of Social Anthropology, London, 1951, p. 375.
As WE have seen, Nadelts relativism—his i.deas‘about “adjl{supent”
" _are based on assumptions of the pax Britannica, for why is it that
o raid on a D.C. post, a refusal to be recrurted into .forced public
works projects, or refusal to obey a Government chief, or to pay
taxes, i considered maladjustment? Whose survival are we talking
about? The criteria of adequacy which allows one to interpret a
strike or revolt against colonial rule as maladjustment seems rather
specific to one’s class allegiance.

Returning to the problem of cause, I've noted above that if you
examine carefully a functionalist, you will likely discover a moralist
or a psychologist. Thus Nadel focuses heavily on ‘self-regulation’
in his writings, and while in the Nuba Mountains gathered an in-
ordinate amount of data on witchcraft, suicide, individual aggres-
sion, and shamanism. This material was necessary to the mystifica-
tion that his job required—for illustrating that frustrations and
alienation have their origins in people’s heads. In his widely read
paper “Witchcraft in Four African Societies”,** Nadel begins with
the assumption that ‘“‘witchcraft beliefs are causally related to frus-
trations, anxieties or other mental stresses precisely as psychopatho-
logical symptoms are related to mental disturbances of this
nature’s®

There is another very practical aspect to the mystification in
psychological causes—for if people under drastic change and new
forms of oppression expressed their frustrations socially, it was
dangerous; but if they expressed them in neurotic tendencies, re-
pression, or suicide,’® it was much healthier for Europeans. It is
small wonder, then, that so much is made of these manifestations of
alienation, and the ways of dealing with them studied so carefully.
Witchcraft could not harm Europeans, but only local people, so far
better that the reaction to Europeans take this channel than a more
effective social form.

In spite of two ‘theoretical’ books and several related essays, a
major problem with Nadel is the incredible confusion about pro-
cess and explanation. Certainly the job of science is to explicate
processes. In so doing, however, we must assume that the world
changes in discoverable ways, and that the relationships and pro-

“The two Nuba societies discussed in this essay are the Mesakin and the
Korongo (see above). In this essay, however, we find no reference to the
differential treatment of the two societies at the hands of the Government
troops. For this sec S. Nadel The Nuba, p. 317 u.

*S. Nadel (1952), op. cit., p. 408.

“The Nuba, p. xiii.
166 S F NADEL AND THE SUDAN
cesses in it are not random, capricious, or unique, Wha ;
terest, then, is in fact change. The fundamentally re:actionals 1n.
acter of functionalism is exposed since it focuses on why thriy Cha.
not change, rather than why they do. Since to accept a worlnd 0
. . . ., tha
is always in change, constitutes a political challenge to the Soci t
supporting and sanctioning functionalism. 5o (00 docs it e, ety
an intellectual challenge to functionalism as explanation, T, 0
industrial capitalism as the natural state into which all other SOCieqj
would develop, and a natural state that would not funda;m-.,m‘,ﬂ(fS
change—also demanded that the history of its own evolutigp be
mystified (by positioning its origins in great men or great religions
or unique events, etc.) and its persistence guaranteed (by the para.
digms of functionalism).

Nadel’s view of explanation was that it is but complete descrip.
tion.” Thus, to understand the world was to observe it and describe
it. Theories were empirical and arrived at by inductive accumula.
tion of facts. This is an amazingly naive view for the times in which
he worked. We observe things, but the processes by which these
things came to be the way they are mus? be the products of theory.s
Nadel’s science was, however, committed to measuring rather than
theorising—since in the allegiance to inductive empiricism, the only
way in which he could reveal relationships was by correlating
facts.®

Nadel’s use of consequence as cause, effect as determinate, and
his psychological reductionism sufficed as explanation. And this, he
tells us, is simply complete description. Nadel’s theory, inasmuch
as it only generalises from the facts, is incapable of falsification.
Facts for Nadel exist not to disprove theories, but to statistically
verify them—a methodological mistake of a crippling kind in theory
and explanation.®®

¥S. Nadel (1951), op. cit., p. 199.
“Cf. P. Newcomer, op. cit. _
“As Marx reminds us, if the appearance of things coincided with their
essence, there would be no need for science at all (Capital, New York,
1967, Vol. 111, p. 817). Processes are seldom visible (cf. J. Faris, “Cognitive
Studies and Materialism”, Paper delivered to the Symposium Marx I:
Science History and Materialism, American Anthropological Assocration
Annual Meeting, New York, November 1971). No one has ever seen
biological evolution taking place—we see its consequences and products
speciation and some of its mechanisms (differential reproduction and
natural selection). But evolution is not a fact—it is a theory of how the
facts came to be the way they are. It is not a law, and it cannot be proved;
but it can easily be faksified—the hallmark of a well-constructed theory.
*Cf. J. Faris, “Concepts and Methodology in Social Process’, paper pre-
sented to the Symposium Marx I11: Critiques of Theory, American An-
167

FARIS
JAMES , : . s .
. tications of this are far-reaching. Nadel’s inductive em-

The m;prced him to view the world probabilistically—in quantita-
. icism owith causal relationships established by correlations based
(ive ch'rns eas of their function. If all relationships can then be statis-
on his lde fined and quantitatively determined, as in one of Nadel's
tically constructed about role systems, then any change must be
matr;%esas incremental, or quantitative. All qualitative distinctions
(reatthus be reduced to their quantitative specifications. Thus, for
;?gdd, class is simply a type of stratification, law is simply one type
of control custom, underdevelop.men.t is simply gua{ltltat}vel)r less
(han development, and local society is but a nation in microcosm.
et me look at these examples (all from Nadel) more closely.

Taking for example law: Nadel regards law as the codification
of custom—which is in turn the inculcation of self-regulation to
inhibit “‘individual learnings” and to “‘camalise human drives”.®
Law is, for Nadel, in essence written-down order. The reality in
history, as most of us know, however, is that law is opposed to
order.? Law is the product of state systems; it arose with the
breach of customary order—not by everyone, but by the exploiting
group, by the rising elite. Thus, the customary order no longer
applies to all persons—some have law instead (backed in every case
by force). This is, by any standard, a qualitatively different situation.
The codification of customary order (normally this operation in-
volves ignoring some customary order and introducing non-cust-
omary rules as well) is a transformation—to ‘legally’ insure the
status of one group vis-g-vis another. It is not just a matter of
writing down customs.

Nadel seems well aware, however, that some customs cannot
become laws. If law is to serve a ruling élite, then some traditional
customs (which in totality served the entire society and thereby in-
hibited stratification) must be dropped and others invented: ‘‘the
transformation of customs into laws...is of a more controversial
nature...the danger is obvious: it lies in the premature codification
of what is...a tentative adjustment”.®® Those customs Nadel par-
ticularly wished codified surround political structures—governing
structures that could be used in the colonial policies of Indirect

thropological Association Annual Meeting, Toronto, December 1972.

'S. Nadel (1953), op. cit., pp. 265-5. Note thet psychologism here—a charac-
teristic of most functionalists.

*“Cf. S. Diamond, “The Rule of Law Versus the Order of Custom”, in
Social Research, 38, 1971.

“The Nuba, pp. 509-10.
168 > F NADEL AND 1y SUDAy
Rule. The major problem was in finding these—and mgg; fr

the Government chief (who may or may not have been :q“efltly
from one of the priesthoods of the traditional acephaloyg ?"}“ed
was the focus of ‘codified custom’: *‘chieftainship ang lawocle‘Y)
then become reflections of each other, the chief the agent of , |
that is greater and more necessary than he..law and ch; ef@is l;w

. : . ' vralidi »84 , l
will thus attain their ulterior validity together.”'** Nadel saw that ¢
“government-sponsored” (government-enforced) chiefship requir N
law—that the traditional authority figures were simply diﬂ_er;:l
(though his lack of general theory prohibited him from seeing tha:
they were qualitatively different), and any attempt to simply direqy
‘make use of’ them was not possible. In discussing one such failyre
Nadel quotes an informant: '

..*‘our young men would never obey clan or family heads i,

political matters; they obey only the Meks and Sheikhs which

the Hakuma has appointed.” Unhappily for the anthropologist,

then, the scientifically sounder organisation may prove impracti-

cable, and indeed, unnecessary.®?

Nadel is lamenting here the fact that he couldn’t efficiently make use
of local custom. He simply did not, however, understand just what
is implied by a social system that has chiefs and political structures
—the qualitative distinction between such a society and one without
chiefs and structures to enforce legal codes. He did not understand
that traditional custom and law are not simple arithmetic expres-
sions of one¢ another.

Similarly, Nadel failed to understand that classless societies (the
local society) and class-based societies (the ‘nation’) are not quan-
titative expressions of each other. Societies with forms such as law.
money, and property (class-based societies) are systems with wholly
different implications from societies that are classless—societies
ordered by custom and producing for use-value. In a society where
everyone can have a pair of shoes, or a bicycle, or a car, or a plane
or a yacht, there is no reason to have to protect property with law.
We know, of course that in societies with plancs and yachts, law
is critically necessary to their maintenance because only a privileged
few can have them. But the functionalist ‘explanation’ (the explana-
tion which counts and which measures all change and differentials
in increments) for societies of this type would involve something

“The Nuba, p. 498 (emphasis mine). Here Nadel is much more poignantly
revealing and correct than he possibly wished to be.
®*The Nuba, pp. 498-9.
169
£s FARIS
fact that even though yachts are limited, if everyone just
g the
gbot pard (Or Saves more), he or she too may have.a vacht, Thus
W gifferences between the yacht owners and others is presented as
the santitative. There is stratification, of course (usually regar-
me Yngcessitated by technology, or some other external factor, such
ded fact that some people are just not as hard-working). But such
as 1% |anation doesn’t need class—it can stick to the empirical facts,
an 'e );ptransccnd them, and account for the situation with stratifica-
chcm Nadel did exactly that—he simply viewed the world as if
thcré were no disjunctions or qualitative differences between .s.ocie-
jes, epochs, or things. He was thus able to argue: “tradmgmal
Nuba morality is bounded by the small community: we want it to
embrace the whole tribe, the whole country. Why not teach just
t?"a‘f
tM;But as argued above, Nadel knew full well that some morals of
classless society had to be junked if local people were to participate
in class-based social organisation. His recommendation was to drop
these (and add law and chiefs)—then the Nuba and the governing
elite would differ only in degree! He urged:
The education of the Nuba, as of all primitive groups, should be
guided thus: let moral education take the form of a teaching
of tribal history, modified and weighed in accordance with
modern values. The principal tenets of social morality as we
visualise them, and as they are embodied in tribal structure
and the tribal past, are often the same; only their terms of
reference, the social range to which they refer, need reinterpreta-
tion.®®
Thus, any qualitative differences are obliterated, and everything is
more or less of everything else. Even Nadel, however, could not
find some features of his ideal class-based state in local society (and
here again we find Nadel the moralist), so these he attributes to
“universal moral tenets—the evilness of murder, respect for prop-
erty or marital rights’’.®°
The qualitative differences were simply too great for Nadel to
generate them from any simple quantitative accretion, and he had
thus to introduce into classless local societies a morality derived
from capitalism to complete his functional schema. With this, every

M

“Cf. P. Newcomer, “‘Social Class and Social Stratification”, paper delivered
to the Symposium Marx I11: Critiques of Theory, American Anthropologi-
cal Association Annual Meeting, Toronto, December 1972.

“The Nuba, p. 512.

*Ibid.. p. 512 (emphasis mine).

“Loc. cit.
170 S F NADEL AND THE SUDAN

difference between ‘them’ and ‘us’ is simply a quantitative expres.
sion: customary order is really law, society is really the state
underdevelopment is really development. '
Very little of what I have said is unique to Nadel,?® for his theory
and methodology is the legacy of most of us. But perhaps this s
changing. Certainly the people on whom this sort of theory wy;
applied are rising up to change it. I am glad to be able to say that
this even happened to Nadel at one point, for after a lecture ip
London, he tells us:
At the end of the talk a number of West African students in the
audience violently attacked me, all my fellow workers in that
field, and indeed the whole of anthropology. They accused us
of playing into the hands of reactionary administrators and of
lending the sanction of science to a policy meant to ‘keep the
African down’.™!
It is time that we lend ‘‘the sanction of science’ to eliminating
oppression, and one (but only one) way of doing this is t0 make
clear and attack the role of anthropology in creating, preserving,
and implementing ideologies of oppression.

“Cf. J. Fans, “Review: The Dialectics of Social Life (by Robert Murphy)”
in Science and Society, 36, 1972.
"S. Nadel, Anthropology & Modern Life, Canberra, 1953, p. 13.
