ANTHROPOLOGY AND COLONIAL RULE: THE CASE OF
GODFREY WILSON AND THE RHODES-LIVINGSTONE
INSTITUTE, NORTHERN RHODESIA
Richard Brown

The problem of knowledge and power is, and always has

been, the problem of the relations of men of knowledge with

men of power.!
The relationship of anthropological knowledge to colonial power
has been the subject of much recent comment. Apart from two
highly critical articles in the New Left Review by Goddard and by
Banaji, Kathleen Gough and others have also been contributing to
a distinctly unfavourable image of the colonial anthropologist.?
This work seems to show that scholarly advance—or perhaps more
accurately, the advancement of scholars—requires a form of in-
tellectual parricide: each generation, it appears, must murder its
immediate ancestors. In this case not just the ideas, but also the
academic morality of the scholarly ancestors is assaulted when it is
claimed that the colonial anthropologist was simply the handmaiden
of imperialism. Van den Berghe writes of him as “strongly com-

‘?%\;;rlggé Mills, Power, Politics and People, ed. 1. L. Horowitz (New York,
‘D. Goddard “Limits of British Anthropology’”, New Left Review, S8
(November-December 1969); J. Banaji, “The Crisis of British Anthropo-
logy”, New Left Review, 64 (November-December 1970); K. Gough,
“World Revolution and the Science of Man’’, The Dissenting Academy, ed.
T. Roszak (Harmondsworth, 1969), 135; K. Gough, “Anthropology: Child
of Impenialism”, Monthly Review, Vol. 19, No. 11 (April 1968); J. R.
Hooker, “The Anthropologist’s Frontier: the last phase of African exploi-
tation”, Journal of Modern African Studies, 1 (1963); P. Worsley, “The
End of Anthropology?”’, paper for 6th World Congress of Sociology, 1966,
mimeo. A specific if ineffective attack on the Northern Rhodesian sociolo-
174 GODFREY WILSON AND Ty Ry

mitted to the preservation of the status quo, regarding the CONntineny
as a vast ethnographic Garden of Eden’ and suggests that jt ig onl
recently that anthropologists have become aware of change. Besideg
also allegedly harmonising with colonial rule and stressing only pg,.
mony in the societies he studied, the colonial anthropologist standg
accused of having deliberately adopted narrow horizons: he is sup.
posed to have studied only social units least touched by modery
influences and to have ignored the world-wide setting in which
modern influences nevertheless made themselves felt.?

However, it is to be doubted whether the contrast between the
dark colonial days and the enlightened present is so stark as thege
writings imply. Nor, because “‘colonial administration had an in.
herent need of cogent, objective information on the peoples over
which it ruled,”* should it be too readily assumed that anthropolo.
gists merely carried out mental labour for colonial administrators
or that the interests of the two groups necatly coincided. Readiness
to be an “applied anthropologist’” and to subscribe to a belief in
objective and value-ncutral social research did not necessarily mecan
tame submission to colonial aims as Gerald Berreman appears to
think,* but can also be seen as a method by which the colonial
anthropologist sought to disassociate himself from colonial aims
while preserving the freedom to carry out rescarch in colonial con-
ditions on subjects chosen by himself.® In any case, as the quotation
at the hecad of this paper suggests, the relationship between know-
ledge and power is an indirect one mediated by particular men and
particular institutions and is thus subject to some degree of in-
determinancy. It may therefore be of some interest to examine the
particularities of a single situation, not least since the extensive
literature on the subject of the attempt to apply anthropological
knowledge to colonial problems remains at a very general level and
has yet to be supported by case studies.

The case of Godfrey Wilson and the Rhodes-Livingstone Institute
is an interesting one since it illustrates the fundamental ambiguity
which lay at the heart of the relationship betwcen anthropology and
colonial rule. Furthermore, the RLI was the first institute of its

gical tradition was launched in B. Magubane’s “A Critical Look at Indices
used in the Study of Social Change in Colonial Africa”, Current Anthro-
pology, 12 (1971), pp. 419-430, being easily refuted by those attacked in the
following pages of the same issue.

'P. L. van den Berghe, Africa: Social Problems of Change & Conflict (San
Francisco, 1965), 2-5.

‘P. Anderson, “Components of the National Culture”, Student Power, eds.
A. Cockburn & R. Blackburn (Harmondsworth, 1969), 265.

*G. D. Berreman, “Is Anthropology Alive? Social Responsibility in Social
RI cH ARD BROWN 175
ind in the dependent empire and it served as a model in many
gspects for those that were later established after the second world

:var in east and west Africa and in the West Indies.” The academic

;nfluence of the RLI was also great. Wilson’s three successors as

director—Max Gluckman, Elizabeth Cglson, and Clyde Mitchell—

were not only greatly influenced by him and the worl.i he began
while at the institute, like him they achicved world-wide renown
as scholars. The remarkably high number of senior appointments

:n anthropology and sociology held by former research officers of

the RLI are further evidence of its academic influence.

The foundation of the RLI in 1937 was an isolated event, but it
was not wholly divorced from the gencral tendencies of the time
which were favouring attempts to rclate scientific knowledge to
social problems. After the First World War the focus of colonial
interest moved from the acquisition to the maintenance of control,
and the first stirrings about ‘development’ as a consciously-induced
policy began. Embodied in Lord Lugard’s The Dual Mandate in
British Tropical Africa (1922) and the French colonial minister
Albert Sarraut’s Mise en valeur des colonies francaises (1923), these
shifts in the nature of colonialism were accompanicd by the growth
of an anthropology which its practitioners claimed was of great
practical value. Within the discipline the crucial changes—associa-
ted with Radcliffe-Brown and Malinowski (both of whose first
major works were published in 1922)—were the substitution of
functional for evolutionary social theory and the stress on intensive
field-work. The new emphasis on the workings and maintenance of
social systems closely parallels the way in which, at much the same
time, L. B. Namier was revolutionising the study of 18th century
politics by leaving aside the traditional questions of chronological
development in favour of asking how the political system actually
worked in 1760. It was useless, Namier believed, to study the politi-
cal events of the period unless one first understood the structure in
which they occured. In a similar way, Malinowski claimed that
those concerned with devclopments in Africa must first understand
the workings of the societies with which they were in contact.®
Support for anthropology was thus sought on the basis of its utility,

Anthropology”, Current Anthropology (1968), 391-8.

°This argument is developed at length in the chapter by Wendy James.

'E. Chilver, “The Institutes of Social and Economic Research in the Afri-
can Colonies”, Journal of African Administration, 3 (1951) provides a use-
ful overview.

°L. B. Namier, The Structure of Politics at the Accession of George IlI
(London ,1929); B. Malinowski, “Practical Anthropology”, Africa, 2 (1929).
176 GODFREY WILSON AND THE g,
1

and this appeal found a response from within the specialiseq
overlapping circles which concerned themselves with colonial affajry
The formation of the International Institute of African Langyape,
and Cultures in 1926 was the result. The International African
Institute, as it was later to become, was established by represengs.
tives of scientific, missionary and official colonial bodies, with the
specific aim of “bringing about a closer association of scientifi
knowledge and research with practical affairs.”?® Its first chairmgay
was Lord Lugard, who—with Lord Hailey—was to be a key inte-
mediary between the men of knowledge and the men of power.
The utilitarian aims of the IAI werc to receive still wider pub.
licity in Hailey’s massive and influential African Survey, the idea
of which was first canvassed by Smuts in 1929, but which was not
published until 1938. The Survey is well-known for the support it
gave to research of all kinds, but there was a special advocacy of
anthropological research *‘because policies which do not take into
account the naturc of native socictics arc apt to provoke unforeseen
and unwelcome reactions.””** The importance of Hailey's support
is seen in the unusual distinction paid to him when he was acknow-
ledged by name in thc government white paper dealing with the
formation of a Colonial Rescarch Advisory Committee as part of
the 1940 Colonial Development and Welfarec Act. the first act o
make substantial government funds available for colonial research.'!
Nevertheless, the Colonial Secretarv, Malcolm MacDonald, was
cvidently in some fear of anthropologists. Discussing the composi-
tion of the new research committee, -of which Hailey had becn
invited to be chairman, MacDonald wrote: ‘I feel that 1 shall be
pressed...to include an anthropologist, but 1 gather that it will be
rather hard to find one who has not his own personal axe to grind,
and I am told that in any case anthropologists, as a class, are rather
difficult folk to deal with.”’*? In reply, Hailey stressed the need to
appoint one ‘“‘since there are many people, not themselves profes-
sional anthropologists, who will constantly make it their business to
remind you, that it is useless to provide for enquiry into the physical
sciences, unless you consider also the human elements to which the
result of these enquiries must be applied,”” After stating that hc

but

‘F. D. Lugard, “The International Institute of African Languages and Cul-
tures”, Africa, 1 (1928), 1-12.

"Lord Hailey, An African Survey (London, 1938), 40.

"Cmd. 6175 (1940), 1.

?Malcolm MacDonald to Lord Hailey, personal, 18 April, 1940, Rhodes
House, MSS Brit. Emp. 5.342.
glc.HARD BROWN 177
belicvcd some of the colonial governments would also‘ ‘be disappoin-
od if anthropology was omitted, Hailey went on, “But we must
:ecognise the limits within W‘thh support §hould be given to anthro-

ological studi.&s...[the]. aim is not primarily to encourage academic
study; it is Iimlteql to ghscovermg those things wl!lch our administra-
tion must know, if it is to make the best use of its resources for the
development of the pcople in the Colonies.”**

However, important though these mectropolitan developments
were, the RLI was not their direct product. Although the important
post-war research plans of the institute were to be largely funded
from C.D. & W., its formation in 1937 not only prcceded the act
by three years, but also cut across official thinking which at this
time tended to favour Hailey’s vicw that colonial research ought to
be centrally organised and conducted from Britain rather than from
local institutes situated in Africa.'* In these circumstances. while it
is true that the gencral climate favoured experiments in applied
rescarch, it was also the case that it would be difficult to get the
principle accepted that an institute should be founded in Northern
Rhodesia and difficult, too. to raise the necessary funds. Thus, un-
like the later institutes, which were part of a wide-ranging colonial
office policy to underpin its post-war development plans with social
research, the RLI struggled into existence as a result of a local
initiative, and morc despite than because of colonial office wishes.

The first suggestion came from Sir Hubert Winthrop Young at
the outset of his governorship of Northern Rhodesia in 1934 when
he proposed to the colonial sccretary that a Livingstone memorial
comprising a museum and a rescarch institutc should be established
to carry out research in ‘“‘archaeology, geology, and particularly an-
thropology.” Interestingly, sincc laymen still tended to think of
anthropology as the study of weird rites and obscene rituals, Young
continued, “Livingstone was himself so interested in thc habits and
customs of the peoples of Central Africa that it was thought that
emphasis should be laid on the sociological side of anthropology.”1°

Something of a poseur, Young thought of himself as a scholar
and the institutc scheme¢ probably appealed to his vanity and self-
importance.'™ The scheme was also seen to be an attempt to placate

“Hailey to MacDonald, [-] May 1940, Rhodes House, MSS Brit. Emp. s342.
“Hailey. Survey, 1624-29.
“"Minute by F. A. Stockdale, 15 August 1934, reporting conversation with

Young, CO 795,/72.
“aThis point was made to me by Dr. A. L. Richards at a seminar at the
Institutc of Commonwealth Studies, 30 November 1972,
178 GODFREY WILSON ANp Tig
Ry

the traders of Livingstone, where it was proposed to sitc ¢
tute, for the loss of business on the impending removal of
tory’s capital to Lusaka.’*®

Up to 1930 anthropological knowledge about Northern R
had accumulated in characteristically random fashion through th
activities of amateur enthusiasts who were ecither officials of the
British South Africa Company, who administered the territory,
missionaries.’** Professional study began with Audrey Richards 4 o
carried out field-work on the Bemba in 1930-31. and 1933.34 A
pupil of Malinowski’'s, she concentrated on problems of Nutrition
while also revealing the general outlines of the social and politjcy)
structure of the Bemba peoples. Further enquiry may show thy
interest in the value to the administration of her research played 4
part both in encouraging Young to propose the institute and ip
maintaining his government’s interest during the lengthy and painfy]
gestation of the scheme.**d

The three year delay from 1934 to 1937 in launching the pro.
posal was due to the obstruction of the colonial office. Both the
permanent officials and the colonial sccretary (Sir Philip CunlifTe-
Lister, later Lord Swinton) were lukewarm about the proposal,
doubting its value and fearing that undue burdens would be placed
on the finances of the local colonial governments of central Africa
in spite of Young’s own optimism about raising moncy from private
sources.'” Asked to make the value of his suggestion more explicit,
Young cxplained he had consulted with experts such as Julian Hux-
ley, Audrey Richards, J. H. Oldham and others, and that he was
guaranteed the support of the International African Institute by
Oldham, its administrative secretary. The main object of the re-
search would be “‘to assist towards the formulation of the correct
economic and administrative policy for the mixed African and non-

he ing;.

“bEllis Robins to D. O. Malcolm, 29 May 1937, C.O. 795/88; Professor M.
Gluckman to author, 8 December 1972.

“cAfter Livingstone in the previous century, the first work in this field which
deserves notice is C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane, The Great Plateau of
Northern Rhodesia (London, 1911): both authors werec employees of the
BSA Company. E. W. Smith (a celebrated missionary) and A. Dale (a
company servant) co-operated to produce The fla-speaking Peoples of
Northern Rhodesia (London, 1920), widely regarded as one of the finest non-
professional cthnographic studies of an African people. C. M. Doke’s
The Lambas of Northern Rhodesia (London, 1931) is not of the same quality.
but the author, a Baptist missionary, later became a Profcssor of African
languages.

"dHer first work, Hunger and Work in a Savage Tribe (London), 1932) pre-
ceded Young's proposal. The main study based on the Bemba, Land,
Labour and Diet in Northern Rhodesia was not published until 1939, after
the institute was already in being, but she reports that her earlier “Tribal
BIC HAm BROWN 179
. .an community”'?, and in another document. Young further
Af"ced its utilitarian object on the grounds that relations between
stres and black in central and southern Africa werce perhaps ‘‘the
wmtcﬁt problem in the Empire today™ and the institute “will help
5 o and my successors, and possibly other authorities, by providing
advice upon the potential economic and political future of

o two communities...””*® This led to an alarmed minute by an
assistant under sccretary of state suggesting that Young should
jioned ‘“‘against any statement...which might indicate that the

be caut! : :
conclusions of the Anthropologist would have material weight in

deciding large questions of policy.”*

None of Young’s arguments convinced the secretary of state who
continued to write scornful minutes on the subject and who, al-
though clearly against the proposal in principle, did not refuse his
support outright, but instead adopted the typical civil service tac-
tics of delay by insisting that no decision be taken before the results
of Hailey’s unofficial survey, which was then about to start in
earnest, were known.? Young was bitterly disappointed at being
so refused ‘‘something that would help me to do this difficult job™*!
and he would have bcen still more annoyed had he known that
Hailey protested at the excuse Young had been given, fearing it
“would tend to embarrass his relations with the administrators if
the Survey were to be used as a means by which their schemes
might be indefinitely held up.”"*?

One reason for the scepticism with which Young's proposal had
been received in official quarters was that Northern Rhodesia was
still considered a colonial backwater.?* Although acquired through
the agency of Rhodes’s British South Africa Company, it had es-
caped the notoricty of the violent encounters which had accom-
panied the company’s colonisation of Southern Rhodesia. Nor,

Government 1n Transition. The Babemba of North-Eastern Rhodesia™,
supplement to the Journal of the Royal African Society, 34 (1935), was
used administratively: letter to author, 26 January 1973.

“Minute by F. A. Stockdale, 15 August 1934; minutes by Cunliffe-Lister,
16, 23 August, 24 Scptember 1934; minute by J. A. Calder, 10 September
_1934; minute by E. Boyd, 11 September 1934, CO 795/72.

"Young, “‘Livingstone Memorial Institute”, encl. in Young to Cunliffe-Lister,
29 September 1934, CO 795/72.

"Young to Cunliffe-Lister, 29 September 1934, CO 795,72.

“Minute by W. C. B[ottomley], 7 November 1934, CO 795/72.

*Minute by Cunliffe-Lister, 7 November 1935; Cunliffe-Lister to Young,
13 November 1934, CO 795,72

“'Young to Sir J.Maffey, 21 November 1934, CO 795,75.

“*Minute by S. E. V. Luke, 2 July 1935, reporting conversation with Hailey,

_CO 795/172.
“I. Henderson, “The Origins of Nationalism in East and Central Africa:
180 GODFREY WILSON AND Ty RL
l

when the territory came under direct colonial office rule jj | 4
and the B.S.A. Company was relieved of administrative reg
sibility, were there sufficient settlers to provoke the attention the,
being given to policy problems in Kenya. The development of the
copperbelt shortly after the coming of colonial office rule leq ¢,
some privately expressed concern about the effects of the mines ¢,
African life as was shown by the publication of Modern Industry
and the African, an enquiry into copperbelt life on behalf of {p,
International Missionary Council which included recommendatiopg
about the value of anthropology to both missions and government,
but the colonial office seemed singularly unaware of the copperbele
significance. The explosion of anger by African miners in the strike
of May 1935, when six were killed by police action, led to Northern
Rhodesia being given unaccustomed promincnce in British news.
papers, and it began to be rcalised that the copperbelt presented
novel problems of industrialisation which were not to be found
elsewhere in British Africa.?® The 1935 riots, however, did little
immediately to forward Young'’s plans.

Young used his review of the copperbelt situation following the
riots to revive his scheme. He pointed out to the new colonial secre-
tary, Malcolm MacDonald, that the growth of industrialisation was
“beyond the experience of the local Administration” and that what
was needed was an institute ‘““for the express purpose of studying
this important problem, which cannot be thoroughly understood
nor handled by the Government without some such expert ad-
vice...”’*®* The permanent under-secretary’s minute merely noted.
“The Governor is obstinate about his anthropological institutc,”’*’
and the matter was left to drop. What made the difference was thc
arrival at the colonial office of W. Ormsby-Gore (later Lord Har-
lech), who made it clear that he approved of Young’s schemc and
wished the appeal for funds to go ahead even though the perman-
ent officials still counselled delay until the publication of Hailey’s
survey.”®* By now, Young had modified the original proposal to
make usc of *‘the coincidence of the Rhodes Jubilee [in 1940] with

the Zambian Case”, Journal of African History, 11 (1970), 596.

"‘gblMgél]e Davis, Modern Industry and the African (London, 1933), 375,

“*The Times, 28-31 May, 4 June 1935.

“*Young to Malcolm MacDonald, 29 August 1935, CO 795/78.

“‘Minute by J. L. M[affey], 24 September 1935, CO 795/78.

“*Minutes by Ormsby-Gore, 4 February, 5 April 1937; minute by J. A.

Calder, 26 January 1937; minute by G. J. F. T[omlinson], 27 January 1937,
CO 795/81.
e Livingstone centenary, and [it] is somewhat expanded to appeal
admirers of Rhodes as well as of Livingstone.”*® Whether this
tzdition had any bearing on Ormsby-Gore's decision is not known.
4 The public appeal for funds was issued on 30 June 1937,%° a few
days after an ordinance setting up the institute under a board of
rrustees had been passed by the Northern Rhodesia legislative coun-
cil.3' Young had used the opportunity of his presence in London
for the coronation of George VI to build up an impressive list of
signatories. Besides the colonial scecretary, the institute appeal was
signed by the archbishops of Canterbury and York and the modera-
tor of the Church of Scotland who headed the list; then followed
the president of the Royal Society and other prominent academics
concerned with Africa, representing the world of science; the three
central African governors and governor-general of Canada repre-
sented the dependent and independent parts of the Empire; while
the ubiquitous Lords Lugard and Hailey represented the unofficial
voice of the establishment on colonial matters. A discreet hint of
royal patronage was added to the appeal by the statement that the
Duke of Kent, who had recently visited Northern Rhodesia, ‘“has
full sympathy with this appeal and wishes it every success.” In
commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of the foundation of the
Rhodesias in 1890 and the centenary of the arrival of Livingstone
in Africa, the appeal balanced the widely different associations
evoked by the two names. The appeal stated that the institute was
intended :
as a contribution to the scientific efforts now being made in
various quarters to examine the effect upon native African
society of the impact of European civilisation, by the formation
in Africa itself of a centre where the problem of establishing
permanent and satisfactory relations between natives and non-
natives—a problem of urgent importance where, as in Northern
Rhodesia, mineral resources are being developed in the home
of a primitive community—may form the subject of special
study.??
If the reference to “‘permanent and satisfactory” relations between
black and white was intended to arouse the enthusiasm of the
settlers in Northern Rhodesia itself for the institute, it failed to do

“Young to Ormsby-Gore, § April 1937, CO 795/81.

*The Times, The Livingstone Mail et. al., 30 June 1937.

"Ordinance No. 1 of 1937, Supplement to the Northern Rhodesia Gazette,
29 June 1937.

*See note 30.
182 GODFREY WILSON AND 134 .

so. Throughout the 1930’s and indeed later, they saw thejr secus
. . . . ot u

not in science, but in wresting political power from the colon:
office, either directly through achieving minority self—gcove;-nm,millal
indirectly through amalgamation with Southern Rhodesia. The s°'
tler representatives in the legislative council thus gave the formaﬁ?'
of the institute a cool reception, seeing it as no more than e)(n
periment which they had no reason to oppose outright. DOUbt;
were expressed about the ability of the territory to continue makjj
contributions to its funds and there was concern that the researc},
officers should be properly supervised.** Leopold Moore, the senjq,
elected member and proprietor of the Livingstone Mail, joined the
board of trustees, but in an editorial objected to the ‘“sacerdoty
patronage” of the Institute, fearing the diversion of the enterprise
into “‘a means of disseminating religious propaganda as witness the
BBC.’3* Sir Stewart Gore-Browne, also a leading settler, emphat.
cally favoured scientific research of all kinds and his wife directly
assisted the research of Audrey Richards. Nevertheless, the excla-
mation reported to have been made at one of his meetings that “we
will not be governed by anthropologists’** and the view that the
institute was an example of government wastefulness at a time
when the territory should be “improving hospitals for the benefit
of the living’**® were more characteristic responses. But although
the support of the settlers was important, especially to Young whose
governorship was distinctive for the extent to which he sought to
win their confidence, the financial and research future for an insti-
tute depended much more upon the attitude of the governments
and the big business interests since it was they who were the power-
ful elements in the Northern Rhodesian equation of knowledge and
power. The territory’s African voice was as yet muted, while the
settlers, although vociferous, numbered only 15,000 by 1940.

In the early years of the institute non-governmental contributions
approximately equalled those of governments other than that of
Northern Rhodesia.?” The contributions from other governments
came, firstly, from the British east and central African territories,
who presumably took their lead from the secretary of state, and,
secondly, from Southern Rhodesia, free since 1923 to take an indec-

*Northern Rhodesia Legislative Council Debates, 28, cols. 16-38 (26 & 28
June 1937).

*Livingstone Mail, 30 June 1937, p. 4, col. 4.

“Journal of the Royal African Society, 34 (1935), 383.

*S. Gore-Browne, “The Relations of Black and White in Tropical Africa™
Livingstone Mail, 1 September 1937, p. §, ools. 4-5.
((CHARD BROWE 183
t line, but whom Young had carefully wooed on the grounds
pendfz'e institute could be ““a concrete application™ of the policy of
y -operation™ recently approved by the colonial secretary,
.t of view especially likely to appeal to a convinced amalgama-
%po.lst jike Huggins, the Southern Rhodesian prime minister.38
tlof?ilcre was virtually no response to the appeal from private in-
erests OF purely British ones, and the non-government contributors
:xere, predictably, the main capitalist concerns (and trusts associated
with them) with interests in Northern Rhodesia, such as the British
gouth Africa Company, the mining companies of Broken Hill and
the copperbelt, and the Rhodes and Beit trusts. Yet support for the
institute from these obvious sources was neither straight-forward
nor easily won—as an unkind minute in the colonial office put it:
«gjr H. Young is finding that it is easier to catch your white ele-
phant than to keep it."** The BSA Co., resident director in Salis-
bury had cabled to the company president in London: “very
doubtful as to necessity or practicability of project especially on
vague and expensive lines indicated.”*° In a following letter he also
indicated preferences for direct government-sponsored inquiry and
for natural rather than social science, as well as wondering why the
South African government and universities were left out of the
scheme.* The BSA Co. president, the formidable colonial office
lobbyist, Sir Dougal Malcolm, passed on these and his own doubts
about the institute in a letter to ‘““My dear Billy”’ (Ormsby-Gore),
wishing to know whether the colonial secretary had “any strong
feelings in the matter” before taking a decision about a company
contribution.*? In reply, Ormsby-Gore made it clear that he wished
Young’s appeal to succeed and hoped that the BSA Co. would
back it publicly since *“if one company starts, I feel sure the rest
will join in.”’‘®* Malcolm took the hint and the company advanced

. ‘cl Oscr co

"For example, in 1939 recurrent income was as follows:

Northern Rhodesia £1,000
Tanganyika 100
Kenya 50
Upganda 50
Nyasaland 50
Southern Rhodesia 200
Roan Antelope Mine 200
Nkana Mine 200
Mufulira Mine 200
Broken Hill Mine 50
Zambesi Sawmills 58-5
C. S. Knight 50

2,208-5

Director's Report . . . . 1938-9-40, p. 1.

*Young to Sir Herbert Stanley, Governor of S. Rhodesia, 30 August 1934
184 GODFREY WILSON gnp, -
-~

a £5,000 capital grant. Even so, the copper companieg

ther wooing before they agreed to back the scheme ’Le;ded fur.
annual contributions.*! Making

Among the measures taken to arouse the interest of 1y, c
companies was the circulation of a revealing letter fropm H°I?Der
The letter clearly attempted to dispel the scepticism fe balley,
companies about the value to government and business of an};hthe
pological inquiry. It noted the changes which had come gyq, Im’
subject and stressed the shift from antiquarian and physicyj ¢ ¢
cerns to social ones, while also subtly managing to combjpe v
impression of scientific respectability with practical value, He ar.
gued that anthropological study “is necessary if we are to base on
any sure foundation the improvement we are seeking to make in
African conditions, whether it take the form of increase in agricyl.
tural production, or the betterment of diet and living conditions, o
of health or of capacity to labour.” To these pragmatic argumen
designed to appeal to the business ethic he added a patriotic appey]
by pointing out that, “‘None of the African governments have at the
moment any post of anthropologist or the like. It is to my ming
characteristic, 1 refrain from adding discreditable, that the main
contribution to essential studies of this nature comes from Amer-
ica.”* Hailey was obviously referring to the Rockefeller founda-
tion’s support of the IAI and of its “Five-Year Plan of Research”
(1931) which trained many lecading figures in the subject (including
prominent Africans such as Jomo Kenyatta and Z. K. Matthews).
Hailey’s own work, the African Survey was being paid for by the
Carnegie Corporation, also an American foundation.

The big capitalist interests of Northern Rhodesia were, it is clear.
doubtful of the value of independently conducted social research
and yet were willing, after an initial show of reluctance, to contn-

and telegraphic reply, 17 September 1934, CO 795/72. Telegram, Stanley
to Young, 17 May 1937, CO 795/88.

“Minute by J. S. W. Flood, 28 September 1937, CO 795/88.

“Telegram, Ellis Robins to D. O. Malcolm, 27 May 1937, CO 795/88.

“'Robins to Malcolm, 29 May 1937, CO 795/ 88.

“Malcolm to Ormsby-Gore, 8 June 1937, CO 795/ 88.

“Ormsby-Gore to Malcolm, 25 June 1937, CO 795/88.

“Record of conversation, Young with Mr. Storke, a copper mine executive.
28 July 1937, who agreed to do ‘“his utmost, when he got back to induce
the Copper Companies to come into line with the B.S.A. Company and
Sir Robert Williams’ Companies, at least to the extent of offering some
financial assistance to the Institute for the next three years.” ZNA P2/1/1.

*“Hailey to Young, 17 June 1937. ZNA B1/4/MISC/6/1.
185

.. and this remained the pattern throughout the colonial
':“l;e reason for this perhaps lies in their wish to retain good
period: " the political authorities in London and Lusaka. In
, n? r research they were not hiring handmaidens, but were
paying Oform of hidden taxation by falling in with the expressed
paying af the colonial secretary and the governor of the territory
Wismiﬁ .they operated. In this way, they may well have hoped to
i W'huo](;ng the extremely favourable conditions under which the
heli %ro. and the copper companies existed in Northern Rhodesia.
,an'(he year ending 30 Septerrgbef 1937, merely by existin.g, tl3c
gsA Co. carned £300.000 (principally from copper royalties) in
Northern Rhodesia,'* while thc.freedom of action the mines t}}err.l-
selves enjoyed made observers liken the coppf:rbe:lt to a state \\:’lthm
1 state. This interpretation that business contributions were basnpally
a form of vohﬁm&r); ta]xatior; gaizcs1 syurpport fl;on': th;sezn’éordénary
ter in whic alcolm inform oung of the 0. dona-
::m only after making it clear that he had little faith in the inst.itutc
project, adding “Your appeal, supported as it is by very welgbty
authority including that of the Secretary of State for the Colonies,
is one to which the...Company, in view of its history and traditions,
would be very reluctant to return a negative reply”.*” Nor is it per-
haps without significance that at this time there was not only mount-
ing public criticism of the royalties arrangement in Northern Rho-
desia, but also their legal validity was being questioned—unsuccess-
fully—by Young himself in largely secret correspondence with the
colonial office.*®
Thus the institute came into being at a time when the underlying
climate of opinion favoured the attempt to use the new type of
anthropology for practical purposes. Nevertheless, those in posi-
tions of formal and informal power, whether in government or in
business were at the least divided about the proposal for a special-
1sed institute staffed by professional scientists who would not be
civil servants. It required Young’s persistence, a willing colonial
secretary, and Hailey’s strong advocacy to get the project going.
As a formally independent institution, the RLI was not controlled

“D. O. Malcolm, The British South Africa Company, 1889-1939, (London,
n.d.; privately printed), 56.

“Malcolm to Young, 12 July 1937, “Early History of the Institute” file. IAS.

“The British South Africa Company's Claims to Mineral Royalties in Nor-
thern Rhodesia (Lusaka: Govt. Pr., 1964), 26-28; P. Slinn, “‘Commercial
concessions and politics during the colonial period. The role of the British
South Africa Company in Northern Rhodesia 1890-1964", African Affairs,
70 (1971), 375-377.
186 GODFREY WILSON AND Ty R

directly as a government department, but by a board of trust
As might be expected in an essentially authoritarian colonia]
ture, the composition of the board gave the governor the predom;
ant voice. He was ex-officio president of the board of seven, a:d
nominated two further members. The remaining members were two
civil servants—the financial secretary and the provincial COmmyg.
sioner, southern province; and two settlers—the mayor of Livip,.
stone (where the RLI was situated until the move to Lusaka in 1953,
and the legco member for the Livingstone and western electory
area. The governor possessed a veto over all appointments.

A striking feature of the board of trustees of what was intendeq
to be a scientific institute was the complete absence of scientigts
from the ruling body unless the governor chose to fill either or both
of the nominated positions with scientists. In fact, he did not do so,
but it is of some interest that it was nearly always the governor
who took the more ‘scientific’ view in conflicts within the board of
trustees. In fact, the RLI was as a rule more favoured by govern-
ment house than by the secretariat. Why this should have been so,
is not immediately clear. Possibly governors enjoyed ruling in a
territory which had at least some pretensions to learning or perhaps
in the colonial situation, where the governor rules as well as reigns,
potential alternative sources of information are comforting addi-
tions to the chief secretary’s near-monopoly of information.

How far an institute devoted to social rather than natural science
would be able to operate both harmoniously and independently in
a colonial setting was something which would have to be worked
out in practice. There were no real precedents and, unlike the later
colonial institutes of social research, there was no local university
to which it could be attached and from which it could derive some
protection from colonial pressures. Much would clearly depend on
the choice of the first director. Here again the specialised lobby
which took an interest in colonial affairs played an important part.
When the institute had first been mooted in 1934, J. H. Oldham
had stressed the need for a first-rate appointment and mentioned
Godfrey Wilson as a possible choice.*® Three years later, both
Lugard and Hailey strongly recommended Wilson as a “‘Functional
Anthropologist,”*® and after the colonial office had been unable to
find out “anything to the discredit of Godfrey Wilson"’>'—who was

Stru.::

“Minute by G. J. F. Tlomlinson], reporting conversation with Oldham, 6
November 1934, CO 795/72.

*Young to Ormsby-Gore 24 May, 17 August 1937, CO 795/88.

"Telegram W. C. B[ottomley] to Young, 26 May 1937, CO 795, 88.
‘UCHARD BROWN 187
en in Tanganyika—the board of trustees at its first meeting, per-
ominously only after “‘considerable discussion™, agreed to his
intment.>? He was interviewed at a special meeting of the board
and accepted appointment from the beginning of May 1938.>% On
this occasion he apparently created the wrong impression by beating
the governor at chess,>* but more serious disagreements lay ahead
and were to lead to a more or less enforced resignation within three
ears. The nature of the conflicts throws considerable light on the
osition of the social scientist in a colonial situation.

Godfrey Baldwin Wilson (1908-1944) was the son of the noted
chakespearean scholar, John Dover Wilson.** At Oxford he read
classics and philosophy before developing an interest in anthro-
pology through his friendship with Monica Hunter, whom he mar-
ried in 1935. Together they studied in Malinowski’s influential
seminar at the LSE before doing fieldwork among the Nyakusa
in what was then Tanganyika. Monica Hunter’s Reaction to Con-
quest (1936), a study of the Pondo not only in their “tribal” setting,
but also as labourers on European farms and in the towns of South
Africa, has been singled out as a notable example of a diachronic
or historically-dimensioned study at a time when ahistorical and
static studies are said to have dominated the field.>® In fact, the
rejection of history by the functionalists was never as absolute as
is often implied, their attack being mainly directed at the ‘‘con-
jectural history”” of human institutions which offended against the
most elementary rules of historical scholarship.

Nevertheless a wide outlook, often alleged to have been absent
from colonial anthropology, was an outstanding characteristic of
Godfrey Wilson and was to inform all that he wrote before his
premature death. His refusal to see any significant differences be-
tween social anthropology, sociology, and history, and his deter-
mination to bring economic and administrative factors into his
analysis of central African society owed a good deal to Marx.**

haps

“Minutes, Ist meeting, 27 July 1937, IAS.

“Minutes, 2nd meeting, 3 September 1937; Wilson to Lane Poole (PC,
southern province), 6 September 1937, IAS A/16.

“Information kindly given in discussion by Professor Monica Wilson, 18
March 1971.

“See J. D. Wilson, Milestones on the Dover Road (London, 1969) and the
obituary notice by Max Gluckman in the first number of the Rhodes-
Livingstone Journal (1944).

“This breadth of view also informs her chapters in thc recent Oxford His-
ic;?g o)l‘g.s_"c;x)uh Africa, 2 vols, eds. M. Wilson and L. Thompson (Oxford,

“He described social anthropology and sociology as “two words for the
188 GODFREY WILSON
RL[

Indeed, The Analysis of Social Change, written jointly wit, hic .
and published posthumously in 1945, must be one of th;S Wi,
ambitious brief attempts to explain the overall processes of m
since the Communist Manifesto. However, although im
Marxism as an explanatory system, in particular in conp
the world slump, Wilson was a devout Christian and 3 Pacif
Moreover, he believed passionately in the possibility of an ghie..

. . . . . ODjJective
social science. This was to be attained, he belicved, by excludip
all judgements of a moral kind: ‘“‘Balanced judgement ang soba
sentiment belong to politics and philosophy, they do not belong ¢4
science, whose sole task consists in accurate description of events
together with dispassionate analysis of the actual forces that detey.
mine them.” He was aware of the problem of bias and selectivity
in the facts themselves, but believed the problem could be overcoma
by “‘practice and self-knowledge, and by the use of a properly
systematic and comparative technique.”*® Thus so far as knowledge
and power was concerned he believed, “The scientists must make it
their boast that both governments and oppositions can trust them
equally because they say nothing that they cannot prove, because
they are always pedestrian and never leave the facts. The men of
affairs must make it their boast that they allow the scientists per-
fect freedom in their researches and pay to their results when pub-
lished the attention which proven fact deserves.”’*®

These ideals were soon to come to grief amid the realities of
Northern Rhodesia at that time. Wilson came to the RLI with high
hopes of proving the beneficence of modern social anthropology,
for which he forsaw an extensive public role. Among the first of the
institute’s publications was an attempt to popularise the methods
of anthropology,” and an early suggestion to the trustces was a
scheme for associate membership by which amateur social en-
quirers would be trained by the institute staff in “modern techniques
of study which are at once simple in application and quickly illu-
minating,”®! but official reaction was predictable alarm at the pros-

Presseqd ge

ection wig,

same thing” in a letter to A. A. Smith (M.L.C.), 28 December 1938, TAS
“Plans for Urban Research File”. History and socioclogy were identical,
excsept ﬁgr minor details, wrote Wilson to C. E. Fripp, 13 August 1938,
T1AS 1/45.

*G. Wilson, ‘“The Rhodes-Livingstone Institute of Central African Studies’ -
The Cambridge Review, 14 January 1938, 172.

*G. Wilson, “Anthropology as a Public Service™”, Africa, 13 (1940), 47.
*G. Wilson and M. Hunter, The Study of African Society, Rhodes-Living-
stone Papers No. 2 (1939).

*Wilson to Young & encl, 22 June 1938, ZNA B1,/4/MISC/6/1.
gICHARD BROWN %
.t of amateur researchers coming into 'dir‘ect contact wi.. Afri-
. outside the master-servant relationship®>—Northern Rhodesia
caﬂ:his ime had been described by Young’s predecessor as so
at | lly stratificd that the Litunga of Barotseland was the only
rwﬁtan with whom a white man was supposed to shake hands.®
Af;h ¢ more scrious conflicts arose out of the form and methods of
wilson’s social rescarch. In conformity with his views on scientific
;ndependence, Wilson at once faced the trustees with the request
that he rather than. they should propose the research programme
for the institute. This was reluctantly agreed to, although two qf the
five trustecs present thought the board itself should make a list of
roblems from which the director should select, and there was a
gencral feeling on the board that the subject *“‘should be of somc
value to Government in assisting it to frame its native policy.””*

Far from secking out thc most remotc and uninflucnced African
society to study, as the stercotype of the colonial anthropologist
suggests, Wilson’s proposals went to the heart of the evolving
Northern Rhodesian social system. Admittedly, there was no sug-
gestion that the settlers themselves required direct investigation, but
he proposed that the institute should discover what was happening
in three types of situation concerning Africans:

(a) “in the new African society of...permanent and semi-perma-
nent residents in urban and industrial areas’ (according to official
policy at that time¢ such urbanisation ncither was nor would be
allowed to occur).

(b) to the “‘group that alternates rcgularly between urban and
rural areas.”

(c) to African society in the rural and ‘“‘especially the denuded
arcas.”’®?

The urban research he proposed to tacklc himself, while Max
Gluckman went to the rural area of Barotseland when a second
anthropologist was appointed in 1939. Wilson specified a wide range
of topics for investigation in the urban areas, including the nature
of African ambitions and aspirations in a white-dominated society.%®
This and other topics proposcd were sensitive issues in the eyes of

“Minutcs. 6th (wrongly typed as “Sth™”) mecting, 29 Junc 1938, IAS.

“L. H. Gann, A History of N. Rhodesia, (London, 1964) 282, refcrring to
mrcmarks by Sir Ronald Storrs.

Lane Poole, “‘Research Proposals by the Director”, 28 June 1938, recalling
mdlS.CUSSIOn at Wilson’s interview, 3 September 1937, ZNA B1/4/MISC/6/1.

Wilson, “Preliminary Plan of Research”, 30 May 1938, for consideration
“ll)g'. Jrustees at 6th meeting (29 June), IAS 1/45.

id.
190 GODFREY WILSON aAnp T
Ry

government, but they were also issues on which, especigyy ..
the riots of 1935, it might most have welcomed informaﬁoi Singe
of the problem as the government saw it was that Wilson haq’ Pan
it plain that he intended to carry out the investigations in th, ;“gde
areas by the same means as anthropologists had beep taug h’t an
apply in village society, by participant observation, and not iustlgo
consulting official records and statistics. Such Malinowskiap ﬁeldy
work methods raised the delicate question of relations wi the
mining companies, to whom more or less complete power gver lhei?
own labour compounds had been granted, and to whom the Ng,.
thern Rhodesia government rarely felt itself strong enough to g;.
tate. Nevertheless, the trustees brought themselves to approve ;).
son’s research programme subject to the proviso that he firg
occupy himself with some rural inquiry and did not pay the pre.
liminary visit to the copperbelt he had originally proposed “‘unj
this could be arranged conveniently”.*’

From the first, nervousness at the prospect of rescarch outside a
safe rural area was the prevailing view in the secretariat where
opinion also clearly feared that Wilson’s proposals would alarm
the mine authorities ‘‘who will be apprehensive lest the questionings
stir up discontent.’”’®® It was suggested to the governor that research
which would indicate whether the “prospects of re-establishing
Native Local Government are deteriorating or improving’’ would
be more valuable. This diversionary tactic was scotched, however,
apparently by the governor himself.®°

Administrators on the copperbelt were equally uneasy about the
suggested research, likewise arguing that though it was doubtless
important, it would upset the mines or could be done better at a
later date. The provincial commissioner suggested that Wilson
should be directed to begin on some other line of rail town “in
order that some report may be received of his personality, tact, and
methods before he comes to the copper belt.””?° In fact Wilson had
already made careful approaches to the mines,”* and the provincial

““Minutes, 6th meeting, 29 June 1938, 1AS.

®Secretariat minute, 13 June 1938, ZNA B1,/4,MISC/6/1.

“Minute by R. H. Hudson, 18 June 1938, reporting conversation with the
governor, ZNA B1/4/MISC/6/1.

““H. F. Cartmel-Robinson to Hudson, confidential, 30 June 1938. See alsc
minutes by the DC's at Mufulira, Ndola, Kitwe, and Luanshya, enclosed
in Cartmel-Robinson to Hudson, 8 August 1938, ZNA B1/4/MISC/6/1.

“"Wilson to Hon. S. Gore-Browne, 23 July 1938, IAS ‘Notes from Provincial
Commissioners” file; letter to general mine managers at Nkana Luanshya.
Mufulira, Nchanga, and Broken Hill, 19 August 1938, 1AS I. 30.
g PROWN 191

..ioner was clearly taken aback when two mine managers
commiss! ally agreed to permit Wilson to work in their compounds.
p “S'o?,ted, the PC now raised new objections, fearing, as he put
No® dauWilsbn “might introduce technical criticism [of new local
it, that t provisions] from the anthropologist’s view without con-
overnmen p . . Y . .

° 1aration Of practical difficulties or real knowledge of local con-
,.fj.er;ls » The new arrangements had only come about “after pro-
dine i ussion between people experienced in native affairs, both
longed disc -

. rural and urban arcas, and that any interference at the last
minute even by a tra{ned anthropologist might lead to tension or
indefinite procrastination.””* The most the PC felt able to recom-
mend was that Wilson be allowed to pay a short visit to the copper-
belt “to obtain a mental picture of industrial conditions without
doing any fieldwork.”** In other words, Wilson was to look at, but
not talk fo African miners!

It was in these circumstances that Wilson reluctantly agreed to
begin his urban research not on the Copperbelt, but in the African
locations of Broken Hill, Northern Rhodesia’s oldest mining town,
where lead and zinc had been mined since 1902. He still intended
to work on the copperbelt too, but after the outbreak of war the
two mines which had earlier given permission for research work on
their premises withdrew it and the PC informed him that the admin-
istration would allow no copperbelt research for the duration of the
war. According to Wilson, the Broken Hill mine general manager
“laughed at the nervousnecss of the Copperbelt authorities and
allowed rescarch to continue. However, 1940 saw strikes by first the
white and then the black miners. Seventeen of the latter were killed
by the military when violence broke out despite the generally
sophisticated industrial tactics emploved by the African strike
leaders, and Wilson was asked to suspend his research for a fort-
night. Shortly afterwards complaints that Wilson fraternised with
Africans during fieldwork—surely an indispensable part of the
method—Icd the Broken Hill authorities to withdraw all permis-
sion for research.™

Sir John Maybin, Young's successor as governor, intervened and
met the mine authorities in Wilson’s presence, but they refused to
alter their decision because, it was said, his “methods...might cause

"l(\ldalrstcmcé-’Robinson to Chief Secretary, 8 November 1938, ZNA Bl/4/
. /6/1.

"‘Cartmel-Robinson to Wilson, 15 November 1938, ZNA BI1,4,MISC/6/1.
"ggson, “Report on the position of the RLI”, 6 May 1940, IAS A. 25/ A.
192 GODFREY WILSON AND Thg RL

discontent and unrest besides undermining the African respect for
the European mineworkers.”’’* By this time the position of the
institute as a whole had been caught up in new controversies. Of itg
three scientific staff (an archaeologist, J. Desmond Clark, had been
appointed curator of the associated museum as well as secretary
of the institute) two were conscientious objectors and the third. May
Gluckman, was rumoured to be of doubtful political loyalty becayge
of left-wing views. A motion that the institute be closed was intrg.
duced in legco by the unofficial members, while the budget con.
mittee considered that the trustees should terminate the director’s
appointment.”™ Although the trustees, at the governor’s promp.
ing,*® agreed to keep the institute going on a reduced scale during
the war, it was made clear to Wilson at an emergency meeting of
the board “‘that his position as a conscicntious objector made it
undesirable that he should be allowed access to large bodics of
natives where an expression of his views might have a weakcning
influence on native morale and interfere with recruiting.”’’® In the
light of this opinion and the impasse over his industrial research.
Wilson offered his resignation and left the institute at the end of
April 1941, just three years after taking up his appointment.

His experiences were not merely personal for they also illustrate
thc underlying friction which tends to exist between men of powcer
and men of knowledge as well as highlighting the ambiguity of the
colonial anthropologist’s position in the colonial situation. Friction
arises because where those in authority require new social know-
ledge, they are also inclined to fear its implications. Anxiety 1s
aroused that they will be exposed in some way or that their auth-
ority will be undermined by an expert claiming esoteric knowledge:
defensively, doubt may be cast on the superiority of e¢xpert know-
ledge over everyday experience—all features which underlay the

"Confidential minutes of 14th meeting, 27 October 1940. (The trustees
held confidential and emergency meetings to discuss the position of the
institute and staff on 12 July, 22 September, and 27 October 1940. The
minutes of these meetings were not placed in the minute book held by thc
TAS, but copics of at least two of them survive: the 13th meecting (22
%gtember) in B1/4,MISC/6/1 and the 14th (27 October) in B1/4,MISC/

/3).

"Confidential minutes, 13th meeting, 22 September 1940 (sec previous notc).
Wilson to Governor (Sir John Maybin), 27 August 1940, B1/4/MISC/6/2.

""Chief Secretary to J. D. Clark, secretary-curator of the RLI and museum,
informing him of the legco motion, 25 September 1940; ‘““Budget Committee
Progress Report™, Item 25, 17 October 1940; Wilson to Maybin, 18, 27
July 1940. ZNA B1/4/MISC/6/1.

®"Minutc by C. G. S. Follows circulating the governor's views to trustces,
RICHARD BROWN 193

attitudes of the copperbelt PC extensively quoted above. Morcover,
the authorities may fear the effect of the research activity itself on
the human subjects over whom they rule. The more authoritarian
the system, the more these fears are likely to operate, as they so
clearly did in the case of Wilson’s urban research. The 1935 dis-
urbances pointed to the existence of serious social problems and
helped to establish a case for promoting detached scientific research
which would, it was thought, at the same time be useful. Yet the
very existence of the social problems made those in authority ner-
vous of having them independently investigated. The existence of a

roblem calls for study, but because there is a problem, study is
considered dangerous and likely to exacerbate the problem. Thus
on a later occasion, one administrator favoured -an anthropological
study of the Sala-Soli group in Northern Rhodesia “because they
had proved too resistant to authority in the past,”” but another ad-
ministrator doubted whether it would be cxpedient to send an
anthropologist to study them because “‘they were a group who had
proved so resistant to authority.’’®°

Colonial situations (but not only colonial situations) are prone to
produce ‘‘agitator”” theories of discontent. Where discontent is
recognised it is explained as the result of contamination of other-
wise contented subjects by outsiders, be they members of the colo-
nised group or fraternising anthropologists. Since it was the avowed
aim of the latter to explain phenomena like discontent by other
more structural regularities, and also to acquire their information
by face to face contact with the subject population, both the con-
clusions and the methods were suspect in the cyes of colonial ad-
ministrators. Furthermore, the colonial anthropologist in N. Rho-
desia was invariably a member of the dominant colour group in a
sharply stratified racial society, but his methods and inquiries in-
evitably took him outside the rigidly defined patterns of customary
behaviour. By so-called fraternisation with the subject group, the
anthropologist aroused the resentment of the dominant Europeans
who saw their norms being flouted by men who as temporary rather
than permanent residents were in any case distrusted.** Their in-

26 September 1939, ZNA B4/ MISC/6/1.
*Confidential minutes, 14th meeting, 27 October 1940 (Seec not 75).
“Minutes, 65th meeting, 9 December 1954, 1AS.

*This hostility was forcefully expressed in editorials in the Central African
Post, 10 and 17 April 1953, which led to a series of bitter exchanges
between anthropologists and the comparatively liberal editor, Dr. Alex-
ander Scott. See also the satirical and anonymous song “The Battle Hymn
of thc Rescarch Experts”, The Northern Rhodesia Journal, 3 (1956-59),
194 GODFREY WILSON AND Thp 5,
|

volvement in the daily life of a subject people. the outl
discipline, and the often venomous hostility with which they Wer
faced from white settlers, combined to help make the amhropoloe
gists on the whole identify with the Africans.*? Thus Sir R,
Welensky tells us—presumably using information from his gOVern!f
ment’s special branch files—that anthropologists were in 1953 excep,.
tions to Kenneth Kaunda’s “‘gcneral indictment of Europeapg»
because they “advised the people against federation and serveq a4
informers for Congress.”’%?

Although Wilson could not escape the colonial conditions of
Northern Rhodesia and in particular the consequences of the oyt.
break of the Second World War, this did not prevent his three years
as director from being fruitful. Apart from an important intellec.
tual legacy to his successors, his Broken Hill research, abruptly
terminated though it was, resulted in his Essay on the Economics of
Detribulisation in Northern Rhodesia, a pioneering study of urban-
isation processes in colonial Africa.®* Moreover, the work is marked
not only by good scholarship in the technical sense, but also by that
breadth of view and imaginative sympathy for the colonised to
which attention was drawn carlier. Ironically, it begins with a no
doubt sincere claim to be no more than a bare description of “the
actual social conditions and the inescapable tendencies which deter-
mine the possible limits of Government policy, as they determinc
those of all other forms of human behaviour in this present situa-
tion.”'?> In spite of this disclaimer, Wilson’s strongly humanist values
are clearly evident throughout the work which, for all its apparent
neutrality, is implicitly a passionate indictment of the Northern
Rhodesia of his day.

In the context of the current radical critique of colonial anthro-
pology, a most interesting feature of the work is the way that 1t
emphasises the essential inter-relationships both between the rural
and urban areas and between Northern Rhodesia and the world
cconomic system. Thus Wilson shows how a local circle of poverty
was kept in being by ‘“‘cheap and unskilled labour, disproportion
in the rural and urban populations, and a semi-primitive and un-

472: Dr. Andrew Roberts kindly drew my attention to this item.

**‘Besides thc debate in the Central African Post, see W. Watson's contribu-
tion, “The Social Background”, to the anti-federation book edited by C.
Leys and C. Pratt, 4 New Deal in Central Africa (London, 1960) and M.

Gluckman’s evidence to the Monckton Commission Report, Appendix VI,
Cmnd. 1151-1V (1960), 127-136.

“R. Welensky, Welensky's 4,000 Days (London, 1964), 55.

:'})n tho garts, Rhodes-Livingstone Papers, 5 & 6 (Livingstone, 1941, 1942).
‘Part I, 4.
QICHARD BROWN 195
ed peasant agriculture.””®® This situation is ascribed partly

presence of European skilled workers and farmers with
interests in preventing permanent urbanisation, African rural de-
velopment, African technical training, and African wage increases,
and partly by a world economy directed “rather to the production
of producers’ goods, high dividends—and guns, than to that of con-
sumers’ goods, high wages—and butter.”*” Furthermore the Econ-
omics of Detribalisation is no mere static survey, but is suffused
throughout with a sense of historic process arising from the occur-
rence of a central African “industrial revolution.” In fact, though
he shared much of the functionalist emphasis on social cohesion
and harmony as the product of equilibrium, another target of the
radical critique, his interest in social change made him equally
aware that disequilibrium, such as he identified in Northern Rho-
desia, was not merely maladjustment—it was the motor of perma-
nent change. The final words of his study are:

. . . in the structure of Northern Rhodesia (as of the world at

large ) radical social contradictions are evident today; and that,

in consequence, that structurc must be changed, in one way or

the other, so as to resolve them. This necessity is not a moral

necessity; it is objective and matecrial.®®
In short, Wilson attemptcd, consciously or unconsciously, a marri-
age of Marx and Malinowski, by attempting to deal within the same
frame of reference with both cohesion and change. These ideas
werce further developed in The Analysis of Social Change with its
fruitful ideas about extensions of scale. Where he differed from
Marx—though Marx himself was sometimes equivocal on the point
—was in believing that a ‘“moving equilibrium” of cven change,
which was also real change, was possible.

For bringing out the underlying nature of the social and economic
conflicts inside Northern Rhodesia resulting from the penetration
of a modern mining cconomy on a massive scale and, moreover,
relating thesc local factors to the world economy, Wilson was criti-
cised by some contemporarics.®® No doubt they were equally dis-
turbed by the fact that his findings were not confined to a small
coterie of scholars, but were extensively used in an influentially
critical and popular study of colonialism in Africa, Leonard
Barnes’s Soviet Light on the Colonies (1944).

ba]aflC
to the

“Ibid, 37.

¥Ibid, 54.

*Ibid, Part II, 82.

*M. H. R, “Godfrey Wilson” (obituary), 4frica, 14 (1944).
196 GODFREY WILSON AND Tig
1

In Northern Rhodesia, Wilson’s more permanent influence -
felt within the RLI. Although Audrey Richards was designateq as
his successor, she never took up the appointment, in part at least
because of the lack of scientific representation on the boarg
trustees,” and it was left to Max Gluckman, who had worked unge,
and admired Wilson, to keep the institute in being alone for the
remainder of the war. Besides continuing his research on the Lqy;
Gluckman spent a good deal of time preparing the seven yea,
research plan which got under way shortly after-the war ended »
The plan was to do much for the institute’s reputation in scientific
circles. Although in detail it was Gluckman’s, the plan owed a goog
deal to the general ideas set out by Wilson in 1940 for submission
to the proposed colonial research advisory committee.”> By em.
phasising the effects of industrialization and labour migration, the
plan helped to prevent the large number of first-rate empirical
studies which emerged in the nineteen-fiftics from being too paro-
chial, but the proposed co-operative volume on the central African
industrial revolution which would have done much to pull them all
together was unfortunately never written.

After Wilson’s vain attempt to make the institute a centre of
social engineering, it increasingly evolved as a scholarly outpost
of academic social anthropology which at this time was begin-
ning its expansion in British universities.?®* This evolution took
place partly because Gluckman prevented the institute from remain-
ing in the exposed and isolated situation of Wilson’s day by most
emphatically insisting—against the wishes of both the board of
trustees and the colonial office—on the need for research officers
to undcrtake their writing up as well as their preliminary training
in universities in Britain.*’His own move into British academic life
in 1947 helped to strengthen these links still further. The role of the
institute was also influenced by the fact that most of the research
officers who were appointed came to Northern Rhodesia not to
pursue a permanent carcer or scttle there. They were much more

“Audrey Richards to Sir John Maybin, 3 January 194! and Richards to
D. O. Malcolm, 12 January 1941, ZNA B1,/4/MISC/6/1.

“Max Gluckman. “The Seven Year Research Plan of the Rhodes-Living-
stone Institute”, Rhodes-Livingstone Journal, 4, (194S5), 1-32.

*Wilson ““Draft of Proposals...”, 3 March 1940, ZNA B1/4,MISC/6/1.

*"M. Banton, ed, The Relevance of Models for Social Anthropology, (Lon-
don, 1965), Introduction by Max Gluckman and Fred Eggan on the growth
of academic social anthropology in Britain.

*Minutes, 46th meeting, 10 June 1947; Agenda, Annexure A, for 47th mcet-
ing. 25 August 1947, IAS A1b(2)/ ABOa. The shortage of housing in post-war
Livingstone was also a factor in the decision.
RICHARD BROWN 197
concerned with obtaining a British doctorate and in .advancing the
sudy of social anthropology generally than in ministering to the
needs of the Northern Rhodesia government. For their part, gov-
emnment officers, if they did not ignore the institute altogether,
complained that what the anthropologists wrote and said was unin-
celligible or of little use in making day to day decisions.”® The RLI
answer was not to abandon fundamental research or discourage the
idiosyncrafic research interests of its officers, but to suggest that
the government should stop expecting help from the RLI and
appoint its own government anthropologists instead!®® This was
hardly the marriage of convenience between science and govern-
ment for which Young had striven twenty years earlier, but it was
a logical development of Wilson’s insistence on the need for scien-
tific independence. The government, however, did not accept the
suggestion that it should appoint its own experts and instead in
1956 the trustees, for the first time, brought in an outsider as
director, a colonial civil servant who had been a government an-
thropologist in Tanganyika. The era which had begun with Wilson
was over. Far from being an institute of colonial apologists, it had
developed as a surprisingly independent centre of learning and as a
means of outdoor academic relief for a tightly-knit group of soci-
ologically motivated men. Of the twelve anthropologists, apart from
Wilson, who held full appointments in the period up to 1956 no
less than eleven now hold professorial rank. The one exception is
a government anthropologist in Rhodesia, the only one of the group
not to obtain his doctorate on the basis of research carried out at
the institute (excluding Gluckman and Colson who already had this
qualification at the time of their appointment). Financed by colonial
governments and, more reluctantly, by the copper companies and
their associates, the institute was nevertheless the servant of neither.
Yet the Wilson episode and the later withdrawal of facilities for
research in a mine compound involving A. L. Epstein’s copperbelt
inquiry®’ are a clear reminder that the pursuit of knowledge at the
RLI did not occur in a vacuum. The full effects of this on the kind
of work done by the institute as well as its detailed history after
Wilson’s resignation must be worked out at greater length else-
where.

"‘I‘ASeSven-th Conference of Research Officers”, October 1953, mimeo., p. 22.

“J. C. Mitchell, “The Need for a Government Anthropologist”’, endl. in
Mitchell to Secretary for Native Affairs, 11 January 1954, with copies to
the SNA’s in Nyasaland and Southern Rhodesia, IAS C2/A9a.

“A. L. Epstein, Politics in an Urban African Community, (Manchester,
1958), xvii-xviii.
COLONIALISM AND THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION IN
FI1JI
John Clammer

The object of this paper is to examine some of the ways in which
colonialism or to be precise a colonial administration has succeeded
in interposing a ‘conscious model’ of its own creation between the
social reality and the ‘home-made’ or ‘conscious’ model of that
reality of a subject people.! The subject matter of this study is
Fijian society in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries
and some of the activities indulged in by the British colonial gov-
ernment during that period in their attempts to codify the custom-
ary practices of the Fijian people with a view to thereby more
effectively governing the native polity.

The effects of colonialism are pervasive, and by no means all of
them stem directly from the activities of the colonial administra-
tions. Planters, traders, missionaries and the editors of local news-
papers in the colonial tongue contribute equally to the formation
of a picture of the subject society in the eyes of those who see
themselves as its ‘natural rulers’. The discrepancies between the
colonial and native conceptions of the society in question may thus
be not only great but varied. I propose to examine the one point

*The notion of ‘conscious’ and ‘unconscious’ models is of course derived
from Lévi-Strauss. See C. Lévi-Strauss, ‘Social Structure’ in A. L. Kroeber,
(ed.) Anthropology Today, Chicago, 1953 and in C. Lévi-Strauss, Struc-
tural Anthropology, London, 1969.
200 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION 1y gy,

at which all these viewpoints converge, notably in the conceptualjs,
tion of the constituent units of Fijian social structure at q
supra-family level, in the determination of the economic and o,
activities properly associated with each of these units and with (e
significance of the alternative conceptualisations that have begp
offered in terms both of the practical issue of the governing of Fij;
and of the anthropological one of understanding Fijian social stryc.
ture.

I will thus begin with an examination of the ‘conscious mode’
of Fijian social structure created by the colonial government in the
late nineteenth century, abetted by the missionary and planter com.
munities. I will reconsider the reactions of Fijians to this feat of the
colonial imagination and the subsequent effects of this upon their
own perception of what constituted ‘traditional’ social organisation
when the new model was brought into conflict with the old ones,
I shall review some of the ways in which anthropologists have re-
acted to this situation whether by accepting or modifying the ‘offi-
cial’ version of Fijian social structure. Finally, I will attempt to
draw some picture of what may honestly be said to constitute tradi-
tional Fijian social organisations when all the imported and subse-
quently self-generated conscious models have been cast aside.

By social structure in this context I mean only the hierarchical
sequence of agnatic kin groups in their ascending order of inclu-
siveness which compose traditional Fijian society. I also mean
‘structure’ to include what might otherwise be called ‘organisation’.
i.c. the activities and attitudes associated with each level of or unit
in the social hierarchy and which is therefore part of its definition.

The native culture discovered in the Fiji Islands in the early nine-
teenth century by sandalwood traders and, after 1835, by Wesleyan
missionaries, was exceptionally diverse. The large number and
geographical spread of the islands composing the group and the
varied topography and geology of these habitats was in itself suffi-
cient to guarantee heterogeneity in economy and culture. To this
ecological basis must be added in particular the effect of long term
contacts with Tonga to the south-east and quite possibly other
island groups as well, including Samoa, the Ellices and Melanesia
to the west. The cultural differences between the Lau or eastern-
most group of islands within Fiji and the western high-islands is still
marked. Likewise there is still debate as to the number of dialects
spoken across the group. Depending on the precise definition of
dialects there may still be distinguished up to a hundred. localised
and often only locally intelligible speech forms. This situation was
JOHN CLAMMER 201

no doubt aggravated by and largely stems from the fragmentary,
factionalised and constantly warring society found by early Euro-
an settlers in the islands. While the situation was better on the
surface at the time of cession to the British Crown in 1874 the
onderlying problems opposing cultural unification of the group
still existed and to a great extent still exist to this day. It was the
first self-appointed task of the Colonial governors to bring ‘order’
to what appeared to them to be this intolerable chaos.

The motive however was not an anthropological one, but a prac-
tical one, or rather two closely related ones. The first was to under-
stand Fijian society in order to govern it more effectively by the
method of local ‘indirect rule’. The second was to resolve the diffi-
culties over land tenure which, in causing friction between white
planters and Fijians on the one hand and between different groups
of Fijians on the other, was the chief obstacle to the peaceful imple-
mentation of indirect rule.

It was not until the appointment of David Wilkinson as director
of the Lands Commission that, after fifteen vears of futile effort
directed towards codifying the native land tenure practices, and
recording the ownership of lands on this basis, that Wilkinson’s
original suggestion to the first permanent governor of Fiji was
implemented. Wilkinson’s suggestion, apparently forgotten by all
but himself, was that there was no point in simply registering
a piece of land as belonging to a member of a social unit identified
only by its geographical name if the nature of the units claiming
proprietary rights in land was not first established. The relation-
ships between the chiefs, who claimed to have the right to alienate
land, and the social groups with which they were associated, and
which often claimed other or contrary rights would also be clarified
once this was done. While Wilkinson was quite correct in his general
methodology he was unable to fulfil his theory in practice, because
(and the reason for this I will return to) of his inability to unam-
biguously define, even on the basis of his investigations, the exact
nature of the social units having land tenure rights.

It was as a solution to this problem that in 1912 one G. V. Max-
well was appointed Native Lands Commissioner, with the brief of
resolving once and for all the ‘inconsistencies’ which his predeces-
sors had inevitably found to characterise traditional Fijian social
structure and land tenure practices. In less than a year Maxwell
succeeded in producing an account of traditional social structure
which named the social units involved and defined their relation-
ships, Maxwell’s model was as follows:
202 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION IN fyy;

Vanua
j B

| | |
Yavusa Yavusa
| |

' | |
Matagqali Mataqali Matagqali
|

| | |
Tokatoka Tokatoka Tokatoka

The system was thus characterised as a simple agnatic descent
structure—the Yavusa being composed of direct descendants of a
divine ancestor figure, whose sons founded the component Mata.
qgali of each Yavusa. The Tokatoka are the minimal units having
rights to land and were formed by sons of the founders of Mara-
qali when population growth dictated further subdivision. All these
units are thus linked by kinship and by their subdivisional holding
of tribal lands.? Upon its presentation to the Fijian Legislative
Council this simple and hierarchical system was immediately en-
shrined as the ‘official’ doctrine of native social structure.

The Maxwell system is unambiguous, despite the severe difficul-
ties of the same order as those which taxed his predecesors,® yet
they were all resolved to Maxwell’s satisfaction in less than six
months of fieldwork. With the settiement of the nature of traditional
social structure to the satisfaction of the administration the first step
in the process we are examining was complete. The second is to
observe the native reaction to this instant codification of their tradi-
tional polity.

This reaction began immediately. Indeed there is evidence that it
began while the Commission was still collecting its evidence. It
rapidly became apparent that the natives regarded the Commission
as an impertinent inquisition which, while it could not legally be
ignored, could at least be rendered relatively harmless by a number
of means. One of these was to meet beforechand and for different
landholders to agree between themselves an account of land rights
which could be represented to the Commission as immemorially
sanctioned by tradition. An alternative was to invent social units
which had never existed. This latter option was a favourite, for with
a little forethought it was possible for the inhabitants of a district
to organise themselves on the basis of the Commission’s ideal struc-

*Council Paper 27 of 1914, p. 2. Fiji Legislative Council.
’igig.. pp. 34.
‘ibid.
JOHN CLAMMER 203

ture of Fijian society, thereby preventing upsets in the local status
quo and hurrying the Commission on its way without the crippling
expenses of having to support the Commissioner, his aides, scribes,
porters and the men from other villages in the district who had
come to give evidence.

Maxwell was aware that evasions were constant and that ‘evi-
dence’ presented to the Commission was often suspect, but he did
not connect this with any inadequacy in his model.> In order to
ensure the co-operation of the Chiefs in this project however, the
Governor of Fiji in 1914, Sir Bickham Sweet-Escott, issued in the
course of his address at the opening of the Council of Chiefs, a
restatement and confirmation of the Maxwellian and now official
administrative orthodoxy and a warning that failure to comply
with it would be viewed with great disfavour by the Government.®
The Government indeed possessed the ultimate threat—that it could
register as landless any social units failing to comply with the Lands
Commission’s requirements and criteria and the land of such groups
would automatically pass to the Crown if substantiated claim could
not be laid to it. The Governor went on to instruct the Chiefs to see
that preparatory meetings were held in all villages so that a uniform,
officially acceptable and Fiji-wide register of all land titles and
appropriate social groupings could rapidly be drawn up. This was
seen to be doubly important when it was realised by Maxwell that
‘the people are absolutely incapable of classifying themselves with-
out assistance’” and that many villages were not certain of the
groups to which they belonged and in some cases could not even
identify their ancestor or vu.® Thus a policy that had begun with the
first Governor of Fiji, Sir Arthur Gordon, was finally established in
all its detail. The hallmark of Gordon’s administration was his
belief that:

It is of the utmost importance to seize, if possible, the spirit in

which native institutions have been framed, and endeavour so

to work them as to develop to the utmost possible extent the
latent capacities of the people for management of their own
affairs without exciting their suspicion or destroying their
self-respect.®

Sibid.

*Fijian Council of Chiefs. Opening Address by Sir B. Sweet-Escott, 20 May,
1914. Extract translated in P. France, The Charter of the Land: Custom
and Colonisation in Fiji. London and Melbourne, 1969.

*‘Minute on C.§.0. 197/19. Central Archives of Fiji and the Western Pacific
High Commission.

*R. R. Nayacakalou, ‘Fijian Leadership in a situation of change’, unpub-
204 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION IN Fyj

The question to which we must shortly turn is how accurate thea
Colonial image of Fijian society was, what evidence there is for the
‘Maxwellian Model’ and what influence the official adoption of thig
system has had on the indigenous inhabitants.

But before doing this it is instructive to consider some of the
ways in which the Colonial orthodoxy has been exploited by anthro.
pologists and other commentators on Fijian society. 1 will initially
draw my illustrations from the works of two writers—W. R. Geddes
and G. K. Roth."* Thus Geddes argues that ““Despite their exposure
to alien influences the Fijians have retained their traditional social
structure to a remarkable extent.””'' He goes on to state that rights
to land ‘“‘are vested in their patrilineal clans’” and that many
islanders “‘have been criticising the traditional structure and arguing
for its abandonment on the grounds that it is hampering the econo-
mic advancement of the Fijians,'? while others have taken a con-
trary view. Geddes’s paper is not designed to take sides in this
dispute, but to ‘“‘describe the traditional structure, 10 analyse some
of the more important changes which have influenced it, and to
indicate what may be the effects upon it, and upon the cultural life
of the Fijians which it sustains, of further possible changes.”*
Geddes’s first assumption therefore is that Fijian social structure as
observable in the field today is in fact that ‘traditional’ structure.

Geddes’s second assumption is to argue that “Indeed, so neat
and essentially simple was the system that we are tempted to speak
of it as beautifully structured’,'! the operative words being ‘neat’,
‘essentially simple’ and ‘the system’. The assumption, in other
words, is of uniformity throughout the group and non-ambiguity
and uniformity of the form of and relations between higher and
lower order units of the structure within any one descent group.
Indeed he goes on to argue that “The logical consistency of the

lished Ph.D. thesis, University of London, 1963, pp. 71-72.

*Sir A. H. Gordon, ‘Paper on the System of Taxation in Force in Fiji, Read
before the Colonial Institute’, London, 1879, p. 178.

"W. R. Geddes, ‘Fijian Social Structure in a Period of Transition’, in
Anthropology in the South Seas, ed. J. D. Freeman and W. R. Geddes,
New Plymouth, 1959.

Also ‘Deuba: A Study of a Fijian Village’, Polynesian Soc. Memoir, 22,
Wellington, 1945, and ‘An Analysis of Culture Change in Fij’, unpub-
lished Ph.D. thesis, University of London, 1948.

G. K. Roth, ‘Native Administration in Fiji during the past 75 years’,
Occasional Paper, No. 10, Royal Anthropological Institute, London, 1951;
and Fijian Way of Life, Melbourne, 1953.

“"Geddes, 1959, p. 201.

“ibid., p. 201. My italics.

“ibid., p. 201. My italics.

“ibid., p. 202.
JOHN CLAMMER 205

structure as a whole was an important feature of the system™.!3
(Nowhere does Geddes rehearse his evidence for these categorical
statements.) This consistency furthermore was alleged to be “con-
ceptual, emotional and behavioural”.'®
Geddes goes on to describe Fijian social structure in terms of
kin terminology, sex and seniority distinctions and behavioural
norms governing relations between categories of kin. This leads
logically into a characterisation of the group structure, i.e., the
level of organisation with which I am concerned. Geddes’s synopsis
of the group structure, which may most instructively be comparcd
with that of Maxwell, is as follows:
By a corporate group we mean a group with a dcfined
membership, all the members of which share in common rights,
whether these be rights over property or rights to participate
in group activities and share in the rewards thereof. Every Fijian
belongs to a series of three such groups in addition to the
elementary group of the family. As with the family these groups
are patrilocal. The subsidiary groups within the larger have a
hierarchical order in respect of one another based upon the
principle of seniority of descent and persons belonging to them
because their fathers belonged. They are therefore agnatic groups.
In Fijian terminology they are called, in order of inclusiveness,
the Yavusa, the Mataqgali and the Itokatoka. We would describe
them as the maximal, the major and the minor agnatic groups.
[deally, the series comprises a single descent line. In such
case the mythology posits an original founder, who is known by
name. The groups of the second order, the Maraqali are
regarded as being founded by the sons of the founder of the
maximal group. The third order groups, the /tokatoka may also
in some instances be regarded as founded in the same way,
namely by the sons of the foundcr of the Matagali. . . . These
third order groups are important in daily life but they are
normally unimportant in the overall political and ccremonial
structure.!?
While Geddes concedes that only a few Yavusa in Fiji are of the
‘ideal’ type, in theory all Yavusa should possess its single ancestor
god, place of ongin, name, totem and common ownership of land,'®
although now many Mataqali have usurped these characteristics.

“ibid., p. 202. My italics.
“ibid., p. 202.

Yibid., p. 205.

®ibid., pp. 206-7.
206 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION IN Fyy
War, population pressure, internal disputes, role differentiation a4
a result of the impingements of a cash economy and the removy)
of old sanctions and occupational categories with the introduction
of Christianity have been the several causes of this. But on the other
hand the necessity for survival of maintaining group cohesion ip
the face of these same pressures when applied from outside “‘ex.
plains why the phratry structure was so consistently maintained.” o

Geddes continues by discussing the nature of Confederationg
(Matanitu) or groups of Yavusa, the descent versus the local prin-
ciple in the kin composition of villages, and the traditional and
changing functions of the units of the group structure. This latter,
which is relevant to my argument, Geddes diagrammatically repre-
sents as follows : °

Type of Minor Agnatic Group

Grouping or Patrilineage
(itokatoka)

Functions:

A

Numbers Small co-operative
tasks in farming,
house repairs, etc.

B

Political Leadership by
senior agnate

C

Religious

D

Ceremonial Contributory unit
in goods for
cercmonial

E

Proprietary

Rights

F

Obligations Mutual aid circle
of great intensity

®ibid., p. 207.

Major Agnatic Group

or Clan
(matagqali)

Task requiring large
numbers—fishing
parties.

Leadership by clan
chief (turaga ni
mataqali). Special
political role in
relation to yavusa
chief.

Guardianship by and
worship of clan god.

Unit in Ceremonial

Land tenure

Mutual aid circle
of considerable
intensity.

Maximal Agnatic
Group or Phratry
(yavusa)

House Building,
village site
maintenance, track
clearing, large fish
drives, elc.

Leadership by
phratrv chief
(turaga). Division
among clans of
subsidiary political
roles.

Guardianship by and
worship of phratry

god.

Validation and
co-ordination of
ceremonial by
constituent clans.

Mutual aid circlc of
less intensity.

“ibid., p. 214. Partial representation of Geddes’s diagram.
JOHN CLAMMER 207

While many of these functions, e.g.. those of rcligion, have dis-
appeared, the general format is held by Geddes to remain. One
point however, stands out in particular—the ascription to the
mataqali alone of proprictary rights over land. About this Geddes
says:

3fﬂ)c chief factor at present giving stability to the descent grouping

is the communal ownership of land, generally by the clan but

sometimes by the phratry if it is a single patrilineal group. There

is no individual ownership of the soil. Patrilineages may have

use of particular sections of the clan land, but they cannot

dispose of it either temporarily or permanently without clan

approval. Clan ownership is embodied in the law of the Colony.*?
Geddes goes on to claim that the communal system of work is tra-
ditional, and he contrasts this with individual enterprise,* and that
the ‘traditional’ system of mutual aid and obligations has been onc
of the greatest restraints on economic progress. We thus have here
a detailed exposition of the colonial dogma. We may divide this into
a set of assumptions, vis: i) that the present social structure is the
traditional one; ii) that social organisation is uniform geographically
and structurally; iii) that the group structure is as determined by
Maxwell; iv) that rights to land are or should be vested only in
matagali; and v) that the ‘communal system’ is the traditional
form of economic (or at least labour) organisation.

Geddes is a social anthropologist. To underline my contention
that he is not an isolated case in holding to these assumptions 1
will point briefly to some aspects of the work of my second example,
G. K. Roth. 1T will take onc principal example of his writings—his
paper *““‘Native Administration in Fiji During the past Seventy-Five
Years: A Successful Experiment in Indirect Rule™.* Roth notes
that the chiefs who ceded Fiji to Queen Victoria did so on the con-
dition that she ‘“‘govern them righteously and in accordancc with
native usages and customs’,’* and he traces thc failure of the
immediately pre-cession Thakombau government, which was domi-
nated by planting interests, to its incapacity on these very grounds.

The system of indirect government set up by the temporary
governor, Sir Hercules Robinson, can be represented diagrammatic-
ally as follows:

¥ibid., p. 216.

¥ibid., p. 217.

*Roth, 1951.

*ibid., p. 1 and ‘Parliamentary Paper in Continuation of H.L. 120 and Cd.
3763, Colonial Office, October, 1908.
208 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION IN FI3j

Responsibility for Lang
records, births, deaths,
Native regulations,

'Roko
(Provincial Chief)

(Council of

 fe _ {Mbuli
Egg:fafs;“ (Tikina or District Chief)

Detailed Administration
Rates, dues, social
statistics.

Turaga-Ni-Roko
(Village Headman)
Scribes Court officials Police
This system, which was assumed to mirror the political structurc of
native society, was cntrenched and extended by Sir Arthur Gordon
with his policy of governing Fiji in accordance with native prin-

ciples. So, says Roth :
How precisely he wrought these principles into a practical policy
acceptable to the Fijians is evident from a perusal of the code
of Native Regulations made under the Native Affairs Ordinance
which he enacted. This was the first code of Fijian custom set
down in writing after discussion by representatives from all parts
of the Colony and, generally speaking, the great body of custom
that it contains has been understood for generations; and so it
was not something new and thercfore suspect to the Fijians to
whom it was applied.?®

Thus again we have the claim that, within the administrative struc-

ture on this occasion, ‘‘the basis of the Native Regulations is native

custom.’’2°

Central amongst the claims made for ‘native custom’ by Gordon

was that “‘a system of government by councils of chiefs and elders

[had] been in ‘vigorous existence’ beforc the time of cession’. Roth

continues
It has been customary for them to meet to consider matters
rclating to custom, alliances, and discipline, and the innumerable
feuds attendant on their natural form of government in those
days. In conformity with his policy of encouraging the use of
native institutions whenever practicable the Governor gave
statutory authority to three such types of council. Their members
were thus enabled and required to take part in the system of
Fijian local government.’’?

Local Executive

“Roth, p. 2.
“ibid., p. 3.
JOHN CLAMMER 209

Most important amongst these councils was the Council of Chicfs.
Equally important was Gordon’s land law of 1880 which recognised,
according to Roth, “the force of custom which holds inseparably
the Fijian social unit and the land that it owns-in-common. Such
jand is as much a part of a Fijian’s entity as his name. ... ** Roth
goes on to repeat the orthodoxy relating to the names and propri-
etary rights of social units, and claims that the success, i.e. lon-
gevity, of Gordon’s policy is proof enough of its correctness.*® In
going on to review the prescnt day Native Administration Roth
concludes that *“‘the spirit of the undertakings given to the Fijians
by Sir Hercules Robinson will be found in the principal measures
that he initiated and in the Fijian Administration in its present
form.”*" Roth was for many ycars Assistant Colonial Secretary in
Fiji, and as such was in constant contact with the aspects of native
lifc that he speaks about.

The question which has quite clearly lain behind all the preceding
discussion is *how much substance can be given to the claims of the
colonial orthodoxy with respect to the aspects of Fijian society
which I have particularly mentioned?’ For the sake of clarity I will
reducc the ideology of the colonial orthodoxy to a series of proposi-
tions which may be sct out as follows:

1 Geographical and Structural Uniformity of Social Organisa-

tion.

2 Uniformity of Land Tenure practices, including rights over

alienation of land.
2.1 Unambiguous naturc and identification of the proprietary units
in land matters.

3 The traditional naturc of the Communal System.

4 The political structurc of indirect rule equates to a closc ap-

proximation of the indigenous political svstem.

4.1 The assumption that the traditional system of government was
through a series of chiefly councils.

What cvidence is there for these propositions?

I have alrcady cast some doubt upon the possibility of even
beginning to assumec that social organisation was uniform through-
out the Fiji group. ‘Family Resemblances’ certainly existed—for
this must be the justification for calling Fiji by a single name imply-

*ibid., p. 3. Also Sir A. Gordon, ‘Native Councils in Fiji, 1875-1880°, Con-
temporary Review, May, 1883.

“*Roth, p. 4.

“ibid., pp. 4-5.

“ibid., p. 9.
210 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION IN fy,

ing that it was in some sense an entity—but not uniformity. Tqy a
great extent this belief is less of an assumption than a prescription
which has its origins not with the colonial administration, but wig,
its forerunners—the Wesleyan missionaries. From the outset the
missionaries had wavered between regarding Fijian as a ‘general 3.
guage’ and as a collection of dialects.?! The problem had more thap
theoretical significance, for it became clear, once the work of Bible
translation was entered into, that either different versionswould have
to be made in each major dialect, or a lingua franca had to be
selected from amongst tongues of the many speech communitics,
The solution in part suggested itself, as Mbauan, the language of
the rising paramount Thakombau and his supporters, although very
localised geographically, was increasing in importance as a ‘diplo-
matic’ language in proportion to the waxing of Thakombau’s for-
tunes. The first extensive grammar of Fijian—that of the Rev. D.
Hazelwood—was in fact a grammar (and dictionary) of Mbauan,
and the existence of this work clinched the matter. The first com-
plete edition of the Bible in the vernacular also appeared in Mbauan
in 1847, and henceforth that dialect was considered the linguistic
vehicle for Christianity. The colonial administration thus inherited
a situation in which Mbauan was automatically accepted as thc
language of govcrnment, a situation which equally obscured the
essential differences between localities and the difficultics of com-
municating with people within those localities. The importance of
this lies not only in the difficulties created by settling upon a
medium of official communication alien.to the vast majority of the
population, but also in the anthropologically important considera-
tion that kin group terminology varied widely from dialect to dia-
lect. The Maxwellian System is Mbauan in its terminology, not
Fijian. Thus while the term matagali has become used generally
to refer to the middle-range functionally defined communities, the
term tokatoka is exclusively Mbauan, sub-mataqali units being
called variously kete in Ba, matani bure in Macuata and Ra, kau-
sivi in Bua, bati ni lovo in Cakaudrove and Lau, and by other
names elsewhere. The terminology has different implications in cach
case.

But to return to the main argument. From the diversity of Fijian
culture at the time of the first missionary contacts—for examplc

“Davies, J.. A Grammar of the Tahitian Dialect of the Polynesian Languagc,
Tahiti, 1823; and Cargill, D., Letter, 18th October, 1836. For discussion
and analysis, J. R. Clammer, Literacy and Social Change in Fiji, unpub-
lished D.Phil. thesis, University of Oxford, 1972.
JOHN CLAMMER 211

the marked differences between the Viti Levu hill peoples and the
coastal peoples of Mbau and elsewhere over such fundamentals as
the nature of their respective political systems which were still clear
in the late nineteenth century—it is apparent that no one ‘traditional’
system of political, social or proprietary organisation existed. The
inability of the various Lands Commissions to determine a land
tenure system on any unified principle is therefore entirely under-
standable although it escaped the colonial administration. Enough
has been said about the basic ‘uniformity versus diversity’ argu-
ment. We must turn now to some more detailed examples of the
differences between the colonial ‘conscious model’ and reality. 1
will take two specific issues since the land tenure problem itself has
been dealt with elsewhere.3? These issues are that of ‘Communalism’
in Fiji, and that of the functions of the social units in the social

structure.

Communalism

Was ‘Communalism’ as conceived by the colonial administration
‘traditional’, or did it indeed exist at all? The colonial ‘communal’
thesis falls into parts: the belief that land was owned in common
by a mataqgali and the belief that labour was organised communally
to work this land. There is no evidence for the former thesis: on the
contrary, traditional practice appears to have been that yavu or
house site land was owned by occupants of the house: that gele or
cultivated land was vested in the extended families which cultivated
it, subject (usually) to the payment of sevu or first fruits to the chief.
Veikau or forest land, while regarded as being the property of the
community (not necessarily a matagali) which defended it, was
de facto vested in the individuals who cultivated or exploited any
parts of it, again usually subject to sevu prestations. Families or
lineages disinherited by war or other misfortune could normally
obtain thesc same rights in a new area by seeking the protection of
its chief and presenting to him rabua (whales teeth).

Communal labour was equally never the normal organisation of
manpowcr, but was only employed for specific and limited purposes,
and always on a reciprocal basis. Communal labour on a house or
in cultivation never dissolved the individual ownership over the
property or _its fruits.>® Land could equally be granted, for example

“France, op. cit.

®As Dumont D’'Urville recognised as early as 1827: J. S. C. Dumont
D'Urville, Voyage de la corvette I’Astrolabe pendant les années 1826-29,
Histoire du Voyage, 1V, Paris, 1832. See also B. Thomson, ‘General Report
212 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION |y Fuy

on marriage or for services rendered in time of war, to individya|,
cither by a chief, or by another commoner individual. There iy ),
no evidence that there was a communal right to alienatc lang, ,
right which was often exercised by a chief on his or his communigyg
behalf once the idea has been put to the Fijians. The Native Regy.
lations nevertheless succeeded in enshrining the dogma of com.
munalism as a traditional form of organisation. Subsequent debatey
on the evils of communalism, either relating to its crippling effectg
on attempts to foster economic progress by way of individualisms3:
or in deploring its effects on the declining native population®’ were
thus at a further remove from reality. The dogma was indeed rein-
forced by European inability to comprehend the customs of lalu or
tribute and service to chiefs, kerekere or mutual appropriation of
property and solevu or feast giving, all of which were seen as as.
pects of the communal system, and therefore traditional, but also as
severe brakes on economic and moral progress.®*

Social Units

Closely related to these questions is that of the nature of social
units. The non-uniformity of terminology I have alrcady indicated.
but what of their functional uniformity? We must remember that
the colonial government assumed both. We have just seen that
propricty rights to lJand were ncver seen as being invested in the
mataqgalis as such since that land was not recogniscd as a com-
munally exploitable commodity.

There is also clear evidence that even if agreement over the term
matagali could be reached, there was no accord amongst Fijians
over what the term denoted.’” The government nevertheless insisted
that all land should be registered by matagalis. This was despitc
the clcar recording of individual ownership in Rewa by Thomson,*
and the discovery by the Wilkinson commission that in the Yasawas
land was held by individuals and for their immediate families, and
that in this case no connection at all was claimed between the
mataqali (or the yavusa) and the land.>* Wilkinson’s recommenda-

on the Rewa Province', Native Lands Commission.
“e.g. Sir Henry Jackson to the Colonial Office, 23 April, 1903.
“Report of the Commission Appointed to Inquire into the Decrease of the
Native Population, Suva, 1896.
“ibid., p. 6.
““Notes on the Proceedings of a Nalive Council’, Native Lands Commission,
22, 1876, pp. 50 and 53.
®*Thomson, op. cit.

*Final Report on Ba/Yasawa’, para. 107, C. S. O. 2987/97.
JOHN CLAMMER 213

tion that this method of recording land tenure was correct and
- raditional and should be adopted in lieu of matagali registration
was rejected on the grounds that it would be too expensive to ex-

and the Commission staff and in any case too time consuming.
wilkinson’s endeavours were not entirely wasted however, for al-
though by modern anthropological standards his recording of social
units and their associated terminology was crude, he nevertheless
succeeded in breaking down the ‘simple’ model of Fijian social
structure by identifying units (in Ba/Yasawa) which he called
kausivi, kete and lewe, or ‘septs’,** and similarly in Bua land hold-
ing units which he described as Co-brotherhood, Family and In-
dividual holdings which are subdivisions of kausivi.* Wilkinson’s
views were supported by Fijian opinion*? which also supported the
view that the very notion of ‘tribe’ was alien to many Fijians who
could not identify the social unit to which they belonged at a struc-
tural level higher than their village (koro) or even house-site.** The
whole situation was plunged into even greater confusion by Thom-
son’s conclusion that the yavusa was a sub-division of a matagali
with a structural status similar to or the same as the rokatoka.**
Fison, another ‘authority’ seems to have deduced that mataqalis
were families comprising koros (villages),* of which the yavusa was
again a minor division.*®

The remaining problem is to determine how this ‘colonial model’
is reflected ‘on the ground’ in contemporary Fiji. Its first manifesta-
tion may be seen in the collective activities required of villagers by
the Government and which include such tasks as house-building,
the maintaining of paths and preservation of the village site. Mod-
ern communalism is entirely the child of the Colonial administra-
tion. It is organised through the Government headman, who receives
his instructions where necessary from the Tikina administration. In
addition to the activities mentioned, land-cleaning for agricultural
purposes, taro planting, and the maintenance of water sources and
courses are common communal activities, the personnel of which

Yop. cit.

"“Final Report on Bua’, para. 3, C. S. O. 4903/02.

“Ratu Sevenaca Senioli to the Governor, 20 July, 1904, C. S. O. 3824/04.

";Iglé);es on the Proceedings of a Native Council’, Native Lands Commission,

“Reggrt of the Commission...into the Decrease of the Native Population,
p. 92.

“L. Fison, J.A.l., Vol. 10, p. 335. See discussion in R. W. Williamson, The
Socicsz:) asnsd Political Systems of Central Polynesia, Cambridge, 1924, Vol. 2,
pp. 50-5S.

“L. Fison, Land Tenure in Fiji, London, 1881, p. 9.
214 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION N FI)|
in a larger village may be divided on a ‘sectional’ basis into wq
parties which are not based on kinship. The Government headmay,
has legal sanctions which he can employ against individuals wp,,
refuse to co-operate in communal activities. In terms of the artjc,,.
lation of the social structure, Government ‘communalism’ has res.
ulted in the increasing eclipse of the kin-principle vis-a-vis the lg¢g
principle at the level of the village economy. This clearly runs cop.
trary to the most commonly encountered form of the ‘traditiong)’
economy, which was based on autonomous family units. Thus gz
Sahlins says of Moala:

The government-established political system, which tends to

favour village organisation of communal production, is en-

croaching upon the native system, which allowed local kin

groups (as well as families) greater autonomy. What is

happening in Moala and Fiji is, of course, but one instance of

a very general phenomenon, the integration of larger units of

native structure at the expense of smaller by dominant, outside

powers as a matter of convenience and effective administration.*’
Sahlins traces the virtual collapse of the ‘‘self-integrated kin group
economy”’ to this usurpation by the collectivity of the traditional
tasks of the family based units.*®

At the level of kin group terminology there has been a similar
eclipse of the varied terminological distinctions throughout Fiji in
favour of the officially sanctioned Maxwellian model, but only at
the official level. The ‘underground’ languages of the non-Mbauan/
official language groups continue to flourish amongst the differcnt
dialect groups in many instances. But this must be contrasted with
the phenomenon also encountered where, especially in South-Eas-
tern Vita Levu, the official dogma will be recounted to the investiga-
tor as traditional truth., Similarly land-tenure is often now seen as
reflected truthfully by the colonial model, and rights over land will
be claimed on the basis of mataqali membership, as when a person
has a right to cultivate land of the matagali into which he marries.
This also contrasts with the principle often expressed that land is
owned individually or by the extended family. Modern practice also
clashes with the Maxwellian model over the unity of structure and
functions of the rokatoka, which are still vague and diverse,*® and

M. D. Sahlins, Moala: Nature and Culture on a Fijian Island, Ann Arbor,
1962, p. 266.

Yibid., p. 267.

“'e.g. see ibid., pp. 223-225 and pp. 237-240.
py no means always even fulfil the minimal criterion of being com-
osed of members of a common stock. Much the same can be said
of the mataqali.

Thus ‘on the ground’ common patrilineal descent is not insisted
upon; there is often a failure to be able to name the founding
ancestor; the yavusa is not regarded as a group; members of villages
often have no idea of which mataqali they are supposed to belong
to. The forcing of traditional organisation has led not only to the
confusions I have mentioned which arise from the multitudinous
discrepancies between the ‘official’ and ‘practical’ models of Fijian
social structure, but also to such anomalies as villages being ‘eleva-
ted’ to the status of yavusas where one did not exist. Equally the
combination of tokatokas into mataqalis often reflects Government
policy and not actual (traditional) links between groups. Exceptions,
which are practically the rule, have thus become subordinated to the
concept of Fijian social organisation as a segmented lineage system
which, via the mechanism of patrilineal descent, proliferates accord-
ing to a symmetrical and logical pattern. Yet the ‘lineages’ are
often merely ‘stocks which do not originate from a common named
ancestor, descent has many of the features of a cognatic system,
arbitrary factors such as war or local residence patterns are often
responsible for group formation which should be based (according
to the model) on kin relations with the next higher order group,
and asymmetry is the rule in the ordering of the (often in fact
unattached) segments of a descent group. The unity of Fijian kin-
group organisation is what Sahlins, in a slightly different context,
calls a ‘structural deception’. Fijian group organisation is in essence
(and terminologically) not rigidly structured, but highly relativis-
tic.5°

In a more obviously practical context, i.e., in relation to present
economic development and the connection between this and the
racial situation in Fiji, the question of ‘traditionalism’ has more
than a merely academic interest. This can be seen in two specific
spheres—that of land ownership and/or leasing by members of the
Indian community and in that of ‘individualism’, or the problem
of whether or not and to what degree entrepreneurial activity in the
rural areas by galala (persons exempted from communal obliga-
tions) should be encouraged. We can agree that much that passes
for ‘tradition’ in matters of land tenure is not so, and yet it is the
sanctions of ‘tradition’ which are used by the Fijian Council of

*For a discussion of Moalan organisation see ibid., pp. 240 ff.
216 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION 1y y,

Chiefs and others to justify the status quo and to prevent Indian
from acquiring freehold or very long lease land, although in facsl
most of the land owned by the Fijian community is never useq by
them 3!

The long term economic results of the Colonial policy €Mmanatip
from Gordon have become quite the opposite of the effect intendey
The setting aside of a sacrosanct Fijians communal system hy,
aggravated economic discrepancies between the ethnic groups, |y
fact the Fijians were forced into a dependency upon their colonijg]
rulers and into a situation which while in ethos ‘conservative’, crys.
tallised in practice into an inflexibility incapable of exploiting even
the constructive aspects of the new communalism. The other side
of this coin can be seen in the constant debate as to the desirability
of ‘individualism’ in Fijian society in the colonial past and in the
colonial heritage of today. It must be remembered that Gordon
‘instituted’ the communal system not only because he believed it (o
be traditional, but also to allow the Fijians free economic (and
social) development within their own sector and specifically to pre-
vent men being taken off the native lands and employed as wage
labour on plantations. The chiefs supported Gordon in this, for they
feared that the extension of the plantation economy would destroy
the basis of Fijian social life and even prevent the Fijians from
deploying enough labour in their own fields to maintain their self-
sufficiency in food.*? Yet the Commission of inquiry into the de-
crease in the native population, which published its findings in 1896
identified ‘the communal system’ as one of the leading causes of the
decline of the Fijian population and the decay of cultural standards
generally.®*® No action was ever taken to rectify the Gordonian illu-
sion, largely because of Gordon’s (by then Lord Stanmore) defence
of his ‘system’ against subsequent attempts to tamper with it by
succeeding Governors, and his opinion carried much weight in the
Colonial Office and House of Lords.>* The result has been the in-
sulation of Fijian society against structural changes since the incep-
tion of the colonial era.

®For a discussion of this problem in a broader economic context, see E. K.

Fisk, The Political Economy of Independent Fiji, Wellington, 1970, esp.
38-39 and 72-73.

‘Councnl of Chiefs, Account of discussion passed from Wilkinson to Gor-

don, January 8, 1872, in Lord Stanmore (Sir A. Gordon), Fiji: Records

of i’;igvate & Public Life, 4 vols, privately printed, Edinburgh, 1897, vol. 3,
p.

131896, ‘keport’, pp. 6 fI.
“France, 1969, esp. pp. 157 ff. Also Debates, 29 September, 1911,
JOHN CLAMMER 217

The one half-hearted attempt to restore the balance in favour of
«ndividualism® has been the galala or exempted farmer system, but
even so the right to deny exemption still lies with the local com-
mune, and there are minimum conditions of income, standards of
agric.ultural practice and land area worked which must also be ful-
filled by a prospective galala. The conditions indeed are so strict
that the bias is strongly against the individualist and in favour of
the commune, and this is official administrative policy. There are
thus contradictions at more than one level between the ideals of
communalism and individualism. Such contradictions are height-
ened by the fact that in dichotomising the situation into Individual
(progressive) v. Traditional (stagnation) the alternative basis for co-
operative activities outside of the ‘official’ mataqali and tokatoka
units have been overlooked. As I have already suggested in practice
non-kin unit ‘communalism’ exists on the basis of /ala (duties per-
formed for a chief), need. friendship or simple economy. Yet such
‘kin-alternative’ organisation is not recognised in or by the ‘system’.
And such a state of affairs is likely to increase when it is remem-
bered that generally although land is registered on a maraqali and
tokatoka basis, the functions of those units which are alleged to
correspond with this fact, no longer or never did, obtain. The result
of colonial policy in economic terms has basically been to withdraw
economic incentives by giving the community too great a share of
the individual’s time and produce and in then being unable to solve
the problems that this has engendered within the context that colo-
nial administration created for itself. The situation is seen to be even
less fortunate when it is possible to show that in its origin it is partly
merely semantic and arises basically from the failure to see that
‘community’ does not equal ‘communalism’ in an economic sense.
It is certainly true that traditional Fijian society was communal,
but economically it was based on largely autonomous households
and not on ‘collectivist’ or ‘communistic’ production. Colonialism
in Fiji created for itself a web of errors in which the entire society
is now enmeshed.

It remains to conclude with some account of the way in which
tradition and the new order are perceived and how the relationships
between them are regarded. The willingness, in many cases, of the
Fijian people to present to the Lands Commission a neat and tailor-
made version of their land tenure system in accord with the pre-
conceptions and desires of the commissioners, we have already dis-
cussed. The attitude of the Chiefs appeared in the early years to be
equally flexible, Thus it was reported to Wilkinson, and through
218 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION [y ),

him to Gordon, that the Council of Chiefs unanimously agreeq that
all land was vested in the mataqali alone and that all land wag in.
alienable.®® As France quite rightly points out® this attitude wag a
complete reversal of earlier native policy, and indeed of some later
outspoken native leaders, one of whom explicitly suggested that th
units recorded by the Europeans were figments of their colonjg)
imaginations.%?

The units themselves were not the only things requiring double
vision on the part of the Fijians. Great difficulty was often experi.
enced in discovering the name of the vu (ancestor) of a desceny
group, but discovered it had to be, because the authorities had pro.-
nounced that every group had one.*® The shaky foundations of thig
belief have been further weakened by recognition of the fact that
the general Fijian origin legend—the Kaunitoni—is itself a fabrica-
tion and was first recorded as a result of a competition held by the
newspaper Na Mata in 1892 and was published as the authentic
legend, without reference to the fact that Williams, Waterhouse,
Hunt, Pritchard and others denied the existence of any Fijian
origin legend at all.>® Yet this legend has since been seen as authen-
tic, by Fijians and foreigners alike. Of equal significance is the fact
that Fijian genealogies are generally shallow in depth, subject to
changes that new historical and political conditions dictate, and
often merge with mythical tales. The insistence on the discovery
and existence of ancestor figures was thus ill-conceived, vet becausc
it was required, passed into the orthodoxy.

Even today many Fijians are ‘ignorant’ of the mataqali and
yavusa units to which they are supposed to belong.?® Yet “Whilst
in village life the system is ignored or evaded wherever possible, it
is, at the national level, lauded and defended as being at the very
foundation of Fijian social order.”®' The Council or Chiefs in par-
ticular has vigorously defended the system against proposed chan-
ges,®? especially as it is regarded as the chief bastion against Indian
encroachment on Fijian lands and privileges. The aristocracy of the

“‘Regulation 27 of the Native Regulation Council. Also in “Notes on the
Proceedings of a Native Council’, 1879, p. 77.

*France, 1969, p. 113.

“"C. S. O. 3824/04, 1904, Ratu Seniloli to the Govemnor.

“R. R. Nayacakalou, ‘Fijian Leadership in a situation of Change’, p. 72.

“For details see France 1969, pp. 34; and France, P., ‘The Kaunitoni
Migration: notes on the genesis of a Fijian tradition’, J. Pacific History,
1, 1966. Also see Sahlins, 1962, p. 14.

“Council Paper No. | of 1958, p. 212.

“France, 1969, p. 174.

*“Council Paper 29 of 1959.
JOHN CLAMMER 219

native society have thus come to perceive the colonial system as
immutable and immemorial tradition—so the commoner has little
option but to do likewise. The concious use of this new tradition
for political ends has been yet a further step. The eminent Fijian
jeader, Ratu Sir Lala Sukuna, thus often reiterated the Gordonian
position as enlightened and forward looking thinking,** despite its
obvious economic and (vis-a-vis the Indians) social shortcomings,
quite apart from the fact that the newly lauded ‘tradition’ was, in
the Sorelian sense, a myth.** The contradictions between the native
and official systems have not been recognised (at least publicly) by
those best placed to see them. The ‘way of the land’ has ceased to
be what Fijians were told to regard as such, and has become that
which the Fijians wish to regard as such, from the vital issues of
their social structure, down to beliefs as trivial as the conviction
that tobacco smoking is indigenous and not a habit introduced by
Europeans.®®

Colonialism has thus profoundly influenced the Fijians’ percep-
tion of their own traditional polity and its sustaining beliefs. But
from the initial imposition of a system based upon, but alien to, the
original traditional system, the dogma of ‘traditionalism’ has be-
come itself tradition, and as such is exploited by the present political
leaders of the Fijian community. The recent de-colonisation of Fiji
has been more apparent than real, for while the official demise of
colonialism has meant the rejection of its overt influence and appar-
atus, its mental creations have not vanished with them. The colonial
mentality has not disappeared from Fiji, but is now to be found
amongst the Fijian ruling class, and not the British one. While this
is, to say the least, unfortunate in Fiji's present precarious economic
and racial position, it is to some extent understandable when the
origins of the ‘syndrome’ are revealed. Fijian tradition has been
transformed by the Colonial regime, and since the late nineteenth
century Fijian society has been in the process of being transformed
itself to fit this new image of ‘traditionalism’, and this process is
not yet complete, and one hopes that it never will be. Colonialism
in Fiji has succeeded not only in physically ruling an alien people,
but in imposing its own ill though-out ideology or image of that
society, and so dominating them mentally, and that many anthro-

"e.g. Council Papers 10, of 1945, and 5 of 1952. See also, for European
Comment, Roth, 1951, esp. pp. 4 ff.

“G. Sorel, Reflections on Violence, London, 1970, speaks of political myth
in terms of “warmly coloured images™” which act as “springs to action".

®e.g. Sahlins, 1962, p. 4.
220 THE PERCEPTION OF TRADITION [y Fy
pologists have fallen into the trap of accepting the new image a5 ¢y,
old, and confusing both with the authentic. Yet recent ang wﬂe
conceived fieldwork in Fiji and the publications resulting®s have
been (almost inadvertently, for they have not been intendeq as
studies of colonial influence) analyses of facts which confront ever
Fijian with the lack of authenticity of his own social structure, but
which few recognise as such. But this too is understandable, for the
passage of colonialism has left not only the ruins of the old tragj.
tion, but also a shaky orthodoxy, the legitimacy of which is ques.
tioned only by those who are prepared to carry the dialogue betweep
the competing demands of traditionalism and modemity into the
post-colonial era.

®e.g. Sahlins, ibid.
