ANTHROPOLOGY AND IMPERIAL ADMINISTRATION:
SIR ALFRED LYALL AND THE OFFICIAL USE OF
THEORIES OF SOCIAL CHANGE DEVELOPED
IN INDIA AFTER 1857
Roger Owen

Sir Henry Maine’s Ancient Law (1861) is often described as one of
the most significant contributions to the ‘early study of anthro-
pology. It was also one of the first works to combine an investiga-
tion of the nature of Indian society with general comments about
the pattern of all human social development. As Maine himself was
to write in his Village Communities in the East and the West (1871),
India was of enormous interest as ‘‘the great repository of verifiable
phenomena of ancient usage and ancient judicial thought™.! Mean-
while, in the interval between the publication of these two works
Maine had had first hand opportunity to pursue his study of India
during his time as Law Member of the Viceroy’s Council, when he
was always ready to underline the importance of ensuring that
official policy was informed by a sound knowledge of Indian society.

But the career of Henry Maine is only one of the many links
between India, anthropology and imperialism. Another, equally
important, is the stimulus given to British officials by the Revolt of
1857 to look more closely at the structure of Indian society in an
effort to discover how it was being changed by imperial rule. In
some cases the knowledge was put to direct use in framing govern-
ment policy. More rarely it was employed in an attempt to con-
struct a theory of Indian social development based on the methods
to be found in the works of the early anthropologists. It was no
accident that it was the decade which saw the publication of

Willage Communities in the East and the West, London 1871, p. 22.
224 SIR ALFRED LYALL IN 'NDI\

Ancient Law and J. P. McLennan’s Primitive Marriage, as we|| as
the founding of the Anthropological Association in 1863, which 4},
saw the first attempt at a “scientific’” study of Indian society,

A central figure in this two-fold process of using the study
society both as a guide to the formulation of policy and as the ray,
material for the development of theory was Sir Alfred Lyvall (1835.
1911). His importance lies in three related directions. First, not only
was he a close friend of Maine but he was also one of the first mey
to employ many of the ideas to be found in Ancient Law in a speg;.
fically Indian context. Second, Lyall was the author of a series of
articles, later collected together in one work, Asiatic Studies: Rel;-
gious and Social (First Serics, 1882), which were a serious, although
not very well sustained, attempt to analyse the structure of Indian
society. Third, as a result of Asiatic Studies, and also of the import-
ant posts he came to hold at the cnd of his Indian career, Lyall
becamec one of the most influential men within the Empire, some-
one whose advice was sought on many major issues. He was thus
in a position to make sure that his ideas did not go unregarded.

Unlike Maine, who is usually remembered as a writer on the
sociology of law rathcer than as an Imperial administrator, Lyall is
regarded first and foremost as an official who also happened to pro-
duce a few books. However, as I hope to show, his career is, among
other things, a good illustration of the misleading distinction between
writing and governing. I will begin with a description of his inves-
tigations into Indian religious and social organisation while on
service in the Central Provinces (1865-73) and in the Rajput States
(1874-78). There will then be a brief account of certain works
written by Lyall after his retirement in 1888 when he had an oppor-
tunity to return to his early studies of the development of Indian
society. Finally, I will conclude with an assessment of the influence
of Lyall’s thought on the policics pursued by the British in India
and elsewhere.

1. Lyall and the role of religion in the development of Indian
society

Alfred Lyall was born in 1835, the son of a well-to-do clergyman.?

He was educated at Eton and then at Haileybury, from where he

set out for Calcutta in November 1855. Once in India hc asked to

be sent to the North West Provinces. He was posted to a town not

‘For details of Lyall’s life, see Sir H.M. Durand, Life of Sir A. C. Lyall,
London 1913,
ROGER OWEN 225
far from Meecrut and within a little more than a year found himself
:n the thick of the fighting which marked the first stage of the sepoy
mutiny. It was the events of this period which first seem to have
aroused his interest in questions relating to the British government
of India. As he wrote home in 1859:
[ always find myself diverging into Indian politics, for 1 am
interested heart and soul in the affairs of the country, and am
always thinking of the probable future of our Empire and trying
to conceive it possible to civilise an enormous nation by the
mechanical process of the present times by establishing schools
and missionary societies. Also, having civilised them, and taught
them the advantages of liberty and the use of European sciences,
how are we going to kecp them under us, and to persuade them
that it is hoped for their own good that we keep all the high
offices of government.?
Such preoccupations were to continue for the rest of his life.
After writing this letter Lyall spent another six years in the North
West Provinces before being transferred to a district in the Central
Provinces in 1865. It was here that his interest in the effects of
British rule on Indian society took a more constructive form, when
he was forced to pursuc his habitual observation of Indian social
and religious organisation in a disciplined way as a result of the
need to contribute to, and later to edit, some of the first gazetteers,
those vast compendia of information about the geography and eth-
nography of each particular district under British control. Lyall
spent some years editing the Gazetteer of the Central Provinces,
sifting through the large amounts of data provided by the magis-
trates, collectors and others and trying to reduce it to manageable
proportions. Later, he was the sole editor of the Gazetteer for West

Berar, or the so-called Hyderabad Assigned District, which first
appeared in 1870.

It was the information collected and edited during these years
which formed the basis for much of Lyall’s thinking about the
development of Indian socicty. But before giving a brief analysis of
the major tenets of his thought it would be useful to say something
about the influence of Maine, McLennan and the other early an-
thropologists on his whole approach to the subject. As he freely
acknowledged, it was they who provided him with the methods by
which random observations could be ordered and by which different
social groups could be analysed.

‘Ibid., p. 89.
226 SIR ALFRED LYALL IN INpy,

To begin with, Lyall, like Maine and McLennan, was a firy,
believer in the utility of what was then known as the “comparatiy,
method”’, the basis of which consisted in the recognition of certajj
similarities between the political and social institutions of contep,.
porary ‘“primitive” peoples and those of the communities which
had existed in Europe many centuries before.* Given the prevailing
assumption that human progress could be seen as a linear movement
from ‘barbarism” to civilisation, it was then supposed that it wag
possible to undertake the systematic classification of different socije.
ties with the object of constructing a hypothetical sequence illus.
trating the historical development of mankind. Two implications
followed. One, just as Maine and McLennan regarded it as legiti-
mate to assume that you could learn much about Europe’s past by
looking at Asia’s present, Lyall believed that you could also use this
process in reverse and fill in certain gaps in India’s recent history
by studying developments in Europe many centuries beforc. Two,
the comparative method provided a means, not only of classifving
different societies in different parts of the world, but it also sug-
gested that it was possible to “‘rank’ different social groups within
India itself, according to the level of development they had reached.

Lyall’s second debt to the early anthropologists can be seen in
the way in which he used McLennan’s theories about the central
role played in a ‘“‘primitive’” society by the rules governing the
choice of marriage partner. For Lyall, the analysis of such rules
was basic to his efforts to understand the role of caste and clan in
Indian life and also to his attempts to explain the way in which
these institutions had developed.®

Finally, Lyall seems to have been greatly influenced by the idcas
of Maine and other Positivist thinkers that the belief system of a
particular society was moulded by its communal needs, and thus
that, as needs changed. so too did beliefs. In Maine’s words:

. . . the usages which a particular society are found to have

adopted in its infancy and its primitive seats are generally thosc

‘For the use of the comparative mesthod at this timec, see G. Lienhardt,
Social Anthropology, London 1964, ch. 1; E. E. Evans-Pritchard, Essays
in Social Anthropology, London 1962, ch. 1; and T. K. Pennman, A
Hundred Years of Anthropology, 2nd edn., London 1952, pp. 1524.
5Lyall’'s debt to McLennan can be seen clearly in his scction of the Berar
Gazetteer devoted to the study of local marriage in terms of McLennan's
concept of *‘exogamy”’, Gazetteer for the Hyderabad Assigned Districts,
commonly called Berar, Bombay 1870, pp. 187-9.
ROGER OWEN 227

which are best suited to promote its physical and moral
well-being. and if they are retained in their integrity until new
social wants have taught new practices, the upward march of
society is certain.®
Lyall also followed Maine in his assertion that, though men were
led to match beliefs with needs. they often did this without properly
knowing what they were doing.” Hence, although they observed
customs of obvious social utility they were incapable of understand-
ing why they did so, with the result that they were left to invent
false, superstitious reasons for their activity. In the words of J. W.
Burrow, Maine regarded man as “an incompetent sociologist’’.®
Lyall, on thec other hand, whose interest was mainly with Indian
religions and which, unlike Maine, he regarded as more than mere
“superstitions’ and central to the ordering of Indian society, some-
times changed the emphasis a little and was more ready to regard
man as “‘an incompetent scientist’.” As he saw it Man’s efforts to
come to terms with his horrible fecars of a dark, capricious universe
led him to personify or to deify natural forces and thus, of course,
to a completely “‘unscientific”’ approach to what was actually taking
place in nature. ‘“Here in India, more than any other part of the
world,”” he wrote in that section of the Berar Gazetteer devoted to
“Religion and Castes”’,
do men worship what they understand least, Not only do they
adore strange phenomena and incomprehensible forces—being
driven by incessant awe of the invisible power to propitiate every
unusual shape or striking natural object—but their pantheistic
piety lcads them to invest with a mysterious potentiality the
animals which are most useful to man, and even the implements
of his profitable trade.!®
It is now possible to return to Lyall’s own theories about Indian
society, based on the observations he made in the Central Pro-
vinces.!* One is of particular importance and lies at the root of al-
most all he was to write about India in the years which followed:

*Ancient Law, London 1861, p. 15.

‘Ibid., p. 16.

*Evolution and Society, Cambridge 1966, p. 167.

*This is also Burrow’'s phrase. /bid.

“Gazettcer of the Hyderabad Assigned Districts, pp. 189-190.

"Lyall's principle theories based on his Central Provinces experiences can
be found in three articles first published in the Fortnightly Review in 1872
and then republished in Asiatic Studies, 1st ser., London 1882, as “Religion
of an Indian Province” (ch. 1), “Our Religious Policy in India” (ch. B8)
and “The Recligious Situation in India” (ch. 9).
228 SIR ALFRED LYALL IN INpy,

his belief that Indian society had in-built divisive tendencies. Of
these by far the most important was religion, acting through (he
agency of caste. Using Max Miiller’s three-fold classification of th,
formation of Indian castes—ethnological, political, and professiong]
—he went on to add a fourth, the sectarian, “‘meaning the cayteg
which are produccd by differences of religion, by new gods, new
rites, new views, and new dogmas’.'? It was castes organized on thig
last, religious basis, with strict rules forbidding marriage or cvep
the sharing of food with outsiders which, according to Lyall, acted
constantly as a wedge upon Indian society, subjecting it to ““per-
petual morcellement’ by splitting existing groups into smaller sub.
groups and by creating more and more new divisions. Some of the
ways in which this process took place are described in the Berar
Gazetteer and in his article “‘Religion of an Indian Province”. One
which he mentions is that a man might break the matrimonial rules
of his caste and be forced to leave it. Later, in the course of time, he,
or perhaps his children, might draw together with others in a similar
position and a new sub-caste would be formed. Alternatively, the
excommunicated man might seek to vindicate himself by precach-
ing a new doctrine and so, by this method, gather a group of fol-
lowers around him. Another way in which, according to Lyall, new
castes were formed stemmed from the Hindu practice of setting up
tutelary deities without number who watched over the interests of
special classes and callings, and who were served by special rites
peculiar to their shrines. New deities of this type were constantly
being recruited from the ranks of hermits, ascetics, and even mcn
who had been known for one particular virtue in a worldly career.
After death a shrine would be established at their grave—they were
not cremated as other men—and, gradually, a group of peoplc
would collect round it, eventually forming a new caste of its own.
One of the most important effects of British rule, however, was
to diminish the vitality by which fresh secretarian divisions werc
constantly being created: and, according to Lyall, this tendency
was certain to increase as the years went by. As evidence for this
he was later to cite the introduction of new laws, for example the
Native Marriage Act as it had existed before amendment by Mainc
in the 1860s, which made illegitimate the children of people expclled
from their caste. By increasing the penalties for leaving a particular

**Religion of an Indian Province”, p. 5. For Miller’s analysis of the origins

22 caste, cf. his Chips from a German Workshop, London 1867, ii, pp. 319-
ROGER OWEN 229

caste, the law automatically increased the hold which it possessed
over its members and inhibited the formation of new sub-groups.!?
Again, more importantly, the British were engaged in the task of
transforming the whole Indian environment, with their trains which
reduced journeys to a fraction of their former length, their schools
where children could obtain a European education, their public
works, and their emphasis on law and order. This in turn was bound
to have far-reaching effects on Indian religious beliefs and social
organisations. It was not merely a question of the rational, sceptical,
questioning attitude of mind which the British had brought to India
and which, as Lyall asserted, had produced among the Indians “an
advanced party of those who are easily inculcated with the Vol-
tairian spirit, with contempt for irrational beliefs and for institutions
which seem absurd on the face of them’.!* But as a country’s reli-
gion was always so intimately connected with its political organisa-
tion, its system of laws, and its material condition, any radical
change in these latter would inevitably involve the former. “The
beliefs of the multitude,”” he wrote
are the reflections of their social and political history through
many generations. Now that the Hindus have been rescued by the
English out of a chronic state of anarchy, insecurity, lawlessness
and precarious exposure to the caprice of despots, they will
surely introduce, at least, some ideas of our rule, organised
purpose, and moral law, into their popular conceptions of the
ways of their gods towards man. It seems certain, at any rate,
that wider experience, nearer and more frequent intercourse with
the outside world, and the general education of modern life,
must soon raise even the masses above the mental level that can
credit contemporary miracles and incarnations, however they
may still hold to the prodigies of older tradition. And this will
be enough to sever the tap-root of a religion which now, like the
banyan tree which it venerates, strikes fresh roots from every
branch, discovers a new god under every mystery and wonder.'?
What was to replace the old beliefs? Here Lyall’'s answer is less
certain. Although he was sure that the small group of western-
educated Indians would give up religion altogether, there could be
no question of the great majority of the people abandoning their
traditional faiths. Just as he believed that higher education could
lead only to atheism,’® he was also convinced that the harsh nature

"“Sir Henry Maine"”, Law Quarterly Review, iv, 14 April 1888, p. 133.
'"““The Religious Situation in India”, p. 302,
230 SIR ALFRED LYALL |y IND)

of the Indian environment would always demand some
spiritual response from those who continued to live outside the |5,
towns.” One possibility he sometimes seems to have put fomafg
was that there might be a move up to the religious scale, thyg is
away from “‘naturalism’ towards “‘supernaturalism™. Evidence for
this comes from his assertion that British rule was leading to the epg
of “simple Paganism” and idolatry.” On the other hand, his accoyp,
of the religious situation in Berar, in which he attempts to classify
the beliefs of different groups in an ascending order from the wor.
ship of sticks and stones to that of ‘‘the supreme gods of Hip.
duism™,'? leaves the reader in doubt as to whether he supposed thay
all people could be expected to progress naturally from the “lower”
to the ‘“‘higher”’. Indeed, there is one passage in which he seems tg
be suggesting that any movement up the religious scale was inevit-
ably followed by a counter movement downwards. Describing the
founder of a sect called the Manshaus, he wrote:
Men of this temperament have constantly come forth in India,
who, by their creative intellectual originality, joined to a spiritual
kind of life, have stirred up great movements and aspirations in
Hinduism, and have founded sects which endure to this day: but
it has almost invariably happened that the later followers of such
a teacher have undone his work of moral reform. They have
fallen back on evidences of miraculous birth, upon signs and
wonders, and a superhuman translation from the world: so that
gradually the founder’s history becomes prodigious and
extra-natural, until his real doctrines sink into mystical secrets
known only to the initiated disciples, while the vulgar turn the
iconclast into a new idol.2°
What is more certain is that Lyall was convinced that any new
religious movement would spread very much more widely than in
the past. Previously, before the coming of the British, the political
confusion, the division of the sub-continent into separate states and
the difficulty of getting from one part of India to another had pre-
vented the growth and expansion of the numerous sects which had
kept springing up. Now however all that had changed, and the
barriers which had previously prevented such a movement from
gaining adherents from over a large area had almost totally dis-

kind of

**Religion of an Indian Province”’, pp. 28-9.

“Cf. his letter to his mother, 22 February 1856, Lyall Papers, India Officc
Library, MSS. Eur. F.132/2.

“Cf. his review article, “*Christianity and the Brahma Samaj” (n.d. 18737), a
copy of which is in Lyall Papers MSS. Eur. F.132/49.

"“‘Religion of an Indian Province”, p. 29.

*1bid., pp. 7-27.
nOGER OWEN 231

appeared.”’ Thus once again, so he believed, the effects of British
rule was to unify, to break dox:vn divisions, and perhaps ultimately
to produce the very thing which it had most to fear—a religious
movement incorporating the vast majority of the Hindu peoples.*

Lyall left the Central Provinces on leave in March 1873. Soon
after his return, 18 months later, he was made Home Secretary of
the Government of India, promotion which he felt he owed in part
to his articles on Indian religion.?* However his stay in Calcutta
was of only short duration for in 1874 he was posted to the Rajput
States as Agent to the Governor General, a kind of British Resident.
It was during his service in Rajputana that Lyall continued his
examination of Indian political and social development. The result
of his thinking can be found in two articles, ‘“The Rajput States of
India”?* and ‘““On the Formation of some Clans and Castes in
India’’?® which do much to provide an historical context for his
earlier theories about the rdle of religion in shaping the structure of
Indian society.

The article on the Rajput States provides a brief sketch of India’s
political development during the previous two or three centuries.
According to Lyall the Mughals had destroyed all the centres of
existing political power in those areas of North India which fell
under their direct control. Only Rajputana and one or two other
states had been able to resist Muslim pressure. Hence the British
had come upon a land without long-seated ruling dynasties or an
ancient aristocracy, and this was one of the reasons why they had
been able to conquer it without difficulty. Again, with the exception
of the Rajput States, all the dynasties and principalities which
existed in India in the 1870s had been established during the
chaotic conditions of the 18th century. The majority of them owed
their preservation to British rule without which they would certainly
have disappeared, being unfitted by their primitive institutions to
resist the professional armies of peoples like the Marattas and the
Pathans.

Lyall was anxious for political reasons that the British continue
their protection of these states. But in the case of Rajputana there
was also an additional reason: the fact that it provided a window

*Ibid., pp. 26-7.

*“The Religious Situation in India”, p. 301.

*Cf. Lyall.to Morley, 1873, in Durand, Life of Lyall, pp. 164-5.

*1bid., p. 162.

*First published in Edinburgh Review, July 1876. Republished in Asiatic
Studies, 1st ser., ch. 8.

*First published in Fortnightly Review, January 1877. Republished in
Asiatic Studies, 1st ser., ch. 7.
232 SIR ALFRED LYALL IN Inpj,

onto a system of political and social organization which had beep
superseded almost everywhere else in India. It is a description of
this system which forms the subject matter of *“On the Formation
of some Clans and Castes’. According to Lyall there was a perigg
in the history of all peoples, whether European or Asiatic, when the
dominant institution was that of the tribe. In India this period hag
not yet come to an end in areas like the Rajput States which were
never subject to strong government from outside. It followed that
an examination of the social institutions of Rajputana would revea]
‘the roots from which society has grown up all over India’’. What
were these institutions? Lyall believed that, in general, they ranged
themselves along two lines: those of kinship (clans) and those of
religion (caste). Both had much in common. In particular they were
each defined by certain basic rules about whom their members
could could not marry. These marriage rules were to be seen most
clearly in an institution Lyall calls the “pure clan”. All its members
believed themselves to be descended from one common ancestor,
all were subject to a tight system of rules which forbade marriage
either to certain members of their own family or to those outside
the clan. In McLennan’s phrase, they formed a large “circle of
affinity™.

Such clans, so Lyall believed, owed their origin to the success of
some chieftain in using his power to form a kinship group out of
some of the “irregular tribes”’ inhabiting Central India, which, lack-
ing a well-formulated system of rules or a common ancestor, were
neither ‘“‘pure clans’ of descent nor castes. Once formed there was
a tendency for such clans to move ‘“‘upwards”, as a result both of
success in war and also of the influence of Hindu laws which im-
posed more and more rigid rules on any group which managed to
maintain its social cohesion and its political power over a certain
period of time. But as in the case of castes “downward’ movement
was also possible. In Lyall’s view the very strict rules which distin-
guished the “pure clan” of descent were too rigid for a “good
working institution’, while the tendency for the leaders of such
groups to become an aristocracy, soon ‘‘shackled by luxurious
vices”, led to a decline in their warlike capacities. Hence, such clans
might find themselves pushed aside by “impure” clans pressing up-
ward from below. Then as time went on the newcomers would also
become more particular and more orthodox in their turn, as they
were exposed to “‘the increasing pressure of the Brahmanical atmo-
sphere” with its heavy emphasis on social regulation.

Castes, like clans, were also formed as the result of developments
ROGER OWEN 233

within tribal society. In the more settled areas, where the hold of
tribes over their members tended to dissolve, the separate family
groups would begin to take different occupations and to inhabit
different places.
Then the trade, or the profession, or the common ritual becomes
the bond of union instead of descent or political association;
and thus the mixed population of India may have re-arranged
itself into castes, propelled into those grooves of the archaic and
inveterate exclusiveness of primitive Asiatics regarding marriage
and food.?*
Once again the role of religion was all important, the result of the
influence of the Brahmins over the marriage law which, according
to Lyall, lay at the “‘foundation of society™. Yet powerful though it
was Brahmanism had never attempted any reform of tribal customs;
it had not acted to crush out the innumerable sects of heathendom,
as had Christianity in Europe after the fall of the Roman Empire,
or Islam in North India. Its rle was not that of an agent of change.
rather it ‘‘registered and confirmed” changes which had already
taken place. Thus when Lyvall speaks of religion as being the
“cement” of Indian society he does not mean that it imposed a
straightjacket on Indian social evolution; what he means is that it
provided the framework inside which that evolution could take
place. Once tribal groupings began to break down, it was the insti-
tutions of clans and castes, their structure determined by certain
religiously-sanctioned rules, which served as an alternative form of
social organisation. Again so pervasive was the influence of Brah-
manism that, as a group began to develop, its customs and senti-
ments, which may originally have been formed according to
“practical needs and experiments”, inevitably tended to harden into
laws. However you might choose to look at it, religion was the key
to the understanding of Indian society.

2. Lyall and the “arrested state” of Indian development

Lyall left the Rajput States in 1878 to take up the post of Foreign
Secretary of the Government of India. This was followed in 1882
by six years as Lieutenant-Governor of the North West Provinces,
and 1t was only after his retirement in 1888 that he seems to have
found time to continue his early studies of Indian social develop-
ment. In particular he returned to the problem, raised over and
over again in Asiatic Studies, of trying to explain how India had
come to be in what he believed was “an arrested state of develop-

**‘On the Formation of some Clans and Castes in India”, p. 177.
234 SIR ALFRED LYALL IN INpj,

ment’’.2? Why had the tribal groups of which it had once been
composed not gradually amalgamated and fused into larger politi.
cal entities inhabiting well-defined territories, as they had i,
Europe? What had kept Indian society as a “mere loose conglo.
meration of tribes, races, and castes”? Lyall’s provisional answer tq
these questions is to be found in a number of articles and in two
works of history, Rise and Expansion of British Dominion in Indi,
(London, 1894) and the chapter on ‘“The Moghul Empire’ which
he wrote for the Cambridge Modern History, Vol. V1. In brief, what
he believed was that India’s “backwardness’ was due to its failure
to develop the political institutions which in Europe had paved the
way for the emergence of a strong, stable nation-state by acting as
a counter-balancing force to the powerful centralising tendencies of
the monarchy. As he described the process:
In Asia a new kingdom is almost always founded by some able
leader with a genius for military organisation, who can raise and
command an effective army, which he employs not only to beat
rivals in the field but also to deal with all minor chiefships, to
disarm every kind of possible opposition within his borders. and
generally to level every barrier that might limit his personal
authority. But he who thus sweeps away all means of resistance
leaves himself no supports, for support implies capacity to resist;
and the very strength and keenness of the military instrument
that he has forged renders it doubly dangerous for his successor.
If the next ruler’s heart and hand fail him, there is no longer any
counterpoise to the overpowering weight of the sword in the
political balance, and the state of the dynasty is upset.?®
The Moghul Empire was a good illustration of this thesis. Founded
by soldiers of genius, it lasted only so long as there were men
strong and skilful enough to rule its wide dominions. Meanwhile no
alternative centres of political power could be allowed to develop.
The great towns of India never achieved any municipal autonomy.
Most of the nobles owed their position to the Emperor and could
be removed at will. The religious corps had little independent influ-
ence of their own. Finally the army was not a locally-recruited force
as in Europe, with men of all religions in its ranks, but consisted
almost entirely of Muslims, many of them foreign mercenaries

““My attention was drawn to this point by E. T. Stokes. Cf. his “The
Administrators and Historical Writing on India” in C. H. Philips ed.
Historians of India, Pakistan, and Ceylon, London 1961.

""“Rise3amé Expansion of British Dominion in India, Sth edn., London 1910,
pp. 321-2.
ROGER OWEN 235

whose loyalty could not always be relied on. In such a situation
there was nothing to prevent a collapse when the supreme authority

assed into “‘feeble hands’.?®

Wwithout political stability there could be no religious or social
stability either. Long dominion by foreigners arrested intellectual
development. It also kept the Hindus in a dislocated and dis-
organised condition, for their priesthood was never able to achieve
any great degree of mastery of the constant movement and change
in ritual and belief.*® But it was not just a question of the Muslims
disorganising Hinduism without substituting any strong religious
edifice of their own; the basic factor in the situation was the way
in which their presence had inhibited the development of strong
nation-states in the sub-continent. As Lyall had written in 1872, the
formation of nations “‘aids powerfully the concentration of religious
beliefs’”, by providing a framework inside which the stronger sects
gradually absorb the others.*’ Again, it assisted the formation of a
formal ecclesiastical organisation with a well-defined theology.**
Other aspects of India’s “‘arrested development” could also be ex-
plained in this way. Lacking the protection which a stable state
afforded, people were forced to create a system of social cohesion
for themselves out of caste and clan.*® Kinship ties refused to
narrow down to encompass simply the restricted family. Polytheism
persisted. Only with the coming of the British was progress possible.

3. The policy implication of Lyall’s analysis of Indian society

The various articles in Asiatic Studies (First Series), as well as
those written after his retirement contain a number of hints as to
the policy implications of Lyall’s analysis of Indian social develop-
ment. [t goes without saying that for him, as for every other English-
man, India’s numerous political and religious divisions were a
source of British strength. If the Mutiny had taught them one
lesson 1t was that anything which allowed the Indians to combine
was dangerous, while anything which kept them apart was to
Britain’s benefit. But in Lyall’s case his anxiety about the speed at
which the old barriers between different sections of society were
crumbling was accentuated by the conclusions he had drawn from

”'“’rhgzg.{gghul Empire”, Cambridge Modern History, Cambridge 1909, vi,

pp. 525-6.

"‘"‘Nlaztural Religion in India”, Rede Lecture, 17 June 1891, Cambridge 1891,
p- 12.

""The Religious Situation in India”, p. 292.

“Ibid., p. 292.

*:Sir Henry Maine™, p. 132,
236 SIR ALFRED LYALL IN Inpy,

his reading of De Tocqueville’s Ancien Régime and from his styg,
of the causes of the break-up of the Moghul Empire. In each j;,.
stance a great state had prepared the way for its own downfal] by
its passion for uniformity, which had led it to level out all smajje,
centres of local power upon which in other circumstances it Might
have relied for support.”* Lyall was too much of a realist to imagine
that the processes set in train by the British in India could be re.
versed. But he did urge that nothing be done to accelerate the
amalgamation of India’s many different political and religioys
groups. In the case of the Rajput States, for instance, the British
might well be about to destroy a central feature of their political
arrangements—the method by which the power of their chief was
balanced by that of “turbulent and reactionary nobles”’—in the
interest of helping the former to create a uniform institution over
his whole territory. This would be to begin the decay of an institu-
tion which had existed for many hundreds of years. It would be a
pity to see it destroyed before understanding how the void it would
leave was to be filled.®*. He was equally anxious about any policies
which might put an end to religious division. *‘Caste”, he observed,
might look ‘“‘unnecessary and burdensome”
. . . but these things will tumble quite fast enough without our
knocking out their keystones by premature legislation. It is
hardly in our interest to bring them down with a crash. We have
ourselves to overcome the rather superficial contempt which a
European naturally conceives for societies and habits of thought
different from those within the range of his ordinary experience;
but also to avoid distilling too much of the destructive spirit
into the minds of Young India, remembering that for English
and natives the object is how to preserve social continuity.*®
This in an Indian context was a classic statement of the conserva-
tive position, with its concern lest old social institutions be swept
away before new ones were created, with its accent on the need to
maintain difference rather than to attempt to create uniformity. As
such, it was a point of view which carried great weight, and its in-
fluence on official opinion was considerable. In the first place, in
the 1870s, it was used to counter the arguments of a number of
powerful administrators who maintained that concern for the fate
of traditional ways should never be allowed to provide an excuse

*CI. the letter to his mother, 11 July 1859, Lyall Papers, MSS, Eur. F.132/13.
®“The Rajput States of India”, pp. 225-7.
*“The Religious Situation in India”, pp. 302-3.
ROGER OWEN 237

for holding up the introduction of necessary reforms. One import-
ant exponent of this latter view was James Fitzjames Stephen (Law
Member of the Government of India, 1869-72) whose writings con-
tain a closely-reasoned defence of his efforts to create a new code
of law, regardless of the disruption it might cause within Indian
socicty. Indeed so long as it was not politically explosive he seems
to have welcomed such disruption, for it was only by destroying
the old ways, so he believed, that moral and material progress along
European lines could take place.?” A good example of this is his
attack on those who sought the preservation of the traditional
Indian village community. Such a community he argued might well
have existed for many centuries, but this only showed that India
had long been in a stagnant position, ‘‘unfavourable to the growth
of wealth, intelligence, political experience, and the moral and intel-
lectual changes which are implied in these processes”. And he went
on:
The condition of India for centuries past shows what village
communities are really worth. Nothing that deserves the name of
political institution at all can be ruder and less satisfactory in its
results. They are, in fact, a crude form of socialism, paralysing
the growth of individual energy and all its consequences. The
continuation of such a state of society is radically inconsistent
with the fundamental principles of our rule both in theory and
practice.?®
Lyvall, for his part, while agreeing with many of Stephen’s assump-
tions about the long term necessity of introducing such European
values as belief in law and order and unrestrained competition was
always ready to stress the dangers this posed to the British position
in the short run. All policies had to be judged in terms of their
possible effect on Indian society. Measures which had worked well
in Europe might have opposite effects in Asia. It was arguments of
this type which Lyall’s writings provided for those who wished to
oppose the influence of latter-day Benthamites like Stephen.
Secondly, in the early 1880s, Lyall used his theory of Indian
social development as the basis for a strategy by which the British
could maintain political security while at the same time introducing
a number of much-needed concessions to local opinion. His ideas
on the subject are spelled out in detail in an anonymous article,

Cf. Stephen’s chapter on law in Sir W. W. Hunter, Life of the Earl of
Mayo, London 187§, 11.
*Ibid., pp. 165-6.
238 SIR ALFRED LYALL N INDI4

“Government of the Indian Empire”, published in 1884.> Aftey 5
opening scction in which he outlined the main elements ip the
changing situation which then faced the British in India as a regyq
of such factors as the spread of western education, the emergenc,
of a new middle class in the cities and the activities of 3 hostile
press, he went on to state that the problem was one of steering ,
middle course between “innovation” and *“‘conservation”. Whilc it
was impossible for the government to stand still, while it was necey.
sary to make some concessions to the demands of western-educateq
Indians for a greater share in administration, it was vital that this
be accompanicd by a policy designed to strengthen the main pillars
upon which British rule was based. Of these, much the most im-
portant was the multiplicity of India’s divisions. ‘*At present the
240 millions of India are separated into social compartments by
differences of blood, caste, and religion; and they are also politically
intersected, to a material degree, by the native states.” However,
“as the old social prejudices decay, there is a tendency, already
perceptible among the leading classes, to a kind of political fusion,
to that gradual subsidence of gentile and religious distinctions that
ultimately produces the level of modemn society.”
In these circumstances and with these prospects, it is clear that
the Viceroy’s present policy of decentralisation and of discarding
class privileges is an appropriate adaptation of administrative
measurcs to change that must be recognised. The old inequality
and variety of laws, customs, and personal status parcelled mcn
out into groups, and did thus provide some sort of local
self-government, some distribution of authority. Now that these
sub-divisions are vanishing, it is in accordance with natural
cxpediency to substitute other administrative and territorial
groupings, and to prevent authority from being fixed and
concentrated in aristocratic bureaux as in Russia. Otherwise the
English dominion in India may drift towards that condition of
over-centralised isolation, with shallow foundations and
inadequate support which renders an Empire as top-heavy as an
over-built tower, and which is unquestionably an element of
political instability.
Other recommendations followed. It was important that men of
local influence were associated with British rule wherever possible.
Great care should be taken when it came to cfforts to reform insti-

“Edinburgh Review, clix, 325, January 1884, Attributed to Lyall by Durand,
Life of Lyall, p. 477.
ROGER OWEN 239

tutions which “no foreigners can be expected to understand
aocurately or exhaustively”. Finally, it should always be remem-
bered that it was in ““the content and confidence of the land-owning
class” that the government found its essential element of stability.

As for the practical application of this strategy it is first necessary
to look at Lyall’s own approach to the drafting of the three most
important bills passed during his term as Lieutenant-Governor of
the North West Provinces : the local-government bill, the Oudh rent
bill, and the bill to establish a provincial Legislative Council. Let us
consider them in turn.

The local-government bill owed its passage to an initiative by the
viceroy, Lord Ripon, whose general aim was to provide a political
outlet for the ambitions of the growing number of western-educated
Indians. One method by which he hoped to do this was to breathe
fresh life into thc existing machinery of local administration. In
two resolutions (30 September 1881 and 18 May 1882) he invited
the provincial governments to examine ways and means of raising
the numbers of non-official members on municipal and local boards
until they comprised at least two-thirds of the total membership.
It was also proposed that non-official members be elected wherever
possible. Lyall, for his part, was quite content to carry out these
proposals as they stood where they applied to the municipal boards
in the North West Provinces; but when it came to changes in the
composition of the boards in districts and sub-districts he made
strenuous efforts to limit their effect. In his first scheme all new
members of such boards were to be nominated rather than elected,
and it was only after pressure from the viceroy that he suggested
a compromise by which an electoral body of government nominees
was to choose who was to sit on the sub-district boards from among
their own number.*® A second dispute involved the question of
whether the district boards should have an official chairman, as
Lyall thought necessary, or a non-official one, as Ripon believed
was vital to his whole policy. Once again a compromise was
reached, by which the non-official members were to be allowed to
elect a chairman of their own choosing, provided at least three-
quarters of the board were present at that particular meeting. This
was something to which the viceroy agreed with the greatest reluc-
tance. As he wrote to Lyall on 8 May 1883, the official members
could always prevent such a move by staying away en bloc. Further-

“'{;ya:g toZRipon. 10 November, 12 December 1882, Lyall Papers, MSS. Eur.
132142,
240 SIR ALFRED LYALL IN jnpy,
more :
I must say that the introduction of such a provision renders th,
while proceeding little better than a sham. If the proposal
emanated from a person in whom I had less confidence than yqy
I should say that it was an claborately-prepared device for =~
taking away with one hand what was seemingly given with the
other.?
It has been pointed out that Lyall’s cautious approach to the vice.
roy’s proposals was in some measure justified by the disturbed con.
ditions in parts of his vast province, particular in Oudh.** But it is
also clear from the long correspondence between the men that
they were in fundamental disagreement about the whole purpose
of the reform. Whereas for Ripon, local self-government was to be
an instrument of political and popular education and a means by
which educated Indians were to be allowed to take a great step
forward in the management of their own affairs,*® for Lyall it
appeared very much more as a useful instrument of administrative
devolution and, as he wrote to the viceroy, a way of bringing men
of *‘position, influence, and character’ into district administration.
One aimed at a limited enfranchisement of the new middle class,
the other at associating the landed aristocracy with British rule.
What Ripon attempted to effect in accordance with his liberal prin-
ciples and his experience in Ireland, Lyall tried to modify in terms
of his conservative approach to problems of Indian social change.
The influence of Lyall’s analysis of developments in Indian
society can also be seen at work during the preparation of a bill
aimed at reforming the conditions of tenancy in Oudh. While he
was as convinced as Ripon that some measure was necessary (o
protect the peasants of this over-crowded area from what was often
an annual demand for increased rent and from the summary evic-
tion which might so easily follow, he was also anxious to ensure
that nothing was done to alienate the local land-owners, the taluk-
dars. For this reason great care was taken to ensure the agreement
of the talukdars at every stage and on a number of occasions Lyall
attempted to modify provisions in the draft bill in their interests."*
As a result the protection afforded the peasants was less than it
would otherwise have been. But this was justified by the fact that

“1bid.

“S. Gopal, The Viceroyalty of Lord Ripon 1880-1884, London 1953, p. 103.

“Ibid., pp. 84, 93.

“Cf. Lyall to Dufferin, 8 May 1886, Dufferin Papcrs, India Office Library,
MSS. Eur. F. 130/42A.
ROGER OWEN 241
ther were “important political considerations™ involved.'> As Lyall
wrote to Lord Dufferin, Ripon’s successor as viceroy:
There is no doubt at this moment that the talukdars, as a body,
still adhere to the old-fashioned notion that it is their duty and
their interest to submit to the clearly declared wishes of the
government so long as they can rely upon the government
treating them well and considering their interests. And it is, of
course, very expedient politically to give them no reasonable
grounds for abandoning this notion, especially since cven in
Lucknow a good many persons are already anxious to convince
the taludkars that their ideas are obsolete, and that the only way
of meeting the Government is by opposing it.*®
The third, and last, important measure passed in the North West
Provinces during Lyall’s governorship was the introduction of a
Legislative Council. Unlike the local-government reform and the
tenancy bill this was the result of his own initiative. But, like them,
he was rcady to justify it in the most direct political terms.
What is wanted in thesc provinces is to bring forward our
leading native gentlemen and to encourage them to take some
responsible share in the higher administration. They have been
rather kept in the background since the Mutiny. The events of
1857-59 left a lasting impression on the generation that saw and
suffered by them; and the higher classes became little accustomed
to comc forward in public affairs, or to show an independent
interest in politics as may be noticed (for example) among somc
of the prominent men in the Punjab. Any step towards drawing
out these classes and enlisting them in support of local
administration will to my mind be a measure of conservative
policy.*”
But Lyall’s strategy for strengthening the British position during
the process of rcform was not applied in the North West Provinces
alone. Elements of it are to be found in many of Lord Dufferin’s
policies, especially those aimed at encouraging the Princes, and at
a further decentralisation of the financial administration.*® Its influ-
ence can also be seen outside India in much of what Lord Cromer
attempted to do in Egypt. It was Cromer’s opinion that, “every

“Lvall to Dufferin, 2 Septcmber 1886, Dufferin Papers, MSS. Eur. F.130/
MSS. Eur. F.130/42A.

“Ibid., 8 May 1886, Dufferin Papers, MSS. Eur. F.130,42A.

Yitbid., 12 July 1885, Lyall Papers, MSS. Eur. F.132/46.

*“Cf. S. Gopal British Policy in India 1858-1905, Cambridge 1965, p. 156
aggssir A. C.5 Lyall, The Life of the Marquis of Dufferin and Ava, London
1905, 1, p. 154.
242 SIR ALFRED LYALL IN INDIA

European who occupies a high posmon in the East should study
Sir Alfred Lyall’s work™,*® and there is considerable evidence that
he, himself, often took Lyall as his guide.”® Like the author of
Asiatic Studies he was concerned to strengthen British rule by
strwsmg Egypt’s many internal divisions. Like him too he wag
anxious to incorporate the conservative classes, notably the rura]
land-owners, into the machinery of government. Finally, strategy
apart, it is likely that Cromer’s awareness of the dangers of popular
discontent arising from ignorant assaults on local traditions came
from his friendship with Lyall and his reading of Lyall’s works. As
he wrote of the Egyptian Ministry of the Interior in 1895, there is
no department in which “the zeal of the earnest reformer is more
to be deprecated. The habits and customs of an oriental pecople
must not be trifled with lightly.”’5?

Conclusion

Lyall’s whole working life is yet another illustration of the close
links which have always existed between anthropology and imperial
government. Several of these links have been described in what has
gone before. First, when the Rebellion of 1857 first drew attention
to the urgent need to study the changes which were being produced
in Indian society by British rule, it was the early anthropologists
who seemed to provide a method by which these changes could be
analysed. However, second, it was not merely a question of men like
Lyall borrowing ideas from academic writers like Maine and
McLennan; the process also worked the other way round. In the
days before ‘field’ work the anthropologist in England had to rely
almost exclusively on British officials for his information about
Asian societies. In Lyall’s own case, as he once pointed out in a
letter, Maine’s 1875 Rede lecture (on ““The Effects of Observation
of India on Modemn European Thought™) contained one or two
“leading’ ideas taken from his own ‘“‘Religion of an Indian Pro-
vince’’.* This was just one of a large number of borrowings of a
similar kind. Third, the fact that much of the early anthropological
writing about India was the work of British officials meant that it
often directly reflected what might be called the administrative

“Cf. my “The Influence of Lord Cromer’s Indian Experience on British
Pohcy in Egypt 1883-1907", St. Antony’s Papers No. 17, London 1965.

"szglild pp. 1234, The Earl of Cromer, Modem Egypt London 1908, i,
p n

““Annual Report for 1894, Parl. Papers 1895, cix, p. 12.
*Lyall to Barbara Lyall, 31 August 1875, Lyall Papers, MSS. Eur. F.132/16.
ROGER OWEN 243

int of view. In the case of Lyall and Maine for example it is in-
teresting that they should have stressed the institutional aspect of
custom in India rather than, as Tyler and Robertson-Smith might
have done, its ritual character.

Lastly, there is the whole question of the direct influence of
Lyall’s writing on British imperial policy. Reference has already
been made to the way in which his study of Indian society could be
used to make a powerful justification for Britain’s presence in India
by stressing the argument that it was only the arrival of the British
which allowed Indian society to emerge from its state of ‘‘arrested
development’’. Just as important is the point that his analysis also
pointed the way to a political strategy aimed at confronting many
of the problems faced by the Government of India in the last
quarter of the 19th century. Beyond this Lyall’s writings were also
important for the way in which they both reflected and then, in
turn, reinforced the fundamentally conservative position of the
British administration. The inherent conservatism of anthropolo-
gists’ policy recommendations has already been noted by a large
number of writers.>® In Lyall’s own case his detailed knowledge of
the social institutions to be found in the Central Provinces and in
the Rajput States led him continually to lay greater emphasis on the
disruptive nature of British-induced change and on the need to
preserve old forms than he would otherwise have done. At a time
when the reformers like Stephen seemed likely tc carry all before
them, Lyall was one of the most important men who pointed to the
danger of applying, wholesale, measures that could only be justified
because they had worked well in Europe. Legislation had also to
be judged in terms of its probable effect on India, and this could
only be done by starting from the position that Indian society was
governed by more than a mere collection of outworn, obscurantist
social ordinances; that it was not static and immutable as many
had supposed, but subject to its own laws of development like any
other. It is a measure of his influence that he was able to persuade
so many officials that this lesson, drawn from the study of Indian
society, should be taken seriously to heart.

“Cf. L. Mair, Anthropology and Social Change, London 1969, p. 2.
THE INDIGENQOUS CRITIQUE OF COLONIALISM:
A CASE STUDY
Roy Willis

|

What is now happening is the re-emergence of a dialogue between
Western and non-Western societies and cultures, a dialogue which
was brutally interrupted by the colonial period. We seek a deeper
understanding of what is called colonialism, and this search leads
to an increased awareness of the subtle dialectic between social
theory and practice, particularly in the special and interesting case
of the relation between anthropology and the colonial system. Here
is no simple matter of naive anthropologists unwittingly (for the
most part) serving the interests of metropolitan imperialism. Though
there was plenty of that too.! But before fieldwork was invented there
were anthropological giants about; and it was the grandiose anthro-
pologv of 19th century Britain which produced the essential legiti-
mizing mythos for the colonial enterprise. The renowned self-
confidence and unshakeably paternal authority of Britain’s colonial
administrators expressed a deep awareness of their country’s awe-
somely responsible position at the top of the social-evolutionary
ladder. Without Spencer, Tylor and Frazer there would have been
no Sanders of the River.

In the inter-war years, anthropologists got quietly on with their
job under the protective umbrella of the colonial system. The equi-

'Cf. Banaji, J. 1970 ‘“Anthropology in Crisis”, New Left Review, p. 64;

Goddard, D. 1969. “Limits of British Anthropology”, New Left Review,

iB; .Gou%g, 111(. 1968. “Anthropology: Child of Imperialism”, Monthly
eview, 19, 11.
246 THE FIPA OF TANZAN],

librium model of the functionalists fitted well with Lugardiap in-
direct rule to establish a neat division of labour. But I think it is trye
to say that anthropology during this period made little impact oy.
side the restricted bounds of its own discipline: the works of Maljp,.
owski, Radcliffe-Brown, Firth, Fortes and Evans-Pritchard were i
no way part of the intellectual furniture of cultivated folk in Britajp
as those of Spencer, Tylor and Frazer had been. It is also problen.
atic, a matter for investigation, how far the solid output of anthro.
pological monographs during the inter-war years was of practica]
assistance to colonial administrators. Indeed it is only recently, with
the virtual extinction of classical colonialism, that the substantial ad-
vances achieved by anthropologists during the colonial period in
human self-knowledge have begun to penetrate the consciousness of
non-anthropologists.? The analytic and synthesising labours of Lévi.
Strauss represent, I suspect, only the first wave of a massive resur-
gence of the primitive, mediated through the theoretical constructs
of social anthropology.

The case study offered here is intended primarily as a contribution
to the intellectual history of the small-scale societies who were on
the receiving end of colonialism. So far the literature of the “pro-
test’ of the colonised has dealt with armed revolt against the colo-
nisers, with the more devious expression of discontent in spirit pos-
session cults and independent churches, or with the rebellious
writings of Western-educated évolués.®> The case under discussion
differs from all these in containing a formal critique of Western colo-
nialism and what was perceived by a non-literate African people as
the value-system inherent in it. Properly to appreciate this critique,
it must first be placed in the context of the history, sociology and
basic values of the people concerned.

n
In the middle 1840s, about the time that Karl Marx, as a refugee in
Paris, was working on the crucial /1844 Manuscripts and writing the
Theses on Feuerbach, the people of Ufipa, in what is now south-
west Tanzania, were undergoing the ordeal of foreign occupation.
The Ngoni under Zwangendaba had invaded and conquered the
country about 1842. Before that Ufipa had been disturbed for many

*Thus, Evans-Pritchard’s study of the Azande, published in 1937, is just
beginning to make its mark for what it really is: a contribution of the
first importance to the comparative sociology of knowledge.

3See, for example, Protest and Power in Black Africa, eds. Robert 1. Rot-
berg and Ali A. Mazrui, O.U.P., 1970.
ROY WILLIS 247

years by internecine struggle between the related dynasties, called
Twa, which ruled the rival Fipa states of Nkansi and Lyangalile.
Fortunately for the Fipa, the Ngoni domination was relatively short-
jived. In the late 1840s, Zwangendaba died and in the disputes over
succession which followed, the Ngoni split into several factions
which almost immediately moved out of Ufipa to other parts of East
and Central Africa. The Twa in Nkansi and Lyangalile re-establish-
ed the structures of state power but they never fought one another
again. Instead the two countries devoted most of their energies to
economic progress and by the later 19th century had achieved a
high level of prosperity in relation to most other parts of East-
Central Africa. This condition obtained most particularly in Nkansi,
the larger and more populous northern state which also had the
advantage of lying across one of the main trans-continental trade
routes between the mineral-rich empire of Katanga and the East
African ports.* Between about 1860 until the definitive end of Twa
sovereignty with the establishment of a German force there in 1898,
Nkansi enjoyed a period of peace and affluence which contrasts
markedly with the turbulence and impoverishment suffered by Afri-
cans over a wide area during this same period. The contrast was
very apparent to the few European travellers through Ufipa during
this time. For Joseph Thomson, who stayed at the capital of Nkansi
in 1880, there was ‘‘no more peaceful race in all Central Africa’:

They are more of a purely agricultural race than any other tribe

I have seen. To the cultivation of their fields they devote them-

selves entirely. They never engage in war, although they will, of

course, defend themselves.®
The English Protestant missionary Edward Coode Hore reported
seeing ‘“‘vast fields” of many different food-crops when he visited the
Lake Tanganyika domain of Nkansi in the same year. When he left
his boat’s crew was ‘‘discontented at leaving the land of plenty”.*
Entering Lyangalile fourteen years later, one of the first Catholic
missionaries, Pére A. van Ost, noted :

As soon as one arrives in Ufipa one recognises in the crops an

‘It was in Nkansi that T did most of my field research in Ufipa, between
1962 and 1964 and again in 1966. In Lyangalile my work was confined
mainly to the collection of oral traditions. I wish to express my gratitude
to the Emslie Horniman Anthropological Scholarship Fund and to the
Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research for making this
work possible.

*Thomson, J., To the Central African Lakes and Back, 1881, I, p. 221.
““Voyage to the South End of Lake Tanganvika in 1880”, (unpublished
manuscript.)
248 THE FIPA OF TANZANy,

industrious people. The least patch of reasonably fertile land i

cultivated. . .7
This material abundance was the visible product of a specific socjy
order, a complex structure of institutional forms and cognitive pat-
terns, which must be grasped in outline before we can understapg
the Fipa perception of Western capitalism and colonialism. Techpq.
logically, Fipa agriculture reposed on a vigorous and sophisticateq
iron-working industry, which also supplied its military force with
hardware. A recent authority describes this industry as “the strong.
est in the Corridor region™.® The range of iron implements produceq
included, besides spears and arrow-heads, various Kinds of hoe,
large and small axes, scythes, chisels, wood-files, pincers, tongs and
nails. The Fipa are not shifting cultivators, like the majority of the
inhabitants of what Vansina calls “‘the savanna region”—the broad
belt of grassy upland stretching across Central Africa south of the
equatorial forests of the Congo.’ Instead, a shortage on the Fipa
plateau of trees (lopping and burning the branches of which fertilises
the gardens of the savanna cultivators) has led the Fipa to adopt a
method of compost fertilisation involving the construction of large
mounds called intzuumba. These mounds are themselves planted with
beans. The result, according to a former Director of Agriculture in
the Tanganyika Government, Mr. A. H. Kirby, *“is an interesting
example of the empirical use of green dressings for improving tilth
and adding nitrogen, and the symbiosis of a leguminous plant and
its nodule bacteria, also for increasing soil nitrogen™.!'°

Although there are no figures to back this up, there seems little
doubt that this method of agriculture gives a substantially higher
return in food products in relation to area of land cultivated than
the “slash and burn’ techniques of the savanna peoples, since the
Fipa have escaped from what must be a tedious necessity common
to these latter peoples of constantly changing village sites as nearby
land becomes exhausted. The Bemba, for example, change their
village sites every four or five vears.'' An important consequence of

“““Voyage au Rukwa’, Chronique Trimestrielle de la Société des Mission-
naires d’Afrigue (Péres Blancs), 64, October 1894, p. 613.

*Christopher St. John, writing in R. Gray and D. Birmingham (eds.),
Precolonial African Trade, 1970, 206. The “Corridor’ referred to is the
region between Lake Tanganyika and Lake Malawi. This writer is, how-
ever, wrong in implying in the same article that the Fipa iron industrv
died out during the colonial period. To my knowledge at least one well-
known smith was still in active production in 1964, and I heard of others.
*Vansina, J., Kingdoms of the Savanna, 1966.

*Official Memorandum dated March 14th, 1927.

“Richards, A. 1., Land, Labour and Diet in Northern Rhodesia, 1939, p. 19.
qOY WILLIS 249

this difference in productive techniques between the savanna peoples
and the Fipa is that the immobile Fipa village is, on average, two
and a half times the size of the average settlement in the adjacent
eastern savanna region—250 inhabitants against 100.'? These Fipa
settlements are tightly concentrated, with huts packed closely to-
gether. It is consistent with the differences in productive technique
and the status of the village in the savanna region and among the
Fipa, that whereas in the former region man’s dependence on wild
nature is emphasised in cosmological belicfs which assign the highest
mystical prestige to hunting,'* among the Fipa hunting is considered
a mundane activity of no special account and man, centrally organ-
ised in the village, is sccn as dominating the surrounding, peripheral
world of nature.

There is a further significant difference between the people of
Ufipa and the peoples of the Eastern savanna which must bc taken
into account when considering the Fipa view of man and his rela-
tion to naturc. Bemba villages consist of clusters of kin gathered
round one ambitious man who is the founder and headman, and
when he dies the village usually breaks up. Elsewhere small localised
lineages provide the core of settlements, with the lineage head also
being the village headman.'* Neither of these conditions apply to
the Fipa: there the headman is the elected representative of the
village residents, and it is he who is identified with the village rather
than vice versa, as among the Bemba. There is no lineage system
among the Fipa, and therefore no headmanship by right of descent,
nor any relation between descent groups and ownership of villages
or land. The Fipa village is an association of (theoretically) equal
individuals who, by right of residence, participate in the village’s
collective ownership of surrounding land. Rights and duties associ-
ated with communal labour apply equally to all residents.

This distinctively Fipa type of social organisation is consistent
with a view of man as a being who discovers or constructs himself
through interaction with his fellows in pursuance of the collective
purpose of human domination of nature. Fipa hold that it is through
practical activity aimed at changing or transforming the world that

'*The eastern savanna figure is taken from Vansina, op. cit., 28. Villages in
the western savanna are larger—between 150 and 200 or more inhabitants
(ibid.). The Fipa figure is based on a preliminary analysis of data from
more than a hundred settlements in central Ufipa, and probably errs on
the conservative side.

See Vansina, ibid.. p. 24. A particular example are the Lele as described
by Mary Douglas in African Worlds (ed. C. Daryll Forde), 1954, p. 1-26.

"Cf. Vansina, op. cit., p. 26-8.
250 THE FIPA OF TAy; ANIA

man constitutes himself, and that such activity is necessarily social
a function of the relation between the self and interacting others.
Such a world-view inevitably emphasises the primacy of verba] com.
munication as the ground of that mutual understanding which g the
basis of common action, and the concentrated settlements of ¢,
Fipa effectively meet this primary need. Thus, for about 30 yeays j,
the later 19th century, while their centrally controlled military force
held off the imperialisms of the Nyamwezi to the north and the
Bemba to the south, the people of Nkansi built an essentially
humanist society : in the sense that man saw himself as a being alone,
unmediated by any such time-transcending entity as a clan or line.
age, constructing himself in social interaction with his fellows, 3¢
part of the continuing process by which human society controlled
and dominated external nature. Such a world-view was itself the
outcome of a long and conflictful historical process, recorded for
Fipa themselves in their massive corpus of historical traditions. Its
cardinal discoveries are preserved in a large body of stories and
proverbs through which, in a still largely non-literate society, the
accumulated knowledge of the past is transmitted to the young. It
was this historically shaped and developed world-view, with its in-
stitutional basis and framework, that accounts for the pacific, order-
ly and industrious characteristics of the Fipa which so impressed
19th century European observers. Not that they had always been
so: in 1798 the Portuguese traveller Lacerda noted that the Fipa
settlers near Kazembe’s country in what is now north-west Zambia
were, like the Bemba, ‘““mortal enemies to, never sparing, the Caz-
embe’s people’.!’

By 1880, the Fipa had completely shed these aggressive and zeno-
phobic characteristics. Joseph Thomson’s characterisation of the
Fipa as pre-eminently peaceful and hard-working has been invoked
already. He was also under the impression—probably mistakenly—
that capital punishment was unknown in Ufipa: but the impression
is nonetheless signficant.'* E. C. Hore was particularly struck by the
suave, unruffled manner in which the Lake Tanganyika villagers re-

1*Lacerda, F. J. M., Journey to Cazembe in 1798, 1873, trans. R. F. Burton,
p. 99. Burton, after Lacerda, calls these people *‘“Mussucumas” and
evidently equates them with the Sukuma of the Lake Victoria region, who
speak a language closely akin to Nyamwezi. In fact the “Mussucumas”
are a people of the central plateau of Ufipa, whom the Fipa call aSukuma,
and their language is one of several main dialects of what is now generally
called ciFipa, the language of the Fipa, and which is grouped by linguists
with Bemba.

'*Thomson, op. cit., II, p. 222.
ROY WILLIS 251

acted to the sudden appearance in their midst of a complete stranger
such as himself, writing:

Here in Fipa more than anywhere else the people most wonder-

fully disguised their surprise on seeing me—one would think white

men were as common as black among some whom I knew had

never seen one before.!”
So far in fact from repelling foreigners, the society constructed by
the Fipa in the second half of the 19th century seems positively to
have welcomed them. Arab and Swahili traders from the East Afri-
can coast were known from the 1850s onward, according to oral
tradition, and the Nyamwezi traders traversed the country much
earlier on their way to Katanga.'* By the time of Thomson’s visit in
1880, a considerable number of Arabs and Swahilis had become
thoroughly integrated into the structure of Fipa society, as Thomson
attests.!* He was, however, almost certainly wrong in assuming that
the leader of this immigrant community, an Arab called ‘“Ng’oom-
besasi”’, ‘“the rich in cattle”, wielded disproportionate power in
Ufipa to the extent of having the legitimate ruler of Nkansi, the Twa
chief Nandi Kapuufi, “very much under his thumb’’.?° For ten years
later, in 1890, we find the same ‘“Ng’oombesasi’ (his real name was
Shinkambi Khamis?') being removed from the royal capital by
Kapuufi and transferred to the governorship of Kirando, a Lake
Tanganyika port on the very edge of Fipa territory.2?

The culturally instilled attitude to strangers current in Ufipa in the
later 19th century was that, no matter how bizarre their outward
appearance, they were people with whom business might profitably
be done—an attitude summed up in the proverb “Young man, don’t
hurt the black snake—it may bring forth an abundance of (edible)
black fish™.?* Ethnically the population of Ufipa was by this time
extremely diverse (as it remains to this day). From about the end of
the 17th century or the beginning of the 18th there appears to have
been a migration into Ufipa of small groups from the Zambian

'"Hore, op. cilt.

"Livingstone records meeting an old man in Tabora, central Tanzania, in
1872 who remembered as a small boy accompanying his father on a trading
ji?urnelys gl)lrough Ufipa to Katanga. (Livingstone, D., Last Journals, 1874

, P. .

“Ibid., p. 217-8.

**Thomson, ibid.

"'See the “History of Ufipa” written by Sir John Lamb in the Sumbawanga
District Book, c. 1927.

**Reported in Chroniques Trimestrielles, May 1890, p. 130.

”‘.;‘Unnbdurlneendo, utaci ucuum’ insoka induku, utamanyile cikulufyaal”
ikambaale”’.
252 THE FIPA OF TANZ Ay,

plateau and the south-eastern highlands of the Congo; one of ¢y,
earliest of these groups established the ritually important chiefs;
of Milansi in central Ufipa.** Other groups entered Ufipa from ),
north, coming from central and North-western Tanzania; this Categ.
ory included the ancestors of the politically dominant Twa chiefs of
Ufipa, who were quite probably of Tutsi origin. This long process of
immigration into Ufipa of heterogeneous alien elements, and thej;
absorption into Fipa socicty, was accelerated in the 19th century by
the turbulent conditions created first by the Ngoni depredations ip
Zambia and northern Malawi, and later by the imperialistic expan-
sion of the Bemba state to the south of Ufipa and the Nyamwez;
empires of Mirambo and Nyungu-ya-Mawe to the north.?* The very
violence attending these movements of refugee groups into Ufipa,
and the social disruption wrought in Ufipa by the Ngoni conquest
and occupation, may well have contributed to the shaping of the
peculiarly Fipa social order, based on the co-operation of self-acting
individuals joined in the collective enterprise of human domination
of external nature which emerged in the latter half of the 19th
century.

I
We come now to the encounter between Fipa society and culture
and Western colonialism, an encounter which may be said to have
begun with the first organised European missionary expedition into
Ufipa—that of the Société des Missionnaires d’Afrique (the White
Fathers), whose representatives were cntertained at the royal capital
of Nkansi by Nandi Kapuufi in 1886. As a result of this visit, this
missionary society set up its first station in Ufipa, at the Lake Tan-
ganyika port of Kirando, in 1888.?¢ Two years later the Anglo-
German Agreement of July 1890 assigned Ufipa, together with what
is now the rest of Tanzania, as a German sphere of influence. The
last nominally sovereign ruler of Nkansi, Nandi Msuulwa, commit-
ted suicide in 1898, after ‘‘seeing his authority pass almost entirely

“*See Willis, 1964, and the same author’s chapter on Fipa history in A.
Roberts (ed.) Tanzania Before 1900, Nairobi, 1968.

“*The destruction and terror wrought by Bemba slave-raiding forays into the
territory of the Mambwe and Lungu, whose territory borders Ufipa to the
south and south-west, is vividly described by several authorities including
V. Giraud, Les Lacs de I'Afrique Equatoriale: voyage exécuté de 1883 a
1885, Paris, 1890, p. 531 ff. On Mirambo and Nyungu-ya-Mawe and the
aggressive expansion of thesc two Nvamwezi chiefs see Aylward Shorter,
‘Nyungu-va-Mawe and the ‘“Empire of the Ruga-Rugas”,” Journal of
African History, IX, 2, 1968, p. 235-59.

**Vide Lechaptois, A., Au rives du Tanganyika, 1913, pp. 272-3.
ROY WILLIS 253

into the hands of Europeans™.*” Three days after the succession to
office of Msuulwa’s heir, Kapele, a German force entered the count-
try and took formal possession of it in the name of the Kaiser.*®

The interesting question is how this change in political sovereign-
ty, and the radical changes in the economic and ideological spheres
which accompanied colonial domination, were perceived by the
Fipa. We have seen that the social order which took definitive shape
in Ufipa after about 1850, predisposed the people to admit, and then
assimilate, foreign people and exotic ideas and products.®® There
was, however, that in the world-view of Western capitalism which
challenged the very basis of Fipa culture, which assumed the social
order to be built on the reciprocal interaction of autonomous human
beings. Fipa consciousness of the essential differences between the
world they knew in the later 19th century and the forces shaping
socicty and the individual under Western colonialism is expressed
in a myth in which old and new worlds are explicitly contrasted.
This myth, which I transcribed from Fipa informants during field
research in Ufipa, 1 have called “The Story of Kaswa” after the
principal actor in it.*°

The myth begins by introducing the central figure, the prophet
Kaswa, sitting with a group composed of ‘“‘elders” and “‘equals”.
The myth has already identified one of the fundamental contradic-
tions in Fipa society—that between the assumption of equality be-
tween the reciprocally interacting, autonomous individuals com-
posing the human community, and the arrogation of authority and
power by a minority of ‘“‘elders’. The resolution of this contradiction
is to be one of the main themes of the myth. But the position of
Kaswa is made clear only two lines later : it is solely to the “equals”
(aniina)*' that Kaswa addresses himself :

And, being scated, he speaks to these comrades saying . . .
—And what he says is patently mysterious, to the effect that *“*some-

“’Lechaptois, ibid., p. 685.

*Vide Lamb, op. cit.

“Thus, before the colonial period Ufipa had a flourishing weaving industry,
producing a warm and durable cloth. But as soon as European clothes
began to arrive in the country, the pcople of Ufipa, led by the chief
Kapele and his courtiers, began to wear the new style of clothing. Within
a few vears the indigenous industry was virtually extinct. (Chroniques
Trimesrielles, 1900, 87, pp. 401-2.)

*°A literal and a free translation of this extraordinary text, together with
the vernacular original, first appeared in “Kaswa: Oral Tradition of a
Fipa Prophet’’, published in Africa, July 1970, pp. 248-56.

8., unniina—variously meaning, according to context, ‘‘sibling of the same
sex”’, “fellow”, “friend”, “comrade”, etc.
254 THE FIPA OF TANZAN),

thing is coming, creeping, from the east—something with god.Jjk,
powers’”. These two lines gain their force not merely by reference
to a historical process—it was from the East coast, along the eggt.
west trade route, that European missionaries, explorers and armeg
expeditions penetrated into the East African interior—but algg
because they cvoke a proverb well known to Fipa, according 1o
which anything that can be formulated by the human mind, how-
ever improbable, will eventually come to pass.*?

The myth says that Kaswa’s hearers admit to having tried byt
failed to understand him, and so he goes on more explicitly:

There are coming monstrous inventors,

Bringing war, striking you unawares, relentlessly.

‘O you people, you are going to be robbed of your country—

You won’t even be allowed to cough’.

There follows, in the second part of the myth, an account by Kaswa
of the main changes in the structure of Fipa society which arc to
ensuc from colonial domination. The younger generation, breaking
away from the authority of their fathers, are not even present when
the old ones come to die. As for the Twa ruling dynasty, it will dis-
appear altogether.**

Kaswa goes on to characterise the changes in man’s perception of
himself and his relation to others which are to be introduced by
Western capitalism. Man becomes isolated from his fellows: he
cannot ‘‘see’’ them nor can he be himself ‘“‘seen’. The myth makes
Kaswa express this “disappearance’” of man as an autonomous but
reciprocally interacting social being by saying that ‘‘a person clothes
his whole body, even his eyes are clothed”. In this state men are un-
able to communicate meaningfully one with another:

Those born in that time are devoid of manners,

Incapable of civilised utterance.

As for material things, everything will be measured in money—even
natural products like grass and earth:

Everything becomes currency (ifyuuma)®*—grass and the very

earth itself.

In this alarmingly transformed world, the products of man’s social
labour take on a frightening life of their own, so that the motor-cars

**“"Caatakwa, cisuulwa, kwiisa”.

*This prophecy has been virtually realised: the Twa in Ufipa are now a
tiny and diminishing group with scarcely a trace of their old authority.
**This word refers to the pieces of unworked iron, each sufficient to make
a medium-sized hoe, which functioned as currency in Ufipa in the later
19th century. Cf. Marx (1964, p. 169): “Money . . . confounds and ex-

changes all things”.
ROY WILLIS 255

of the Europeans, the ‘‘monstrous inventors”’, have ‘‘protruding
eyes” (headlamps), while their anuses (exhaust pipes) exude fire.
Alienated and reified human labour has itself become a monstrous
force in this image of the prophet Kaswa.

In the third and final part of the myth, an attempt is made to re-
solve the tension generated by the juxtaposition of two incompatible
world-views. The narrative invokes the original unity of the Fipa
universe, in which man dominates the world of nature. Kaswa him-
self acts out this human role, which is shown as consisting in a com-
bination of action and intellectual control :

Then he arose and went all over the country,

Teaching people the names of every thing:

Mountains, rivers, trees, and so on.

Then Kaswa returns to the contradiction in the Fipa social order
between an ideal of human equality and the privileged position of
a minority of elders—the problem which had been posed in the be-
ginning of the narrative. In an almost brutal symbolisation of the
dissolution of bonds between the generations, he seizes the children’s
carrying-cloths—the pieces of goatskin or calico with which Fipa
mothers bind their infants to their backs:

Then he steals the carrying-cloths of the children,

And returning, he went to a place called Loss of Mind.**

Then he said: ‘You people:

I am going with these cloths of your children!’

There follows a vivid image which again recapitulates the structural
unity of the Fipa cosmos. Kaswa raises his hands ‘high towards
heaven” (‘“‘fi umw'iyulu’’)—then sinks into the ground. (In Fipa cos-
mology ‘‘sky” is conceived as analogous to the dominant intellect or
“head”, and to organised human society, in relation to “‘earth”,
which is analogous to both “wild nature’ and to the properly sub-
ordinate Jower body or ‘“loins’’.*¢)

The myth ends, no doubt appropriately, in an ambiguous manner,
for the resolution of the problem posed by the conjunction of Fipa

*Nkooswa n’llaango. There is said to be a place of this name in the unin-
habited bush in central Ufipa. The name may indicate that it was once a
cult centre involving spirit possession. But the name also fits into a pattern
running through the whole myth in which conscious human control of the
world is contrasted with a converse state in which the (real) products of
the human mind control man and annihilate his freedom and conscious-
ness.

*Cf. Willis, R. G., The head and the loins: Lévi-Strauss and Beyond (Man,
196:;7), II, p. 4); and Willis, “Pollution and Paradigms’” (Man, 1972, VII,
p. 3).
256 THE FIPA OF TANZAN;,

and Western cultures is a matter for the future. The people reacy to

the disappearance of Kaswa with reasoned and co-ordinated actiop -
They say: ‘Let’s dig and seize those cloths of our children !’
They found but a stone. . .

That is, Kaswa has gone for ever, and the Fipa are left alone wiip

their historical heritage and their present condition.

IV

Obviously not every non-literate society would or could have
produccd such a critiquc of modern Western culture as is contained
in the Kaswa myth. Thesc oddly familiar ideas could be generated
by the Fipa because their society and culture shares with the West a
scnse of having dcveloped, and as still developing, through time.
Such a historical consciousness has been lacking in many literate
civilisations and anthropological research has shown it to be lacking
in many, and perhaps most, non-litcrate societies. Another signifi-
cant and related feature of Fipa culture, that again recalls a charac-
teristic of Western civilisation, is that it sees itself as changing
through absorption of ncw people, ideas and products from outside.
From the particular conjunction of the Fipa geographical and eco-
logical situation, and their conflictful and often violent history up to
the middle of the 19th century, there emerged a peaceful, industri-
ous and orderly society devoted to the ““‘domestication™ of nature
and external humanity. But towards the end of the 19th century, the
Fipa came to realise that what they had caught in their net was a
monster—something, in their terms, at once sub- and super-human.

Evidently the rather close parallelism between Fipa and Western
world-views, a structural similarity which enabled the Fipa to ex-
press such oddly familiar ideas as those contained in the Kaswa
myth, poscs a problem of explanation. This is not the place to pur-
sue it.>* For us at this time the signficance of such testimonies as the
Kaswa myth, and of the social anthropology that was born out of
the colonial system, may well lie primarily on the light they, and it,
can shed on the dark aspects of our own social selves.

YFor a fuller statement of this problem see Man and Beast: a comparative
analysis of animal symbolism in three African societies (Willis, in press).
SOME REMARKS FROM THE THIRD WORLD ON
ANTHROPOLOGY AND COLONIALISM:
THE SUDAN
Abdel Ghaffar M, Ahmed

With the abolition of the slave trade, African Studies could no
longer be inspired by the economic motive. The experts in
African Studies therefore changed the content and direction of
their writings; they began to give accounts of African society
which were used to justify colonialism as a duty of civilisation.
Even the most flattering of these writings fell short of objectivity
and truth. This explains, I believe, the popularity and success
of anthropology as the main segment of African Studies.
(Kwame Nkrumah, quoted in D. Brokensha, Applied
Anthropology in English-Speaking Africa, 1966, p. 15.)
The first phase of contact between Europeans and Africans was
marked by the establishment of the slave trade on a large scale. The
second phase was dividing Africa between the dominant European
powers seeking the exploitation of the area. The goal announced by
these European powers when appealing for the help and support of
their masses was to establish law and order among the ‘savages’ and
to stop them from killing each other. “Now that he (the savage)
was no longer to be carried off to civilisation, it might be right that
civilisation should be carried to him.”! In this process the ways of
life and the systems of thought of the “‘natives” had to be studied
so that alternative ways of introducing civilisation to them, or intro-
ducing them to civilisation with the least possible cost, could be
found.

V. 2?3 Kieman, The Lords of Human Kind, London, 1969 (Pelican edition),
p. 213.
260 REMARKS FROM THE THIRD WORLp

Nkrumah, though he might not have becn fully justified, was say-
ing aloud what many other African nationalists werce thinking, It
was typical of much contemporary thought in new nations. ‘“Most
African intellectuals are at best indifferent to, or mildly tolerant of,
social anthropology, and frequently they have strong feelings of
hostility to the subject and its practitioners. This attitude is reflected
in the small number of Africans who study the subject; when Ken-
vatta, Azikiwe, or Busia were students of anthropology in the 1930s,
therc was a very different climate, and it was not thought strange or
inappropriate that they should concentrate on anthropology. But
today African anthropologists face a difficult time, with little under-
standing or cncouragement from their own society.”’?

Anthropologists arc regarded as reactionaries by thc majority of
thc African intellectuals; and hence statements to the cffect that
“most social anthropologists held and still hold radical or liberal
political views’* hardly find much sympathy among African intel-
lectuals. The basic argument of the African intellectual here is that
in the colonial period anthropological studies did not reflect the
libcral political ideals of their authors. While it remains true that
“in their personal capacity anthropologists, like cveryone else, have
a wide spectrum of political views. Some arc known ‘conscrvatives’;
others lean far to the ‘Icft’,”’* it has also been argued that ‘“‘classical
functionalism prevcented [liberal anthropologists] from effecting a
fruitful conjunction between their political commitments and their
sociological analysis.”® That is really what counts in this situation,
and therefore the attribution of “‘invidious political motives’’ to such
anthropologists cannot be dismissed as mistaken or unjust.

In this paper I shall make some remarks on the relation of anth-
ropology to colonial rule on the basis of the Sudan experience. 1
shall touch—though without drawing firm conclusions—on an issue
which is mostly neglected in anthropological analysis: the anthro-
pologist’s initial attitude towards the people he is studying. Such
attitudes arc mostly the products of thc anthropologist’'s own
socicty, and are the results of the judgement that arose from the

first contact between the colonial powers and the populations of the
colonies.

‘D. Brokensha, Applied Anthropology in English-Speaking Africa, 1966,
p. 16.

“T. Asad, The Kababish Arabs, London, 1970, p. 10.

'V. Turncr, (ed.) Colonialism in Africa 1870-1960, Cambridge, 1971, p. 1.
“T. Asad, op. cit., p. 19.
ABDEL GHAFFAR M AHMED 261

||

The case of the exploitation of African workers from former French
colonies that was to be investigated by the International Labour
Organisation—at the request of the United Nations Economic and
Social Council—during the first week of August 1972 led to many
comments which reflected the persistence of European attitudes
towards the population of their ex-colonies. (See, e.g., Newsweek,
August 14, 1972.) At the same time a comment on the issue, given
by a British anthropologist on BBC radio, elaborated on the defi-
nition of slavery giving comparative ethnographic material from a
number of societies studied by anthropologists.® His whole exer-
cise, by obscuring the meaning of slavery, amounted to an indirect
justification of the exploitation of African workers in Europe. This
shows how the anthropologist might use his knowledge to justify
certain attitudes held by his own society towards other people.

The whole issue has a long genealogyv. European attitudes to the
outside world in the imperial age had—and still have—a great
influence on the thinking of many European scholars in various
fields of knowledge. Kiernan gives an extensively documented ac-
count of some of these attitudes and how they developed and varied
considerably between the seventeenth and twentieth centuries. Some
basic ideas held by some Europeans about the “natives” who came
under their domination have remained in currency, e.g., that the
European is a superior human being in relation to the “native”
who is hardly human in every respect. On the basis of such ideas
a number of drastic measures taken against “natives’” were justified.
For example, “as the slave-trade grew and prospered, it suited
Europe to think of Africa so unmitigatedly barbarous that no
removal from it could worsen the lot of its inhabitants™.” The
assumption has aways been that since Europe is the home of civili-
zation it is the mission of the European—who makes this assump-
tion himself—to lead “barbarians” and “savages” in the rest of the
world towards “civilization”. By doing this the European, whether
a trader, an administrator, or a missionary, was trving to set a
course for the European exploitation of areas that came under his
power. In confirming this much of the literature on the people of
the colonies accounted for different customs and values that pro-
jected them as “‘not much better than animals™, or, at best second
rate human beings. Even in the fifties it was not unusual for a

‘This commentary on the news was given by Anthony Forge.
'V. G. Kiernan, op. cit,, p. 203.
262 REMARKS FROM THE THIRD WORLp

European child on meeting a black man in the street to rush “to
his mother’s arms [crying]: ‘Mama the nigger is going to eat me’.”®

Taking the Sudan case, many examples of such attitudes may be
cited. In forcing the population to do compulsory work that the
government felt necessary for its own purposes, a European admin-
istrator who played a major role in the establishment of the Anglo-
Egyptian Condominium justified the policy as follows: *‘ “The nigger
is a lazy beast’, said Sir Rudolph Slatin of the Sudan, ‘and must
be compelled to work—compelled by the government.” Asked how,
he replied: ‘With a stick’.” Another example is Churchill’s descrip-
tion of the Mahdists first published in 1899. While Gordon was
pictured as a leader of a civilizing mission, the Mahdi and his men
who led a revolution to free their land from Turkish rule were rep-
resented as a ‘“savage mob”. It must be admitted that Churchill,
albeit with an air of superiority. had something good to say of
the Mahdi: “It should not be forgotten that he put life and soul
into the hearts of his countrymen, and freed his native land of
foreigners. The poor miserable natives, eating only a handful of
grain, toiling half-naked and without hope, found a new, if terrible,
magnificence added to life. Within their humble breasts the spirit
of the Mahdi roused the fire of patriotism and religion.””*® Dignity
is assumed, by Europeans, to be normally a virtue of “civilized”
people in ordinary life and hence it is almost conventional to see
the native behaving in a dignified way only in defeat or at the
moment of his death. Describing the end of the Khalifa, Churchill
wrote that “Osman Sheikh-ed-Din was wounded, and as he was
carried away urged the Khalifa to save himself by flight; but the
latter, with a dramatic dignity sometimes denied to more civilized
warriors, refused.”"!

The attitudes of superiority embodied in such statements were
later expressed in an explicit way by one of the most able adminis-
trators in the British Empire , Sir Harold MacMichael. Discussing
anthropology and its relevance to administrators, especially when
it studied social structure, customs, beliefs and ways of thought of
the “races of mankind”, he said: “Some understanding of these
will be conceded to be an essential equipment of the administrator

‘fgggn qggted in Wallerstein, 1. (ed.) Social Change, the Colonial Situation,
, P- 78.

’V. G. Kiernan, op. cit., p. 24243,

“W. S. Churchill, Frontiers and Wars, His Four Early Books Covering

Ig;zb’fe agza Soldier and War Correspondent, London (Pelican edition),
1972, p. 162.
“W. S. Churchill, op. <it., p. 378.
ABDEL GHAFFAR M AHMED 263

responsible for the tutelage of primitive races whose mental pro-
cesses are not as ours. Between the mind of the educated European,
with its heritage of some centuries of occidental [?] and that of
the primitive savage a great gulf is fixed which the former can
bridge hardly and with patient study only.”*?

With these attitudes, developed over a period of time and firmly
held by administrators as well as missionaries,’® it is hard to see
how the anthropologist, who shared the administrator’s and mis-
sionary’s cuhture, could avoid the influence of such attitudes in his
work. What makes this influence more probable is that in all
situations it was the administrator or the missionary—or both—
who introduced the anthropologist to the people whom he wanted
to study, and acted as intermediary in the early stages of the study,
suggesting informants and giving advice and information. It is true
that “anthropologists are trained over almost as many years as
doctors to collect a certain kind of information as “participant
observers” which will enable them, whatever may be their personal
views, to present as objectively as the current level of their discip-
line’s development permits, a coherent picture of the sociocultural
system they have elected to spend some years of their lives in
studying, and of the kind of processes that go on in it.”** But it is
also true that the institutes that give the anthropologist his training
are influenced by ideas current in the society to which they belong.
It is these training institutes which are responsible for planting in
the minds of their students a number of questionable Euro-centric
assumptions as if they were accepted facts; e.g., that “It is a fact of
history that it was the European peoples who discoverd the others,
[...] and not vice versa.”!3

Such assumptions have affected the kind of terminology adopted
by anthropologists as well as the emphasis put on certain topics in
the field of their studies. It is unfortunate that up to the 1960s
European anthropologists found it convenient to use terms such
as ‘primitive’ that express their assumed superiority. It is hard to
see how a European anthropologist can escape being influenced by
ideas in his own society, and to insist that he can avoid this influ-
ence would be to minimise the importance of socialization empha-

“H. MacMiochael, Letter dated 10th Jan. 1929, No. C.S./17/M/! Financial
Secretary, S. G. Khartoum, GGC[296-99 File 18.D.7, Sudan Law Project,
University of Khartoum.

M. Forsberg, Land Beyond the Nile, New York, 1958.

V. Turner, op. cit,, p. 1.

L. Mair, Primitive Government, London, 1962, p. 1.
264 REMARKS FROM THE THIRD WORLp
sized by anthropology as a discipline.

411

“Social anthropology has never been merely an aid to enlightened
colonial administration, nor should it be viewed now as merely an
aid to development in new states.””'® The emphasis as it was put by
Lewis here confirms the fact that anthropology—beside other things
—was an aid to colonial administration. The feeling among intel-
lectuals of ex-colonies is that though it was not merely an aid to
colonial administration, it played—more than any other human
science—a major role in introducing to the administration the
people of the colonies and in showing ways by which their social
system could be controlled and hence exploited. It is true that
anthropologists were not policy makers. ‘“Anthropology had grown
under the wing of the colonial office in Britain, and academics were
restrained when dealing with overseas policy. Administrators re-
ceived training in anthropology, and had a fairly good idea of the
limitations on its practical use; they learned the local language and
kept close to people, so that much of what the anthropologist had
to say was not strange to them.”’!” The administrators by combining
their general knowledge with the anthropologist’s special knowledge
of specific peoples were able to develop their policy over time. But
it can be legitimately argued that anthropologists, being in such a
position, did at least indirectly contribute to policy making.

This association gave anthropology a conservative reputation and
in recent years has led to many debates among anthropologists
themselves when some of them tried to evaluate the influence of the
subject and the rdle of its practitioners during colonial rule. The
most recent of these was Sir Edward Evans-Pritchard’s angry letter
to The Times Literary Supplement dismissing Kluckhohn’s state-
ments regarding the positions held by British Anthropologists in the
Foreign Office.

Sir,—In going through some notebooks I find a quotation from

the late Clyde Kluckhohn’s widely circulated Mirror for Man

(1949). He says:

During the recent war applied anthropology blossomed. British
anthropologists held important posts in the Foreign Office,
the Admiralty, the British Information Service, the Wartime

"], Lewis, Comment on “Social Responsibilities Symposium™ in Current
Anthropolagy, vol 9, No. §, pp. 417-18.

"G. Cochrane, Development Anthropology, Oxford, 1971, pp. 4-5.

“The Times Literary Supplement, March 10, 1972.
ABDEL GHAFFAR M AHMED 265

Social Survey, and in the field. One man was political adviser
for the whole Middle East, another carried the main
administrative burden for the vast Anglo-Egyptian Sudan,
still another handled liaison problems in Kenya and Abyssinia.
This makes us look pretentious, stupid and vulgar, and T think it
should be stated, in case this should get into the history of our
subject, that it is, at any rate in my opinion, complete rubbish.
Who these people holding “‘important posts’ were I cannot
imagine. However, as I have sometimes been asked if I was
“‘political adviser for the whole Middle East” T have a right to
reject this imputation. I would wish to put it on record that T
was nothing of the kind—I was just an insignificant captain who
held no important position whatsocver. With regard to the
anthropologist who is supposed to have ‘“‘carried the main
administrative burden for the vast Anglo-Egyptian Sudan”, I
can only suppose that the late Professor Nadel is referred to.
In fact, he had nothing to do with administration of the Sudan.
For good measure I may well add that the statement (page 176)
that British anthropologists “created the principle of ‘indirect
rule’  is also nonsense. Who were they and how and when and
where did they do it?
E. E. EVANS-PRITCHARD
All Souls College, Oxford.
In spite of this the fact that anthropology had been a great help to
administrators was acknowledged by many of them, no matter
whether the anthropologist in the situation was appointed by the
colonial government or was working from a British University.'? In
the words of Sir Edward Evans-Pritchard himself writing two
decades earlier: ‘“The value of social anthropology to administra-
tion has been generally recognised from the beginning of the cen-
tury and both the Colonial Office and colonial governments have
shown an increasing interest in anthropological teaching and re-
search. For a good number of years past colonial cadets, before
taking up their appointments, have received, among other courses

YAn example of this is P. M. Larken’s statement when referring to Evans-
Pritchard’s work on the Zande:
With his knowledge for a guide, one can now form a just appreciation
of Zande action and reactions which might otherwise appear incompre-
hensible or even blameworthy. No doubt many people will, thanks to
him, escape unjust punishment, and receive a favourable response to their
often obscure requests.
My constant regret is that he did not make his visit many years earlier,
so that I could have had the chance to benefit from his teaching, for 1
should have been a far better D.C. if such good fortune had been mine.
(l..ark)en quoted in Singer and Street Zande Themes Oxford (1971 opening
page.
266 REMARKS FROM THE THIRD WORLp

of instruction, instruction in social anthropology at Oxford and
Cambridge, and more recently in London.””?° In fact not only did
administrators recognise the role of anthropology. but in a number
of cases, they suggested fields of study and produced lists of the
kinds of questions that ought to be asked, on the grounds that they
were best qualified to point to social problems of special relevance
to the stage of development of a particular colony. The colonial
governments, through lack of finances, could not afford the luxury
of supporting research on topics that did not contribute directly to
their main interest—maintenance of ‘law and order’.

Considering the Sudan situation, many intellectuals nowadays
connect the fact that most social anthropological studies were
focused on the southern region of the Sudan to colonial government
policy towards the south. But in my view this is a mistake, mainly
because the discussions and publications as well as the events of the
last twenty years have proved, beyond any doubt that the colonial
government lacked a consistent policy towards the South. To explain
why the northern Sudan did not have a fair share of anthropological
studies, when compared with the South, we have to consider a
number of points. First, it was financially difficult to support anthro-
pological studies. Secondly, since the main focus in the early stages
of the administration was on the maintenance of law and order, the
administrators in the north, most of whom were very competent and
highly qualified, thought that there was not a great deal that anthro-
pology could do there for them. Their own contribution in the field
of cultural history and social organisation of the people among
whom they worked laid the basis for the limited series of objectives
they had in mind.?* It is apparent that even when anthropologists,
who were willing to work in the area, appeared, they were directed
to places where the Government lacked information or did not
have enough or enough competent administrators — namely the
south (e.g. the Seligmans).

The development of anthropology and its increasing contribution
to the administration of other colonies gradually convinced the lead-
ing administrators in the Sudan Government that they should make
use of it. The value of anthropological research especially in rela-
tion to the administrative problem of the South was stressed. On

*E. E. Evans-Pritchard, Social Anthropology, London, 1951, p. 110.

*The large number of articles on history, beliefs, customs and values that
appeared in Sudan Notes and Records represent a major part of these
contributions. Some other major works include MacMichael’'s: 4 History
of the Arabs in the Sudan Tribes of Northern and Central Kordofan...etc.
ABDEL GHAFFAR M AHMED 267

this topic MacMichael’s letter to the Financial Secretary of the
Sudan Government on the 10th January 1929 concerning the em-
ployment of a trained anthropologist throws light on the relation
between anthropology and the colonial administration in the Sudan.
Here and subsequently, I quote, at length, from that letter:
When Professor Seligman proposed Mr. Evans-Pritchard’s visit
it was made a condition of the grant to the latter that he should
give the Sudan Government, within a reasonable time, a report
of his studies in a form suitable for the use of administrative
officials.
After stressing the importance of anthropology to the European
administration of ‘primitive’ peoples, MacMichael goes on to ex-
plain that “‘the administrative official is unavoidably handicapped
in the endeavour to study the cultural anthropology of the people
with whom he is in contact.”” This is attributed to a lack of the
necessary minimum of technical anthropological training required
to enable him to sift and co-ordinate his evidence or even, in the
first instance, to question the native intelligently with a view to the
collection of evidence itself
IMustration of the foregoing arguments and of the effects of the
lack of expert knowledge could without difficulty, I think, be
cited from the record of this Government’s administration of
the south, where grave errors have been all too often made
through ignorance of local beliefs and habits and insufficient
understanding of savage ways of thought, and there can be no
doubt but that our troubles with the Nuer, e.g., have been
intensified by our lack of knowledge of the social structure of
this people and the relative status of the various kinds of chiefs
and Kujurs.

[ feel strongly that, assuming officials ought to be encouraged
by every possible means to acquire a fuller and more intimate
knowledge of all that pertains to native modes of thought, their
efforts must be based upon scientific research which calls in the
first instance, for the services of a trained anthropologist. [
would urge that the Sudan Government provide the means for
the conduct of this research.

Two alternative decisions were possible:
(a) We might employ a staff of trained anthropologists to make
a complete comprehensive and elaborate anthropological survey
of the Sudan. Such anthropologists would be appointed for an
indefinite period and their work be comparable to that done by
the Geological Survey.
268 REMARKS FROM THE THIRD WORLD

(b) Alternatively we might employ a trained anthropologist
or a series of trained anthropologists for field-work, each for
a limited period and for a specific objective or objectives, on
the same lines as those on which we are engaging a language
expert.

I am personally strongly in favour of the adoption of the
latter alternative because it is not ultra-ambitious nor ultra-
expensive. I feel too that we should get practical results in a
shorter time and have more chance of avoiding the danger to
which one is always liable in dealing with the scientific expert,
viz: that he will sink the practical in the recondite and lapse
into over-elaboration.

The sum of my proposal is therefore that a properly qualified
man be employed as from next winter, on the same lines as
Mr. Evans-Pritchard, to study a given tribe or series of tribes.
It should certainly be a part of his terms of reference that he
should within a given time furnish the Government with a report
of the results of his fieldwork in the form of a monograph or
series of monographs couched in easily comprehensible terms
and dealing with those social and cultural aspects of the subjects
of his study a knowledge of which is essential to the adminis-
trator. He might be given as a guide a short questionnaire
covering these essential points, such as that which was drafted
for Mr. Evans-Pritchard in 1926 and to which, as illustrating
my arguments, I would draw particular attention.

The immediate field of study should probably be the Nuer.

It is possible that Mr. Evans-Pritchard himself is the right man,
and might be willing to undertake the work. The period of his
present engagement ends in April next and he will then wish to
spend some months in England collecting and preparing his
material. If he does not wish to return upon our terms, I am
certain that Professor Seligman, whom 1 consulted when last in
England, could suggest a suitable alternative.

The Appendix mentioned in MacMichael’s letter consisted of the

following questions :

1. Names of tribe.
(a) Used by the tnibe itself
(b Used by neighbouring tribes
(c) Used by the Arabs and the Govt.
2. Habitat and boundaries. Nature of country.
(Plains, hills, forest, swamps, rivers.)
3. Re!jaftions with neighbouring tribes, raiding, intermarriage, alliances,
trade.
4. Language. If possible give the first ten numerals and a few common
words such as fire, water, man, woman, child, sun, moon, etc.
etc. and names of all game animals.
(a) With which other tribes are they mutually intelligible?
ABDEL GHAFFAR M AHMED 269

(b) Can any relationship with other languages be traced?
c.g. Shilluk and Anuak are mutually intellibible. Shilluk and
Dinka are not mutually intelligible, but are related.
Divisions.
(a) Political e.g. chieftainship acting logether politically and in war.
(b) Social e.g., clans, totemic and otherwise tracing descent from
a common ancestor. Age grades.
6. Chiefs. Paramount and sub-chiefs. Political and religious chiefs,
such as rainmakers. Are these identical? What are their powers?
How appointed?
7. Numbers, as far as ascertainable of tribe and sub-sections.
How many villages?
8. Economic Life.
Pastoral or agricultural or both? Nomadism. What animals are
kept? Size of herds. What plants are cultivated. Hunting and
fishing. Crafts such as iron working, pottery and basket-making.
Are these professional? Carried on ‘by men or women?
9. Weapons used for war, hunting and fishing. Dress and ornaments.
10. Distinguishing customs relating to
(1) birth
(2) marriage
(3) death and burial
(4) inheritance
(5) circumcision
(6) naming
(7) initiation
11. Religious beliefs and specially cults, organisation of cults, secret
societies. ’ _
One cannot say whether Sir Edward Evans-Pritchard actually sup-

plied answers to these questions directly to the Sudan Government :
the fact is that they were available in the classic monographs on the
Nuer.

Other examples of how the relationship between anthropology
and administration, based on the same principles, continued could
be seen in Nadel's appointment to make a study of the Nuba and in
Arkell’s appointment as a government anthropologist.** It is right
to emphasisc the fact that anthropology was not ““merely an aid to
cnlightened colonial administration™ but such an emphasis is an
attempt to avoid the question about the extent and influence of that
aid. The Sudan case shows that the indirect role of anthropologists
—whether they were aware of it or not—was great; and that the
reactions of intcllectuals in the country towards the subject are
based on findings filling a large number of files in the Sudan Gover-
nment Archives.

At thc same time one would like to sec anthropology aiding
development in new states especially when the anthropologist in-

tn

2K 2918)() Hendcrson, The Making of the Modern Sudan, London, 1952,
pp. 79-80.
270 REMARKS FROM THE THIRD WORLD

volved is a ‘“‘native”. Since I have this attitude, I would like to make
it clear that I am not condemning the involvement of anthropolo-
gists with administration in the Sudan during the colonial period.
I am merely establishing and documenting this involvement. [
believe that no branch of social science can or should be neutral
and these anthropologists conform with my view. One feels that
they were doing what they thought was right and adopted the cur-
rent ideologies of their time. This invites a more systematic re-
valuation of their contribution seen within the context of the
colonial framework (similar to Magubane)?®* which this paper,
though condemning the ideology of colonialism, falls short of
making.

1V

To sum up, though my remarks might seem a little incoherent, 1
try to make the point that the cultural heritage, education and
socialisation of the anthropologist as a member of a human group
which has developcd certain images of ‘‘natives” must have carried
some of these images with him to the field. How much this influen-
ced his work is a different question; and the answer varies from one
individual to another, especially in relation to training and charac-
ter. By going into such questions I hope to cast some doubt on
issues taken for granted rather than to reach firm conclusions.

The only reference to the relations between anthropologists and
administrators in colonies appeared in bricf acknowledgements in
prefaces to anthropological monographs. The administrators on
their side stated their views on the subject through their own chan-
nels. After independcnce the intellectuals of new nations gained
access to state archives and so learned many things about the his-
tory of the subject and its practitioners. They took anthropologists
to be equally responsible for the inadequacies of development in
these countries during the period of colonial rule and thus became
hostile to them and to their subject.

“B. Magubane, “A Critical Look at Indices Used in the Study of Social
Change in Colonial Africa”, Current Anthropology, vol. 12, No. 4-5.
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY
Philip Marfleet

This short article will review the substantial contributions to the
debate over anthropology and colonialism. It will attempt to give
an initial orientation to the themes of the discussion, which will
provide a basis for the consideration of later contributions, and a
number of reference points for the literature cited as bibliography
throughout the book. ‘Substantial contributions’ include all those
dealing in whole or part with the anthropology/colonialism rela-
tionship as a specific and particular question.

Anthropologists have long been aware of a relationship between
their discipline and colonialism. Such an awareness was however
largely restricted to an acknowledgement of the colonial system as
simply part of the given order. Anthropologists may have been
aware, for cxample, of certain problems created by imperial admin-
istrations, but it is reasonable to suggest that by and large they were
uncritical of colonialism as a system, as constituting a problem in
itself. It is when colonialism came to be regarded in these terms that
the relationship with anthropology was brought into question.

In the late 1940s came a first isolated attack from Gregg and
Williams in their paper “The Dismal Science of Functionalism”
(1948). Although later described as ‘“‘frequently incorrect in fact
and ecthically entirely too wild and presumptuous” (by Marvin
Harris in his The Rise of Anthropological Theory, London 1968
p. 534), this article anticipated many later critical reviews especially
274 BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

of the British method. They saw the ‘dismal science’ consisting in
a perspective largely borrowed from the laissez-faire doctrines of
neo-classical economics. Its ‘primitive’ world was peopled with a
socially rational man motivated by self-interest to gratify the needs
generated by inborn physical mechanisms. But like the classical
economic analysis of capitalist society, such a perspectivc makes all
social interests appear right and good by definition. This individual-
ising bio-psychological analysis, argued Gregg and Williams, was
placed in a context which made the ‘primitive’ community function-
ally organised and perfectly integrated, and thus an unchangingly
proper and seemingly naturally just ‘organism’. The sterile func-
tionalism which articulated such a view was to be seen as merely
another apology for the status quo, for the social organisation of
capitalism, with its *‘depressions, imperialism, and war’’. The activi-
ties of anthropologists in the British colonial administration or in
the American military establishment, reflected the utility of anthro-
pological thcory in maintaining society as it is.

This type of radical and forceful attack upon the anthropological
establishment, here with a detailed, if patchy examination of func-
tionalist thecory was not to be repeated for nearly twenty years.

The next positive comment on the colonial relationship was made
by J. R. Hooker in “The Anthropologist’s Frontier; The Last
Phase of African Exploitation” (1963). This historical study des-
cribed the changing position of the anthropologist in relation to the
gradual breakdown of colonialism. Initially the hand-maiden of
colonial governments, the anthropologist found himself increasingly
in sympathy with African interests, and by the anti-colonial period
was even actively engaged against the administration. African sus-
picion of the discipline remained however and despite his personal
concern the anthropologist has found himself rejected. He has not
been able to overcome the stigma of involvement in a study seen
as so closely related to the colonial system.

Hooker’s article was closely followed by a paper from a Belgian
anthropologist Jaquet Maquet whose ‘Objectivity in Anthropology”
appeared in 1964. Maquet noted the irony of a situation in which
the anthropologist, seeing himself, as Hooker had noted, as liberal-
minded and sympathetic toward ‘primitive’ societies, was neverthe-
less responsible for the development of ideas ideologically useful to
the exploiting powers. Maquet located the anthropologist as not
merely a member of the dominant white ruling group, but as a
representative of its middle classes—those most completely involved
in the colonial system. This paper also contained one of the first of
PHILIP MARFLEET 275

many prophesics of the coming disintegration of anthropology.
With the disappearance of the ‘primitive’ world, and of the colonial
relationship, argued Maquet, anthropological subject matter would
be divided between history and sociology. Then at least a more
objective body of theory might be assembled.

At this stage it remains convenient to consider contributions to
the debate chronologically, and it is Worsley’s paper “The End of
Anthropology™ (1968) which comes under review. This article
made a more indirect criticism of the colonial relationship in the
course of an analysis of the theoretical state of the discipline, and
noted that the anthropologist had traditionally seen his concern as
with the ‘primitive’ world. But emergent social relationships in post-
colonial society are increasingly of the ‘modern’ type—a universal
society is in the making. Unhappily, the anthropological desire for
universalism is negated by sterile theoretical formalism and rela-
tivism. There must be a developmental, processual perspective
which will allow for the consideration of a world developing outside
the old imperial frame. For Worsley only a rapid reorientation to
dynamic study could provide an alternative to anthropology’s dis-
solution and fragmentation.

Claude Levi-Strauss in ‘“Anthropology: Its Achievements and
Future (1966) reinforccd Worsley's doubts. He saw the developing
world’s hostility toward anthropology as an understandable reaction
to a discipline which had been part of the appallingly violent pro-
cess of domination which established and maintained colonialism.
For ‘native’ cultures cver to view anthropology as legitimate, it
must undergo a transformation, to disengage itself from the colo-
nial system. It must become a study of society from the inside,
breaking down into a number of other disciplines. Anthropology
will survive in a changing world “by allowing itself to perish in
order to be born again in a new guise”.

Published in the same year (1966), Onwuachi and Wolfe's “The
Place of Anthropology in the Future of Africa” also noted the
rejection of anthropology in a continent where the old imperial
power relationships had been destroyed. Africa had once been
merely an extension of Europe; in now asserting its own identity
it rejected an anthropology which had not redefined its own per-
spective. As the science of man, anthropology should work within
the broadest context, yet the traditional, and now damaging interest
in small-scale societies was still dominant. Anthropology might
have a future in Africa, but only after a genuine and careful re-
organisation.
276 BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Isolated articles written over a period of threc years to 1966
may now be seen as elements in a pattern of criticism which was to
become more sharply defined, and to assume the proportions of a
major debate. Since 1968 there has been a growing interest in the
problcm of the colonial relationship: contributions have appearcd
more frequently, and have assumed a more intense and polemical
character. These more recent contributions may be conveniently
viewed in four groups—those constituting the radical American
critique, the British New Left critique, those of the African anthro-
pologists, and the general reviews by Firth and Leclerc.

The Amcrican Critique

The three initial papers of the American critique fall together by
virtue of their simultaneous appearance in the Current Anthro-
pology Social Responsibilities Symposium of 1968. Berreman’s Is
Anthropology Alive? is primarily concerned with the ethical posi-
tion of the American anthropologist. The continuing currency of
the myth of a value-free science he argues has lead the anthro-
pologist to allow the utilisation of his research material by those
whose interest is not for people but like the U.S. military establish-
ment and the CIA, for power. ‘Scicntific unaccountability’ has
mercly disengaged the anthropologist from his real moral respon-
sibility. This must be rcasserted. Although expressed in an intense
polemic against the American anthropological establishment, Berre-
man's position is, wc are warned from further to the Left, merely
“a modcl for seductive left-libcralism in the guise of a radical altcr-
native.” (Moore 1971. See below.)

Gjessing in ““The Social Responsibility of the Social Scientist”
expresses a concern for anthropology as having had a more general
relationship with Western colonialism. He notes the development of
the discipline as a response to certain imperial demands, and the
nature of its theory as being ideologically useful to the dominant
powers. Like Berreman he points out the dangers of acceptance of
the idea of scientific neutrality. He argues for a realisation of the
true nature of the anthropological perspective, especially of its Wes-
tern middle class orientation. The anthropologist Gjessing asserts
must be able to look outside this framework by asking questions
which may be subversive of the wider system. Primarily he must
define his overriding responsibility by making a real personal com-
mitment to the cause of the oppressed.

The third of these symposium papers—Kathleen Gough’s ‘‘New
Proposals for Anthropologists”—has the most critical and militant
tone. It locates anthropology as *“‘the child of Western imperialism”’,
a discipline which has interpreted the non-Western world in terms
PHILIP MARFLEET 2717

of the absolute values of capitalist society. The socialist states of the
developing world have largely been ignored, and the problems posed
by the growth of revolutionary struggles confronting Western, and
primarily American imperialism, left unattended. Yet these are
issues of the greatest importance. Anthropologists must make a
rapid reassessment of their personal positions in relation to the dis-
cipline. If not able to assert themselves in favour of their individual
moralities, they should first ask how they may free themselves from
the limitations imposed by their own system.

A related but later American criticism has come from John
Moore. His ‘‘Perspective for a Partisan Anthropology™ (1971) traces
the development of both British and American anthropology in
relation to the changing needs of the two imperialisms. The former
aided the colonial administration as well as providing the rationales
needed by an exploitative system. The latter, when involved in the
colonisation of Amerindian lands provided a similar set of settler
ideologies. Later during the neo-imperial period it has been expli-
citly tied to the capitalist ethic, and responsible for research into
the efficiency of the very techniques of exploitation. In an intensly
critical paper Moore argues for a truly revolutionary or ‘partisan’
anthropology to provide the only alternative for a discipline com-
plicit in exploitation and oppression. This genuinely radical per-
spective will contrast with the mere ‘liberalism’ of White, Harris and
Berreman.

This set of papers from the United States emphasised the imme-
diate and practical character of the anthropological relationship
with imperialism. The main concern was to assert the need for in-
dividual responsibility in the light not only of the discipline’s rela-
tionship with an exploitative system, but of its continuing involve-
ment in, for example, the Vietnam conflict. By contrast the British
critique put greatest emphasis upon theoretical and particularly ideo-
logical aspects of the relationship.

The British New Left Critique

The first of the British Contributions, Anderson’s “Components
Of the National Culture’ (1968) was an attempt to expose the ideo-
logical nature of the whole of British intellectual life under capital-
ism. In Britain, Anderson argued, the development of the total
social idea was proscribed by a ruling class careful to avoid the
possibility of social theory becoming subversion. The notion of
totality was displaced onto the colonial world, where the concept
of ‘the primitive’ could be elaborated within the classically totalis-
ing perspective of functionalism at no risk to the domestic political
scene. A flourishing, indeed ‘brilliant’ anthropology was allowed to
develop, which played the dual role of administrative advisor and
278 BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

ideologist for the imperial system. David Goddard’s “Limits of
British Anthropology” (1969) contained the most careful analysis
of the theoretical shortcomings of anthropology in relation to its
colonial setting. Goddard saw the relegation of human identity to
that of ‘the primitive’ to be related to a limited self-conscious
borrowing from the work of Durkheim, (and to a lesser extent from
Maine) which emphasised the rule-governed nature of society.
Applied in the oppressive colenial situation this resulted in a study
of social ‘things’—real of de facto aspects of behaviour—to the ex-
clusion of a consideration of the most important part of the Durk-
heimian heritage—its ‘metaphysical’ aspect. This emphasised the
analysis of phenomena into their constituent parts, and implied the
importance of an analysis of the non-normative elements of social
life—conflicts, interests, and the like. In ignoring this area of Durk-
heim’s work anthropology remained theoretically sterile, and un-
aware of the crudity of the system within which it developed.

“The Crisis of British Anthropology” by Jairus Banaji (1970)
suggested that during the post-war period anthropology has un-
successfully faced two problems. First, the development of a world
in which economic and national change and revolutionary struggle
make traditional subject matter and fieldwork less and less viable
bases for the formation of theory. Born out of imperialism the dis-
cipline cannot now adapt to an anti-imperial world. Second, faced
with the growth of structuralism as a partial alternative to stagnant
functionalist theory, anthropology has ignored the new scheme or
‘naturalised’ or ‘defused’ it. Now in crisis, functionalism is offered
but one solution, that of historical materialism with its theory of
‘social formations’. Marxist anthropologists must expose the cruelty
of the imperial system, and substitute new theory in conjunction
with real political practice on behalf of surviving ‘primitive’ groups.

The British New Left perspective has been phrased in less per-
sonal and immediate terms than the American critique. It has been
less wide-ranging, and less militant in tone, though it has utilised a
more recognisably Marxist form of analysis.

The African Anthropologists

The third group of most recent studies consists in two articles by
African anthropologists. These are not classified together by virtue
of the social origin of their authors, but in relation to the perspec-
tives adopted, which are critical of certain categories and assump-
tions which have been the planks of functionalist theory in Africa.

Mafeje’s “The Ideology of Tribalism’ (1971) notes that there has
often been no indigenous word for ‘tribe’, and that it has been the
colonial authorities, aided by the anthropologist, who have “crea-
PHILIP MARFLEET 279

ted” these entities. ‘Tribalism’ has an ideological basis, and it re-
flects the power of the European ruling class, or that of the new
African elite. It is merely a fiction in the false consciousness of
supposed tribesmen, it obscures the realities of exploitation and con-
trol, and as such is ideology in the original Marxist sense. The real
history of Africa will only be rewritten when the importance of
regional particularism, of culture, and of class formation, are asser-
ted against the imperialists’ mystifications ‘tribe’ and ‘tribalism’.

““A Critical Look at Indices Used in the Study of Social Change
in Colonial Africa” by Bernard Magubane (1971) is a detailed ex-
amination of the way in which anthropologists have misinterpreted
the true nature of ‘Westernisation’ or ‘modernisation’. The ruling
imperial powers attempted to obliterate the independent African
personality. In the urban situation, where the African was most
subject to the pressure to conform to petty European standards
(related to dress, education, occupation, and the like) the anthro-
pological study made him human only in so far as he approximated
to a set of status indices determined in relation to the values of the
dominant culture. A complex of status hierarchies was made to
overlie the reality of an extractive, two-class system. But the ideo-
logical complicity of the anthropologist could not complete the pro-
cess of eradication of the African identity, which has reasserted
itself to expose the crude nature of colonial sociology.

The two articles by Mafeje and Magubane have been among the
most interesting studies of the anthropology/colonialism relation-
ship. Each is concerned with the way in which one area of anthro-
pological theory has been related to a specific part of the colonial
system. Each makes an analysis in terms of the legitimacy that
functionalist categories have had for the subjected sector of colo-
nial society. An attempt has been made to expose ideology ‘from
the inside’. Hooker and Levi-Strauss among others had made an
appeal for such a form of analysis. It is worthwhile noting that of
all contributors to the recent debate only these two authors have
been in a position to draw on the indigenous African experience.

Firth & Leclerc

The final set of contributions are those most recently published.
By 1972 the issue had become one of real importance, and two
general statements appeared. Leclerc’s book Anthropologie et Colo-
nialisme pinpoints classic functionalism’s principle failing to have
been an inability to distinguish colonial reality as merely one among
others. The imperial system bred an uncomprehending, ideological
discipline. Certain trends in anthropology, notably American cul-
tural anthropology, supported in France by Griaule and others,
280 BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

stressed the importance of cultural relativism, and thus gave assis-
tance to the anti-colonial movement. But anthropology today is
still a mirror of existing colonial attitudes, and it has been rejected
both by Third World intellectuals and Western radicals. Even the
anthropology of a decolonised world, structuralism, is condemned
as being ideological. Anthropology is unable to escape its origins.
For Leclerc an anthropology more closely related to the founding
spirit of the Enlightenment—anti-colonial, liberating, and universal
—will provide a genuine alternative to today’s stigmatised discipline.

The first argued response to the radical critics of anthropology
has come from Raymond Firth, a leading figure of the British
school. His paper “The Sceptical Anthropologist? Social Anthro-
pology and Marxist Views on Society’ is partially devoted to a
response to the ‘gut-Marxists’ and others who have sought to ex-
pose the discipline as having supported an exploitative system.
Much of their criticism, claims Firth, is ‘a travesty’. ‘“Anthropology
is not the bastard of imperialism, but the legitimate child of the
Enlightenment.”” Anthropologists have sought to gain respect for
the peoples they have studied, and have often received appreciation
in response. They have recorded the disruptive effects of colonial-
ism, and examined the system itself as a social type. Conflict as well
as integration has been stressed, and cognitive as well as behaviou-
ral aspects of social life examined. Firth responds to Gough’s analy-
sis of the personal crisis faced by the contemporary anthropologist
by suggesting that the delineation of priorities is often difficult, and
that critics frequently simplify alternatives within complex situa-
tions.

Firth’s reaction to the radical attack, from a self-defined position
as ‘a liberal anthropologist of socialist interests’, relies upon asser-
tion rather than argument and example. So certainly do many of
the articles to which he responds.

Anderson, P., “Components of the National Culture”, New Lejt
Review, 50, 1968, pp. 3-57.

Anthropologie et Imperialisme: Symposium, in Les Temps Mod-
erne, 27, Dec. 1970-Jan. 1971, pp. 1061-1201.

Balandier, G., The Sociology of Black Africa, London, 1970.

Banaji, J., ““The Crisis of British Anthropology’’, New Left Review,
1970, pp. 71-85.

Batalla, G. B., “Conservative Thought in Applied Anthropology :
a critique”’, Human Organisation, 25, 2, 1966, pp. 89-92.

Berreman, G. D., “Is Anthropology Alive? Social Responsibility in
PHILIP MARFLEET 281

Anthropology”, Current Anthropology, 9, 1968, pp. 391-398.
Copans, J., “Pour une histoire et une sociologie des études Afri-
caines’’, Cahiers d’etudes Africaines, 11, 1971, pp. 422-47.
Firth, R., “The Sceptical Anthropologist? Social Anthropology and
Marxist Views on Society”, Inaugural Radcliffe-Brown Lecture
in Social Anthropology, 1972. (Pamphlet)—from the Proceed-
ings of the British Academy, Vol. LVIII, Oxford University

Press, London, 1972.

Gjessing, G., “The Social Responsibility of the Social Scientist™,
Current Anthropology, 9, 1968, pp. 397-402.

Goddard, D., “‘Limits of British Anthropology’’, New Left Review,
58, 1969, pp. 79-89.

~ Gough, K., ‘““New Proposals for Anthropologists”. Current Anthro-

pology, 9, 1968, pp. 403-407.

‘Gregg, D., Williams, E., “The Dismal Science of Functionalism™,
American Anthropologist, 50, 1948.

Harris, M., The Rise of Anthropological Theory, London 1968. .

Hooker, J. R., “The Anthropologist’s Frontier: The Last Phase of
African Exploitation’, Journal of Modern African Studies, 1,
1963, pp. 455-59.

Leclerc, G., Anthropologie et Colonialisme, Paris, 1972.

~ Lévi-Strauss, C., “Anthropology: Its Achievements and Future”, -
Current Anthropology, 7, 1966, pp. 124-7.

Mafeje, A., ‘“The Ideology of Tribalism™, Journal of Modern Afri-
can Studies, 9, 1971, pp. 253-261.

Magubane, B., “A Critical Look at Indices Used in the Study of
Social Change in Colonial Africa”, Current Anthropology, 12,
1971, pp. 419-430.

Maquet, J. J., “Obijectivity in Anthropology™, Current Anthro-
pology, S, 1964, pp. 47-58.

Manners, R. A., “Functionalism, Realpolitik & Anthropology in
Underdeveloped Areas”, in R. A. Manners & D. Kaplan (eds.),
Theory in Anthropology, Chicago, 1968.

Moore, J., “Perspective for a Partisan Anthropology”, Liberation,
Nov. 1971, pp. 34-43.

Onwuachi, P. C., Wolfe, A. W., “The Place of Anthropology in the
Future of Africa”, Human Organisation, 25, 1966, pp. 93-95.

Worsley, P., “The End of Anthropology?”, Paper for Sociology
and Social Anthropology Working Group, 6th World Congress
of Sociology, May 1966.
