4 ♦ Power


			Over the course of less than two centuries, a nation most of whose citizens formerly subsisted almost exclusively on foods produced within its borders had become a prodigious consumer of imported goods. Usually these foods were new to those who consumed them, supplanting more familiar items, or they were novelties, gradually transformed from exotic treats into ordinary, everyday consumables. As these changes took place, the foods acquired new meanings, but those meanings—what the foods meant to people, and what people signaled by consuming them—were associated with social differences of all sorts, including those of age, gender, class, and occupation. They were also related to the will and intent of the nation’s rulers, and to the economic, social, and political destiny of the nation itself.

			There are plainly two different senses of the term “meaning” here. One refers to what might be called “inside” kinds of meaning—inside the rituals and schedules of the group, inside the meal or eating event, inside the social group itself—the meanings people indicate when they are demonstrating they know what things are supposed to mean. Thus, for example, hospitality “means” self-respect; self-respect “means” knowing one’s place in the class system; and knowing one’s place can “mean” offering appropriate forms of hospitality—greeting, inviting in, serving tea and sugar and treacle tarts, or whatever. At births and weddings, funerals and feast days, moments of repose from the day’s work following the calendar of hours, days, weeks, months, and the lifetime itself, new forms of consumption might be grafted to older forms with similar or analogous meanings.

			I have already suggested the two processes by which inside meanings are acquired and conventionalized. In “intensification,” consumption replicates that practiced by others, usually of a higher social status—also imitates, even emulates. The wedding cake and its sculptured decorations, complete with dragées, congratulatory script, hardened sugar figures, was more than just a new “food”; consumption was firmly attached to a special event and ceremonialized as part of it. As the custom of having a wedding cake percolated down through society, one would expect the usages to change, because of great differences in means and circumstances, but since the emulative features of the custom were undoubtedly also important, this process was “intensification” nonetheless.

			Much consumption behavior toward sugar and its accompaniments seems to have arisen among the British working classes without any imitation, especially when the contexts were different from those of the more privileged classes. Since sugar products became even more important to the poor than they once had been for the wealthy—as sources of calories even more than of status—and since the occasions for eating them multiplied, new uses and meanings arose at a great remove from the practices of the privileged. To these kinds of innovation the term “extensification” has been applied.

			In both instances, new users appropriate the behavior and inside meanings they perceive as their own, and new uses and meanings sometimes appear that are not merely imitative. In “intensification,” those in power are responsible both for the presence of the new products and, to a degree, for their meanings; with “extensification,” those in power may take charge of the availability of the new products, but the new users inform them with meaning. In the wider historical process that concerns us—the diffusion of sugar to entire national populations—those who controlled the society held a commanding position not only in regard to the availability of sugar, but also in regard to at least some of the meanings that sugar products acquired.

			The other sort of meaning can be grasped when one considers what consumption, and its proliferated meanings for the participants, can signify for a society as a whole, and especially for those who rule it; how those who govern or control the society perpetuate their status and profit from the intensified diffusion of inside meanings, and of the consumption which the validations of these meanings entail. One can see here that the kind or level of consumption of social groups is not a God-given constant; and certain beliefs about human character and potentiality are open to amendment. Conversely, the spread of internal meanings can be stimulated and manipulated; the simultaneous control of both the foods themselves and the meanings they are made to connote can be a means to pacific domination.

			The substances and acts to which meanings attach—inside kinds of meaning—serve to validate social events. Social learning and practice relate them to one another, and to what they stand for. Rice and rings have meanings in weddings much as lilies and lighted candles do in funerals. These are historically acquired—they arise, grow, change, and die—and they are culture-specific as well as arbitrary, for all are symbols. They have no universal meaning; they “mean” because they occur in specific cultural and historical contexts, where their relevant meanings are already known to the participants. No symbol has a life of its own, and though it lacks any intrinsic connection with any other symbol, it may travel together with other symbols through time, each reinforcing the other by the “signals” its presence creates. Just as the symbols may be traced back to a past when they were not associated (the way tea and sugar were once not associated, for instance), so may there come a time when their substantive associations are dissolved or invalidated by some change or other (the way tea and its meanings dropped out of colonial American drinking habits, and were replaced by coffee).

			As for substances like tea, then, events like meals, or ideas and meanings like hospitality and equality, human intelligence puts them together into patterns in the course of social acts in specific times and places, employing certain availabilities and under specific constraints. Birth and death are universal in the sense that they happen to all human beings; our capacity to symbolize, to endow anything with meaning and then to act in terms of that meaning, is similarly universal and intrinsic to our nature—like learning to walk or to speak (or being born, or dying). But which materials we link to events and endow with meaning are unpredictably subject to cultural and historical forces. We make biological events like birth and death into social events because we are human; each human group does it in its own way. Large, complex societies, composed of many overlapping subgroups, usually lack any single assemblage of social practices by which life is endowed with meaning; their members differ widely in the way they can live, and in their historically influenced access to the acts, objects, and persons through which they validate their knowledge of life’s meaning.

			Seventeenth-century England, like its Continental neighbors, was deeply divided by considerations of birth, wealth, breeding, gender, occupation, and so on. The practices of consumption in such a society were deeply differentiated, and reinforced by rules. Hence the ways that new consumption practices were taken up and by whom, and the ways they spread to members of other groups, with or without their associated meanings, suggest how British society itself was organized, and mark the distribution of power within it.

			Before the end of the seventeenth century, while sugar was still a precious and rare substance, it had little meaning for most English people, though if they ever got to taste sugar, they doubtless thought it desirable. The rich and powerful, however, derived an intense pleasure from their access to sugar—the purchase, display, consumption, and waste of sucrose in various forms—which involved social validation, affiliation, and distinction. The blending of sugar with other rare and precious spices in the preparation of food; the use of sugar as a fruit preservative; the combination of sugar with crushed pearls or fine gold in the manufacture of medical “remedies”; the magnificent subtleties giving concrete expression to temporal and spiritual power—all confirm what sugar meant, and how sugar use informed meanings, among the privileged.

			This multiplicity of meanings was also revealed in language and in literature, and linguistic imagery suggested not only the association of sweet substances with certain sentiments, desires, and moods, but also the historical replacement, in large measure, of honey by sugar. Honey imagery was ancient in British, as in classical Greek and Latin, literature. Both substances were associated with happiness and well-being, with elevation of mood, and often with sexuality. The quality of sweetness, so important in the structure of human taste and preference, was applied to personality, to generous acts, to music, to poetry. The Indo-European root swād is the ultimate source of both “sweet” and “persuade”; in contemporary English, “sugared” or “honeyed” speech has been supplemented by “syrupy tones” and “sweet-talking.”

			Chaucer’s references to sugar are scant; they mainly stress its rarity and preciousness. By Shakespeare’s time, the references have multiplied, and though they remain concentrated upon rare substances, the imagery flowing from them is highly diversified. “White-handed mistress, one sweet word with thee,” says Berowne in Love’s Labour’s Lost; “Honey, and milk, and sugar; there is three,” the Princess puns in response. Or Touchstone, the clown, teasing Audrey in As You Like It, tells her that “honesty coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar.” Northumberland to Bolingbroke, in the wolds of Gloucestershire: “Your fair discourse hath been as sugar, / Making the hard way sweet and delectable.” Or, finally, Brabantio, before Othello and the Duke of Venice: “These sentences, to sugar, or to gall, / Being strong on both sides, are equivocal.” From the seventeenth century onward—and it may be worth noting that Shakespeare died nearly half a century before sugar from Barbados, the first English “sugar island,” began to reach England—sugar imagery became ever commoner in English literature. Written usage of this sort mattered most to the literate, of course, but sugar imagery became an important part of everyday talk as well, competing with or supplanting honey imagery among the terms of endearment and affection. This imagery bridges the two very different “meanings” we have discussed: the inside meanings as sugar became commoner, and its employment in social settings by even the least privileged and poorest of Britain’s citizens; and the significance of sugar for the empire, for the king, and for the classes whose wealth would be made and secured by the growing productivity of British labor at home and British enterprise abroad.

			This second meaning is embodied in the writings of political economists like Josiah Child or Dalby Thomas, or physicians like Frederick Slare, whose enthusiasms kept pace with the steady expansion of those portions of the empire within which sugar cane and other plantation crops could be grown. Their encomia were not limited to the medical, preservative, nutritive, and other proclaimed virtues of sugar. In fact, they mostly treated the beneficial character of sugar as self-evident. How trade would follow the flag; why plantation production befitted the nation, the crown, and—of course—the enslaved and coerced workers; the general importance of commerce as a stimulus to manufacturing; the civilizing benefits to the heathen of the British presence—all these themes were pressed into sugar’s service. And though sugar was obviously not always and everywhere a moneymaker within the empire—many an investor, as well as many a planter, ended up a bankrupt (and sometimes a jailbird) because of it—its cumulative value to crown and capital alike was enormous.

			As far as the British West Indies were concerned, the zenith of sugar’s imperial role probably came in the late eighteenth century, during the rule of George III. Lowell Ragatz, historian of the British West Indian planter class, recounts the story, probably apocryphal, of George III’s visit to Weymouth in the company of his prime minister. Irritated by the sight of a West Indian planter’s opulent equipage, complete with outrider and livery as fine as his own, the king is reported to have exclaimed: “Sugar, sugar, eh?—all that sugar! How are the duties, eh, Pitt, how are the duties?”1

			The meaning that sugar attained in the imperial economy was a wholly different matter from what it eventually meant in the lives of the English people, but the availability and price of sugar were the direct consequences of imperial policies that took shape partly in terms of what the market was, and more and more in terms of what it might become. As the home market was made to grow, the proportion of sugar that was re-exported dropped sharply, and production itself was levered more securely into the imperial orbit. And as control over production was consolidated, consumption at home continued to rise. Much later, when protectionist policy based on differential duties lost out in Parliament and the West Indian planters lost their protectionist advocates, sugar went on being consumed in ever-increasing quantities, even as African and Asian colonies entered into cane cultivation and sugar making, and even as beet-sugar production began to overtake cane-sugar production in the world economy at large. By that time—which is to say, by the mid-nineteenth century—the two sorts of meaning suggested here had become united to a certain extent.

			The English people came to view sugar as essential; supplying them with it became as much a political as an economic obligation. At the same time, the owners of the immense fortunes created by the labor of millions of slaves stolen from Africa, on millions of acres of the New World stolen from the Indians—wealth in the form of commodities like sugar, molasses, and rum to be sold to Africans, Indians, colonials, and the British working class alike—had become even more solidly attached to the centers of power in English society at large. Many individual merchants, planters, and entrepreneurs lost out, but the long-term economic successes of the new commodity markets at home were never in doubt after the mid-seventeenth century. What sugar meant, from this vantage point, was what all such colonial production, trade, and metropolitan consumption came to mean: the growing strength and solidity of the empire and of the classes that dictated its policies.

			But what most anthropologists have in mind when they think about meaning is entirely different. To paraphrase Clifford Geertz, human beings are caught up in webs of signification they themselves have spun. We are able to perceive and interpret the world only in terms of pre-existing, culture-specific systems for endowing reality with meaning. This perspective puts the cognitive order between us and the world itself—we must think the world to be able to see (classify) it, rather than the other way round—and it should be persuasive for anyone who considers culture as the prime defining feature of human uniqueness.

			But if humanity gives meaning to the objective world, with different sets of meaning for different human groups, one must still ask how this is done and by whom in any given historical instance. Where does the locus of meaning reside? For most human beings most of the time, the meanings believed to inhere in things and in the relationships among things and acts are not given but, rather, are learned. Most of us, most of the time, act within plays the lines of which were written long ago, the images of which require recognition, not invention. To say this is not to deny individuality or the human capacity to add, transform, and reject meanings, but it is to insist that the webs of signification that we as individuals spin are exceedingly small and fine (and mostly trivial); for the most part they reside within other webs of immense scale, surpassing single lives in time and space.

			It is not at all clear that such webs are single-stranded, or that the same webs exist for each of us. In complex modern societies such webs of signification can be imagined more easily than they can be demonstrated to exist. Our ability to explain their meanings is limited, because each generality we offer requires that we believe people in a complex society agree, at least grosso modo, that what something means is unmistakable. This is sometimes true, but not always. People’s agreeing on what something is is not the same as their agreeing on what it means. Even on a quite simple level, this difficulty can be real. We need to learn that rice “means” fertility, and though that association may seem commonsensical or “natural” once we learn it, actually it is neither. If there is any explanation, it is historical. When we pass on to our children the meanings of what we do, our explanations consist largely of instructions to do what we learned to do before them. In societies arranged in groups or divisions or layers, the learned meanings will differ from one group to another—just as the learned dialect, say, may differ. The supposed webs of signification ought to be interpretable in terms of such differences, particularly if some meanings diffuse from one group to another. Otherwise, the assumption of a homogeneous web may mask, instead of reveal, how meanings are generated and transmitted. This is perhaps the point where meaning and power touch most clearly.

			• • •

			The profound changes in dietary and consumption patterns in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Europe were not random or fortuitous, but the direct consequences of the same momentum that created a world economy, shaping the asymmetrical relationships between the metropolitan centers and their colonies and satellites, and the tremendous productive and distributive apparatuses, both technical and human, of modern capitalism. But this is not to say that these changes were intended, or that their ancillary consequences were well understood. The ways in which the English became the biggest sugar consumers in the world; the relationships between the colonial loci of sugar production and the metropolitan locus of its refining and consumption; the connections between sugar and slavery and the slave trade; the relation of sugar to bitter liquid stimulants; the role of the West Indian interest in protecting the plantation economy and winning special state support for sugar; the unexpected suitability of sugar for the crown’s desire to impose duties—these and many other aspects of sugar’s history must not be thrown together and labeled “causes” or “consequences” as if, once enumerated, they explained anything by themselves. But it is possible to point to certain long-term trends the general consequences of which are readily discerned. The steady and cumulative decline in the relative price of sugars is clear enough, in spite of occasional short-term increases. Generally speaking, the demand for sugar, even in thirteenth- and fourteenth-century England, was substantial, though the price put it beyond the means of most people. The earliest prices mentioned, for 1264, range from one to two shillings per pound, which would be the equivalent of at least several pounds sterling today. As the Atlantic islands came into sugar production at the end of the fifteenth century, the price in England fell to as low as three or four pence per pound. Prices rose again at the mid-sixteenth century, probably because of Henry VIII’s debasement of currency and the influx of New World silver. But sugar prices did not climb at a rate as high as those for other “eastern” commodities, even after the fall of Egypt to the Turks (1518); possibly the Atlantic islands were already supplying much—or most—of England’s sugar.2 Even in those early centuries, the relative price of sugar was higher than it had been in the first decade of the century—while consumption continued to rise. In the view of Ellen Ellis, the economic crisis engendered by the currency debasement did not force England’s “merchants and the landholders who were raising sheep, and selling the wool at a greatly enchanced price, [who] had been the chief consumers of sugar before,” to “give up their consumption of the good things in life.”3

			In the course of the seventeenth century, the prices of sugar continued to fall. In 1600, the highest price for fine sugar was two shillings; in 1685, the price stood at eight pence the pound. The growing cheapness of sugar is suggested as well by the scale of units in which it was purchased:

			In the earlier times rich people bought it by the pound, or at most by the loaf, a loaf of sugar being a favorite present to a distinguished personage. Even such an opulent person as Lord Spencer buys stocks of sugar by the loaf, though on two occasions, 1613, 1614, the weight of twenty loaves bought is given. In 1664, it is first bought (and without the designation of loaves), by the hundredweight at eighty-four shillings. It is again purchased in the same manner in 1679.4

			The increase in sugar production in the mid-seventeenth century was so headlong that prices of sugar fell—between 1645 and 1680, by 70 percent—with temporarily adverse effects upon Caribbean producers.5 The consequence of this decline for consumers was equally important: the number of new users may have risen quite sharply. Sheridan’s estimates, cited earlier, suggest a fourfold increase in consumption during 1660–1700, followed by a trebling between 1700 and 1740. Indeed, overproduction of sugar affected the whole Atlantic economy for several decades. In Amsterdam, the price of raw sugar fell by one-third between 1677 and 1687,6 and in England in 1686, muscovado sugar fell to a price so low it would not be reached again for nearly two centuries:

			The growth of consumption during the seventeenth century may be partly explained by the cheapening of sugar, first by Brazilian and then by West Indian supplies; but the demand continued to grow long after the trend of prices took an upward turn in the 1730s. More than once a brief collapse of sugar prices seemed to indicate that production was outrunning demand: at the end of the fifteenth century, when Madeira, the Canaries and São Thomé were offering supplies to Europe on a new scale; in the 1680s when the massive growth of West Indian supply gave a check to the prosperity of the Brazilian plantations; and in the 1720s when Jamaica and St. Domingue emerged out of the tribulations of war to enlarge the scale of Caribbean production. But time and again rising demand came to the rescue, even absorbing without difficulty the sensational rise of production when Cuba came on to the market in the 1770s; and at the end of the eighteenth century the prospects were bright enough to cause the opening of production beyond the Americas, in Mauritius, Java and the Philippines.7

			The developments “beyond the Americas” represented the maturation of world trade in sucrose. Britain, acknowledging the transformation of sugar into a daily necessity, gradually replaced the protectionism offered the West Indian planters with a “free market,” thereby assuring practically unlimited quantities of sucrose—except in times of war—to her own people. This triumph for “free trade” was bought at some political cost; just as there were those who profited from the end of the differential duties, there were others who had benefited from them for centuries. The advocates of more sugar for more people at cheaper prices won out.

			The nature and scale of sucrose consumption in the United Kingdom had changed completely by 1850: the popularization of sucrose, barely begun in 1650, brought some of it into the hands of even the very poor within a century; then, between 1750 and 1850, it ceased to be a luxury and became a necessity. The gradual erosion of the discriminatory duties thereafter, doubtless hastened by the competitive effects of better beet-sugar manufacture upon the tropical cane-producing areas, tended to equalize competition among producers, at least within the empire, meanwhile encouraging foreign producers to vie for the enormous British market.

			It is impossible to say what percentage of the English populace consumed what percentage of sucrose imported in a given year, or to indicate in what degree and in what regards consumption increased and proliferated. But there is no doubt that the quantities imported and retained during that two-century period when sucrose changed from rarity to daily ingestible rose steadily; that the increase was comparatively larger than the population increase; and that by the mid-nineteenth century the British were eating more sugar than ever before, and were as sugar-hungry as ever. These were the facts upon which free-trade advocates based their successful campaigns; they rightly believed they could count on an elasticity of demand created during the preceding century of increasing sugar use, even among the very poor. Per-capita consumption continued to climb upward well into the twentieth century, leveling off at around 105 pounds per person per year only in the past decade.

			Many (though not all) sucrose-eating populations in the West ate more and more sugar during the past century (a few reaching averages of 105–15 pounds yearly, or about one-third of a pound per person per day). In the case of the United Kingdom, the downward movement of prices after 1857 was accompanied by steady increases in consumption. But though price greatly affected the ability of the English—particularly the poorer classes—to buy as much sucrose as they wished, it does not explain why they ate so much of it even when it was relatively costly. The movement to bring down prices by opening trade pitted two different segments of the British capitalist classes against each other. Unsurprisingly, the segment allied with factory capitalism won out.

			The political power needed to change the relative positions of competing sucrose sellers in the imperial market seems—and is—notably different from the more informal “power” that, at earlier points in British history, influenced the consumption choices of the emerging proletariat. One’s choice of what one wants or needs to eat makes sense only in terms of one’s preferences and aspirations—in terms, that is, of the social context of consumption. The consumption of products such as tobacco, tea, and sugar may have been one of the very rare ways in which British workers of the mid-nineteenth century achieved the fulfillment of the promises implicit in the political philosophy of a century earlier. Particularly for the working poor, eating more and more food with substantial amounts of sucrose in it was an appropriate response to what British society had become.

			The theory of mercantilism—to the extent that one can reify a point of view that only occasionally coalesced into firm and unified policy—held that “demand” was a constant for any people or country. Markets did not grow; they reached an equilibrium. The political economist Charles Davenant put it this way: “For there is a limited stock of our own product to carry out, beyond which there is no passing: as for example, there is such a quantity of woollen manufactures, lead, tin, etc, which over and above our own consumption, we can export abroad, and our soil as it is now peopled, will not yield much more; and there is likewise a limited quantity of these goods which foreign consumption will not exceed.”8

			The received wisdom was that lowered prices could only mean lowered profits, without any compensation in the form of increased sales. So firmly did people believe in static markets that “the adoption by common people of dress and consumption habits previously confined to the rich, was received as a symptom of moral economic disorder. Such consumer behavior would drain the state of its treasure at the same time that it undermined God-ordained status distinctions. Sumptuary laws—invariably futile—continued to be enacted to obstruct the downward diffusion of upper-class fashions.”9 But in spite of the common view that the poor neither would nor should consume objects and substances preferred by the rich even if they could afford them, there were those who wanted to increase such consumption. Men like Thomas and Slare and Benjamin Moseley and George Porter, writing at different times and from quite different perspectives, argued both that demand should be expanded—indeed, created—by insisting that sugar was good for everyone; and that none should be deprived of the widespread benefits that would result from its consumption. From Dalby Thomas on, there were voices in Great Britain that spoke for the deliberate augmentation of demand, rather than for its leveling off to fit prior, status-determined differences.

			The Dutch economic historian Jan DeVries argues that two features of economic life—often attributed to so-called precapitalist or primitive economies—had to be radically modified to enlarge demand. First, more families (or wage-earning individuals) had to become involved with the market, both as producers for sale and as buyers of consumption goods. Second, the disposition to satisfy only pre-existing levels of consumption and to work no more than these required—the so-called backward-sloping supply curve of labor—had to change. Many seventeenth- and even eighteenth-century theorists thought such a conservative disposition was natural, inherent to the laborer, and not subject to modification by outside forces. DeVries cites Sir William Petty, who, in his Political Arithmetic, written in the 1670s, argued: “It is observed by Clothiers and others, who employ great numbers of poor people, that when corn [grain] is extremely plentiful, that the labour of the poor is proportionately dear: and scarce to be had at all (so licentious are they who labour only to eat, or rather to drink).”10 This view persisted in the eighteenth century: “Scarcity, to a certain degree . . . promotes industry. . . . The manufacturer [i.e., the worker] who can subsist on three days’ work will be idle and drunken the rest of the week. . . . The poor in the manufacturing counties will never work any more time than is necessary just to live and support their weekly debauches.”11

			On the one hand, then, political economists supposed that “ordinary people” would work only enough to stay alive and not a minute longer; on the other, they thought that “ordinary people” would indulge themselves foolishly, seeking to consume substances that, for moral or medical or other reasons, were simply not good for them or for society. There was a diversity of opinions, some of which led to support for the expanding consumption of goods (such as sugar), usually on the grounds of its being good for the consumers and for the nation; and some to opposition to such expansion, usually on the grounds of its being physically or morally bad for the consumers and economically and politically bad for the nation. Over time, the struggle to increase consumption of any good on the grounds of the consumer’s rights to his/her own buying power kept pace with the desire of more “progressive” capitalists to expand the market or their share of it. In a few cases this was not quite true—alcoholic beverages, for instance, could interfere with the efficiency of labor—but it certainly held in the case of tea, sugar, and like stimulants.

			Though DeVries says, “We would credit seventeenth-century merchants and manufacturers with more imagination and radicalism than they possessed by saying that they acted to create a social order compatible with expanding demand,”12 that social order did in fact emerge. Its effects upon the sugar market were truly sensational, and the reverse effects, though less important, were no less real.

			The period 1600–1750 was one of rapidly increasing urban populations in northern Europe. The raising of livestock and the production of fodder displaced much vegetable farming; landless populations were employed more and more as agrarian wage-earning laborers moved into the growing cities. The cumulative effect was a greater dependence on the market on the part of more and more people, even for items of daily consumption such as bread and beer, and, soon enough, tobacco and sugar and tea. The concomitant growth of government taxation—taxation of a regressive sort, falling disproportionately upon those least able to pay—may have somewhat constrained consumer demand. But it also tended to force up domestic production for the market, to provide the wherewithal for payment—that is, local producers tried to produce more, so as to maintain their own buying power. One change, essential to my argument, was that proletarian work schedules were transformed by structural changes in the national economy, and created for the laboring classes new tasting opportunities and new occasions for eating and drinking.

			This did not happen overnight. Nor, for that matter, did majority opinion encourage a mass market for sugar. Even after royalty and the planters’ friends in Parliament had discovered that plantation products were eminently taxable, as well as edible, the better part of another century would pass before sugar protagonists based their argument firmly on the possibilities for enlarging consumption among the working poor. It was then that they became, in effect, the political enemies of the West Indian planters, by putting cheap sugar ahead of colonial preference.

			The eminent British historian Eric Hobsbawm points out: “Neither economic theory nor the economic practice of the early Industrial Revolution relied on the purchasing power of the labouring population, whose wages, it was generally assumed, would not be far removed from the subsistence level.”

			When by any chance some section of them earned enough to spend their money on the same sorts of goods as their “betters” (as happened from time to time during economic booms), middle-class opinion deplored or ridiculed such presumptuous lack of thrift. The economic advantages of high wages, whether as incentives to higher productivity or as additions to purchasing-power, were not discovered until after the middle of the [nineteenth] century, and then only by a minority of advanced and enlightened employers.13

			All the same, the political fights that eventuated in the end of the preferential duties for West Indian sugars were an important step in unleashing proletarian buying power. Cheaper sugar came at a time when its increased consumption was guaranteed not by the sugar habit itself, but by the factory world and machine rhythms which were the background for its use. It was not just that labor worked harder in order to get more; those who paid its wages profited both from labor’s higher productivity and from its heightened use of store-purchased commodities.14

			• • •

			Few concepts in the social sciences have caused as many disagreements as the concept of power, and no satisfactory consensus on its definition has emerged. But there is no way to avoid the term—or one like it—when the objective is to clarify under what conditions the population of a entire country changes its behavior radically without the compulsion of open force and violence. Of course it is possible to interpret such a change as no more than the expression of will, of free choice—in the case of sugar, in obtaining a desired good previously not available. But this requires us to assume that each and every Briton, day by day and year by year, chose individually to seek and consume sucrose and other new and expensive products with which it was associated, until the United Kingdom was somehow transformed into a nation of sucrose eaters. To omit the concept of power is to treat as indifferent the social, economic, and political forces that benefited from the steady spread of demand for sugar. It asks an unjustified ingenuousness of us.

			The history of sugar suggests strongly that the availability, and also the circumstances of availability, of sucrose—which became one of the most desired of all edible commodities in the empire—were determined by forces outside the reach of the English masses themselves. There had been a time, after all, when no one in England knew of sugar, followed by a period, centuries long, when it was a costly rarity. Only after around 1650 did sugar become important to England’s ruling strata, so that more and more of it was imported: mounting economic—and, soon enough, political—forces supported the seizure of colonies where cane could be grown and raw sugar manufactured, as well as the slave trade that supplied the needed labor. The proportion of imported sugar consumed in Britain increased and the price fell. Even though the buying power of those who came to like sucrose was limited, consumption rose steadily; more and more people consumed more and more sugar. The uses to which it was put and its place in the diet changed and proliferated; it grew more important in people’s consciousness, in family budgets, and in the economic, social, and political life of the nation.

			These changes have to do with “outside” meaning—the place of sucrose in the history of colonies, commerce, political intrigue, the making of policy and law—but they have to do with “inside” meaning as well, because the meanings people gave to sugar arose under conditions prescribed or determined not so much by the consumers as by those who made the product available. Before the rich and powerful who first ate sugar in England could give it new meanings, they had to have it. Then its uses changed as it became more common and familiar. We can assume that some meanings, conveyed by the forms of use, were freshly invented, others synthesized with what was learned from elsewhere.

			After 1650 sugar prices decline and quantities increase; many more people get to taste it, mostly in conjunction with tea (or one of the other new beverages). The downward spread is slow and halting but continuous; some time before 1700, the pace quickens. For the new users, as we have seen, sugar comes to play a very different part in diet. On many sides there is ample evidence of a real push to seize more colonies, establish more plantations, import more slaves to them, build more ships, import more sucrose and other plantation products. And as these substances come within reach of the poor, the possibility of a steadily expanding domestic (national) market, as opposed to an export market, becomes clearer.

			That genuine attempts were made to increase sugar consumption is hardly in doubt, even though many railed against these strange new products. Of course consumers must have wanted to consume sugar, and demonstrated as much by forgoing other consumption opportunities in order to have it. But one must go on to note the emergence of different groups within British society that came to benefit from the production—and consumption—of this new product.

			When it was first produced in the West Indies, sugar easily won the attention and interest of Englishmen. Not only was it already prized as a luxury good by the nobility and the wealthy, but it soon appeared to be a promising (if risky) form of investment. The slave trade, shipping, the plantations themselves, the provision of credit against which plantations and stocks of slaves and sugar could be collateral, and, soon enough, opportunities for retailing and refining—all seemed to offer rewards to the rich and daring. But not only to the rich. The brilliant Trinidadian historian Eric Williams, in his pathbreaking study of the slave trade and sugar, points out that though the Liverpool trade oligopoly rested in the hands of only ten or so firms, many slavers were financed by a highly democratic pooling of the modest resources of “attorneys, drapers, grocers, barbers and tailors. The shares in the ventures were subdivided, one having one-eighth, another one-fifteenth, a third one thirty-second part of a share and so on.”15 “The little fellows” had no comparable opportunity to invest in plantations, however: whereas investment shares at home could be aggregated into slaving ships and banks, plantations were almost always run as individually owned enterprises, and most planters came from families of at least some means back at home.

			But some men of limited means did end up rich planters. Richard Pares’s magnificent A West-India Fortune (1950), which details the career of the sugar-cane-planting Pinneys of Nevis, reveals that Azariah Pinney, the founder of the family fortune, was sent dry goods by his father and siblings, from the sale of which he was able eventually to acquire a small plantation, around which the Pinney riches subsequently grew. Pares, who probably knew as much about the evolution of the British West Indian planter classes as anyone ever has, shows us no rags-to-riches ambience in the sugar islands, but stresses instead the importance of familial support at home for younger sons striking out overseas, and of the value of special skills like bookkeeping, practicing law, and retailing in enabling even those persons without the wherewithal eventually to become planters themselves.16 Perhaps the principal point is that the plantation colonies afforded pioneering opportunities, as did the slave trade and the derivative trading and commercial activities the plantation system made possible in the colonies and at home.

			The creditors, both great and petty, who had invested in various aspects of the sugar economy naturally had a stake in its success. To these can be added the planters, many of whom came from already rich families, but who often added to their wealth by their plantation operations. Their style of life during the maturity of the plantation era is as famous as was, during certain periods, their political influence at home. Even as sober and dispassionate a historian as Pares can write:

			Many colonies made no laws at all about the feeding of slaves before the humanitarians forced them into it at the end of the eighteenth century; and even where there were laws, the standards which they enforced were pitiably low. The French code noir stipulated for a supply of protein which would amount to little more than a kipper a day; and this code was not at all well observed. Some planters normally gave their slaves no food at all, but fobbed them off with payments of rum wherewith to buy food, or with Saturdays and Sundays to till their own provision grounds and feed themselves. The rum was drunk, the Saturdays or Sundays encroached upon or wasted, and the slaves starved. Their masters almost wholly disregarded their needs for protein, and could not see why they went on hunger-strike, or lost their sleep catching land crabs, or died. When I think of the colossal banquets of the Barbados planters, as Ligon describes them, of the money which the West Indians at home poured out upon the Yorkshire electorate and Harriette Wilson, of the younger William Beckford’s private orchestra and escapades in Lisbon, of Fonthill Abbey or even of the Codrington Library, and remember that the money was got by working African slaves twelve hours a day on such a diet, I can only feel anger and shame.17

			Williams tells us a good deal about these planters in the colonies, and of their ability to sway Parliament, of which many were members.

			Allied with the other great monopolists of the eighteenth century, the landed aristocracy and the commercial bourgeoisie of the seaport towns, this powerful West India interest exerted in the unreformed Parliament an influence sufficient to make every statesman pause, and represented a solid phalanx “of whose support in emergency every administration in turn has experienced the value.” They put up a determined resistance to abolition, emancipation, and the abrogation of their monopoly. They were always on the warpath to oppose any increase of the duties on sugar.18

			The planters, bankers, slavers, shippers, refiners, grocers, and people in government whose interests lay along such lines or who accurately foretold the unfolding fiscal possibilities sugar offered were among those groups whose power counted in this story. All of these people exercised power of one sort or another in increasing the disposition of the crown and Parliament to support and to favor the extension of the rights of the planters, the maintenance of slavery, the availability of sugar and its by-products (molasses and rum) to the people at large. It is to their efforts that England owed the institutionalization of a rum ration in the navy (begun “unofficially” after the capture of Jamaica in 1655): half a pint per day from 1731 on. In the late eighteenth century it was increased to a pint a day for adult sailors—much-needed creeping socialism for an infant industry. The official allocations of sugar and treacle to the poorhouses in the late eighteenth century were similar support measures.

			When the protection of the West Indian interests became too expensive for their erstwhile supporters, who were sensitive to the immense potentialities of the untapped sugar consumer market at home only awaiting lower prices, power was applied in different ways. The same had been true when the abolitionists—opposing first the slave trade, and later slavery itself—many of them with economic interests radically different from those of the planters, took stands that the planters saw as destructive of the plantations. Different interest groups might align themselves together at one time, but shifting economic fortunes often pitted such powerful allies against one another. (Citing an observer who reported in 1764 that fifty or sixty West Indian voters could turn the balance in the House of Commons any direction they wished, Eric Williams adds that there was a new combination in the Reformed Parliament that was just as strong: “It was the Lancashire cotton interest, and its slogan was not monopoly but laissez faire.”19)

			The various blocs, then, were ready to change sides—and often did. But their seeming fickleness in no way reduced the power they were able to exercise in critical situations. The political and economic influence of the governing strata set the terms by which increasing quantities of sugar and like commodities became available throughout English society. This influence took the form of specific legislative initiatives affecting duties and tariffs, or the purchase of supplies of sugar, molasses, and rum for dispensing through government agencies, like the navy and the almshouses; or regulations affecting matters of purity, standards of quality, etc. But it also involved the informal exercise of power: a combination of official prerogatives with the use of pressures made possible through cliques, family connections, university and public-school contacts, covert coercion, friendship, club membership, the strategic application of wealth, job promises, cajolery, and much else—most of it familiar to any serious reader of today’s newspapers.

			Such power and its application have to do with “outside” meaning—with the setting of the terms within which the various forms of sucrose were made available. But power was also exercised in the shaping of “inside” meaning.

			• • •

			In 1685, when the young Edmund Verney went up to Oxford, his father’s letter to him, detailing the contents of his student trunk, included mention of oranges, lemons, raisins, and nutmegs—as well as “three pounds of Brown Sugar, one pound of white poudered sugar made up in quarters, one pound of Brown sugar candy, one-quarter of a pound of white sugar candy.”20 Not every young man went to Oxford, and few parents were so rich and solicitous, yet the “everyday treat” quality of this list, only thirty years after the conquest of Jamaica, is telling.

			Among countless Britons poorer than the Verneys, the fall in sugar prices toward the end of that century encouraged the eating of puddings, among other treats, but also encouraged additional uses of sugar, transmitted from the boards and kitchens of the wealthy. The suet puddings Arthur Young describes on the menus at the almshouse at Nacton, for example, were innovations, institutionalized in the eighteenth century, fed to the desperately poor. It was of these people that Young wrote with some impatience:

			Pease porridge used to be dinner on the two last days [Friday and Saturday], but they petitioned for bread and butter instead of it, which [they] found their favourite dinner, because they have tea to it. I expressed surprize at this being allowed; but they said they were permitted to spend 2d. in the shilling of what they earned, as they please; and they laid it all out in tea and sugar to drink with their bread and butter dinners.

			Indulgence renders it necessary to let them do as they please with it, but it would be better expended in something else.21

			The various uses of sugar eventually acquired many local, particular, and distinctive meanings, and only exacting regional research will substantiate this diversification on local and regional levels—funeral cakes and Christmas pies, puddings and candies, custards and all the rest. But two kinds of use are involved. Counter-posed to the downward and outward “intensification” of upper-class usages (and some of their meanings), there was the largely independent invention of new uses; in the conjuncture of these two lines of development the relationship of power to “inside meaning” is revealed.

			In the course of everyday life, social groups transmute acts, substances, and the relationships among them into units of different meaning. Rituals involving eating, for instance, may be marked by unusual foods (items otherwise tabooed or those prepared in a traditional or archaic manner), or by ordinary foods taking on a wholly different significance because of the ritual context. Examples are plentiful of both: the Passover seder, the Eucharist, Thanksgiving turkey, and so on. The custom of marking the end of a time unit (“week”), or a day of rest, by distinctive food consumption is also widespread.

			In seventeenth- and eighteenth-century England, new and modified sucrose uses were wedged into ritual and ceremonial contexts at court and among the rich and powerful. Most such practices were originally French or Italian and had come to England by way of royal visits, the settlement of confectioners and sugar sculptors in England, and the international social reciprocities of the dominant classes. As these uses of sugar were diffused downward, they were probably simplified, not only for reasons of economy—the differentials in wealth were of course staggering—but also because for the vast mass of people they could not involve comparable validations of status. The unusual combinations of spices and sweets accompanying holiday meats and fowl; the wide variety of sugared treats for religious holidays; the gifts of sweet foods to express thanks or to wish well to the ill; the use of sweet drinks and baked goods at rituals of separation and departure (including funerals)—these and other such usages provide examples of both extensification and intensification.

			Ceremonies and rituals that underlined or dramatized the exercise of temporal or secular power and authority drifted down the social ladder without the force that underlay them and that they had once served to symbolize. It was the economic ability to consume in that fashion, rather than the status right, that came to matter. Over time, sugar proved to be a superb vehicle for just such transformations. By the time the laboring poor were using sucrose for ceremonial purposes, the relationships of their consumption behavior to their self-identification was consistent with the rest of what was happening in English society. It was possible even for the relatively poor to consume sugar conspicuously in providing hospitality, meeting ceremonial obligations, and validating social links, for it was now an inexpensive good that continued to seem like a luxury, imparting an aura of privilege to those who served it and to whom it was served.

			The practices that turned sugar into something extraordinary, ceremonial, and especially meaningful (“intensification”), and the more common transformation of sugar into something ordinary, everyday, and essential (“extensification”), were surely not perceived as qualitatively different, or even as separate, processes by any social class. But distinguishing between them has some utility here, for it can throw light upon the controlling groups in English society. Because sugar was new for most people, it acquired its meanings within English life during a downward spread from the dominant classes, whose norms provided certain models.

			Substances like tea, sugar, rum, and tobacco were used by working people in accord with the tempos of working-class life. Those centuries when England was transformed, albeit irregularly and unevenly, from a predominantly rural, agrarian, and precapitalist society were centuries of novelty in consumption. Sugar was taken up just as work schedules were quickening, as the movement from countryside to city was accelerating, and as the factory system was taking shape and spreading. Such changes more and more affected the patterning of eating habits. We have already seen how hot liquid stimulants sweetened with calorie-laden sugar, and tobacco, among other novelties, transformed meals and even the definition of the meal, while economic changes transformed the schedules of eating.

			It is at this point that the ideas of meaning and power touch. Surely none of the sugar touts of the seventeenth century foresaw the nation of sucrose eaters their England was soon to become, yet they, and the classes they endorsed, ensured the steady growth of a society ever richer in sugar, and enriched by the slave trade, the plantation system, slavery itself, and, soon enough, the spread of factory industry in the metropolis. As the exemplar of luxuries turned into affordable proletarian goodies by dint of individual effort, sucrose was one of the people’s opiates, and its consumption was a symbolic demonstration that the system that produced it was successful.

			In the mid-nineteenth century one of the most able protagonists of the equalization of duties—a fight waged to get cheaper sugar onto the British market—was George R. Porter, himself a broker in sugar and a shrewd observer of English eating habits. “Without being one of the absolute necessities of life,” he wrote in 1851, “long habit has in this country led almost every class to the daily use of it, so that there is no people in Europe by whom it is consumed to anything like the same extent.”22 Porter argued against sugar duties by asserting that the people of Great Britain were ready to eat much more of it if they could only afford it, and that the duties were a disproportionate and unjust burden upon the poor. For the rich, he said, sugar was so minor an item in the family budget in the 1840s that they would buy the same quantity whether it cost sixpence or a shilling; it was otherwise for the less fortunate. In order to make his case more persuasive, Porter hazarded some clever guesses about differential consumption, first establishing that overall consumption had fallen during those years in the period 1830–49 when the price of sugar rose: “With one exception only, that of the year 1835, every rise in price has been accompanied by diminished consumption, while every fall in the market has produced an increased demand.” He then assumed (on the basis of “inquiries carefully made”) that rich and middle-rank families, whom he estimated to be perhaps one-fifth of the national population of Britain, consumed in the 1830s about forty pounds of sugar per year per person, for all purposes.23 Porter concluded that the annual per-capita consumption of the other four-fifths of the British population would have been fifteen pounds in 1831, nine pounds in 1840 (when duties were higher), and twenty pounds in 1849. Against such calculations he put the interesting observation that every person serving on one of Her Majesty’s ships was allowed one and one-half ounces per day (or thirty-four pounds per year) by official issue; while the allowance to aged paupers in government almshouses at that time was nearly twenty-three pounds per year.

			To put it somewhat differently, before the preferential duties (designed to ease the lot of the West Indian planters and—ostensibly—of the newly freed West Indian people) were removed and the price of sugar began to seek its world level, Britain taxed the poor regressively for their sugar, and hence kept sugar consumption substantially lower among the poorer classes than it was even among the sailors and paupers who were its official charges. The West Indian plantations had been profitable from the first because of the desire for sugar (and like products) in Europe; as we have seen, English internal demand eventually overshadowed almost completely the re-export trade. Sugar, then, was a cornerstone of British West Indian slavery and the slave trade, and the enslaved Africans who produced the sugar were linked in clear economic relationships to the British laboring people who were learning to eat it.

			Emancipation was a defeat for the planter classes, but a victory for those at home who believed in expanded commerce and heightened consumption. The indemnities paid to the planters (and ostensibly intended to “protect” the newly freed, as well) were paid by the British government; but they were more than amply compensated for by the sugar duties, paid out of all proportion by the poor. When the legislation supporting those duties began to crumble in 1852 under the attacks of the free-trade advocates, the disingenuous assertion arose that the duties protected the West Indian freedmen, but in fact the preferential duties did not help the freedmen one whit. The duties certainly did protect the West Indian planters, however, made mechanization of the sugar industry a less attractive alternative, and kept the price of sugar in Great Britain elevated.

			Throughout the British West Indies, the planters’ “sufferings” after freedom were resolved, with the connivance of the Foreign Office, by the importation of contracted laborers from India, China, and elsewhere, and special legislation to keep freedmen from voting and from acquiring land. The overall aim was to prevent the newly freed from either securing a livelihood independent of the sugar industry, or from using collective bargaining and strikes to negotiate wages and working conditions, as the proletarians in the metropolis were doing. These strategies worked; even though the West Indies never again produced so high a proportion of the sucrose consumed by the United Kingdom, they remained “sugar islands,” their people doomed to straddle two economic adaptations—as reconstituted peasants and as rural proletarians—neither of which could become economically secure. During the two centuries when enslaved Africans had produced Britain’s sugar in her Caribbean colonies, they were tied intimately to the emerging factory populations of the English cities by economic reciprocity and the circumstances of their emergence. Now free but almost entirely ignored by the metropolis, the West Indian people became invisible, until their migration to the center of empire brought them back into uneasy view more than a century later.

			None of this would have been of concern to men like Porter. He was interested in increasing sugar consumption at home, not in whether the West Indian planters (and certainly not in whether the West Indian freedmen) could make a living. He found fault with those who, “without much consideration, have chosen to identify a high price of sugar with the happiness of the lately-emancipated slave population of our West India colonies,” and argued that being free was reward enough for the ex-slaves.24 It was Porter, and other “free-trade” advocates, who carried the day. Within two decades, the special protections for West Indian sugar had all been removed.

			As prices fell, new sucrose uses were added on—the development of marmalades and preserves, condensed milk, chocolate, and sherbet. The desire of the British working classes for sugar, in the half-century after the first cracks appeared in the preferential duty system, seemed insatiable. This certainly involved prior experiences with sugar and the balance of their diet:

			Sugar for a great part of our population is a stimulant, a source of immediate energy if not inspiration, whether it is turned into alcohol or whether it is consumed raw. As a matter of fact, the very high consumption of sugar in some poor families is very closely correlated with the poverty of their diet in what one might call secondary satisfactions of diet and in its immediate stimulating faculties. This is a very important point in sugar consumption, especially when this includes sweets and “spreads” (on breads) for children. Then there is this question—what is food or expenditure on food and how far is it a necessity? The question put in that way perhaps does not mean much, but I remember a statement—I think it is Bernard Shaw’s “Essay on Rent”—that you feed your work horses with hay and your hunters with oats. This is how we treat our human population: we feed our decorative professions on foods that yield them a great deal of stimulation, a great many secondary satisfactions, and we feed our lower population with a very unstimulating and a very poor diet. . . . From the economic point of view, conventions determine what particular foodstuffs are going to be bought by any given amount of available income and a great many of these are pure class conventions.25

			Ashby touches here on an aspect of the transformation of English diet that reverts to the early diffusion of sucrose and stimulant beverages. Once one has read the encomia to tea and sugar by Slare and Moseley, together with the Reverend Davies’s indignant remonstrance that the poor would drink milk or small beer instead of tea if they could afford it, it would be simplistic to conclude that people ate more sugar after 1850 just because its price declined. Meaning and power touch this time at the point when a sugar-hungry population had access to well-nigh-unlimited supplies of sugar—once they were habituated to its use. That is why production must be linked to consumption, and so-called inside meanings to the larger, “outside” meanings.

			It is a pretty general observation, that those things which give us most delight, by the free use of them, become hurtful; this cannot be said of sugar; for as no ill property belongs to it, so nothing pernicious can possibly attend its use. . . . It might be hop’d that those who have complain’d of the cholic from the use of Tea, might, by being less profuse in that, and more so in the free use of the finest Sugar, by its soft and balsamick quality, prevent that disorder.26

			So wrote an anonymous saccharophile of the mid-eighteenth century whose enthusiasms were boundless. Mothers’ milk, he tells us, is improved by the addition of sugar. Molasses is more nutritious than butter or cheese, especially on bread, and ale and beer are served better when brewed with it. Rum is healthier than brandy. Even unripe fruit can be made palatable with sugar.

			Intemperate praise of this sort was common at the time, and the reader should make no mistake: whatever else the message, these paeans were also political tracts, read by parliamentarians, judges, physicians, military officers, businessmen, squires—and these “progressive” ideas had a cumulative effect upon legislative attitudes toward sugar and other imported foodstuffs. Yet the creation of a radically new diet for the people of the United Kingdom—some features of which were shared by all classes, and others differentially distributed—cannot possibly be explained by reference to simple legislation or some single, narrowly defined “cause.” Our primate liking for sweetness, our capacity to endow the material world with symbolic meaning, and our complication of the biology of ingestion with our social structures all played a part in the rise of sucrose consumption in England. But these neither explain why consumption varied over time or from one class to another, nor get at why social groups can affect the behavior of other groups, at different points in time or in different ways.

			The heightened productivity of the laboring classes, the radically altered conditions of their lives, including their prior diet, their readiness to emulate their rulers, the evolving world economy, and the spread of the capitalist spirit—these factors cannot be measured or weighted against one another. But they can be distinguished from factors such as our primate nature, our symbolic faculty, and our disposition to organize our biological satisfactions in social terms, for these latter are constants, givens, the operation of which can be described, but not explained in terms of their origins or differential effects.

			Before analyzing how sucrose or any other food or taste fits into the meal systems of the component groups or classes of a complex society, we ought to be able to explain how it got there in the first place (particularly in the case of a recent import such as sucrose), what forces influenced its increasing use, and what made its consumption important—changing it (in this instance) from rarity, novelty, or bauble into absolute necessity. That anthropologists engaged in the study of food in modern societies should apparently be so unconcerned with where the foods come from and who produces them is odd, since such disinterest diverges so radically from the traditional concerns of anthropologists of food. When food enters into the description of a preliterate society such as the Trobriand Islanders, the Tikopia, or the Bemba, the nature and circumstances of its production, sources, and availability are essential features of sociological analysis.27 But such features are not analyzed when the food systems of modern societies are studied, probably because the production of the foods and the circumstances of their consumption seem so remote from each other. It is of course true that few of us now produce our own food and that we usually buy all that we eat—or the largest proportion of it—from other non-producers. A far cry from the small, largely self-supporting “primitive” societies anthropologists supposedly study, complex modern societies appear to have divorced food production from food consumption; but why what quantities of food were made available when they were, and how such availabilities shaped choices, are questions deserving answers all the same. There is still a connection between production and consumption, and in the case of sugar, the facts suggest that early on production was actually undertaken with specific groups of consumers in mind—the national population of the United Kingdom, in fact.

			If a study of the ritualization of foods in British life were undertaken without reference either to time or to class divisions, the search for meaning would be limited to what was presumably shared by all English people at one point in time. So resolutely unhistorical a position would make the system of meaning coterminous with the present—and thus obscure, rather than clarify, the uses and meanings of food. Divorcing the process from time, like divorcing the consumption of sugar from its production, confines the discussion to a single point; explaining why things are as they are is confined to existing relationships among the parts of a social system. But looking backward enables us to see how the relationships among the parts of such a system took on their characteristic form over time.

			As the first exotic luxury transformed into a proletarian necessity, sugar was among the first imports to take on a new and different political and military importance to the broadening capitalist classes in the metropolis—different, that is, from gold, ivory, silk, and other durable luxuries. Whereas the plantations were long viewed as sources of profit through direct capital transfers for reinvestment at home, or through the absorption of finished goods from home,28 the hypothesis offered here is that sugar and other drug foods, by provisioning, sating—and, indeed, drugging—farm and factory workers, sharply reduced the overall cost of creating and reproducing the metropolitan proletariat.

			How did the British laboring classes become sugar eaters, after all? The readiness of working people to work harder in order to be able to earn—and thus consume—more was a crucial feature of the evolution of modern patterns of eating. A new commercial spirit had to recognize this readiness, perceiving it as a virtue to be encouraged and exploited. Unleashing that spirit accompanied great changes in the economic and political order, which transformed English agrarian life, “freed” the rural population, led to the conquest and harnessing of the tropical colonies, and resulted in the introduction of new comestibles into the motherland. My argument is that the heightened consumption of goods like sucrose was the direct consequence of deep alterations in the lives of working people, which made new forms of foods and eating conceivable and “natural,” like new schedules of work, new sorts of labor, and new conditions of daily life.

			But this does not mean that British working people were merely the passive witnesses of change. An eighteenth-century writer observed:

			In England the several ranks of men slide into each other almost imperceptibly; and a spirit of equality runs through every part of the constitution. Hence arises a strong emulation in all the several stations and conditions to vie with each other; and a perpetual restless ambition in each of the inferior ranks to raise themselves to the level of those immediately above them. In such a state as this fashion must have an uncontrolled sway. And a fashionable luxury must spread through it like a contagion.29

			Though this commentator surely exaggerated “the spirit of equality” of his time, other writers have commented on the role of the laboring classes themselves in taking on the habits and customs of their “betters.”30

			Different attitudes among the controllers of society toward working people, and the disposition of working people to experiment with novel foods eaten by wealthier people—such tendencies no doubt worked together in the late eighteenth century. In the next century, other nations followed the United Kingdom; becoming more urban and industrialized, changing eating schedules to meet work schedules, teaching laborers to eat away from home, to eat prepared food more frequently, and to consume more sugar along the way. Managers of such societies recognized the potentiality of workers to increase their own productivity if sufficiently stimulated, and to open themselves to new, learnable needs.

			The determinate “cause” of such changes is a context, or a set of situations, created by broad economic forces; within that context new food “choices” are made—indeed, are given shape before they are even perceived as choices. The choice between a “Danish” pastry and a “French” doughnut during a ten-minute coffee break is a choice, but the circumstances under which this choice is made may not be freely chosen. Like the choice between a McDonald’s hamburger and a Gino’s chicken leg during a thirty-minute lunch hour, the choice itself is far less important than the constraints under which the choice is being made.

			In much the same way, imitation (or emulation) does not take place in some unhistorical but symbolically meaningful vacuum. What working people actually imitate in the behavior of those with power over them, and what they mean (intend and communicate) with such behavior, is not always clear. The history of the tea habit is a case in point. What laboring Englishmen did by way of imitation in this regard was to drink tea with sugar and milk (usually inferior tea, sometimes twice-used tea, or even hot water poured over bread crusts, sweetened with treacle), as did others more privileged than they. Taking to the custom with a vengeance, they increased their consumption of heavily sweetened tea steadily, until World War I briefly interrupted the upward climb. But does it explain very much to call this upswing the outcome of working people’s imitation of their social betters? That the sweetened tea was hot, stimulating, and calorie-rich; that hard work for wages under difficult conditions typified the circumstances under which tea came to be drunk; that tea had the power to make a cold meal seem like a hot one—these seem equally important points. Still another factor was the intimate relationship between where these foods were produced, on whose initiative, by what sorts of workers, and under whose control, and where they were consumed. The empire, after all, had an internal structure that had seen the creation of the categories of plantation slave and (eventually) factory proletarian within a single political system, and had profited immensely from their provisioning one another under the imperial thumb.

			Where does this leave us, though? Why did the English people become such enthusiastic sugar consumers? Not because of the innate primate liking for sweetness; not because our species is symbolically communicative and builds meaning into all it does, including eating; not because socially inferior groups imitate their “superiors”; not even because people in cold, wet climes supposedly like sugar more than other people. Certain homelier facts seem more persuasive. The diet of the British worker was both calorically and nutritively inadequate and monotonous. Often working people could not get hot food, especially for their breakfasts and midday meals. New schedules of work and rest, changing conditions of employment, the end of the dependent relationship of agricultural laborer to squire, the development of a putting-out system, then a factory system—these were among the contextual conditions for changes in food habits. It is in their light that the vaunted disposition of people to imitate their betters can be made to rest on a broader interpretive basis. When we read the encomia to sugar and remember that this was a society swiftly adopting a more urban, time-conscious, and industrial character, it is not surprising that Slare sounded nearer the truth of things than Hanway.

			Still, sugar, tea, and like products represented the growing freedom of ordinary folks, their opportunity to participate in the elevation of their own standards of living. But to assert this is to raise some questions. The proclaimed freedom to choose meant freedom only within a range of possibilities laid down by forces over which those who were, supposedly, freely choosing exercised no control at all. That substances like sugar could be changed from curiosities or adornments in English life into essential ingredients of decent self-respecting hospitality required that people weave them into the fabric of their daily lives, endowing them with meaning and teaching each other to enjoy their consumption.

			It was not by processes of symbol making and meaning investment that sugar was made available to the English people, but because of political, economic, and military undertakings the organization of which would have been unimaginable to the ordinary citizen. The immense quantities of coerced labor required to produce sucrose and bitter stimulant beverages also had to be arranged for, or the substances in the quantities desired would not have been forthcoming. Only with these arrangements secured could the wonderful and uniquely human capacity to find and bestow meaning be exercised. In short, the creation of a commodity that would permit taste and the symbolic faculty to be exercised was far beyond the reach of both the enslaved Africans who produced the sugar, on the one hand, and of the proletarianized English people who consumed it, on the other. Slave and proletarian together powered the imperial economic system that kept the one supplied with manacles and the other with sugar and rum; but neither had more than minimal influence over it. The growing freedom of the consumer to choose was one kind of freedom, but not another.

			Porter’s argument that lowered sugar prices were always followed by higher consumption was amply borne out in the second half of the nineteenth century, a period during which taxes and duties on sugars dropped as well. A comparable abolition of government levies was a long time coming, but by 1872 they were cut in half. Tax historian S. Dowell’s reflections on this illuminate nicely the preceding two centuries for us:

			Here undoubtedly, in the opinion of many careful and provident persons who bore in mind our fiscal system in the whole, and, regarding advance in prosperity by leaps and bounds as a temporary and not the normal condition of the progress of the nation, fixed their attention on the eventualities of the future, we should have stayed the process of reduction, which, if carried further, threatened the annihilation of the tax. This tax, with those on tea and coffee, held, in their opinion, a position of peculiar importance: to be kept, in time of peace, at low rates at which, so evenly do these taxes lie over the whole surface of the nation, the pressure was not felt by anyone, they were powerful engines available when the nation should be called upon for a general effort in time of war. To abolish these taxes would be to remove the mainstays of our system of taxation.31

			The part such taxes played in the creation of state extraction systems, sustained by skimming from the costs of personal consumption, is significant. Of sugar and other exotic products—particularly the bitter, habit-forming stimulants which English people combined it with—sugar was the most aptly taxable, partly because it was poorly suited to smuggling (unlike tea, for instance). As its yield of wealth to the exchequer grew, so its value as a taxable item was enshrined: there arose a powerful vested interest in its continued and expanded consumption. Like tea or tobacco, it could be counted upon to yield revenues even when scarce supplies drove up its price. And, as Dowell says, because its consumption was so widespread, “the pressure was not felt by anyone.” Thus was the new freedom to afford sugar a key to governance itself.

			With the change in place of such commodities in the English diet, and the growing recognition of the ultimate consequences of mass consumption, the world market gradually set the price of sugar. But even this overstates the case, for probably no single food commodity on the world market has been subjected to so much politicking as sugar. If it earlier was too important to be left to West Indian planters, it later became too important to be left entirely exposed to market forces. Sucrose was a source of bureaucratic, as well as mercantile and industrial, wealth. Once the magnitude of its market and potential market was grasped, maintaining control over it became important. Sugar led all else in dramatizing the tremendous power concealed in mass consumption. Control over it, and responsibility for the eventual outcome, led to a sweeping revision of the philosophy that determined the connections between metropolis and colony. It might not be too much to say that the fate of the British West Indies was sealed, once it became cheaper for the British masses to have their sugar from elsewhere, and more profitable for the British bourgeoisie to sell more sugar at lower prices.

			To the extent that we can define things for others under circumstances that make it difficult for them to test the meanings we attribute to those things, we are exercising control over whether those others use these things, consume them or fail to consume them, prize them or disdain them. We affect their self-definition by motivating their consumption, thereby entering intimately into the organization of their very personalities: who and what they think they are. Tobacco, sugar, and tea were the first objects within capitalism that conveyed with their use the complex idea that one could become different by consuming differently. This idea has little to do with nutrition or primates or sweet tooths, and less than it appears to have with symbols. But it is closely connected to England’s fundamental transformation from a hierarchical, status-based, medieval society to a social-democratic, capitalist, and industrial society.

			The argument advanced here, that big background alterations in the tempo and nature of work and daily life influenced changes in diet, is difficult or impossible to prove. The further assumption is that the nature of the new foods was important in their eventual acceptance. The substances transformed by British capitalism from upper-class luxuries into working-class necessities are of a certain type. Like alcohol or tobacco, they provide respite from reality, and deaden hunger pangs. Like coffee or chocolate or tea, they provide stimulus to greater effort without providing nutrition. Like sugar they provide calories, while increasing the attractiveness of these other substances when combined with them. There was no conspiracy at work to wreck the nutrition of the British working class, to turn them into addicts, or to ruin their teeth. But the ever-rising consumption of sugar was an artifact of intraclass struggles for profit—struggles that eventuated in a world-market solution for drug foods, as industrial capitalism cut its protectionist losses and expanded a mass market to satisfy proletarian consumers once regarded as sinful or indolent.

			In this perspective, sugar was an ideal substance. It served to make a busy life seem less so; in the pause that refreshes, it eased, or seemed to ease, the changes back and forth from work to rest; it provided swifter sensations of fullness or satisfaction than complex carbohydrates did; it combined easily with many other foods, in some of which it was also used (tea and biscuit, coffee and bun, chocolate and jam-smeared bread). And as we have seen, it was symbolically powerful, for its use could be endowed with many subsidiary meanings. No wonder the rich and powerful liked it so much, and no wonder the poor learned to love it.





5 ♦ Eating and Being


			By 1900, sugar in the form of processed sucrose had become an essential ingredient in the British national diet. Combined with bitter beverages, it was consumed daily by almost every living Briton. It was added to foods in the kitchen and at table, and could be found in prepared delicacies such as jams, biscuits, and pastries, which were consumed at tea and frequently with meals. Sugar had also become a common feature of festive and ceremonial foods from season to season and from birth to death. Bread and salt had been the basis of western man’s daily fare and daily imagery for millennia; now sugar had joined them. Bread and salt—and sugar. A loaf of bread, a jug of wine—and sugar. The diet of a whole species was gradually being remade.

			The vastly expanded use and increasing individual consumption of processed sucrose from 1650 to 1900 was made possible by many achievements, among them the ever-greater technical mastery of sugar chemistry, and a fuller scientific comprehension of sugar’s remarkable versatility. It was the result of the application of new chemical knowledge to a versatility long-esteemed, but never before so imaginatively and completely exploited. By the time of World War I, the enforced rationing of sugar was regarded as among the most painful and immediate of the petty hardships caused by war—and of course the more acutely felt by poorer and less privileged Britons.1 For the poor, the tastes for sweetened tea, treacle pudding, condensed-milk custard, biscuits, jam-smeared bread, candy, and chocolate were acquired early and depressingly well. The more comfortable classes’ sweet tooth—just as noteworthy in terms of what is called “national character”—was tempered because they had so many other luxuries within reach.

			The experience of the English in having sugar pumped into every crevice of their diet was, as I have said, repeated in other lands, at times more swiftly, after 1900—but with some significant differences. Take, first, the United States, which had battened upon molasses and its yield, rum, even before the thirteen colonies revolted.2 By 1880–84, the United States was consuming thirty-eight pounds of sucrose per person per year—already well ahead of all other major world consumers except the United Kingdom. In three short years consumption had risen to 60.9 pounds.3 Within another decade, United States consumption rose still higher. And after 1898–99—not a date picked out of a hat—it rose higher yet. Whatever British capitalists had learned about sugar as a source of profit after 1650, North American capitalists learned far more quickly; those interested in the rise of North American imperialism could do worse than looking carefully at the history of U.S. sugar consumption.

			It is not entirely clear to what extent the perceived need of the United States to introject tropical sugar-producing areas, by transforming them into various sorts of colonies, was homologous with the imperial objectives of other powers a century or so earlier. But the mercantilist elements in this aspect of American foreign policy, especially clear in the expansion of American military power in the Caribbean sugar bowl, appear very late. Instead of Barbados the United States had Puerto Rico; instead of Jamaica, Cuba; for the Pacific areas, there were Hawaii and the Philippines. Not surprisingly, from the time when the consumer market in the United States became substantial—beginning around the end of the Civil War—until the present, U.S. sugar policy has been a major political football, and a source of stupendous (and often illicit) gain.4

			The experience of France offers a startling contrast to that of the Americans and the British. Like England and unlike the United States, France early developed “sugar colonies,” exported sugar and its related products in enormous quantities in the eighteenth century, and developed a sweet tooth of its own. During much of the seventeenth century, French interests dominated the European sugar trade, not yielding to the British until afterward. French capital benefited from the slave trade and the sugar trade, much as did British capital. Bordeaux and Nantes played roles structurally similar to those of Liverpool and Bristol. And there were many parallels in the colonial experience: the early conquests of Martinique and Guadeloupe, like Barbados, and the beginnings of a sugar industry there using engagés as indentured servants were used in Barbados; shifting to a larger colony, Saint Domingue, as Britain took Jamaica under Cromwell; and so on. (True, England moved faster and farther; and in the Haitian Revolution France was defeated and ejected by the slave revolutionaries.)

			But the French sugar interests, no matter how zealous, were unable to push French consumption to the point where it would deeply affect the nature of French cuisine or the forms of French meal taking. To this day the average French person consumes less sucrose than the average Englishman (though the gap is closing). Only slowly has France begun to approach the United Kingdom, Ireland, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Denmark, Iceland, the United States, and Australia—the world’s leading sucrose consumers. In 1775, gross British sugar consumption was two and one-half times that of the French—when the French population may have been four times that of England and Wales. This would have meant French per-capita consumption at that time was but one-tenth that of Britain. Richard Sheridan, an American historian of the British Caribbean, accepts the view that eighteenth-century French consumption reflected far lower standards of living; but as he suggests, one should also consider the drinking habits of these two nations.5 While the English people moved from beer and ale through gin and rum and partially back to beer and ale again, meanwhile acquiring a profound liking for heavily sweetened tea, the French remained primarily wine drinkers throughout. The acquisition of a coffee habit in the seventeenth century, though certainly important—Michelet believed the French Revolution was in part traceable to its effects!—did not reduce wine drinking. The wine habit may have negatively influenced the disposition to consume sweet substances, even while providing abundant calories.

			Beyond this, there is the matter of cuisine itself. Brillat-Savarin referred to sugar as the universal condiment; but, as P. Morton Shand, commenting on English tastes, wrote, “he was using the word in its wider general sense of a flavoring, and not with the particular and specialized meaning it has since acquired.”6 Sweetness does not seem ever to have been enshrined as a taste to be contrasted with all others in the French taste spectrum—bitter, sour, salt, hot—as it has in England and America. Though dessert has a firm place in French meals, the position of cheese is even sturdier. Sweetness occurs in French food in sometimes surprising fashion—often as if it were a spice. This is rather like the Chinese usage, where sweetness also occurs somewhat unexpectedly, and also not always as the climax to a meal. The less conspicuous role of sugar in French and Chinese cuisines may have something to do with their excellence.7 It is not necessarily a mischievous question to ask whether sugar damaged English cooking, or whether English cooking in the seventeenth century had more need of sugar than French.

			When we turn to the so-called less developed countries, yet another perspective is afforded us. Sucrose, contributing as it does something like one-seventh of the average caloric intake of populations in many developed countries (which means, of course, more than that for certain economic sectors and age groups), is so powerful a symbol of the good life that some eminent authorities suggest its caloric contribution could safely become even greater.8 Linked with the general welfare centuries ago, sucrose is still viewed as beneficial by many observers. To examine the reasons why, it may be useful to say a little more about sugar itself—that is, sucrose from sugar cane—even at this late point.

			In the modern world, where the efficient use of energy counts more and more each day, the efficiency of sugar-cane production is a potent factor in sugar’s success. G. B. Hagelberg, one of the keenest students of the world sucrose industry alive, writes, “As a rule, sugar cane (and sugar beet) produce larger quantities of utilizable calories per land unit in a given time than any other cultivated plant in their respective climatic zones.”9 Per hectare (2.47 acres), sugar cane yields, under optimum conditions, about twenty tons of dry material, some half of which is in the form of sugar usable as food or feed; the other ten tons of cane “trash,” or bagasse, is usable as fuel and for the manufacture of paper products, building materials, and furfuraldehyde (a liquid aldehyde used in manufacturing nylon and resins, and as a solvent). Assuming certain raw material and processing parameters, the fifty tons of millable cane stalks obtainable from one hectare under Caribbean conditions will yield:


1. 5.6 tons of high grade raw sugar. On the basis of an annual per capita consumption of 40 kilograms [88 lbs.], this quantity is sufficient for 140 persons, providing the equivalent of 420 kilocalories a day to each or about one-seventh [14 percent] of the total daily caloric intake.

			2. 13.3 tons of wet bagasse (49 percent moisture, 2 percent soluble solids). As fuel, this has a value equivalent to 2.4 tons of fuel oil. Alternatively, depithed and bone dry, this quantity of bagasse can yield somewhat over two tons of bleached paper pulp. Assuming that 500 kilograms of steam are required to process one ton of cane and that 2.3 tons of steam are generated per ton of wet bagasse, use of the bagasse as fuel to process the 50 tons of cane for sugar should actually leave a surplus of roughly 2.4 tons of wet bagasse or about 5 tons of steam for other purposes.

			3. 1.35 tons of final or blackstrap molasses. Roughly a third of the weight of final cane molasses is sucrose that cannot be commercially recovered as centrifugal sugar and about a fifth is composed of reducing sugars. . . . This quantity of molasses [with some additions] is almost sufficient to fatten one bull from 200 to 400 kilograms live weight.10

			To these remarkable calculations we must add something concerning sugar’s relative efficiency as a calorie supplier. As agricultural yields have risen with better modern scientific methods, sugar cane’s long-standing superiority to other crops has grown proportionately. An acre of good subtropical land will now produce more than eight million calories in sugar, beyond the other products it yields. Comparisons with temperate-zone crops are somewhat biased in sugar’s favor, but they are striking, all the same. It is estimated that to produce eight million calories with potatoes would require more than four acres; with wheat, between nine and twelve acres. (It is senseless to add beef to this comparison: to produce eight million calories of beef requires over 135 acres!11) Such calculations seem stark enough in a world that confronts profound energy problems, but they must be projected backward as well (even allowing that sugar-extraction methods centuries ago were nowhere near so efficient as they are now). Such statistics throw light upon the past, while raising vital questions about the future.

			Where the need for calories, let alone other food values, is a serious problem, sucrose may not be a good nutritional answer (in large quantities, I think it is a terrible one); but circumstances early made it, and have kept it, what looks like a good economic answer. When one adds to this the remarkable energy-transforming nature of plants like sugar cane and maize—even at high levels of human input in the form of fertilizers, cultivation, etc., the solar-energy input is approximately 90 percent of the total energy consumed in producing a usable food—the appeal of sucrose as a solution to food problems becomes almost irresistible.

			If we take into account the underlying hominid predisposition toward sweetness, and add to it the astounding caloric yield of sucrose and the efficiency of production that yield betokens, together with the steady decline in the cost of sugar over the centuries, we have some reason for sugar’s success in gaining new consumers. Of course none of this is to overlook the concerted effort to create demand, nor does it help us understand why some consumer markets have been much better than others over the centuries. But even the most sophisticated contemporary antisaccharites are compelled to recognize sugar’s appeal on grounds of taste, energy economy, relative cost, and calories—an appeal sugar manufacturers clearly recognize, and which their political, professorial, and professional supporters push vigorously.

			If we pick up once more the argument that the human diet since the invention of agriculture has centered upon a core complex carbohydrate “fringed” with contrasting tastes and textures to stimulate appetite (and usually improving nutrition also), then the exact role of sucrose in dietary change is difficult to establish. One might be prepared to group sweet with sour, salt, and bitter as a taste that afforded a contrast to the principal complex carbohydrates. But if the sweet fringe expands so that the proportion of the complex-carbohydrate core is reduced—to where it provides perhaps only half of the caloric intake instead of 75 or 90 percent—then the whole architecture of the meal itself has changed. There is nothing mysterious about this. During the history of western cuisine, among the wealthy and powerful, protein-rich foods like meat, fish, and poultry were probably the first major items to supplant copious starch consumption, and such foods undoubtedly grew more important even for the laboring classes between the seventeenth and twentieth centuries, but not in comparable proportions. Instead, the introduction of foods like sucrose made it possible to raise the caloric content of the proletarian diet without increasing proportionately the quantities of meat, fish, poultry, and dairy products.

			Refined sugar thus became a symbol of the modern and industrial. It early came to be viewed in this way, penetrating one cuisine after another, accompanying or following on “westernization” or “modernization” or “development.” Sucrose turns up as a pioneering and popular sign of “progress” among Native North Americans, Eskimos, Africans, and Pacific islanders. Commonly, people learn about it in one of two ways: either they exchange their labor or products or wages for it (along with other desired western goods); or else it is given to them as part of the charity provided by the West—charity usually donated after the westerners recognize the economic disorganization arising from their protracted contact with “less developed” traditional cultures.

			These are roughly the same processes that, at an earlier time, marked the spread of European power and the economy of western capitalism, from region to region and from continent to continent. Even in the case of societies that have been sucrose consumers for centuries, one of the corollaries of “development” is that older, traditional kinds of sugar are being gradually replaced with the white, refined product, which the manufacturers like to call “pure.” In countries like Mexico, Jamaica, and Colombia, for example, all very old sugar producers and consumers, the use of white sugar and of products fabricated with simple syrup has spread downward from the Europeanized elites to the urban working classes, then outward to the countryside, serving as a convenient marker of social position or, at least, aspiration; the older sugars are meanwhile eliminated because they are “old-fashioned” or “unsanitary” or “less convenient.” Not all of these pejorative labels are wrong: noncentrifugal sugars are not so usable in processed foods and beverages, and the enterprises that produce them are usually less efficient than modern factories. But notions of modernity enter in strongly as more processed sugars diffuse to wider circles of consumers. Eventually, the traditional sugars survive as heirlooms of a sort—expensive relics of the past—whereupon they may reappear as stylish “natural” or conspicuous items on the tables of the rich, whose consumption habits helped to make them rare and expensive in the first place, now produced in modern ways that make money for people quite different from those who formerly produced them.12

			The forces that impel consumers to spend more on “traditional” consumption at one point, and on “modern” consumption at another, are complicated and many-sided. One reason we do not understand them better in the case of sugar is that sucrose vendors have always been interested in patterns of consumption only in order to be able to change them; it is the openness of the patterns to change that concerns them. Vendors also understand that the patterns will not yield unless the conditions under which consumption occurs are changed—not just what is worn, but where and when, and with whom; not just what is eaten, but where and when, and with whom.

			A radical change in the perceived situation—for example, learning to feel continuously hurried—can serve to motivate people to try different things. For sucrose sellers, the aim is to increase the role of the market in consumption. This may involve making consumers insecure about their consumption; motivating them to try to identify themselves differently by what they consume; or convincing them they can change the view others have of them by what they consume. The precise ways in which people change from the traditional to the new or modern are not fully understood. We see how people move from old-fashioned brown-sugar loaves or “heads” to paper boxes or bags of refined white sugar, from local beverages to Coca-Cola, from homemade candy to store-bought candy; but we understand far too little of precisely what steps or changes this involves. What seems likely is that such changes repeat or re-enact earlier, similar sequences. As different stages of change succeed one another, we may see recapitulated in them the fairly regular or recurrent historical stages by which outside forces dominated consumption—and, antecedent to it, labor power—at earlier points in western history.

			We have seen how the relationships between the metropolises and their sources of sucrose have changed radically over time, as the position of sucrose in social life shifted. At first, sugar was brought from afar, purchased from foreign producers. Later, each metropolis acquired its own tropical colonies for the production of sugar on a mercantilist basis, simultaneously enriching the state and its commercial and financial classes, stimulating the consumption of both its home manufactures and colonial products, and increasing the market involvement of its own hinterlands. With the perfection of temperate-zone beet-sugar processing, the move from protectionism to a “free market” received more encouragement. Though the colonies remained important sources of gain, the opening of trade and the mastery of beet-sugar processing—the first important seizure by temperate agriculture of what were previously the productive capacities of a tropical region13—helped to counterbalance the subsequent political challenges to the industrial capitalists at home made by the planter classes in the colonies.

			The character and level of sucrose consumption reflect wider processes in yet another way: the differential allocation of sucrose to different uses is a coefficient of other features of development. It is possible to contrast household sucrose use, in candy making, jam making, baking, etc., with its nonhousehold industrial uses, as in factory-baked goods and the manufacture of other prepared and processed foods, both sweet and nonsweet (salad dressings, breadings, catsup, etc.). Statistics show clearly that the more developed the country, the higher the percentage of nonhousehold, industrial use, and recent history confirms as much. Two students of changes in the American use of refined sugar have demonstrated that direct consumer or household use (assumed to be synonymous with purchases of granulated sugar in packages of less than fifty pounds) declined from 52.1 pounds per year in 1909–13 to 24.7 pounds in 1971; while industrial use (food products and beverages) has risen during the same period from 19.3 pounds to 70.2 pounds.14 This trend also shows up, though much less dramatically, in developing countries.

			Industrial use takes two different forms, however, as far as the consumer is concerned: on the one hand, there is consumption outside the home (in restaurants, at snack bars, checkout counters, theaters, etc.), which has risen, pari passu, together with other developmental indices; on the other, there is the ever-increasing use of prepared foods in the home itself. These different forms of sucrose consumption in manufactured and processed foods are connected; both are responses to wider social forces, and they also show up in the developing countries. That societies increasing their per-capita sugar consumption apace may also be moving away from household toward nonhousehold consumption is a way of saying that their citizens are bound to eat more meals away from home, and to eat more prepared foods within the home.

			Neither trend indicates specifically the social meanings of the changes themselves. The relationship between sucrose and these broad social changes is emblematic rather than essential—sugar is even more important for what it reveals than for what it does—and we can examine what it does to understand better what has made the doing possible. Because sucrose is, in both its production and its consumption, at the contact points of capitalist intent, it is worthwhile tracing the scale, content, and form of the changes in its consumption.

			At the production end, sugar early became one of the leading motivations for making overseas agricultural experiments of a mixed sort—that is, with capitalist means and unfree labor. At the consumption end, it was, as we have seen, one of the first items transformed from luxury to necessity, and thereby from rarity to mass-produced good, a transformation embodying both the promise and the fulfillment of capitalism itself. Sucrose production during the last five centuries of western expansion shows an irregular but noticeable geographic movement: first, it was a rarity, a medicine, a spice, coming from afar, traded for but not produced (indeed, the production was somewhat mysterious); then it became an expensive commodity produced from cane in overseas tropical colonies of the very temperate power whose citizens consumed it, these citizens being proletarianized but not proletarian (which is to say, disfranchised but not yet exclusively wage-earning labor); third, it was a less costly commodity produced elsewhere (not necessarily in the colonies of the same power) by various forms of labor, including proletarians; and, lastly, it became an inexpensive everyday commodity, often produced from sugar beets within national boundaries of the same power, much of it by proletarians for proletarians, but most of it bought and sold worldwide in a “free” market.

			“Development,” as it is called, has meant among other things a relatively steady increase in sugar consumption since perhaps the mid-nineteenth century. Around 1800 the part of world sucrose production that reached the market amounted to some 250,000 tons.15 By 1880 that figure had risen fifteenfold, to 3.8 million tons. From 1880 until the onset of World War I—the period when sugar production was technically modernized—the production of centrifugal (“modern”) sugar rose to more than sixteen million tons. And though the period between world wars was one of economic depression and stagnation, it ended with world sugar production at over thirty million tons. In spite of sharp declines during the war, sucrose production resumed its remarkable climb after 1945. From 1900 to 1970, world production of centrifugal sugar increased by about 500 percent, according to one source; another estimates the increase as being more like 800 percent.16 Since world population approximately doubled during those same seventy years, this means that the “available” sugar per person per day worldwide rose from twenty-one to fifty-one grams. By 1970, something like 9 percent of all available food calories in the world were in the form of sucrose, and that figure is probably higher now.

			Many of the really big consuming countries today are European, but by no means all. Iceland was the biggest per-capita consumer as of 1972—about 150 grams per person per day; Ireland, the Netherlands, Denmark, and England were consuming more than 135 grams per person per day at that time. One hundred and fifty grams works out to slightly more than 120 pounds of sucrose per year, or about a third of a pound of sucrose per person per day. For countries that are already big consumers, like Ireland and England, sucrose may contribute 15–18 percent of total energy consumption per capita. Allocation of differential quantities by age and class, if we had the data, would reveal a remarkable, if not shocking, dependency of some age/class sectors upon sucrose.17 It seems certain that less privileged groups (not necessarily the poorest in the less developed countries; more likely the poorest in the more developed countries) consume disproportionate quantities; and it seems likely that younger persons consume more than older or elderly persons. These are not much better than wild guesses; hunches about regional, urban-rural, racial, and sexual differences in sugar-consumption patterns worldwide would be even riskier.

			With development comes a higher percentage of sucrose use in prepared foods. Indeed, the shift to indirect use, like sugar consumption itself, has become a development signal of a kind. Health researcher Arvid Wretlind estimated that the percentage of total sucrose consumed which was used by food industries a decade ago in the Netherlands was 60, and in England 47.18 Other analysts have found that, in the United States, the proportion of total sucrose consumed which was used in food preparation came to an estimated 65.5 percent of the total in 1977.19 So large a commitment to indirect use does not occur in quite the same way in the less developed world, even when sugar consumption is rising.

			Increasing sugar consumption is only one of the ways “development” changes food habits and choices, of course. While caloric intake probably increases as sugar consumption rises, this increase is partly achieved by substitutions, one of the clearest being the replacement of complex carbohydrates (starches) with simple carbohydrates (sucrose). In England, grain consumption decreased from a high of nearly 250 pounds per person per year to less than 170 pounds between 1938 and 1969; sugar consumption during the same period increased from a low of about 70 pounds (1942) to about 115 pounds; and one authority set the per-capita figure at 125 pounds for 1975.20 This whittling away of the complex carbohydrates is of interest quite aside from its nutritional implications, given the change it betokens in the ancient relationship between starch core and the flavor fringe.*

			The disproportionate contribution of the fringe to caloric intake, as the core’s contribution declines, is only one aspect of the change. Together with the sugar increases come remarkable increases in the consumption of fats. Two students of this change, using the years 1909–13 as their comparison base, have shown for the United States that the average daily per-capita consumption of sugars as a proportion of carbohydrates increased in sixty years from 31.5 percent to 52.6 percent; the total daily average per-capita consumption of complex carbohydrates fell from about 350 grams to about 180 grams; while the consumption of dietary fat increased by 25 percent to 155 grams.21 In the past fifteen years there have been further sharp increases in fat consumption, from 126 pounds to 135 pounds per person by 1979. If these figures are accurate, they mean that the average per-capita annual consumption of food fats and processed sugars in the United States in 1979 reached 265 pounds.22 This works out to almost exactly three-quarters of a pound of fat and sugar per person per day.

			The apparent connection between fats and sugars—and their effect on the consumption of complex carbohydrates—has nutritional, psychological, and economic implications.23 But what does this trend mean culturally?

			First, it is associated with the increasing tendency to eat outside the home. The multiplication of syndicated food dispensaries, so-called fast-food systems, since World War II, and particularly in the last two decades, is highly significant. In the United States, the National Advertising Bureau tells us, the “typical American eater” visits a fast-food restaurant nine times a month. One-third of all food dollars are spent on meals away from home, according to the Wall Street Journal. (Of course we want to know at what rates these trends are revealing themselves, to what specific segments of the population they apply, and over how long a time—and we do not know.)

			Second, there is the increased consumption of prepared foods within the home, along with a heightened differentiation of the foods themselves: we now are “free” to choose several different precooked and frozen veal dishes, for instance, packaged by the same manufacturer but different in “style” (milanese, marinara, limonata, oreganata, francese). The number of foods that require nothing but temperature changes before eating has risen in proportion to the total number of prepared and partially prepared foods, including those that may require more than heating to be done to them before they can be consumed. And the variety of heating and chilling media, usually running on high-energy output—woks, steamers, bakers, broilers, deep fryers, radiation and convection ovens—has also risen sharply, all vended on the basis of “speediness,” “convenience,” “economy,” and “cleanliness.”

			These developments directly affect the role playing that has traditionally accompanied family meals. Anthropological students of food and eating have thought it valid to analogize from linguistics to describe what happens, both in any given meal and in the patterning of meals. Thus, Mary Douglas tells us that “the binary or other contrasts must be seen in their syntagmatic relations.” By this, she explains, she means putting into analyzable order food units descending from daily menu to mouthful, and ascending from daily to weekly or yearly, and from everyday to special, festive, and ceremonial. Paradigmatic relations characterize the components within a meal, and syntagmatic relations characterize those among meals; or, to cite Douglas again, “On the two axes of syntagm and paradigm, chain and choice, sequence and set, call it what you will, [Halliday] has shown how food elements can be ranged until they are all accounted for either in grammatical terms or down to the last lexical item.”24

			But the whole momentum of modern life has been away from any such “lexicon” or “grammar,” and the analogy is not a good one. Describing the foods in a meal in linguistic terminology hardly “accounts for” them, because the structural constraints on ingestion are not comparable to those on language; we can eat without meals, but we cannot speak without grammar. The function of grammar in language has to be agreed upon by the speakers—that is, held in common and understood by them—for communication to take place at all. Hence the relation of so-called grammar to eating is only a cute artifact of description. Eating will of course continue, even if the very idea of “meal” as we know it disappears.

			Viewed from the perspective of the modern-food technologist, abolition of any such “grammar” is the best way of increasing consumption of mass-produced food products while maximizing what he might refer to as “freedom of individual choice.” Increased consumption may not be the admitted intent; but it would be hard to conjecture what else it is. The “paradigm” of the meal, the “syntagm” of the meal schedule, and time restraints on eating may all be considered as obstructions to the exercise of individual preference.

			In contrast, meals that must be eaten by everyone at the same time require advancement, postponement, or cancellation of competing events by the participants. Meals consisting of the same items for all eaters must be based on a least common denominator, rather than on each person’s greatest preferences. Meals that are eaten in some fixed order may run counter to one or another participant’s preference for soup last or dessert later. Ceremonial meals that involve some invariant item (lamb, turkey) may be unpleasant for an individual who dislikes that food. When one is serving oneself from a serving plate, the helpings must be adjusted to the desires of others who are eating. All of these constraints reveal that social eating is precisely that: social, involving communication, give and take, a search for consensus, some common sense about individual needs, compromise through attending to the needs of others. Social interaction leaves room for the operation of opinion and in-group influence. But some might call these constraints upon individual freedom.

			The food technologist interested in selling products aims willy-nilly at the obliteration of such schedules and “grammars,” and at a standardized, even if large, “lexicon”—making it possible for everyone to eat exactly what he or she wants to eat, in exactly the quantities and under exactly the circumstances (time, place, occasion) he or she prefers. Incidental to this is the elimination of the social significance of eating together. Ideally, in these terms, an obese daughter may now eat a series of yogurts, an enthusiastic television-watching father a TV dinner, a jogging mother large quantities of granola, and an alienated son no end of pizzas, Cokes, or ice creams.25

			As food availability has been generalized across modern society, the structures of meals and the calendar of diet in daily life have tended to disappear. Coffee and Coca-Cola are now appropriate at any time and with any accompaniment. So, too, are breaded, deep-fried bits of complex carbohydrate and protein (potatoes, corn and wheat bread sticks, chicken, scallops, shrimp, pork, fish pieces). Synthetic juices that split the difference between the food faddists and the Pepsi Generation; fiber-rich cereals made calorie-heavy with raisins, figs, dates, honey, nuts, and nut substitutes; crackers, cheeses, dips, pretzels, and “munchies”—together these now provide a nutritive medium within which social events occur, rather than the other way round. The meal, which had a clear internal structure, dictated at least to some degree by the one-cook-to-one-family pattern and the consequences of socialization within such a pattern, as well as by “tradition,” can now mean different items and different sequences for each consumer. The week’s round of food, which once meant chicken or some equivalent on Sunday, or fish on Friday, is no longer so stable, nor viewed as so necessary by the participants. And the year’s round of food, which brought bock beer, shad, fresh dill, and new potatoes, each in its turn, turkey twice a year, and fruit cake with hard sauce at New Year’s, survives only on sufferance, finessed by turkey burgers, year-round bock beer, and other modern wonders.

			These transformations have made ingestion more individualized and noninteractive; they have desocialized eating. Choices to be made about eating—when, where, what, how much, how quickly—are now made with less reference to fellow eaters, and within ranges predetermined, on the one hand, by food technology and, on the other, by what are perceived as time constraints.

			The experience of time in modern society is often one of an insoluble shortage, and this perception may be essential to the smooth functioning of an economic system based on the principle of ever-expanded consumption.26 Anthropologists and economists have struggled with the paradox implicit in modern society—that its vastly more productive technologies result in individuals having (or feeling they have) less time, rather than more. Because of time pressure, people try to condense their consumption pleasure by consuming different things (such as movies and popcorn) simultaneously. This simultaneous (but often peculiarly unsatisfying) experience seems to the individual to be a “natural” one—just as does the proliferation of fruit stands, croissant carts, coffee machines, and the like on the corners and in the building basements, laundry rooms, and hallways of American cities, in gas stations, at checkout counters, in theater lobbies, and elsewhere. Maximum enjoyment in minimum time has come to mean both divided (simultaneous) consumption—one eats while walking or working, drinks while driving or watching entertainment—and higher frequency of occasions for consumption. Watching the Cowboys play the Steelers while eating Fritos and drinking Coca-Cola, while smoking a joint, while one’s girl sits on one’s lap, can be packing a great deal of experience into a short time and thereby maximizing enjoyment. Or it can be experienced quite differently, depending upon the values one holds. Most important, however, people who experience pleasures simultaneously in these ways are taught to think about the consumption itself—not about the circumstances that led them to consume in that fashion, other than to sense that there was “not enough time” to do otherwise.27

			Since the only objective way to increase time is to alter percentages for the activities it encompasses, and since the workday has remained relatively the same length for a century, most adjustments in available time tend to be cosmetic, or to involve “time-saving.” The development of prepared food to be eaten in the home, as well as eating out, are both regarded as time-saving practices. Of course, consuming prepared food means surrendering much of one’s choice in what one eats. But, not surprisingly, the food industry touts it as increasing one’s freedom of choice—especially when the industry omits reference to what the food itself contains. Thus is the dialectic between supposed individual freedom and social patterning perpetuated.

			In discussing the penetration of sucrose into the rhythms of the British workday, I was able to give only summary treatment to such fundamental changes as the alterations in the workday, the change in the sexual division of labor, revised allocations of effort, and the inversions of eating time and preparation time. We know that the scheduling of events and rituals changed radically for the British working class when sugar became common, but the research done on this aspect is too broad (and hence too shallow) to permit documentation in any serious fashion. Alterations in the perception of time must have been at least as important as the actual objective remaking of the workday, and these rarely express the exercise of power directly. Indeed, it is just because such power is revealed only indirectly that it can remain mysterious—setting the terms of work as if the machines demanded it, or as if daylight made it necessary, or as if the others in the work force fixed the tempo, or as if eating had to fit within a unit of time, rather than its being the act of eating itself that determines how much time it should take.

			One of the effects of changing the time formula is that it subtly recasts people’s images of their lives and of themselves. How much time people actually have for different pursuits, how much time they believe they have, and the relationship between these are aspects of daily life shaped by externalities and, in particular in the modern world, by the reorganization of the workday.28 What seem visible to the worker, however, are the changed conditions of work. These new conditions shape in turn what is left of his time; yet how much time one “has” may be only fleetingly perceived as dependent, ultimately, on the work regime. People live inside the time they think they have; they may experience subjective changes in their moods, conditioned by their ability to live up to (or, often, not to live up to) their own standards of performance; but only now and then do they conceive of their performance as affected by alterations that give and take away time, or their will to feel they are controlling the use of time.

			The patterning of time is linked to the patterning of ingestion; material on the United States is sufficiently detailed to clarify the line of argument here. The rise in the use of prepared foods, the increase in meals eaten out, and the decline of the meal itself as a ritual (particularly for kin groups) have led in recent decades to different patterns of sucrose usage as well as to increases in the consumption of sugars overall.

			Between 1955 and 1965, per-capita usage of certain sweets and sugars—candy, for example—actually dropped 10 percent. But during the same period, the per-capita consumption of frozen-milk “desserts” rose 31 percent; of baked goods 50 percent; and of soft drinks 78 percent.29 From these figures, I think it is possible to infer an increasing intervention in meal schedules. “The daily three-meal pattern, although mentioned as a valid rule by almost all the subjects [of a recent study,] is no longer a reality,” says the French anthropologist Claude Fischler. Though the research on which this assertion is based is too slight to be generalized, it indicates that 75 percent of American families do not take breakfast together. Dinners eaten together are down to three a week or less, and these meals usually last no more than twenty minutes. Yet among urban, middle-class families, the number of “contacts” between any family member and food might run as high as twenty daily.30 Such figures hark back to the hunting-and-gathering existence of our species, when food was eaten as it became available, without much reference to situation or circumstance.

			One fascinating expression of this modern American way of eating is found in what we know is consumed and what people recall they have consumed. Whereas the Department of Agriculture figures demonstrate that we dispose of about 3,200 calories per capita per day, the average white female adult, for example, can recall, when asked what she ate on the previous day, only 1,560 calories, a noticeably low average, and less than half the “disappearance” figure.31 Since average weight has risen steadily in this country, these recall data are difficult to accept as accurate. They suggest a pattern of ragged and discontinuous but very frequent snacks that are surely forgotten by those who do the eating.

			Sucrose fits snugly into the picture, as the facts concerning sweetened frozen-milk products, baked goods, and soft drinks demonstrate. The “desserts” or baked goods together with beverages (more commonly than not, soft drinks) constitute brief, meal-like interventions during the day, which further erode the traditional three-meal pattern. Enlarged mid-morning and mid-afternoon snacks have the effect of making the meals on either side more snacklike.

			In short, it would appear that the meal structure—the “paradigmatics” and “syntagmatics” of ingestion—is dissolving. To what extent this is true for any given social group in any given western country is, of course, unknown; but it is clear that the history of sugar consumption predates—and in certain ways prefigures—the spread of unscheduled eating as an aspect of modern life.

			There is yet one other way in which sugar has affected the modernization of consumption. The high sucrose content of many prepared and processed foods that do not taste sweet (such as flour-dredged meats, poultry, and fish that are baked, broiled, or deep-fried) is an important source of the increase in sucrose consumption and substantiates the astonishing versatility of sucrose. When used in non-yeast-raised baked goods, we are told, “texture, grain and crumb became smoother, softer and whiter. . . . This tenderizing effect of sugars has long been recognized.”32 Sucrose also supplies “body” to soft drinks, because “a heavy liquid is more appealing to the mouth than water.”33 Sugar inhibits staleness in bread—“shelf life” is important in a society that wants its supermarkets open twenty-four hours a day for “convenience”—stabilizes the chemical content of salt, mitigates the acidity of catsup, serves as a medium for yeast. In all of these uses, its sweetness is largely irrelevant; indeed, many food manufacturers would dearly love a chemical having all of the qualities of sucrose without the calories and, in some cases, even without the sweetness.34 That is how far we have come since the seventeenth century.

			Yet in spite of these many virtues, the fate of sucrose is by no means entirely assured. In the last decade, yet another sugar, high-fructose corn syrup, has been making inroads into the sugar market, particularly among prepared-food manufacturers. The most crushing blow came when Coca-Cola partly replaced sucrose with HFCS; it seems probable that other defeats will follow.35 At any rate, corn syrups are cutting into the consumption of other sugars and will probably do so more and more.

			While per-capita sucrose use in the United States has hovered for some time now around the hundred-pounds-per-year level, the consumption of other sweeteners has risen steadily for at least seventy years. (This is one reason why the somewhat sanctimonious assertions that “sugar consumption” has not risen—here meaning sucrose consumption—usually trumpeted by either sugar-corporation representatives or well-sweetened professors of nutrition, must be viewed with reserve.) Thus the per-capita “disappearance” figure for all nondietary sugars (i.e., sugars not occurring naturally, as in fruits) is nearly 130 pounds per year. If disappearance is the same as consumption, then the daily per-capita total nondietary consumption of sugars is nearly six ounces per day.

			The fact that the eater does not perceive much of this sugar as sweet has two aspects. First, the sucrose may be used in small enough proportions so that its taste is undiscernible—though doubtless there is much individual variation in taste sensitivity to sweetness. Second, it is probable that sweetness is perceived less when it is not expected, noticed less in foods that are not considered “sweet.” If we include nonsucrose sweeteners like HFCS in this consumption picture, the situation gives rise to what one scholar has called “the interconvertibility factor,”36 such that more and more edible substances are becoming more and more substitutable. The German experiments with deriving edible substances from naturally occurring petroleum during World War II were, then, only harbingers of the future. This same scholar suggests that the margarine/butter dyad is one of the oldest “analogue relationships,”37 in which an unlikely food eventually becomes partly indistinguishable from the product it imitates; the sucrose/HFCS dyad gives rise to comparable questions. Whether worldwide, in national markets, or in class-divided consumption patterns, the rivalries between sucrose and other caloric and noncaloric sweeteners, like the rivalry between dairy and nondairy products, are by no means fully understood. At such nodal points of change, culture and technology, culture and economics, culture and politics are in confrontation. And some of the issues to which the recent success of HFCS has given rise—to note again only the most significant such example for the present argument—will not be fully settled in the lifetime of any of us.

			From the very beginning of this book, my argument has been that sugar—sucrose—has to be viewed in its multiple functions, and as a culturally defined good. I have emphasized its unusual symbolic “carrying power,” a symbolic weight that endured among the rich and powerful until sucrose became common, cheap, and desired, when it spread widely through the working classes of all western nations, carrying with it many of its older meanings but also acquiring new ones. The affective weight of sweetness, always considerable, was not so much diminished as qualitatively changed by its abundance. The good life, the rich life, the full life—was the sweet life.

			The advent of margarine, invented by the French chemist Mège Mouriès but made into a world commodity by the Dutch, can be counterposed to the history of sucrose in symbolically interesting ways. As we have seen, the gradual erosion of complex-carbohydrate consumption has been from two sides—sugars on one, fats on the other. These foods occur together in such items as milk desserts; they are epitomized among liquids by condensed milk, among semisolids by ice cream, and among solids by chocolate candy. In the last half-century or so, sugar-fat combinations have taken two other important industrially processed forms: in salty-food/sweet-drink combinations (hamburgers with Coca-Cola, hot dogs with orange soda, pastrami with celery tonic), and in the combination of sweet, cold drinks with deep-fried items in which sugar figures in the exterior coating. These latter represent a special triumph of situationally conditioned taste over nutrition. The fat side is advertised with words like “juicy,” “succulent,” “hot,” “luscious,” “savory,” “rich,” “satisfying,” and “finger-licking good.” The sugar side is touted with words like “crisp,” “fresh,” “invigorating,” “icy,” “wholesome,” “refreshing,” and “vibrant.” These sets of words are counterposed in the language of commercial attraction.38

			The combination of sugars and fats, as food choice or preference, is a very important one.

			Richness in diet is frequently associated with fat and sugar in the diet and “eating out” with fast foods and snack foods. The latter also not only are identified with high fat and high sugar but reflect “fast” as part of the life style and, in some respects, reinforce fast living. . . . Fat and sugar are more than functional aids to shelf life; they are equally associated with the richness of food and, therefore, its acceptability.39

			The food technologist’s lexicon for the uses of sugar and fat pays special attention to sugar’s way of making foods more palatable. Baked products are judged by their quality of “go-away.” Proper proportions of sugar and fat result in “good go-away”—which means that the mouthful of food can be swallowed without leaving the inside of the mouth coated with fat particles. The help of sugar in achieving good go-away is vital. It is now permissible to add up to 10 percent sugar to manufactured peanut butters in the U.S. No other food, they say, has such poor go-away as peanut butter; sugar improves its go-away marvelously. Soft-drink manufacturers, substituting saccharin for sugar, struggle with a comparable problem. Gums of various sorts are introduced to make the soft drink taste heavier in the mouth, the way sugar would make it heavy, since the mouth—food technologists tell us—prefers liquids that are heavier than water. The term “mouth feel” is used to describe the felt “body” of liquids (like soft drinks), to which sugar supplies agreeable weight or balance. It can be seen that this terminology is not really concerned with taste: texture, perhaps, or “feel,” but not taste.

			• • •

			These observations suggest that the lay person’s awareness of the nature of his/her own perceptions of food is undeveloped. Much that is subsumed under “taste” in modern eating is not taste at all, but something else. The reaction to deep-fried foods covered with batter is probably a good illustration. The inclusion of sugar in the batter facilitates caramelization, sealing the food so that it can be cooked without losing its own fatty and liquid contents. Whatever sucrose or other sugars are used, their sweetness function is supplanted by one of sugar’s other food uses; sweetness in the meal comes from the beverages with which such deep-fried foods are consumed. This is not the place to develop further some of the sociopsychological implications of the heightened uses of convenience and fast foods, with their combinations of cold, effervescent, usually stimulant sweet liquids with hot fatty proteins and complex carbohydrates, often “finished” with sucrose-rich batters. Perhaps people associate the “rich life” with such foods, and perhaps the oral stimuli they provide “have numerous pleasant associations that relate to early life experiences.”40

			I have tried to suggest some of the ways that modern eating habits have altered the place of sugar. While many of the world’s peoples are still learning to eat sucrose in the ways and quantities that marked its spread through England and the West, others are moving into a wholly different period of eating history. Roland Barthes argued that the famous place of food in French life has been qualitatively changing, and his argument seems to hold for modern societies generally:

			Food serves as a sign not only for themes, but also for situations; and this, all told, means for a way of life that is emphasized, much more than expressed, by it. To eat is a behavior that develops beyond its own ends, replacing, summing up, and signalizing other behaviors, and it is precisely for these reasons that it is a sign. What are these other behaviors? Today, we might almost say that “polysemia” of food characterizes modernities; in the past, only festive occasions were signalized by food in any positive organized manner. But today, work also has its own kind of food (on the level of a sign, that is): energy-giving and light food is experienced as a very sign of, rather than only a help toward, participation in modern life. . . . We are witnessing an extraordinary expansion of the areas associated with food: food is becoming incorporated into an ever-lengthening list of situations. This adaptation is usually made in the name of hygiene and better living, but in reality, to stress this fact once more, food is also charged with signifying the situation in which it is used. It has a twofold value, being nutrition as well as protocol, and its value as protocol becomes increasingly more important as soon as the basic needs are satisfied, as they are in France. In other words, we might say that in contemporary French society, food has a constant tendency to transform itself into situation.41

			The peculiar versatility of sugars has led to their remarkable permeation through so many foods and into nearly all cuisines. But the subsidiary or additional uses of some sugars, particularly sucrose, have become more important, not less, as prepared foods inside and outside the home grow more popular. The function of sweetness in the patterning of ingestion has changed, even while the nonsweetening uses of sucrose and corn sweeteners have expanded. That sugars not only have remained important in our new diets and eating habits but have become proportionately much more so is additional evidence of their versatility.

			The track sugar has left in modern history is one involving masses of people and resources, thrown into productive combination by social, economic, and political forces that were actively remaking the entire world. The technical and human energies these forces released were unequaled in world history, and many of their consequences have been beneficial. But the place of sugars in the modern diet, the strangely imperceptible attrition of people’s control over what they eat, with the eater becoming the consumer of a mass-produced food rather than the controller and cook of it, the manifold forces that work to hold consumption in channels predictable enough to maintain food-industry profits, the paradoxical narrowing of individual choice, and of opportunity to resist this trend, in the guise of increasing convenience, ease, and “freedom”—these factors suggest the extent to which we have surrendered our autonomy over our food.

			Subtle encouragements to be modern, efficient, up to date, and individualistic have become steadily more sophisticated. We are what we eat; in the modern western world, we are made more and more into what we eat, whenever forces we have no control over persuade us that our consumption and our identity are linked.

			More and more of the so-called “creative” people who design products are not in the laboratories and, therefore, least open to technological and scientific constraints. Marketing executives have found that ideas generated by nontechnical people are more realistically associated with markets and are less inhibited by restraints which would concern technical people. As a consequence new product funds tend to be invested more in services associated with advertising than those of technical groups. . . .

			The effect of such product development practices on consumption is important. . . . If we define what has been referred to as richness as a concomitant of flavor, then the repeated incorporation of “richness” into a new product would not only provide regular reinforcement for recognizing “richness,” but, with all of its omnipresent associations promoted as good, result in increased consumption of fat and sugar. . . . There is supposedly a safety factor associated with fat consumption and probably also with sweetener consumption. But the statistics, at least on the average, support the conclusion that as preparation of food moves from kitchen to factory, the perception of richness and the continuing emphasis on richness, certainly in snack foods, has contributed not only to reinforcement but also the resultant increased consumption. . . . It would appear that such increases due to the relative inelasticity of demand for food could seriously unbalance nutrition. . . . What is perhaps more disturbing is the degree to which the discretionary limits of consumers are being reduced by the system which designs food like any other consumer item. . . .42

			Lionel Tiger, an anthropologist proceeding from a somewhat different perspective, arrives at similarly critical conclusions. He points out that as belief systems in modern societies become more secularized, individuals change the way they view their own safety, and an “extermination model,” as he calls it, results. That is, individuals attach to such environmental risks as exposure to radiation or chemicals, and perhaps especially to eating, a statistical reckoning of their life chances. To believe one has an X-percent chance of developing cancer after Y number of cigarettes is rather different, says Tiger, “from the relatively straightforward connection to a theological dominant in terms of whom the rules of right and wrong are plain and the results of particular actions relatively clearly identifiable.”43 But, perhaps more important, this change to a statistical, epidemiological approach to risk burdens the individual with inhibitions in regard to eating:

			The decision about personal destiny, as far as health is concerned, is stressed directly on the individual, despite the fact that everywhere in the community blandishments exist to increase individual risk of disease development: for example, the countless public feeding facilities such as the fast food outlets who rely unduly on foods that are not highly desirable from the disease prevention point of view. So while the individual is faced with an entirely personal decision to take, he or she must take it in a social context which is relatively provocative in a destructive sense, because of the community’s indifference to or lack of information about suitable patterns of eating, or the vested interest of persons and groups committed to maintaining advantageous positions in the economy which depend upon less than medically desirable eating habits.44

			Fischler, the French anthropologist, appalled by the way “snacking” has supplanted meal taking (it is clear that the very word offends him, and he declares proudly that there is no equivalent in French!), speaks of the replacement of gastronomy by “gastro-anomie,” and raises questions about the trend toward desocialized, aperiodic eating. One senses today a quickening of such diffusion, a speeding up, even in large, ancient societies that were apparently once resistant to such processes, such as China and Japan. The changing nature of the industrial workday, the cheap calories (both in cost and in resource use) provided by sucrose, and the special-interest groups intent on pushing its consumption45 make such cumulative pressure difficult to resist on an individual or a group educational basis.

			Food may be no more than a sign of yet larger, more fundamental processes—or so it seems. Diet is remade because the entire productive character of societies is recast and, with it, the very nature of time, of work, and of leisure. If these occurrences raise questions for us and about us—if they seem to others, as they seem to me, to have escaped from human control even though they are very much the outcome of organized human intent—then we need to understand them far better than we do. We may aspire to change the world, rather than merely to observe it. But we need to understand how it works in order to change it in socially effective ways.

			We anthropologists for too long have paradoxically denied the way the world has changed and continues changing, as well as our ability—responsibility, even—to contribute to a broad understanding of the changes. If we have been betrayed by our own romanticism, we have also lagged in recognizing and asserting our strengths. Those strengths continue to lie in fieldwork (there is little in this book, I confess), and in a full appreciation of humanity’s historical nature as a species. Anthropological interest in how person, substance, and act are integrated meaningfully can be pursued in the modern world as well as in the primitive one. Studies of the everyday in modern life, of the changing character of mundane matters like food, viewed from the joined perspective of production and consumption, use and function, and concerned with the differential emergence and variation of meaning, may be one way to inspirit a discipline now dangerously close to losing its sense of purpose.

			To move from so minor a matter as sugar to the state of the world in general may seem like yet another chorus of the bone song—the hip bone’s connected to the leg bone, etc. But we have already seen how sucrose, this “favored child of capitalism”—Fernando Ortiz’s lapidary phrase46—epitomized the transition from one kind of society to another. The first sweetened cup of hot tea to be drunk by an English worker was a significant historical event, because it prefigured the transformation of an entire society, a total remaking of its economic and social basis. We must struggle to understand fully the consequences of that and kindred events, for upon them was erected an entirely different conception of the relationship between producers and consumers, of the meaning of work, of the definition of self, of the nature of things. What commodities are, and what commodities mean, would thereafter be forever different. And for that same reason, what persons are, and what being a person means, changed accordingly. In understanding the relationship between commodity and person, we unearth anew the history of ourselves.





			A Negro Servant from America Cutting Sugar Cane first appeared in Father J.-B. Labat’s Nouveau voyage aux isles d’Amérique (1722). The artist’s choice of exotic costume was a common affectation of the time. In fact, cane-cutting gangs worked in rags, under the direction of a “driver” who held a whip in his hand. The illustration from Ten Views of Antigua, on the following page, provides a more realistic view of field labor on a sugar plantation. (Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris)





			This careful display of tropical plants, from William Rhind’s A History of the Vegetable Kingdom (1865), includes sugar cane, somewhat exaggerated in height and thickness but otherwise accurately illustrated. Interestingly, the only human figures are shown next to the cane; one appears to be cutting cane, and both are depicted as black.





			One of W. Clark’s Ten Views of Antigua (1823), which shows a slave gang hoeing and planting sugar cane. Though this drawing was made only a few years before the Emancipation in the British West Indies, the highly organized, almost industrial character of field labor probably typified the slave-based Caribbean plantation from its very beginnings more than three centuries earlier. (British Library)





			This fanciful drawing, from De Americae (Part V, 1595), by the engraver Theodor de Bry, illustrates a text by Girolamo Benzoni on the sugar-cane industry in Santo Domingo. Benzoni, an Italian adventurer, visited the New World in the years 1541–55, and his account, La Historia del mondo nuovo (1565), is one of the earliest we have for the Caribbean. In this depiction the workers resemble Classical Greeks more than Africans or Indians, and the cane processing is confusingly presented: a “mill” at the upper right shows only a sluice and a water wheel, while the device inside the shed is an edge-roller, long employed in Europe to crush olives and apples and in India and elsewhere to crush cane, but whose use is not documented for the New World.





			This engraving, from César de Rochefort’s Histoire naturelle et morale des Antilles (1681), is signed “A.W. delin” (presumably delineavit), but A.W. is unidentified. The kind of sugar mill design it shows was retained for centuries.





			 Two interior views of nineteenth-century sugar boiling-houses, by R. Bridgens (top) and W. Clark (bottom). Once again, the time-conscious, disciplined, industrial character of sugar manufacture is suggested. (British Library)





			A contemporary sugar mill in the Dominican Republic. Closely resembling their predecessors going back several centuries, such mills are still to be found in the Caribbean, as well as on the South American mainland. The final product is a coarse brown sugar popular in the traditional cuisines of many regions. (Bonnie Sharpe)





			The Sugar Hogshead, by E. T. Parris (1846). Sugar shipped in great barrels such as this was dispensed by local grocers. Parris, a sentimental and rather undistinguished artist, painted many such London scenes. The children, drawn like flies to the now-empty barrel, reveal nicely how important sugar had become in the nineteenth-century British diet.





			These elegant nineteenth-century desserts, illustrations from the cookbooks of the French bakers Dubois and Bernard, reveal the niche in haute cuisine that developed after sugar lost its special symbolic potency and became a relatively inexpensive commodity. (Centre de Documentation du Sucre)





			Contemporary renderings, in sugar paste, of miniature figures in nineteenth-century costume. (Top: Laurent Sully Jaulmes/Musée des Arts Décoratifs/Centre de Documentation du Sucre. Bottom: Philippe Rousselet/Centre de Documentation du Sucre)





			All Saints’ Day, Día de los Muertos, is celebrated in Mexico with candy skulls, tombs, and wreaths, and an astounding display of artistic/culinary ingenuity. The artistic and ritual association between sugar and death is not a Mexican monopoly; in much of Europe, candied funeral treats are popular. The link between Easter and sugar is neatly contrastive. (C. Gibier/Centre de Documentation du Sucre)





			This sugar mold, which includes a bust of George V, was prepared for the king’s silver jubilee (1935). It harks back to the work of royal sugar bakers of earlier centuries.(C. Gibier/Musée des Arts Décoratifs/Centre de Documentation du Sucre)





			A scale model (1:80) by sugar baker Mary Ford and her husband of the British royal state coach, fashioned for the silver jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II (1977). (C. Gibier/Centre de Documentation du Sucre)





			The Cathedral of Notre Dame at Amiens, in scale (1:80), created in 1977 by sugar baker Hubert Lahm. Twenty thousand sugar cubes and 176 pounds of glaze were used in the construction of this work, which stands 59 inches high, 70 inches long, and 36 inches wide. (Centre de Documentation du Sucre)





			A model sailing ship on an elaborate base, entirely fashioned from sugar paste by baker Hiroomi Tatematsu.(Centre de Documentation du Sucre)





			This model medieval castle was constructed by English chefs at a West Sussex restaurant (1977). It probably typifies the work of royal sugar bakers of an earlier era. (Centre de Documentation du Sucre)





			This sculpture, Caesar’s Thumb, suggests how art and appetite intersect in the history of sugar. Though carried to levels of extreme delicacy in some works, sugar paste can also be employed as if it were clay or stone. (C. Gibier/Centre de Documentation du Sucre)





			Etienne Tholoniat, a great French sugar baker, puts the finishing touches on a life-size chocolate nude with spun-sugar hair. She is lying on a bed of six hundred sugar roses. (Centre de Documentation du Sucre)





