                          PREFACE

The object of this book is to present a brief outline of man’s
prehistoric past. The varying intensity of archaeological research
in different parts of the world, the author’s unequal reading and
the insistent progress of knowledge, which modifies conclusions
almost before they can be set down, all help to distort the picture.
Yet, as a teacher, the author is aware that even an imperfect text
may have its uses, more especially to those prepared to adventure
more widely in the literature of the subject.
   In a volume of this scope and size an author has no choice but
to state conclusions without being able to argue his case in any
detail or even, save on occasion, to specify alternatives or do more
than indicate the very extensive areas of uncertainty which enve-
lope his subject. The present author trusts that where his inter-
pretation differs without explanation from that of some authorities
cited at the end of this volume, the nature and limitations of his
book will be remembered. One of the pleasures of preparing it
has been the stimulus to read more widely, and the author acknow-
ledges the benefits he has received in this way.
   In seeing the book into print the author has received valuable
help and criticism from members of the staff of the University Press.
   Permission to publish photographs has been kindly given by
the following: the University Museum of Archaeology and
Ethnology and the Museum of Classical Archaeology at Cam-
bridge; the Cambridge University Press; Messrs Thames and
Hudson; Dr K. M. Kenyon; the Museum of National Antiquities,
St Germain; the Oriental Institute, Chicago; the Museum, Jos,
Nigeria; the National Museum, Copenhagen; and the State
Historical Museum, Stockholm.
   Finally, the author would like to acknowledge the skill and
understanding with which Mrs Ruth Daniel has drawn the maps.
PETERHOUSE, CAMBRIDGE                         GRAHAME       CLARK
August 1960
                            a,
                            x         be             A       ")

                            aie                     bs                    a




           i    j           iia                 |        a        a       7   ?     :   A



       a
               ot       4Aerie oe                                             ais ane
    pu Aly
                      .
      maeag
                            f                                         7
                                                                  Ter
                                                                                    y       mi
                                                                                    te                  :




                            % My
                            tk         :        =
                            :              ry
                                at     a



                     Fi ni Ay
                kenneironte «run
                       ae ee ia) brbeltalt a
    Clidllng:                      angen pe‘wer wip ailsorelgy aan
    some yiien nrld 42 + Nate te Riecin
                                        ang
    ior o7tl vitnit                   a> ud 54a: Ashi                               avd          de
\          {Viet                            Wh ‘nado                          tt “enya
                    Le ey   ihe: *aeges Ws               ented                    hy QUEM             quel
                    Wet ewagle, (ell qumopce’), aebaki; n
                    wit              lias            avoreaidase (vituegninaeahe
                                                                                                             y
                                                                  D               retin? UaseheSy
                                                                              elites        14 egal f
                                                                                  lea?                masa
                                                                          f       & diuny7 * stabtses
                                                                          itl igh a                   ih opie
                    INTRODUCTION

The idea that human history began when the first hominids pro-
claimed their humanity by making tools according to socially
transmitted patterns is one that has only taken shape during the
hundred years or so since Darwin published The Origin of Species.
It had of course been realized much earlier that something could
be learned about times before the earliest written records by
diligent study of monuments and other material traces, though to
begin with antiquarians were mainly concerned with traces of
classical or medieval civilization. By the end of the eighteenth
century archaeology had already begun to be applied systemati-
cally to a study of the prehistoric, as well as the historic, ages of
man. A close relationship can indeed be observed between the
development of men’s ideas about the biological world and about
their own earliest history, and it may be said that scientific enquiry
killed the idea that history was limited to the span of literate
tradition as surely as it did the dogma of the fixity of species.
   The first systematic attempts to classify archaeological data
were both evolutionary in conception and show very clearly the
impact on the study of human history of ideas that had been
stirring in the realm of biology since the days of Buffon. C. J.
Thompsen’s Three Age System (1836) was based on the succession
of stone, bronze and iron as the leading raw materials for tools and
weapons; and Sven Nilsson’s (1838-43) classification was based
on a supposed progression from a hunter-fisher mode of life to
that of literate civilization by way of herding and cultivation.
These and later attempts to grade prehistoric societies in terms of
evolutionary development owed much to the observation of
modern primitive peoples. In much the same way, it was the
opportunities for studying nature at work gained on Darwin’s
journey with the Beagle and Wallace’s travels in the Malay
                                  I
                         INTRODUCTION

archipelago that led to the theory of evolution by natural selection.
The publication of Darwin’s book, and above all perhaps its
championing by Thomas Huxley in relation to man’s place in
nature, proved a real turning point. Acceptance of the geological
antiquity and zoological relationships of man served to emphasize
the immensity and significance of his prehistory. The need to
bridge the gap between what was known about man from tradi-
tional sources and what was implied by the new hypotheses of
natural science in relation to his origins was now manifest.
   It was to fill this gap that prehistory as we understand it came
into being as a recognized field of study. The use of this term to
designate the history of preliterate societies in contradistinction to
that of literate ones may be thought to be illogical and to run
counter to the basic continuity and unity of history. Yet there is
a strong case for recognizing the distinction between the two
disciplines, so long as it is remembered that there is in fact no
break in the phenomena they seek to study. The kind of informa-
tion about the prehistoric past to be won by archaeology is very
different from that obtainable from written documents, so that
whereas the historian is able to delve down into the motives and
choices of individuals, the prehistorian must as a rule be content
with the fate of communities or classes, and must concern himself
with trends more often than with events. Again, although it is
true that the methods perfected by prehistorians can generally
be applied to elucidating the historic past, the skills and techniques
most frequently used by the historian and by the prehistorian differ
widely, as do their relations with other branches of knowledge.
   If prehistory originated from a philosophical need brought into
existence by the progress of biology, the more general applications
of modern science have recently added urgency both to the
prosecution and the dissemination of prehistory. It is not difficult
to detect among lay public and professional historians alike a sense
of the inadequacy of traditional history at the present juncture of
human affairs. Whatever may be thought about his philosophy or
                                  2
                         INTRODUCTION

scheme of history, it is a merit in Professor Toynbee to have
emphasized the deficiencies in our age of supersonic aircraft and
nuclear fission of the kind of history appropriate to the age of the
horse and buggy or even of the railway. Anomalies frequently
have their comical aspect, but equally they are liable to be
dangerous; and this property is likely to be particularly marked
when something so deeply charged with emotion as men’s view of
the past is involved. What is above all needed is surely a view of
history capable of reconciling the requirements of national
societies with those of a world order. Yet, if Toynbee’s case
against identifying general history with the history of western
civilization is accepted, his insistence on the autonomy of the
major literate civilizations runs the danger of substituting cultural
for national rivalries. It is surely the prehistoric past, largely
overlooked by Toynbee, that provides the only common source
of all civilizations and so of all literate history.
   The aim of this book is to survey in barest outline the history
of mankind from the first dawn of culture down to the time when
successive societies attained literacy. Since, once they had emerged
as such, literate, civilized peoples tended to exert influence over
those still living under prehistoric conditions, it will be necessary
to sketch in the outlines of their subsequent histories at least down
to the time when they were drawn into the range of younger
dominant civilizations. In an outline of this kind it is hardly
practicable to incorporate or even to summarize the kind of
evidence, archaeological and natural-scientific, on which the re-
construction of prehistory depends. Our concern is not with the
bricks and mortar so much as with the building, and attention will
only be directed here and there to the kind of details needed to
convey a vivid impression of texture and substance. It is never-
theless important to remind the reader that the account presented
here rests on fragmentary but concrete evidence, most of it
excavated from the soil and all of it subjected to the kind of
scrutiny practised by experts in the field of criminal detection.
                                  3
                         INTRODUCTION

Since the reader is asked to take so much for granted, he is entitled
to be made aware of some of the main areas of uncertainty and
entreated to remember that the intensity with which prehistoric
research has been carried on varies widely in different parts of the
world. Yet, during the hundred years since the publication of
 The Origin of Species, enough has been learned to make possible
a reasonably valid outline of what happened in prehistory.
    A main difficulty is to ensure a proper balance. It is important
to avoid European or other regional bias, yet it would be pointless
to try and achieve a kind of time-space parity for its own sake;
every period of time and parcel of territory has not contributed on
equal terms to the early story of mankind any more than it has to
contemporary history. Since by and large the tempo of change
has quickened with each advance in culture, it will be necessary to
 treat the much shorter closing phases of prehistory on equivalent
 terms to the lengthier ones that preceded them; yet we must guard
against paying the younger       periods undue attention merely
because of the bulk and diversity of the archaelogical material that
survives from them, and we must seek all the while to weigh the
relative importance of each main episode in the total history of
mankind. Again, it has to be recognized that the focus of human
progress has shifted within wide geographical limits in the course
of time, so that first one region and then another has the chief
claim on our attention.     It is inevitable therefore, and indeed
desirable, that whereas wide territories over long periods of time
will receive hardly more than a passing mention, quite brief
episodes will be given proportionately fuller treatment. The aim
is not to produce a chronicle, a kind of Bayeux tapestry worked
flatly ona roll of fabric, but something more likea history, painted
in depth ona canvas of fixed dimensions. The main difficulty is to
create a unity, to give the illusion of unfolding a complete pano-
rama and yet at the same time to highlight significant groupings
and reveal telling details. Fully to realize this calls for exceptional
powers, and the writer will be content if he helps his readers in
                                   4
                          INTRODUCTION

some measure to view the histories of their own cultures in the
broad perspective of world prehistory.
   An obvious precondition of this is a chronological framework
of world-wide application. So long as one confines oneself to the
prehistory of a single region, one can often piece together an
outline story by analysing changes of fashion, the association in
finds of one period of miscellaneous artifacts and the sequence of
deposits on archaeological sites; moreover, events in different
regions can often be synchronized if trade relations existed
between them. So soon, however, as the field of study is enlarged
beyond the range of prehistoric trade and extended backwards in
time and outwards in space, the need for a more universal system
or chronology becomes apparent. Episodes in the spheres of
climate, geography and animal and plant life during the Plei-
stocene era of geological time provide a rough framework for
prehistoric chronology, but a much finer grid is needed for the
later stages of the story when the tempo of change grew so much
more rapid. The ideal is clearly a system of absolute chronology
in years, world-wide in validity and capable of being applied
readily to archaeological sites. Dates founded on recorded history
are of limited use: they can only be applied to comparatively
recent prehistoric communities within territories bordering on
the ancient centres of civilization; and even so are generally
subject to considerable margins of error, due both to uncertainties
in the earliest historical chronologies themselves and to the diffi-
culty in effecting certain correlations between these and the pre-
historic sequence. Systems based on minute fluctuations of
climate as expressed by variations in the thickness of sediments
deposited in glacial melt water or in the amount of growth made
by trees in certain habitats will often provide a useful yardstick;
yet it is only locally and exceptionally that these can be applied to
measuring the progress of human prehistory. It is easy to see why
the radio-carbon method devised by Dr W. F. Libby in 1949
holds so much promise, for here we have a technique yielding
                                  j
                        INTRODUCTION

dates in terms of years and capable of being applied to archaeo-
logical sites all over the world. The method depends on the fact
that when organisms die their radio-activity runs down at a known
rate, so that by measuring accurately their remaining supply of
C4 it is possible to estimate the time since death. It is very
important to know that the method has plenty of limitations:
apart from the possibility of contamination, which cannot be
avoided even by the greatest care in collecting the sample and may
involve troublesome pre-treatment, there is at present a limitation
in range of around 50,000 years; and, most important of all, there
is an inherent element of statistical uncertainty due to the random
disintegration of atoms, which means not merely that C' dates
have to be expressed with a standard deviation of error, but that,
even so, only a proportion of correct dates can be expected to fall
within the given range, a consideration often ignored by critics of
the method who fail to understand what it claims to do. Yet,
though no reliance can be placed on individual analyses, a general
pattern, based on a growing number of analyses and backed by
intensive research into sources of error, is beginning to emerge
wherever the method has been applied, a pattern which allows us
for the first time to view the achievements of something like
2000 generations of men in historical perspective. Since this book
is intended as an outline for wide use, isolated C™4 dates will in
general be avoided and the chronology adopted will be that
generally accepted by prehistorians, taking account of the radio-
carbon, as of other, geochronological methods, and utilizing
where possible dates extrapolated from the earliest historical
sources.
                          CHARTER


           MAN’S       PLACE         IN NATURE

A major paradox to be faced when we consider our own origins is
that man, who through the power of his mind has come near to
complete mastery over the forces of external nature as they
confront him on this planet, and who is even now engaged in
extending his dominion into outer space, is himself an animal.
In common with all other animals he forms part of the nexus of
living things and individually is subject to the same processes of
growth, maturity and death. Like them, also, he lives within the
framework of a physical environment. If therefore we are to
interpret correctly the material traces of his culture recovered by
archaeology, it is important to begin by considering at least in
broad outline the evolution of his geographical setting during
Pleistocene and later times. Equally, since he owes his power in
the first instance to the physical and mental endowment acquired
from his forebears in the course of evolution, it is essential to
consider, if only in bald outline, the main steps in the recent
history of his emergence as a biological entity.

              PHYSICAL        ENVIRONMENT
The Pleistocene era, which witnessed both the biological and
cultural evolution of the earliest men, was one of profound
environmental change. It was marked above all by a succession
of climatic fluctuations of sufficient magnitude to produce major
shifts of animals and plants as well as changes in the disposition
of land and water sufficient to alter, sometimes drastically, the
possibilities of human migration and settlement. The existence of
these repeated fluctuations in the conditions under which the
                                 7
                   MAN’S      PLACE       IN NATURE
earliest men lived is significant for two reasons: it affords some
insight into the kinds of challenge encountered by our forebears,
both as biological organisms and as builders of culture; and it
provides a broad framework of natural chronology for the main
stages of his early prehistory.

Glacial and pluvial periods
   In the existing temperate zone and in the tropics at high
altitudes the most dramatic feature of the Pleistocene was the
extension and contraction of ice-sheets. Sheets of boulder-clay
of the type laid down by glaciers and trains of boulders marking
their passage, as well as more prominent topographic features,
like the moraines deposited by ice-sheets withdrawing from their
former margins, show that great ice-sheets covered extensive
parts of North America and Europe which now enjoy temperate
conditions. In periglacial zones immediately beyond the margin
of the ice, great sheets of loess, a fine dust blown out of exposed
frost-soils by winds issuing from glaciated territories, blanketed
the landscape, and during temperate episodes between glacial
phases their surfaces weathered, leaving a clear record of climatic
fluctuations. The direct effects of the Pleistocene glaciations on
early man through their denial of areas for settlement and through
the barriers they interposed against human migration, though
locally considerable, were less widespread than those of the
geographical and biological changes associated with them. For
instance the locking up of water in ice-sheets had a profound
influence on sea-levels: calculations show that the excess over
what is contained in the existing ice-caps would have been
sufficient to reduce sea-levels by around 100 metres (c. 325 feet)
and geological evidence points to a lowering of sea-levels during
Pleistocene times of just this order of magnitude. Where thick,
immensely heavy ice-sheets were formed, the earth’s crust might
locally be temporarily depressed, only to recover again when the
ice melted, an effect known as isostasy; in areas subject to heavy
                                      8
                   PHYSICAL     ENVIRONMENT

glaciation, therefore, the onset of a glacial period might entail a
depression of the land in relation to the sea. Nevertheless, apart
from areas under or immediately contiguous to ice-sheets, glacia-
tions were marked by falls and interglacial periods by rises of sea-
level, producing what are known as eustatic changes—enough to
form or intersect land-bridges of cardinal importance to human
migration. Over the extensive tropical and subtropical territories,
which played so important a part both in the early genesis of man
and in his culture, as well as in the development of farming and
urban life, climatic change expressed itself in pronounced and
prolonged periods of heavier rainfall—so-called pluvial periods—
interrupted by interpluvial ones with lower rainfall, marked
respectively by such phenomena as rises and falls of lake-levels
and the activity and inactivity of springs.
   No less profound were the biological consequences of the
changes of climate of which glaciations and pluvials and subsidiary
episodes were merely local expressions. What was in effect hap-
pening with each major cycle was a shifting back and forth of
climatic zones: when ice-sheets expanded into temperate zones,
rain-belts encroached on subtropical ones and the tropics them-
selves contracted; conversely, when ice-sheets retreated, temperate
conditions began to reassert themselves over territories formerly
covered by ice and deserts to reclaim regions temporarily revived
by temperate conditions. Apart from their direct impact, climatic
changes influenced the conditions of human life profoundly
through the plants and animals on which mankind depended for
food as well as for many of the substances required for his material
culture. Widespread transformations in vegetation were an in-
evitable accompaniment of climatic cycles of sufficient magnitude
to bring about large-scale glaciations: tundra, coniferous, de-
ciduous and evergreen forests, desert and tropical rain-forests all
shifted in response to changes of precipitation and temperature.
Equally, since they depended directly on vegetation, the herbi-
vorous animals with which man was principally concerned reacted
                                 y)
                   MAN’S    PLACE        IN NATURE
in similar fashion to the onset and retreat of each climatic cycle,
so that a forest fauna might in any particular locality be re-
placed by one adapted to steppe or tundra conditions and vice
versa.
   The cumulative effect on human societies of these major
fluctuations in the character of the external environment must have
been all the greater in view of the pitifully small cultural capital
available during prehistoric times. When it is remembered that
they were repeated at frequent intervals during the million years
or so of the Pleistocene—no less than fifteen times if the evidence
of ocean cores is to be relied upon—it is hard to resist the idea that
some causative link must have existed between them and the
process of change involved in man’s biological and cultural
evolution. Environmental change was a potent agent of biological
mutation, just as it stimulated migration and emphasized isolation.
On the cultural side anthropological studies suggest that at any
given moment of time an apparent equilibrium exists between
any human society and the habitat (soil and climate) and biome
(vegetation and animal life) of the ecosystem (total natural setting)
in which it subsists and of which in a sense it forms an integral
part: any change in habitat or biome must of necessity call for
readjustments in human society of a kind involving cultural
change, migration, or both, the outcome of which is the establish-
ment of a new and likewise temporary equilibrium. It is in this
continuous process of challenge and response—to use Toynbee’s
vivid phrase—enriched and complicated by interaction between
rival societies and increasingly by contending classes—that we
may surely see some explanation for the mechanics of human
progress, even if it brings us no nearer an ultimate explanation of
prehistory.
   The Pleistocene period that witnessed the unfolding of human
prehistory probably began about a million years ago. It was
marked in the fossil record by the appearance of true elephants,
horses and oxen, but during its Early stage elements of the old
                                    10
                  PHYSICAL     ENVIRONMENT

Tertiary fauna survived in the Villafranchian beds, including such
forms as Dinotherium, Stylohipparion and Sivatherium. As we have
seen the period as a whole was marked by frequent and sometimes
pronounced climatic changes, which assumed different guises in
various parts of the world. Among the most dramatic were the
repeated advances and withdrawals of ice-sheets in the present
temperate zone. On dry land the geological record of these is
incomplete or at least damaged by more recent episodes. Yet,
both on the north European plain and in the Alpine area it has been
possible to map fairly closely the moraines of four major glacia-
tions, which are here named after localities in the Alps where they
were first recognized. The indications are particularly clear for
the Late Pleistocene, which embraced the last or Wiirm glaciation
and its preceding interglacial phase. The Middle Pleistocene,
which owes its special interest to the fact that deposits of this
age have yielded the earliest certain traces of human industry,
was marked by two major glaciations (Mindel_and_ Riss) and a
prolonged Mindel-Riss interglacial. On the other hand the
evidence for the Early Pleistocene is much less well preserved,
even though this phase apparently lasted longer than the two later
ones combined; indeed, geologists have only been able to recover
abundant signs of one glaciation, that of Giinz, though traces of
at least three earlier ones have been detected. Recent studies of
deep-sea cores drilled from the beds of the Caribbean an
Pacific suggest that in all there were fifteen main glaciations, SS
against less than half that number established by ground survey”
in the Alps. This only goes to show how little is known about
the history of the Early Pleistocene period, which must on the
other hand have witnessed vital stages in the emergence of
humanity.
   The most recent glacial deposts are as a rule better preserved
and allow finer divisions to be made, so that in the following
Table A three phases can already be distinguished in the period
of the Wiirm glaciation.
                          MAN’S   PLACE        IN   NATURE


    TABLE A. Major sub-divisions of the Pleistocene period in
              central Europe and East Africa
Geological         Radio-carbon                 Glacial episodes     Pluvial episodes
    time             dates B.c.                 (central Europe)       (East Africa)
                    12,000—8,000          Late Wurm
Upper               29,000-12,000         Middle Wiirm                   Gamblian
 Pleistocene        '70,000—29,000        Early Wiirm
                   100,000—70,000         Riss—Wiirm inter-             Interpluvial
                                           glacial
Middle                                    Riss                           Kanjeran
 Pleistocene                              Mindel-Riss inter-             Interpluvial
                                           glacial
                                          Mindel                         Kamasian
Early                                     Giinz—Mindel inter-           Interpluvial
 Pleistocene                               glacial
 (Villafranchian                          Giinz                          Kageran
 fauna)                                   Sequence of numerous               _
¢. 1,000,000                                   earlier glaciations


   The younger episodes of the Late Wiirm are naturally those
which have so far been most closely dated. The results set out in
Table B are those obtained from a limited part of north-western
Europe, but both the Allerad oscillation and the somewhat abrupt
close of the Late Pleistocene around ten thousand years ago have
left records over extensive zones of the northern temperate zone.


        TABLE      B. Muor sub-divisions of the Late Wiirm in
                        north-western Europe
   Radio-carbon dates B.c.           Climatic stages             Forest history zones
          8,850-8,000                Younger Dryas                       Ill
         10,000-8,850                Allered oscillation                 Il
         10,5 00—10,000              Older Dryas                         Ic
         I1,500-10,500               Bolling oscillation                 Ib
         12,000-11,500               Oldest Dryas                        la


   Outside the glaciated territories, in lands where subtropical and
tropical climates now prevail, fluctuations of climate occurred of
                                          I2
                   PHYSICAL     ENVIRONMENT

comparable magnitude, taking the form of pluvial phases of
markedly greater rainfall, interrupted by arid, interpluvial ones.
In Table A the pluvial periods of Africa and Asia are shown for
convenience marching alongside the glacial ones of Europe and
North America, but it needs to be emphasized that it is quite
unknown whether or how closely they were in fact synchronous.
For this we must await the development and application of
techniques that make it possible to assign absolute dates far
enough back in both areas.
   The value of sequences of this kind for providing a chrono-
logical framework, even for periods for which no absolute dates
are yet available, hardly needs stressing. What is hardly less true
is the importance of climatic changes of the magnitude and
frequency known to have occurred during Pleistocene times to
a proper appreciation of the geographical conditions under which
early man developed both as an organism and as a cultured being.
Thus variations in precipitation and temperature, quite apart from
their direct effects, altered radically the conditions for gaining a
livelihood through their influence on vegetation and animals.
Similarly, the changes of land and sea-levels which resulted from
the growth and retreat of ice-sheets (see pp. 8f.) must have
influenced the pattern of settlement and above all, in an age before
sea-going craft had come into use, have had a profound effect on
the possibilities of migration. Knowledge of the precise coast-line
is of particular importance for the Late Glacial and early Neo-
thermal period, during which widespread migrations occurred.
Deep borings in the Pontine Marshes of Italy and elsewhere have
fortunately made it possible to measure with some accuracy the
displacement of sea-level during the last glaciation and this, in
turn, allows one to form a good impression of the extent of the
land-connections that, for example, linked Britain with the Euro-
pean mainland, Alaska with Siberia, south-east Asia with Indonesia
as far as the Makassar Strait and Australia with New Guinea and
Tasmania.
                                 13
                     MAN'S   PLACE        IN   NATURE


Neothermal climate
   Although in a broad sense the Pleistocene or Quaternary period
lasted down to the present day, it has been found useful to desig-
nate the time since the last major fluctuation by a distinct term.
Workers in the present temperate zone understandably began by
referring to the Recent or Holocene period as Postglacial, but in
the context of world prehistory the more modern term Neothermal
is preferable, since the passing of glacial conditions was only one
of several local effects of a world-wide phenomenon. Radio-
carbon analyses agree with counts of the varved or finely layered
sediments deposited annually in the melt-waters of the contracting
Scandinavian ice-sheet to indicate that the Neothermal period,
which witnessed the gradual emergence of existing physical
environments and an immense acceleration in the process of
social evolution, began some ten thousand years ago. Since the
deposits are both more accessible and better preserved, it is hardly
surprising that we know the history of the Neothermal period in
far greater detail than we do that of any previous geological era.
In the temperate zone in particular it has been possible through
a statistical analysis of the fossil pollen incorporated in successive
layers to zone deposits belonging to this period in terms of their
vegetational history: to begin with, only trees capable of living
under relatively cold conditions were able to colonize the land-
scape freed by the contraction of ice-sheets; only gradually and
progressively did an increase in warmth-demanding trees reflect
the rise of temperature to a maximum noticeably above that now
prevailing in the temperate zones at the time of what in these
territories constituted the Neothermal climatic optimum; and dur-
ing the concluding phases vegetational change reflected above all
a decline from the climatic optimum and the transformation of the
landscape under the influence of farming and industrial activity.
   Rather less has yet been discovered about minor environmental
changes in the existing tropical and more particularly in the
                                     14
                        PHYSICAL          ENVIRONMENT

   present subtropical zones that played so crucial a part in the
   origins of farming and the early development of civilization. The
   most complete sequence is that worked out for East Africa, where
   two minor periods of increased rainfall (Makalian and Nakuran)
   have been distinguished for Neothermal times. Detailed study of
   the fauna from the upper levels of the Mount Carmel caves has
   confirmed the existence in Palestine of an initial dry phase followed
   by a wet one that presumably corresponds with the Makalian, and
   there is some evidence that this latter extended over a broad
   zone of northern Africa.

   TABLE C. Sequence of climatic stages during the last 10,000 years
                    North-west Europe          North America     East Africa
Dates B.c.     Forest zones   Postglacial        Neothermal    Epipleistocene

   i               IX          Sub-atlantic     Medithermal      Nakuran

- 2000           VU            Sub-boreal                        Dry
                        Optimum
                        PA
+ 4000            vit)         Atlantic         Altithermal      Makalian


   6000            “           Boreal
                                                Anathermal       Dry
   8000            IV          Pre-boreal

   Fluctuations of sea-level
      Corresponding to the broad climatic changes of Neothermal
   times were fluctuations of sea-level resembling, though on a much
   reduced scale, those of the Pleistocene. Leaving aside isostatic
   movements, which, however pronounced, were local in their
   effects, the main change was the eustatic rise of sea-level due to
   the melting of ice-sheets. Radio-carbon analyses of samples from
   deposits submerged off the coasts of north-west Europe, North
   America and New Zealand indicate that in areas unaffected by
   crustal movements sea-levels rose at a rate of approximately three
   feet a century between c. 12,000 and 4ooo B.c. Close study of
                                          Tj
                   MAN'S   PLACE      IN NATURE
ancient strand-lines has further shown that at the peak of the
Neothermal climatic optimum sea-levels rose a certain height
above modern sea-level from which they have since receded.

               BIOLOGICAL.            EVOLUTION
The Primates
   The physical similarities between men and anthropoid apes are
so close as to leave no reasonable doubt of their near zoological
affinities: this is so whether one considers the general structure of
the skeleton, the muscular anatomy or the disposition of the
visceral organs, or whether one takes account of the evidence of
metabolic processes or serological reactions; even the human
brain has recently been stated by a leading authority to be ‘in its
morphology. . . little more than a magnified model of the brain of
an anthropoid ape’. Indeed, one might almost go so far as to
classify both apes (Pongidae) and hominids (Hominidae) (the
latter comprising all varieties of living men together with fossils
of all the forms to appear since the anthropoid apes diverged from
the parent stem) as falling within the same family Hominoidea,
a family which is comprised, together with that of the catarrhine
monkeys (Cercopithecidae), in the order Primates. Yet the general
weight of opinion, impressed by the notably larger size of the
brain in relation to body-weight in man and by significant
differences in dentition and in linear proportions of the limbs,
inclines to rate the Pongidae and Hominidae as separate families
alongside the Cercopithecidae.
   From an evolutionary point of view the most significant step in
the emergence of the hominids seems to have been the assumption
of an erect posture. It was this which released the hands from
locomotion, making them available for tool-making and the
securing and preparation of food, and in due time led to the
head being balanced on top of the spinal column rather than
suspended from its upper extremity. No doubt the changes in
dentition, characteristic of the hominids, were to some degree
                                 16
                    BIOLOGICAL        EVOLUTION

linked to the growing importance of the forelimbs and in turn
affected the architecture of the cranium, more particularly of the
brow-ridges. What is reasonably certain is that our remote hominid
ancestors attained a more or less erect posture before their brains
had notably exceeded the range of the great apes.

 The A ustralopithecines
   It would seem that, whereas the great apes were adapted to life
in the forest and so specialized in a brachiating mode of locomo-
tion (that is, one in which they still made considerable use of their
arms) the hominids developed in more open country and early
adopted an erect, bipedal carriage. Three main genera may be
distinguished in the family Hominidae. The first to appear in the
course of evolution were the Australopithecinae; the second
Pithecanthropus; and the third Homo. The original discovery of
Pithecanthropus erectus revealed a creature that combined an erect
habit with a brain not much bigger than that of a large ape. The
more recent revelation of the Australopithecines has confirmed
beyond doubt that in the evolution of the hominids bipedal
locomotion preceded the enlargement of the brain. The majority
of the Australopithecine fossils have been recovered from Early
Pleistocene deposits in South and East Africa and this strongly
suggests that these territories must have been the main centres of
hominid evolution at this time: indeed, the only find so far made
 from south-east Asia, that of Palaeojavanensis (cf. Maganthropus),
 came from Djetis beds of Sangiran in Java now generally assigned
 to an early stage of the Middle Pleistocene (Map 1). The South
 African Australopithecine fossils belong to two main groups, each
 of sub-generic status and dating from successive stages of a late
phase of the Lower Pleistocene. The earlier sub-genus Australo-
pithecus, which dates from the last dry interstadial and the onset
of the final wet phase of the Kageran pluvial, comprises two main
species, A. africanus from Taungs and Makapan and A. trans-
yaalensis (cf. Plesianthropus) from Sterkfontein. The younger
    2                            17                            CE
                   MAN’S      PLACE    IN NATURE

sub-genus Paranthropus, including P. robustus from Kromdrai
and P. crassidens from Swartkrans, dates from the last Kageran
wet phase. Two important finds from East Africa can be classified
within this framework: the so-called Meganthropus africanus from




                                                     SVE          SS

             mem    Wallace Line               Uninhabited zone


      1. The prehistoric world to the end of the Middle Pleistocene


 near Lake Eyasi in Tanganyika falls into 4. transvaalensis; and
 the recently discovered Zinjanthropus boisei from the lowest bed
 in the lacustrine series at Olduvai in the same land fits quite well
 into P. crassidens.
    Morphologically, and particularly in the general structure of
 the skull, notably its height above the orbit, the contour of the
                                      18
                    BIOLOGICAL          EVOLUTION

forehead and upper facial area, and the mastoid process, as well as
in the pattern of the dentition with its evenly curved parabolic
arcade, small teeth, spatulate canines and absence of the diastemic
intervals or gaps either side of the canines, the fossil remains of
the Australopithecines reveal clear hominid affinities, even though
the cubic capacity of the brain ranged only from 450 to 700 c.c.
compared with 685 c.c. for the largest known cranium of a gorilla.
The character of the limb and pelvic bones makes it reasonably
certain that these small-brained, but nevertheless basically hominid
Australopithecines had adopted an upright posture. Their general
evolutionary significance is thus clear: they provide just the
antecedents one might have expected for the Pithecanthropians of
the succeeding Middle Pleistocene era. Yet it would be wise to
recognize that in the existing state of knowledge the precise status
of the Australopithecines in hominid evolution is far from being
agreed by expert opinion. In particular it is sometimes argued
that Australopithecus and Paranthropus mark culminations of side-
branches from the main line of hominid evolution leading to
Pithecanthropus rather than standing on the main stem; and great
significance has been attached to a fossil jaw from the Paran-
thropus deposit at Swartkrans. Yet until more complete fossils of
Telanthropus, as it has been termed, are available there seems no
prospect of deciding whether this form is entitled to a separate
status, still less whether it stood closer to the main line of evolution
than Paranthropus.

The Pithecanthropians
   Since the original discovery of remains of Pithecanthropus
erectus in the Trinil beds of Java, several more finds have been
made on the island and there seems no doubt that hominids of this
genus were living there in Middle Pleistocene times. A much
larger assemblage of upwards of forty individuals has been re-
covered from North China in the Middle Pleistocene filling of
rock-fissures at Choukoutien near Peking (Pl. 1). At first these
                                   19                             2-2
                   MAN’S   PLACE      IN   NATURE

remains were given the status of a distinct genus, Simanthropus,
but later studies have shown that they belong to the genus
Pithecanthropus; indeed it is doubtful whether they ought to be
accorded even the specific designation pekinensis, since the flatten-
ing (platymeria) of the shaft of the thigh-bone, on which the
distinction from P. erectus has been held to rest, could so easily
result from nutritional factors. More recently traces of the same
genus (needlessly termed Azlanthropus mauritanicus), in the form
of two mandibles and part of the cranium of a younger subject,
have come to light in Early Pleistocene deposits exposed in a
sand-pit at Ternifine near Palikao, Algeria; and the old find of a
mandible from Mauer near Heidleberg suggests that the Pithecan-
thropians were also present in Europe during Middle Pleistocene
times. In general character they represent an advance from forms
akin to the Australopithecines and in particular they show a
notable increase in brain capacity: thus the mean of three crania
from Java was 860 c.c. and that of four from Peking was 1075 c.c.,
placing them in this respect more or less intermediate between
Australopithecus (400-700 c.c.) and Homo sapiens (c. 1350 ¢.c.)3
the fact that the Chinese group is well to the fore accords with its
wholly Middle Pleistocene age.
   Although they illustrate at least the beginning of the second
main advance in hominid evolution, the growth of the brain
following the attainment of an upright posture, the Pithecan-
thropians display a number of features which mark them off from
more evolved forms. Thus the skull has a low vault with frontal
flattening, a marked ridge at the junction of the two main side
bones and thick walls; the mastoid process is small; the palate is
enormous and there is marked alveolar prognathism, the lower
part of the face projecting forward noticeably; the mandible is
massive and, in the case of the Java form, the teeth, though
hominid in their general arrangement, show tendencies for the
upper canines to overlap the lower ones and for a diastemic gap to
appear between the incisors and canines; and the weight of the
                                 20
                       BIOLOGICAL           EVOLUTION

mandible is matched by a correspondingly massive development
of the supraorbital and occipital brow-ridges, which, together with
the flattened forehead, would probably strike us most forcibly
were we to encounter one in the flesh. Yet the Chinese variety was
quite certainly manufacturing tools and using fire.

       TABLE D. Simplified classification of the Hominidae
 Geological time     | Genus         Sub-genus                 Species
Late Pleistocene     Homo                             H. sapiens
                                                      Hi. neanderthalensis
                                                      H. soloensis
                                                      H. rhodesiensis
Middle Pleistocene Pithecan-                          P. heidelbergensis (cf.
                    thropus                            H.h.)
                                                      P. africanus (cf. Atlan-
                                                       thropus)
                                                      P. pekinensis (cf. Sinan-
                                                       thropus
                                                      P. javanensis (cf. P.
                                                       erectus)
                                   Telanthropus?
                                   Paranthropus       P. javanensis (cf.
                                                       Palaeojavanensis)
Early Pleistocene    Australo-                        P. robustus
 (Villafranchian)     pithecinae                      P. crassidens
                                   Australopithecus   A. africanus
                                                      A. transvaalensis (cf.
                                                       Plesianthropus)


   It was from this Pithecanthropian stock that the primitive fore-
runners of Homo sapiens must have developed. The rarity and
fragmentary character of well-documented fossils makes it difficult
to know what these were like. The surviving bones of the
Swanscombe         skull obtained from Mindel—Riss gravels in the
Lower Thames basin, together with hand-axes of the type first
recognized at Saint-Acheul, near Amiens in North France, show
no characteristics which enable them to be distinguished clearly
from skulls of Homo sapiens in his modern form. On the other
hand the frontal bone is missing and it is precisely this that, in the
                                       21
                    MAN’S PLACE        IN NATURE
case of the comparable skull from an interstadial deposit of the
Riss glaciation at Steinheim in South Germany, shows primitive
characteristics in the form of the massive brow-ridges that com-
monly went with large teeth and heavy jaws. It seems most likely
that the Middle Pleistocene inhabitants of Europe and probably
of Africa, while retaining certain Pithecanthropian features in
modified form, had a moderately well-developed frontal region,
a relatively high cranial vault and a face of only moderate size.
Neanderthal and Neanderthaloid men
    By early Late Pleistocene times the picture is more complex. Now
for the first time we have evidence for a truly modern type, lacking
massive brow-ridges, in the two fragmentary skulls from the cave
of Fontéchevade in the Dordogne, France. This find is all the more
striking in that it was overlaid by a deposit containing Mousterian
flints (of the kind found at Le Moustier in the Dordogne and
elsewhere) with remains of Neanderthal man, a variety named
after the discovery of a brain-case in the Neanderthal in the
German Rhineland, and since exemplified by a number of others
from Europe dating from the first phase of the last or Wiirm
glaciation. The limb bones of this kind of man are thick-walled,
heavy and unduly short, especially in the forearm and calf, in
relation to his trunk. Again, his skull, although having a cranial
capacity well up to modern average, displays a number of aberrant
features: for instance the cranial vault is flattened, the face is large
and the foramen magnum, the hole at the base of the skull through
which the spinal cord passes to the brain, is set slightly backward;
the supraorbital ridge or torus is prominent and continuous, and
with this is associated a chinless jaw of massive proportions; and,
finally, the molar teeth exhibit the condition of taurodontism
much more often than is usual among modern man. It may be
significant that this extreme form appears to be confined to a
marginal territory of the palaeolithic world; perhaps, as has been
suggested, it represents an aberration in response to extreme
                                  22
                       BIOLOGICAL          EVOLUTION

 climatic conditions, under which the chance of genetic variation
 was likely to have been at a maximum precisely when oppor-
 tunities for migration were reduced.
    In many ways it is unfortunate that the earliest finds which have
 created our image of the ‘classic’ Neanderthal type should have
 been made in this marginal territory. Analogous finds from
 regions that enjoyed more temperate conditions, for example
 those from the Palestinian caves of es-Skhil and et-Tabun,
 Mount Carmel, the Shanidur cave in northern Iraq and the cave
 of Teshik-Tash in Uzbekistan, display Neanderthal characteristics
 to a much less pronounced degree. It has sometimes been argued
 that these Asiatic Neanderthaloids were the product of inter-
 breeding between Neanderthal and Sapiens stocks, but a more
 likely view is that they stand closer to the main stem of human
 evolution and represent, or at least are closely related to, types
 intermediate between Swanscombe             and Steinheim on the one
 hand and modern man on the other. One reason for thinking
 that this is so is that Homo sapiens almost certainly emerged
 somewhere in Eurasia and most probably in western Asia.

 Homo sapiens and modern races of man
    In any event the people identified with the Advanced Upper
Palaeolithic hunting cultures that immediately succeeded the
 Mousterian in this region were essentially modern in type. The
limb bones, relatively light and slender, suggest a fully upright
posture, as does the position of the foramen magnum _which.
faces directly downwards; tlié forehead is rounded and approxi-
mately vertical and |thé’muscular tidges
                                       on thecranium
                                                   are only
lightly marked; thé brow ridges are moderately developed   and
are never continuous; and the§awhas awell-defined chin, is light.
in build and has relatively               smallaL teeth.
                                                   TD
                                                         The overwhelming :
                                                                          con-
neers nar             unanatnsnoenneess nel
sensus of professional opinion is that the existing races of mankind
are without exception variants of this single species, Homo
sapiens.

                                      23
                    MAN’S    PLACE     IN   NATURE

    When and where did the various races of man diverge? The
 first question is particularly difficult to answer, because so many of
 the leading criteria by which racial differences are distinguished,
 such as pigmentation and hair form, are such as can hardly be
 studied from skeletal material. Attempts have been made to read
 racial characteristics into some Upper Palaeolithic remains—for
 instance the type first recognized from the Grimaldi caves near
 Mentone has been variously interpreted as Negroid or primitive
“Mediterranean and that from the rock-shelter of Chancelade in the
 Dordogne has even been held to be Eskimo in type—but the
 dangers of drawing conclusions from such limited evidence are
 obviously very great and it is wisest to admit that we do not yet
 know when the existing races of Homo sapiens came into being.
 What seems most likely is that they arose as a result of gradual
 genetic diversificationnfollowing  onthe widespread migrations and
 colonization ofofnew territories that occurred some time during the
 final major glacial cycle. The degree to which the distribution of
 certain well-defined pigmentation types fits in with that of specific
  environments, after due allowance is made for the effect of migra-
  tion since the period of characterization, is sufficiently close to
  suggest that differences of pigmentation must have been to some
  degree adaptive: thus in the Old World blonde fair-skinned
/ people tend to go with a cool, cloudy habitat; brunettes with the
 strong sunlight and bright skies of climates like that of the
 Mediterranean area; the darkest skinned with the hottest, non-
 forested regions (for example, the savanna of Africa); and those
 with yellowish skin and crinkly hair with the tropical rain-forests
 of Africa and south-east Asia. Again, there are sound reasons for "
 linking width of nasal aperture with climate, since it is a function
 of the nose to mitigate the temperature of the air before it is
 drawn into the lungs: it is therefore not at all surprising to observe
 the narrow nostrils of the Eskimo or even the North European,
 the medium ones of the Mediterranean or the broad ones of the
 Negro. Yet it would be quite wrong to suppose that all geo-
                                  24
                   BIOLOGICAL         EVOLUTION

graphical variations were necessarily adaptive, since the isolation
which must have increased as man extended his geographical
range could well in itself have been sufficient to promote genetic
variations.
   A last point to make is that it was only during the final stages
of the Pleistocene that man spread over the greater part of the
earth. The early types of men were confined to the warmer parts
of the Old World: their remains are found widely over Africa
from Algeria to the Cape; in Europe as far north as lowland
England and central Germany; in western Asia up to the mountains
of northern Iran; in India, south-east Asia and Indonesia; and as
far east as the Makassar Strait, coinciding with the great biological
divide first recognized by Darwin’s collaborator, A. R. Wallace.
It was not until some time after he had emerged in his modern
form that Homo sapiens occupied northern Eurasia and spread on
the one hand into the New World and on the other into Australia
and Tasmania and across Polynesia to New Zealand. The extension
of human settlement over progressively wider territories is one of
the major themes of the prehistory of Late Glacial and Neothermal
times to be treated in later chapters of this book: it was made
possible by the relatively unspecialized character of Homo sapiens
as a biological species, but above all by the possession of culture,
by means of which man has been able to adapt himself to the
widest range of environments.




                                 25
                           CHAPTER      2


   LOWER PALAEOLITHIC CULTURES
        AND THEIR SURVIVALS ,

Criteria of culture
  Although most palaeontologists agree that the assumption of
an upright posture was sufficiently important to justify separating
the hominids from the great apes, few would maintain that it is
possible to distinguish on purely zoological grounds between
those hominids that remained prehuman and those that had
attained the status of man. To qualify as human, a hominid has,
so to say, to justify himself by works: the criteria are no longer
biological so much as cultural. Yet it remains true that a close
interrelationship must exist between cultural achievement and
biological endowment. The adoption of an erect posture, which
may well have been a response to the thinning of forest and the
consequent need to cross open country between one area of wood-
land and another, in itself facilitated the acquisition of culture;
the freeing of the hands from locomotion made them available
for tool-using and ultimately for tool-making; and these activities
stimulated the development of the brain. At the same time they
facilitated it by modifying the architecture of the skull: the
diminishing role of the teeth for eating and manipulating had the
eflect of reducing their size, the weight of the jaw and the strength
of the brow-ridges and muscular attachments. On the other hand
the two-footed stance had its dangers, and ultimately only those
hominids survived who made an intelligent use of tools and
weapons. Indeed the ability to acquire culture was evidently of
adaptive value in the sense that the strains most capable of doing
so were those whose genotypes were propagated most abundantly
                                 26
               LOWER     PALAEOLITHIC        CULTURES

in the course of natural selection. This may well explain why the
increase in the size of the brain that permitted ever greater
advances in culture developed so rapidly in the course of Pleisto-
cene times. Even the biological evolution of the most advanced
hominids was thus in large measure an outcome of developments
in culture.
   In many ways the most striking of these, and certainly the one
most likely to find reflection in the archaeological record, is the
ability to make tools. Here the distinction between tool-using and
tool-making is one that needs stressing: it may be true that one
has grown out of the other, but it is important to emphasize that
it is as a fabricator that man stands out from his fellow primates.
By the use of a tool is meant the active manipulation by an
organism for the furtherance of its aims of some object taken
 from the external environment: thus, to quote Dr W. H. Thorpe’s
 example, a Californian sea-otter bringing boulders up from the
 sea-bottom to crack molluscs is using a tool, whereas a gull
 dropping a mollusc on a rock to break it is not doing so. Tool-
 using in the true sense can be traced far back among quite lowly
 forms of life, but it does not of itself imply intelligence or insight.
 Even the great apes, though showing some dexterity in the
manipulation of sticks and strings and in the stacking of boxes,
reveal grave limitations in their behaviour. For instance, they
show little understanding of statics, and in their handling of boxes
rely almost entirely on blind improvisation rather than insight.
Again—and this is even more significant—their activities are
directed exclusively to securing visible objectives, so that even
when some preparation is involved, such as sharpening the end of
one stick to fit into a socket, the element of foresight and planning
is really very slight. By contrast, tool-making and the building
of structures, even among the most primitive human societies, are
based on a precise knowledge of raw materials and, within the
limits of the technology prevailing, of how most effectively to
handle them. Moreover, it is characteristic of human beings that
                                  27
             LOWER    PALAEOLITHIC       CULTURES

they have a much greater appreciation of the factor of time than
the other primates: in their oral (and in due course literary)
traditions they draw on memories of the past, which serve them
as a kind of cultural capital; and by taking account of the future
they gain the impetus needed to undertake operations which may
in themselves be long-drawn out, and to meet contingencies not
always precisely foreseeable.

Speech
   Speech was almost certainly another cultural attribute of the
earliest men. Students of the great apes are agreed that one of
their greatest drawbacks is the lack of speech, which alone is
sufficient to prevent them acquiring the elements of culture. It is
true that chimpanzees have a wider ‘register of emotional expres-
sion’ than most humans and that they are able to communicate to
one another not only their emotional states but also definite
desires and urges; yet, as Kohler has emphasized, ‘their gamut of
phonetics is entirely “subjective”, and can only express emotions,
never designate or describe objects’. In this connection it is
interesting that in their famous enterprise of bringing up the
chimpanzee Viki from the age of three days to three years, Dr and
Mrs Hayes found it possible to train her to certain commands, but
failed after eighteen months of intensive tuition to get her ‘to
identify her nose, eyes, hands and feet’.     Until hominids had
developed words as symbols, the possibility of transmitting, and
so accumulating, culture hardly existed. Again, as Thorpe has
remarked, man’s prelinguistic counting ability is only of about
the same order as that of birds or squirrels: serious mathematics,
with all the immense advances in control of the environment that
it portends, first became possible with the development of symbols.
Speech, involving the use of symbols, must have been one of the
first indications of humanity. Its only drawback as a criterion for
the prehistorian is that there is no hope of being able to verify
its existence directly for the remotest ages of man. Despite
                                28
                     AND     THEIR        SURVIVALS

suggestions to the contrary, the best palaeontological opinion is
against the notion that articulate speech can be inferred either
from the conformation of the mandible or from study of casts
taken of the inner surfaces of skulls. Probably the best clue is the
appearance of tools of standardized and recognizable form, since
it is hard to see how these can have been popularized and trans-
mitted without the use of verbal symbols.

The first fabricated tools
   Without doubt the most palpable signs of the earliest culture are
the tools made by prehistoric man. The oldest ones recognized by
the pioneers of prehistory were hand-axes, flaked down from
nodules or thick flakes on either face so as to form a well-defined
working-edge. The occurrence of such tools side by side with
remains of extinct animals in ancient river gravels and other
diluvial deposits provided the earliest good evidence for the
antiquity of man. Further evidence was obtained from rock-
shelters and caves, the exploration of which had already begun
more than a generation before Darwin published The Origin of
Species, but which was resumed more intensively in 1858. By
1865 enough had been learnt for Sir John Lubbock to contrast the
immensely long Old Stone or Palaeolithic Age, during which men
lived by gathering and by hunting animals that included many
species now extinct, with the New Stone or Neolithic Age, most
fully revealed by the finds from the pile-settlements (not long
since exposed by the shores of the Swiss lakes), which mirrored
the lives of peasants living a more settled life based on farming
and practising a variety of new crafts that included potting and
sometimes weaving.
   The transition from using whatever lay to hand to the fashioning
of purposive tools must have been gradual and therefore difficult
to detect in the archaeological record. We are indeed fortunate
that early man made extensive use of relatively imperishable
substances such as flint or stone, in addition to the organic
                                     a.
              LOWER     PALAEOLITHIC       CULTURES

materials that have vanished almost entirely from the earlier
chapters of the story. Even so there are grave difficulties in
recognizing man’s first essays in the working of flint and stone,
since not only might a very slight amount of trimming suffice to
adapt a fragment detached by frost or some other natural agency,
but nature herself is capable of simulating artificial flaking of quite
a high order. Assuming that there must have been a more
primitive stage in the working of flint and stone than that re-
presented by the Palaeolithic hand-axes from diluvial deposits,
certain prehistorians of the opening decades of this century
addressed themselves to what they took to be industries from the
dawn of the Stone Age. Many of the so-called eoliths (Eos, Greek
goddess of dawn) were in themselves reasonably convincing (even
if the product of intensive selection), but the very zeal of the eolith
hunters proved their undoing: it was not merely the numbers in
which they found them that aroused scepticism, but even more
the increasing age of the deposits in which they occurred. Speci-
mens from the Pliocene seemed permissible, but when they were
found in deposits of successively earlier phases of the Tertiary
era, from Miocene, Oligocene and even early Eocene deposits, it
became evident—since after all man-sized apes first appeared in
the fossil record from the Miocene—that something was amiss.
Prehistorians also became aware that similar forms occurred in
much younger deposits containing well-made palaeolithic tools
and this helped to stimulate research into the natural agencies that
might have been responsible. In due course assemblages of
chipped flints and stones were found under conditions which
showed them to have been the indubitable products of nature.
From a study of these it is now possible to attribute to specific
natural agencies many of the earlier ‘industries’: for instance the
so-called ‘Cromerian’ flints were products of quite recent storm
wave action on the foreshore; the Kentish ‘eoliths’ were made by
the friction of one flint against another in the course of soil-creep;
the ‘eoliths’ from Eocene deposits at Clermont in the French
                                  30
                      AND       THEIR        SURVIVALS

department of Oise were produced by pressure and movement
caused by solution of the calcareous formation underlying the
flint-bearing   strata,   and    many         ‘Kafuan’   ‘implements’   from
Uganda were apparently the work of waterfalls and rapids in
steep gorges.
  The oldest certain indications of industrial activity date from
the transition from Early to Middle Pleistocene times and present
indications suggest that they were made by people of advanced
Pithecanthropian type. The possibility exists that certain Australo-
pithecines were tool-makers. Three Australopithecine teeth were
recovered from a breccia of Sterkfontein which yielded flakes and
cores of comparatively advanced workmanship, and Australo-
pithecine skeletal remains have recently been found on more
than one floor in bed I at Olduvai, Tanganyika, associated with
animal remains and flaked stone tools. Whether the tools were in
fact made by the Australopithecines or by their hypothetical hunter
( Telanthropus?) can hardly be determined from the evidence yet
available; the absence of tools from the Australopithecine sites in
the dolomite areas of South Africa has been explained by the
suggestion that these were the dens of carnivores rather than
living-sites, but such an argument is somewhat double-edged,
since if the Australopithecines had really been tool-makers it
seems hard to credit that they can have been such ready victims,
especially when we consider the achievements of Peking man with
similar or even inferior tools. A point to be emphasized is that the
brains of the Australopithecines never exceed in capacity that of
modern gorillas (max. 685 c.c.), whereas there is no proof that
even Pithecanthropus javanesis of Java, with an average skull
capacity of 900 c.c., made tools. Tools have never yet been found
either in the Djetis beds, which yielded part of the skull of a young
individual, or in lower levels of the subsequent Trinil beds from
which the main body of hominid fossils came: the earliest lithic
industry yet recognized in the Sangiran area is that from the
upper levels of the Trinil beds, though it should be emphasized
                                        31
              LOWER    PALAEOLITHIC        CULTURES

that lithic tools of very primitive character could easily escape
detection, especially on open sites without recognizable fire-
places.

The culture of Peking man
   If the status of the Java Pithecanthropians with regard to tool-
making must remain an open question, there is no doubt that the
earliest industries of the Far East and of North Africa alike were
associated with hominid remains of the same general category.
There are signs that Sinanthropus, to use the original but now
generally discredited term for Pithecanthropus pekinensis, was
geologically slightly later and anatomically rather more advanced
than the Java forms; in particular the Peking people, witha cranial
capacity averaging 1000 c.c., had noticeably larger brains. There
can be no question but that they possessed a culture, even though
a rudimentary one. The earliest deposits (locus 13) at Chou-
koutien, dating from the earlier part of the Middle Pleistocene,
yielded a typical chopping tool made by alternate flaking from
a chert pebble, giving a sinuous working-edge. The main fissure
(locus 1), dating from rather later in the Middle Pleistocene and
the source of remains of upwards of forty representatives of
Peking man, has produced a wealth of stone artifacts made from
intractable materials like green-stone, coarse chert and quartz. It
must be admitted that many of these were so crudely fashioned
that they would hardly have been recognized as humanif recovered
from an ordinary geological deposit. Nevertheless the industry,
much of the material of which was brought to the site and which
was intimately associated with traces of fire and other human
activity, has certain well-defined characteristics: there are no tools
comparable to the hand axes of Africa and parts of Europe and
south-west Asia; pebbles and flakes were employed as materials
for tools and the flakes had sometimes been formed by crushing
nodules between two boulders, resulting in signs of percussion at
either end; secondary retouch was scarce and irregular; and the
                                  32
                    AND   THEIR       SURVIVALS

leading tools were intended for chopping and scraping, the former
generally made from pebbles, from which a few flakes had been
struck to form irregular working edges, and the latter by trimming
lumps or flakes to form smooth edges. With this rudimentary
stone equipment, supplemented by such tools as he was able to
shape by its aid) Peking man succeeded in living largely on the
flesh of his competitors in the animal world. In this he contrasted
significantly with the great apes, who if not so averse to meat as is
sometimes suggested had in practice to make do almost entirely on
a vegetarian diet.
   To judge from the animal remains associated with him, Peking
man depended largely on venison, since two-thirds of them
belong to two species of deer, namely Euryceros pachyosteus and
Pseudaxis grayi. Yet he by no means restricted himself to this
meat and his victims seem to have included elephants, two kinds
of rhinoceros, bison, water-buffaloes, horses, camels, wild boars,
roebucks, antelopes and sheep, not to mention such carnivores as
sabre-toothed tigers, leopards, cave bears and a huge hyaena.
How he managed to secure this varied selection of game we can
only speculate. No specialized projectile-heads have survived in
the archaeological record, but to judge from evidence from else-
where he would have had available wooden spears with the tip
hardened in fire and it seems likely in view of the character of
some of his victims that he would have used primitive pit-traps.
The meagreness of his material equipment only emphasizes the
important part that team-work, based on articulate speech and on
a conscious network of social relations, must have played even
at this early stage of development, when groups were so small and
so sparsely scattered. Equally we should recognize the immense
courage of these primitive men, who in the face of powerful and
largely unknown forces made their way—and our way—in the
final resort by their prowess as hunters, by confronting and
vanquishing animals larger, faster and stronger than themselves.
    One of their most important aids was fire and it was in layers
                                 33
              LOWER    PALAEOLITHIC       CULTURES

discoloured by burning and mixed with ash and charcoal that
most of their discarded refuse was found. Fire would have been
of value for keeping wild beasts at bay, for warming the cave,
for hardening wooden weapons and of course for roasting meat.
In addition to meat, wild animals provided skins and, in their
bones, teeth and antlers, potential raw materials for making tools
and weapons. There seems no doubt that Peking man utilized
certain of these, though not to the extent that has sometimes been
claimed. Deer antlers were certainly detached from their frontlets,
the beams were sometimes cut into sections and the tines removed,
no doubt for use. Again flakes, from the long bones of various
animals have the appearance of having been used and even
trimmed by flaking. On the other hand there is no sign that Peking
man fabricated well-made artifacts from these materials.
   Both the way in which the bones of Peking man himself
occurred and their condition throw light on other aspects of his
behaviour. There can have been no question of burial, since the
remains were distributed in the cultural deposit in just the same
way as animal bones. This, indeed, taken together with his
primitive appearance, was enough to suggest to at least one
eminent authority that Peking man was himself the victim of
some more advanced human type. The fact remains that, despite
the most careful search of thousands of cubic metres of deposit
and the recovery of an impressive body of material relating to
Peking man, no single trace of his supposed overlord has ever
been found. If it be accepted that Peking man was himself the
hunter—and this view is now unquestioned by leading authorities
—then the condition of his bones argues strongly that he was a
cannibal as well as an avid consumer of animal flesh: his long
bones are normally split exactly as were those of wild animals to
facilitate the extraction of marrow, and the aperture at the base of
the skull has habitually been enlarged in just the same way as
among the Melanesians of recent times who favoured human brain
as a delicacy.
                                34
                    AND   THEIR        SURVIVALS


The evolution and spread of hand-axe industries
   The stone industry from the Middle Pleistocene deposits at
 Choukoutien is not merely archaic in appearance, but in fact
represents what historically speaking is the most primitive level
of human culture certainly recognized. This does not mean that
even the material from locus 13 at Choukoutien is the oldest in
time. The question precisely where hominids first crossed the
threshold of humanity has yet to be decided. Certainly this must
have happened somewhere within the comparatively restricted
territories to which Lower Palaeolithic cultures were confined.
 One reason for preferring east central Africa is that it seems to
have been there that cultural evolution proceeded most rapidly
during Middle Pleistocene times: above all it was there that the
industrial advance, symbolized by the evolution from crude
chopping-tools of hand axes flaked on both faces to form a
progressively more regular working-edge, was achieved. By
contrast, in regions outside those over which the hand-axe in-
dustries spread in the course of Middle Pleistocene times, the old
chopping-tool and flake tradition persisted, in some localities even
through Late Pleistocene and into Neothermal times. Industries
of this general type have already been recovered from Pleistocene
deposits between Ichang and Chungking in the Valley of the
Yangtze in South China, in the Mei Fingnoi valley near Bhan-Kao
in Thailand, from the Kota Tampan district in the Perak Valley
of northern Malaya, from Yenangyaung and other sites in the
Middle Irrawady in Burma and from the tributaries of the Indus
in the Punjab, notably from the Soan Valley.
  It was most probably in east central Africa that the great hand-
axe tradition first arose. Assemblages of stone tools from suc-
cessive levels in the Middle Pleistocene sediments exposed in the
Olduvai gorge in Tanganyika (Map 1) display the gradual
emergence from roughly made chopping-tools of hand-axes
similar in form to those originally recognized at such European
                                  35
              LOWER    PALAEOLITHIC       CULTURES

sites as Chelles, Abbeville and St Acheul in the north of France.
The basal level (bed I) at Olduvai on the other hand yielded an
assortment of tools in the old tradition flaked from water-worn
pebbles or from irregular nodules of quartz, lava, chert or
quartzite. These included choppers, ranging in size from ping-
pong to croquet balls and formed by striking flakes from two
directions; simpler tools made by striking flakes from one direction
only; and flakes, many of which were struck in the production of
chopping-tools. At Olduvai hand-axes proper first appeared in
the lowest levels of bed II and in their first stage they were
primitive in form, comparable to those from the French Abbe-
villian, flaked only at the pointed end, either by being struck by
stone hammers or by themselves being beaten against stone anvils,
and having a markedly irregular working-edge; moreover they
were accompanied by about the same number of primitive chop-
ping-tools, the form from which they were evidently themselves
derived. Thereafter in successive levels of beds II-IV ten more
stages could be recognized, leading up to forms of more evolved
Acheulean type requiring less and less raw material. Not all of
these need be described here and it may be sufficient to say that
hand-axes with a working-edge all the way round appeared for
the first time in stage 4; that by stage 5 the technique had begun
to come into use whereby thin flat flakes making possible a more
even working-edge were struck off by a baton of wood or bone
instead of by a stone hammer or against an anvil; and that from
stage 6, if not before, cleavers, that is, tools with a straight
working-edge as opposed to the more or less pointed business-end
of the hand-axe or the irregular edge of the primitive chopping-
tool, appeared alongside hand-axes.
   Similar types of tool spread widely over much of Africa and
contiguous parts of Europe and Asia during Middle Pleistocene
times. In due course they covered the whole of Africa apart from
the region of the Kalahari desert and a broad zone extending from
the south-west Sudan across French North Africa, today occupied
                                 36
                     AND   THEIR        SURVIVALS

by savannah and by the southern fringe of the Sahara. From
Kenya and Uganda they extended south through the Rhodesias
and Mozambique to the Cape, where the site at Stellenbosch lends
its name to the earlier stages of the local hand-axe industry, and
west over the Zambezi—Congo watershed, where an outstanding
factory site has been explored on the Kamoa stream, to Angola
and the Congo basin proper. Northwards the current seems to
have passed up the Great Rift, by-passing the Horn of Africa until
the close of the Middle Pleistocene, into the Nile Valley, where it is
represented by a rich site on the Khor Abu Anga, a left-bank
tributary joining the main river immediately below the confluence
of the Blue and the White Nile. From the Nile Valley it spread in
two main directions. North-westwards the hand-axe people
occupied, not merely the Gebel el Akhbar and the Maghreb, but
the whole broad territory from the Nile to the Atlantic, including
most of the Sahara, which in pluvial times supported a rich fauna
resembling that of central Africa today. It was without doubt
from north-west Africa that hand-axe users spread into south-west
Europe as far as the Rhine and south-east England, and by way of
the French Riviera into the Italian peninsula. Equally, Egypt was
a bridgehead for Asia and hand-axe industries are found in Jordan,
Palestine, Syria and Mesopotamia. No doubtit was a prolongation
of this movement, presumably across what is now the head of
the Persian Gulf and round the northern coast of the Arabian
Sea, that brought hand-axe industries to India, where they
occupied much of the peninsula south of the Narmada river. It
will be noted that the Middle Pleistocene hand-axe users nowhere
penetrated the mountain zone linking Anatolia, Iran, Afghanistan
and the Himalaya; indeed, they never completely filled up the
territories to the south, and though they penetrated north-west
India they failed to displace the older flake and chopping-tool
tradition represented by the stone industries of the Soan Valley.
   This, and even more the northward limit on their spread into
Europe, suggests that the real barrier to the spread of the hand-axe
                                   37
             LOWER     PALAEOLITHIC      CULTURES

cultures was not the mountains as such but rather the ecological
setting. There seems little doubt that these cultures were adapted
specifically to a forest environment: there they originated and
there their distribution was mainly if not entirely confined. It is
doubtless in the light of this that one should interpret the
appearance on the northern margins of the province, in south-east
Britain, Belgium, North France and parts of Germany, of a
counterpart to the Soan of Pakistan, namely the industries named
after Clacton-on-Sea, England. In these industries, dating from
the Mindel-Riss interglacial, flakes were removed by the same
anvil technique employed by the early Abbevillian hand-axe
makers. Frequently the flakes, which showed a characteristically
prominent bulb and a high angle between the striking-platform
and the main flake surface, were struck from the parent nodule in
two directions, leaving chopper-like cores, resembling the chop-
ping-tools of the Soan, Choukoutien and similar industries of the
East. The idea, advanced by some earlier prehistorians, that the
Clactonians relied exclusively on flakes in stark contrast with the
Abbevillian hand-axe makers can hardly be reconciled with their
chopping-tools or with the fact that Clactonian-like flakes were
commonly produced in the course of making hand-axes by means
of the anvil technique. What can legitimately be said is that the
Clactonians laid greater stress on flake-tools than the hand-axe
peoples. The most likely explanation of this is ecological, namely
that they occupied territories, as did the Soans, on the northern
fringe of the main forest zone.
   The progressively more economical use of the raw material
implied in the refinement of the hand-axe was carried a stage
further with the development at the time of the Riss glaciation of
industries which take their name from the site of Levallois near
Paris. In these there can be no question that the prime object
was the production of flake tools. The Levallois flint-workers,
who like the Acheulian hand-axe makers used the baton or rod
technique, began by preparing the nucleus or core which they
                                38
                    AND   THEIR    SURVIVALS

trimmed into the shape of a tortoise, leaving the under face
comparatively flat and making the upper one convex by striking
flakes radially from different points on the circumference: only
when this work had been completed did they strike off the main
flake, which bore on its upper surface and on its faceted butt
traces of the preparatory shaping of the parent core. Such
Levallois flakes were tools in their own right fully capable of
being used for many of the same purposes as the finer hand-axes
with which they were often found.

Lakeside camping places
   When we remember that they were first and foremost big-game
hunters, it is hardly surprising that the Middle Pleistocene hunters
should have settled in river valleys like the Thames or the Somme,
the Nile, Vaal or Zambezi, the Soan or the Narmada, and the Mei
Fingnoi or the Irrawaddy and by the shore of lakes, such as
those of Olduvai and Olorgesailie in east central Africa, Karar in
Algeria, Torralba in Spain or Hoxne in England. We saw from
Choukoutien what an immense variety of animals they took, and
very similar evidence is forthcoming from the settlements of hand-
axe makers. The Olorgesailie people killed and ate giant baboon,
giant pig, and a large kind of horse and hippopotamus; at Karar
the animal remains included elephant, rhinoceros, hippopotamus,
buffalo, zebra, giraffe, warthog and gazelle; and at Torralba
straight-tusked elephant, rhinoceros, wild ox, stag and horse.
Although, as in the case of the Choukoutien hunters, their
methods of hunting must remain largely a matter of surmise, we
have good evidence that primitive wooden spears of which the
tip had been hardened in the fire were used; a fragment of one
made from yew-wood was found at Clacton and a complete,
though broken, specimen of the same material and nearly eight
feet long was recovered from between the ribs of a straight-
tusked elephant at Lehringen, near Verden in Lower Saxony,
Germany: the first from an interglacial deposit of Mindel—Riss,
                                  39
              LOWER     PALAEOLITHIC      CULTURES

the second from one of Riss-Wiirm age. It is interesting to note
that the pygmies of the Cameroons have been accustomed to stalk
elephant with a wooden spear not much more than six feet long,
which they thrust into the animal’s body with both hands; as the
animal tries to escape the spear works in more deeply and the trail
of blood allows the hunters to keep on his track. When a kill of
a large beast is made among such people it is customary for folk
to collect from far and near to feast off the meat. During the
Stone Age, when implements were easily made and expendable, it
is likely that these would often be worn out and discarded at the
site of a kill and it seems easiest to explain in this way finds like
that at site HK in bed IV at Olduvai, which yielded no less than
459 hand-axes and cleavers blunted by use and lying amid the
disarticulated skeleton of a hippopotamus.
   What kind of men were responsible for the hand-axe industries
of the Middle Pleistocene is a difficult question to answer. The
most likely reply at the moment is that while retaining certain
features of Pithecanthropian ancestry, such as large face and teeth,
heavy jaws and massive brow-ridges, they were beginning to
show in the general conformation of the skull a trend towards
Homo sapiens. This is a view consistent with the occurrence of
hand-axes in North Africa in association with jaws of Pithecan-
thropian character and with the admittedly ambiguous Swans-
combe find (see pp. 21f.). At the present time there is no well-
founded evidence to support the idea that a more advanced
‘Presapiens’ type had emerged at this stage of prehistory.

Decline of hand-axe industries
  The close of the Middle Pleistocene was marked by the onset
of desiccation in territories which by reason of their forested
environment had been most favourable to the hand-axe industries.
The onset of drier conditions transformed much of the Sahara
from a rich hunting-ground to a vast desert and destroyed the
large measure of homogeneity that had hitherto prevailed over
                                 40
                    AND   THEIR      SURVIVALS

the whole African continent and contiguous parts of Europe and
Asia, reduced North Africa, deprived of its extensive hinterland,
to an outlier of western Asia and converted the territories of the
Congo and South Africa into provincial backwaters.
   South of the Sahara the expiring hand-axe tradition left twin
heirs during Late Pleistocene times, provincial cultures occupying
mutually exclusive territories, namely the Sangoan, which main-
tained itself amid the forest country of the great river systems of
the Congo and Angola, in the Zambezi Valley and in the region
of the Great Lakes, and the Fauresmith, found near fresh springs
on high ground in the Orange Free State, Bechuanaland and
Kenya. Both agree in combining hand-axes and faceted flakes
struck from prepared cores, but the Fauresmith hand-axes were
generally smaller and the industry also included well-made
cleavers; the Sangoan on the other hand had begun already in its
middle stage to develop lanceolate hand-axes and lanceheads of
quite specific character. Such changes as did occur were of
essentially local significance. This was even more the case over the
extensive territories in the east of the Old World, into which the
hand-axe cultures never penetrated and where the old chopping-
tool and flake traditions persisted, as they appear to have done in
successive stages of the Soan culture of northern India, without
contributing anything essential to the course of world prehistory.

Mousterian and Levalloiso-Mousterian cultures
   It fell to the northern parts of the Lower Palaeolithic world to
witness the genesis and rise of the Advanced Palaeolithic cultures
on which the future development of mankind was largely to
depend. The precise origins of these cultures, as of the fully
developed Homo sapiens with which they were associated, remain
among the prime objectives of prehistoric research. Recent
discoveries in south-west Asia suggest that the lithic traditions of
the Advanced Palaeolithic may go back to a period contemporary
with the last Interglacial period in Europe. What is certain is that
                                41
              LOWER    PALAEOLITHIC        CULTURES

the industries prevailing at the outset of the last Glaciation were
still essentially Lower Palaeolithic in character and were associated
with men of Neanderthal and Neanderthaloid type. Over parts
of western Europe, including in particular the territory between
the Loire and the Pyrenees, the lithic industries were of the kind
named after the rock-shelter of Le Moustier in the Dordogne: the
tool-kit was still very restricted, comprising scrapers and points
made from flakes trimmed on one or both edges by secondary
flaking of a kind that left abrupt steps on the surface but also
including small hand-axes of triangular or heart-shaped form.
Further south, extending from the French riviera and Italy to
central Europe and the regions bordering the north-east of the
Black Sea, namely the Crimea, the Don—Donetz region and the
coast of the west Caucasus, hand-axes were rarer or absent; but the
industry was enriched by hand awls, points with a shallow flaking
on the under surface and narrow strip flakes with steep secondary
flaking down the working edge. Further south again, in Palestine,
Syria, Iraq and south-west Iran, as well as in northern Africa, the
industries of this time had a pronouncedly Levalloisian character.
    Owing to their habit of occupying caves, we have reasonably
full information about the animals on which the Neanderthal and
Neanderthaloid peoples mainly depended for food, about the use
they made of bone and related materials and the way in which
they disposed of their dead. As hunters these people show no
signs of having been in any way more advanced that their
immediate predecessors. Where, as in certain of the Mount Carmel
caves in Palestine, Levalloiso-Mousterian levels overlie ones dating
from early stages of the Palaeolithic, there is no indication that an
extended range of animals was hunted. Equally, there is no sign
of any marked improvement in the methods of hunting; reliance
evidently continued to be placed on proved methods like wooden
spears, stone balls (probably used as bolas stones) and presumably
on primitive pit traps; and there is a notable absence of specialized
projectile-heads. Again, exceedingly limited use was made of bone
                                 42
                    AND    THEIR        SURVIVALS

and related materials, which, as we know from later practice by
stone-age hunters, were capable of providing a variety of spear-,
harpoon- and arrowheads, as well as fish-hooks and pointed fish-
gorges, a variety of tools and many kinds of personal ornament:
pieces of dense bone, including phalanges, or toe-bones, were used
as anvils for working flint, but there is no evidence that bone or
antler was worked to make well-defined implements or weapons
of any description. Another and possibly more significant limita-
tion is the absence of any indication of a developed aesthetic sense:
Lower Palaeolithic man was capable of producing a limited range of
tools with an astonishing economy of effort, and the perfection of
form and degree of standardization that they achieved, often over
great areas and despite wide variations in the qualities of the raw
materials used, bear witness to firmness of intention and a definite
sense of style; but as far as we know he practised no art—no sign
of carving or engraving for example has been found among all the
wealth of bone and antler from Mousterian and kindred sites; nor
is there evidence of even so much as a single bored tooth to
suggest that he fabricated ornaments to adorn his person.
   In two significant ways however Neanderthal man made im-
portant advances. For one thing he extended the range of settle-
ment well to the north of the frost-free zone to which earlier men
had confined themselves and this at a time of glacial intensity.
Precisely how far he reached has still to be settled in detail, but
there are indications that he colonized parts of Siberia for the
first time, though probably not as early as Wiirm I times, and even
reached as far as China. The presence of well-made flint scrapers
as an important element in his standard equipment suggests that
he found it necessary in his northerly habitat to wear animal skins,
at least out of doors. It was probably the cold conditions of
Wiirm I times, also, that caused the Mousterian and Levalloiso-
Mousterian people to occupy caves where these were available.
    The other marked advance shown by Neanderthal man was in
his treatment of the dead. Certain discoveries from the closing
                                   43
              LOWER    PALAEOLITHIC       CULTURES

phase of the last Interglacial seem indeed to indicate the con-
tinuance of cannibalism, notably the Neanderthal skull from
Monte Circeo, Italy, with the base broken open for the extraction
of the brain, and the mass find at Krapina in Yugoslavia, where
remains of upwards of a dozen individuals, male and female,
young and old, were discovered mixed up in the cultural deposit
with wild animal bones and treated in the same way, having been
broken up for the extraction of marrow, partly burnt in the fire and
soon. On the other hand the Mousterian deposit at La Chapelle-
aux-Saints was found to overlie a grave, cut into the rock floor
and containing the crouched skeleton of a Neanderthal man;
similar burials have been found at La Ferrassie, likewise in the
Dordogne, and also at Kiik-Koba in the Crimea. Even more
significant evidence was uncovered at the Mugharet es-Skhil,
Mount Carmel, in the form of a veritable cemetery of ten graves
with remains ranging from a girl of three and a boy of four toa
man over fifty years of age. As at La Chapelle-aux-Saints the
graves were only just big enough to accommodate bodies with the
arms and legs flexed. No red ochre or personal ornaments were
found, but the jaw-bones of a large wild boar were seen to be
clasped in the arms of the old man. A more recent discovery of
exceptional interest is that of a Neanderthaloid child in the cave of
Teshik-Tash, Uzbekistan, the head surrounded by six pairs of
horns of the Siberian mountain goat, which had evidently been
stood upright in a circle while still attached to the frontal bones.
Quite clearly men of the Neanderthaloid type had developed
concepts well beyond what one might have expected from their
lowly material culture.
   There was a considerable range of variation in physical type
among the makers of Mousterian and kindred industries. As we
have seen (p. 22), the fragmentary skulls from Fontéchevade
suggest that a comparatively modern form, lacking massive brow-
ridges, had already emerged before the onset of the Wiirm
glaciation, and to this period the extreme Neanderthal form,
                                 44
                     AND   THEIR        SURVIVALS

represented by the Chapelle-aux-Saints and other finds, belongs.
This latter type is restricted to limited parts of Europe and is
generally regarded as aberrant, the product of isolation on the
margin of the Palaeolithic world and one which died out without
contributing to the modern races of man. Of much wider distri-
bution are finds of a Neanderthaloid type that combines such
features as large teeth, heavy jaws and massive brow-ridges with
varying degrees of advanced characteristics. It is worthy of note
that these less specialized types occur widely distributed over the
extensive territories of Eurasia, within which Homo sapiens in his
modern form—and the Upper Palaeolithic blade and burin
cultures of which he was the bearer—must have emerged. It
seems highly probable that the Neanderthaloids associated with
Levalloiso-Mousterian industries over a wide territory from
Gibraltar to Italy, South Germany, Yugoslavia, the Crimea,
Cyrenaica, Palestine, Iraq and Uzbekistan stood close to the main
line of hominid evolution that culminated in modern Homo sapiens.

Survivals in Africa and South Asia
   The Advanced Palaeolithic cultures (Chapter 3) which first
appeared in a developed form between 30,000 and 40,000 years
ago both in Europe and western Asia, were confined to the more
northerly parts of the Old World. Over extensive territories to
the south, among them the oldest centres of human prehistory,
Lower Palaeolithic cultural traditions persisted, albeit with
modifications, down to comparatively recent times. From the
point of view of world history, most of Africa, India and south-
east Asia were henceforward by-passed by the main currents of
creative change throughout the remainder of prehistoric times.
This does not of course mean that they did not undergo a certain
evolution of importance to their own populations; but it is worthy
of note that such evolution, for example in the direction of micro-
lithic tools of flint or stone, often followed patterns set by Advanced
Palaeolithic peoples or their Mesolithic successors who in Africa
                                   45
              LOWER    PALAEOLITHIC       CULTURES

were restricted to parts of the Mediterranean zone with a dubious
extension to Kenya. The industries with flint burins or graving-
tools and blades blunted by steep flaking on one or more edges,
often known as backed-blades, that appeared in Cyrenaica during
the Late Pleistocene are presumed to have intruded from western
Asia. Those of Algeria and Tunisia, including the Capsian (after
Gafsa in Tunisia) once considered as a possible source of the
Advanced Palaeolithic of Europe, have been shown by radio-
carbon dating to be predominantly of Neothermal age. Equally,
the industry from Kenya that has been compared with the
Advanced Palaeolithic Aurignacian culture of Europe is almost
certainly much too young.
   One of the most conservative parts of Africa at this time was
the Nile Valley, where traditions stemming from the Lower
Palaeolithic Levalloisian persisted well into Neothermal times and
give rise to industries of Epi-Levalloisian character. One such
was the industry first noted at Sebil in Egypt and characterized by
small crescents and trapeziform pieces shaped by a steep edge-
flaking and evidently designed as insets for composite tools of the
kind that first came into use among Advanced Palaeolithic people.
   In other parts of Africa Levalloisian and Levalloiso—Mousterian
traditions gave rise to industries marked above all by various types
of projectile heads with bifacial retouch. Thus the Aterian (after
the Tunisian site of Bir-el-Ater near Tebessa), based on the
production of faceted flakes from tortoise cores, but featuring also
barbed and tanged arrowheads, leaf-shaped points and tanged
flakes with bifacially flaked tangs, extended in a belt across North
Africa from west of the Nile to the Atlantic. The Still Bay culture
(after a locality in Cape Province, South Africa), was characterized
above all by leaf-shaped points made from faceted flakes by
bifacial flaking and had an even wider geographical range
stretching from the Sudan, Abyssinia and Somaliland, through
Uganda, Kenya and Tanganyika to the Rhodesias and the Union
of South Africa. The resemblance between the Aterian and Still
                                 46
                     AND    THEIR     SURVIVALS

Bay cultures, separated though they were by the Nilotic province,
has often been noted. One explanation would be that they
represent expansions north and east from central equatorial A frica,
where the Upper Sangoan (sometimes known as Djokocian)
combines specialized forest tools like tranchet axes, of which the
working edges are formed in the main by the intersection of two
flake-surfaces, with lance heads made from faceted flakes by
working on both faces; and in this connection there is an interesting
resemblance between the tanged arrowheads of the Final Sangoan
(or Lupemban) and those of the Aterian. An alternative possi-
bility is that similar forms were developed in widely separated
areas from a common        cultural inheritance, possibly under the
impulse of the notion, emanating from Advanced Palaeolithic
 sources, of hafted projectiles.
    During Neothermal times the Still Bay tradition, like the Epi-
 Levalloisian, developed towards microlithic forms intended for
insertion into composite tools and weapons. During the arid
period (c. 8000-5 500 B.c.) that followed the last Pluvial, the area
of human settlement in East and South Africa seems somewhat to
have contracted. Yet the Magosian culture that takes its name
from Magosi in Uganda maintained a high degree of homogeneity
over an extensive territory down to the Cape. Over this region
we find industries with diminutive points of Still Bay type,
associated with small blades removed from prepared cores by
punches, and backed blades and lunates shaped rather like a thin
section of a tangerine with the straight edge sharp and the curved
one blunted by steep flaking. There seems little doubt that the
Magosian, along with more or less parallel cultures like the
Hargesian of Somaliland, was in its turn a source of the even more
widespread microlithic industry, characterized by small double-
ended scrapers and lunate insets for arrows and known after the
South African locality of Wilton. This first appeared during the
succeeding Makalian wet phase and at the extremities of its distri-
bution lasted down to modern times. Other industries included
                                 47
              LOWER    PALAEOLITHIC        CULTURES

in what South Africa prehistorians term their Late Stone Age are
the variant of the Wilton named after the Nachikufu caves in
north-east Rhodesia, found in the savannah woodland country
north of the Zambezi and marked in its earliest stage by narrow
pointed microliths; and the Smithfield of the Vaal and Upper
Orange rivers, an industry with special forms of scraper, but
lacking microliths, the general aspect of which is doubtless related
to the nature of the raw material, a variety of indurated shale. In
the course of their long history—there is a radio-carbon date of
4350+ 250 B.c. for a low level in the Nachikufan cave—these
industries underwent many changes and were enriched by contact
with more advanced cultures (see pp. 113 ff.). In East Africa the art
of potting was early acquired from neighbouring groups, but in
the Union this was a more recent trait. Among other features that
appeared only in the younger stages in South Africa may be
mentioned stones bored from both faces to give an hour-glass
perforation and polished stone axes and beads made from ostrich
and mollusc shell. Both in the Horn of Africa and in the Union
cultures of essentially Mesolithic type lasted down to the spread of
iron-working, which first reached Rhodesia on its way south
during the first millennium B.c.; indeed, microlithic industries in
the Wilton tradition were still being made when European in-
fluence began to penetrate South Africa.        It seems probable,
though by no means proved, that the makers of the later Wilton
industries were Bushmen. Although at present confined to the
Kalahari desert, where certain groups have recently been the
subject of intensive ethnographical research, these hunters formerly
ranged over the whole of the eastern part of South Africa into
which they came at an unknown period from the north. The
Bushman’s way of life is basically the same as that which arch-
aeology leads one to infer for the Wilton people, and moreover,
they make beads of eggshell, weight their digging-sticks with
bored stones and use the bow and arrow for hunting; a main
difference is that they now tip their arrows with bone or iron, but
                                 48
                    AND   THEIR    SURVIVALS

in times gone by arrows were armed with lunates set in resin with
the sharp edges exposed.
    The presence of more or less naturalistic rock-paintings over
broad tracts from Tanganyika and Nyasaland, south through the
Rhodesias to the eastern zones of the Transvaal and Orange Free
State and on to the Cape and south-west Africa, has attracted
widespread interest because of their supposed affinities to ones of
Advanced Palaeolithic age in eastern Spain. A more sober view
of the African paintings is now taken, for many of them were
almost certainly executed during the last two or three hundred
years by Bushmen; moreover, the East Spanish are now generally
considered to be of Neothermal age. Yet there is little doubt that
some of the African paintings are of prehistoric age and that they
were executed by makers of Wilton industries. Again, it is
generally accepted that the rock-engravings found in the interior
of the Union were made by the Smithfield people within whose
territory they are confined. The practice of this rock-art, like the
wearing of personal ornaments and the use of bows with arrows
inset with blunted-back microliths, shows that even peoples
remote from the great centres of Advanced Palaeolithic develop-
ment were to some degree, even if belatedly, quickened by
impulses radiating from them.
    Very little is yet certainly known about what was going
forward in southern and south-east Asia during Late Pleistocene
and early Neothermal times. One of the few general conclusions
is that the trend of development in India seems to have been broadly
analogous to that in much of Africa. Late Soan industries made by
developed Levalloisian techniques can be traced down to Late
Pleistocene times and the presumption is that it was these that
gave rise to the microlithic industries with lunates found in large
numbers in the Gujarat and more widely scattered over the Indian
peninsula down to its southern extremity and in Ceylon.



                                  49                          (iP
                          CHAPTER 3

    ADVANCED PALAEOLITHIC AND
       MESOLITHI@G- CULTURES

     ADVANCED           PALAROLITHIC            PEOPEES
New and more spacious prospects were opened up during the
latter half of the Late Pleistocene era by men whose intellectual
capacity and physique differed in no significant way from our own.
It was somewhere between Atlantic Europe and Inner Asia that
man seems first to have given signs of freeing himself from the
narrow conceptual limits within which Lower Palaeolithic peoples
had been confined. It was here in this heartland of Old World
culture that around thirty-five thousand years ago he first achieved
Advanced Palaeolithic status as a specialized hunter, using a
variety of weapons, adorning his person and practising an art that
testifies to an imaginative awareness and a creativity beyond any-
thing of which he had previously given signs and in which we can
detect a first promise of his later achievements.
    The technology of Advanced Palaeolithic peoples was founded
on lithic industries based on the production, by some kind of
punch, of blades or flakes relatively narrow in proportion to their
length and having more or less regular, parallel flake-scars. From
such blades were made a variety of types adapted to different
functions: knife blades and projectile points and barbs were made
by a steep retouch which gave a rest to the finger or facilitated
mounting in a handle or shaft; scrapers for dressing skins and
probably for shaping other materials were formed by trimming
blades to a convex edge; and burins, vitally important for working
antler and bone as well as for engraving, were made by striking
off flakes more or less counter to the main axis of the blade. The
                                 5°
             ADVANCED        PALAEOLITHIC      PEOPLES

much greater use of antler and bone, facilitated by the flint burin,
was another leading feature of Advanced Palaeolithic industry.
Here again many different forms were produced, such as various
patterns of lance- and harpoon-head, spear-throwers, perforated
batons, leather-working tools, awls, and delicately eyed needles.
Allin all, the Advanced Palaeolithic industries give the impression
of being far more diversified and highly specialized than those
practised by Lower Palaeolithic peoples, whether of an earlier age
or persisting down to Neothermal times over the extensive tracts
of Africa and the Far East that remained outside the sphere of
Advanced Palaeolithic culture.
   Although modern research in eastern and central Europe and
in western Asia has produced evidence vitally important for
establishing the spread of the various Advanced Palaeolithic
cultures, the sequence established in the caves and rock-shelters
of south-western France and set out in Table E remains in some
respects a key one.


     TABLE     E. Simplified sequence of Advanced Palaeolithic
                   cultures in south-western France
   Radio-carbon dates B.c.                 Cultures
       15,000—8,000             Magdalenian
       18,000—-15,000           Solutrean
       2.2,000—18,000           Gravettian (Upper Perigordian)
       28,5 00—22,000           Aurignacian
       3.2,000—28,500           Chatelperronian (Lower Perigordian)



   The first of these, the Chatelperronian, is of little general
significance, being confined to south-west France: a substantial
proportion of the flint tools from Chatelperronian levels is of
Mousterian type and a likely explanation of the culture is that it
represents a local development from the Mousterian in the same
general direction as that taken by the more important Advanced
Palaeolithic cultures that follow it in the French sequence.
                                  51                             3-2
ADVANCED       PALAEOLITHIC       AND    MESOLITHIC       CULTURES

Aurignacians and Gravettians
   Among the earliest widely spread blade and burin industries two
main varieties may be distinguished, each named after French
localities, namely the Aurignacian, characterized by projectile
heads of bone, flint scrapers with steep secondary flaking running
up to a keel and flint burins of beaked form, and the Gravettian,
characterized by flint knives and projectile tips and barbs with
steep retouch. Industries of Aurignacian type are known to have
extended from Northern Iraq and Afghanistan to Transcaucasia,
the Crimea, Syria and Palestine and westward from Roumania to
Hungary, Lower Austria, South Germany, France and Canta-
brian Spain. The Gravettian zone is very different, extending
from South Russia, where sites occur most abundantly on the banks
of the Don and Dnieper and their tributaries, to central Europe and
thence, by way of Italy and South Germany, to France and Spain.
  Very little is yet certainly known about origins, but a Pre-
Aurignacian flint industry of basic blade and burin type has more
than once been recognized in Palestine and Syria, where it underlies
Levalloiso—Mousterian deposits and is even associated with the
“Jabrudian’, and industry of Late Acheulian affinities.          Such
would argue for an ultimately Asiatic rather than a European
origin for the blade and burin industries. The Aurignacian and
Gravettian may probably be thought of as divergent specializations
from a Pre-Aurignacian base that may itself have occupied a
fairly extensive territory in western Asia. To judge from existing
radio-carbon dates it would seem that the Aurignacian was
already established over a broad zone of western Asia as far east
as Afghanistan by around 35,000 years B.c. On the other hand the
Gravettian, which in central and parts of western Europe is found
stratified above Aurignacian industries, seems already to have
appeared in Austria around 28,000 B.c.
   Whereas the Aurignacians lived mainly in caves and shelters,
the Gravettians who extended their range into the loess-lands of
South Russia often in such areas made artificial shelters, the earliest
                                  52
            ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC       PEOPLES

for which certain evidence is yet available. Basically these appear
to have comprised skin tents, supported on a few sticks, weighted
round the margin by heavy bones or tusks and covering irregu-
larly-shaped floors that were often slightly hollowed out of the
subsoil. The oval or more or less round houses identified at
Gagarino in South Russia or Dolni-Véstonice in Czechoslovakia,
which ranged from around four to seven metres in width, pre-
sumably housed single families, but the larger dwelling-areas, like
those at Kostienki IV ranging up to twenty-eight or thirty-four
metres in length, must surely have been intended to shelter larger
groups. Yet the distinction is more apparent than real, since
where extensive excavations have been made, as at Pavlov in
Moravia, small dwellings have been found to occur in clusters and
on the other hand the larger ones have been shown to have been
divided into family units. The oblong dwelling-area at Puskari
on the Desna with its three fire-places has for example been
interpreted as due to the confluence of three conical skin tents.
Again, the ones at the lower level at Kostienki IV, which it may be
noted were never more than from five to six and a half metres
across, are best regarded as rows of family units, such as are more
plainly visible in the upper level of the same site with its rows of
adjacent more or less circular huts, each having its own hearth.
What seems clear enough is that as a rule the Gravettians of the
South Russian and Czechoslovak loess-lands lived and moved
about in bands made up of a number of primary households.
Whether these were matriarchal clans, as claimed by Russian
prehistorians, partly on account of the female figurines found at
several of their settlements, can hardly be determined on the basis
of existing evidence; but the fact that they operated as a group,
rather than as mere biological families, is easily explained when
one remembers the ineffectiveness of their armament and the fact
that in these territories at any rate the Gravettians depended to a
large degree on the mammoth, a beast that must have required
teamwork both in hunting and dismembering.
                                 33
ADVANCED        PALAEOLITHIC         AND    MESOLITHIC        CULTURES



The earliest art
   One of the most characteristic and widespread traits of the
Gravettian was the manufacture of female figurines in which the
sexual characteristics are emphasized at the expense, for example,
of the head and features. These figurines, which are found from
France and Italy to the South Russian plain (Map 2), were most




2. Europe in the Last Ice Age: the spread of naturalistic ‘ Venus’ figurines
  (large dots indicate three or more; ice sheets are shown by stippling)

commonly made of mammoth ivory or of various kinds of stone,
but at three Czechoslovak sites examples were also made from
fired clay. The heads as a rule are represented by mere nobs:
hair is rarely and features still more rarely indicated (Frontispiece).
The figure is shown with full breasts and buttocks and is com-
monly pregnant; apart from a girdle at the back of one of those
from Kostienki and a fringe at the rear of that from Lespugue,
the figurines are unclothed. The arms are generally puny and may
                                     34
            ADVANCED       PALAEOLITHIC      PEOPLES

be folded across the breast and the legs taper from well-filled
thighs, the feet, where these have not been broken off, being
suggested rather than shown in detail. In two cases at least the
figurines were coloured with red paint. The selective emphasis
with which these figurines have been shaped suggests that they
were connected in some way with a cult or at least with a body
of ideas centering round fertility, and the fact that all those with
a definite provenance came from settlements, whether from caves
or artificial dwellings, argues for their domestic rather than
public or ceremonial significance. In addition to the Venus
figurines, as they have sometimes been called, the Gravettians
carved and modelled figures of various animals in a more or less
naturalistic style. Thus at Kostienki I, one of the most famous
of the South Russian stations figures of mammoth were cut
rather crudely from the same chalk material as two of the Venus
figures, together with the heads of many kinds of animal includ-
ing lion, bear, and wolf, some with partly human features. The
Gravettians of Czechoslovakia were similarly fond of carving
animals, and in addition modelled a considerable variety—
mammoth, rhinoceros, cave bear, reindeer, bison, horse, lion or
tiger, wolf and lynx—from clay which they hardened on the fire
like pottery.
   Engraving, on the other hand, was much rarer in eastern and
central Europe than in the west. Objectives of personal adorn-
ment and various tools of bone and ivory were ornamented by
incised fringes and simple criss-cross and linear chevron patterns
and the South Russian mammoth-hunters sometimes built up
conventional designs by means of small pits. Occasionally, as in
the stylized engraving of female figures from Predmost, more
ambitious engravings were attempted, but few engravings of more
naturalistic type have been found and none of these is very
convincing. Yet in the west the Gravettians and even the Aurig-
nacians engraved lively outlines of wild animals on stone slabs and
pieces of bone and, what is even more significant, on the walls of
                                 >)
ADVANCED       PALAEOLITHIC       AND   MESOLITHIC      CULTURES

caves and rock shelters. Although the distribution of the two by
no means coincides, it seems likely that the rise of vigorous
schools of naturalistic engraving on small objects was connected
in some way with the practice of cave art. This latter was restricted
even within the territories of the blade and burin culture in which
caves were naturally available: it was not practised for instance by
those who inhabited the caves of western Asia and of central
Europe and was in fact concentrated in the south-western parts of
France and in Cantabria, with outliers in Old Castille and
Andalusia and in South Italy and Sicily.
   The basic drive behind the cave art, as seen for instance at
Lascaux, was a sense of the hunter’s dependence on the continued
abundance of game and on his ability to secure victims. This is
shown clearly enough by the preoccupation of the artists with
game animals and to a minor degree with the beasts of prey
that might threaten them, rather than with human beings; by
their concern with individual beasts rather than with groups and
scenes, apart only from the theme of male and female; and by the
representation of weapons, wounds and medicine men. Yet such
anxieties and tensions are, and no doubt were, resolved among many
hunting communities by mime, dancing and the beginnings of
dramatic representations—indeed, there are signs that the cave
art itself grew from them, even if they are hardly in themselves
sufficient to account for its practice. It must have been the caves
themselves, with their dark recesses, that heightened mystery and
suggestibility and led the hunters of certain territories well-
provided with caves to develop the art of engraving and painting
their walls, ceilings and on occasion their floors. In this connection
it is interesting to note that the artists sometimes worked with the
aid of lamps deep in the limestone rock; for instance at Niaux
in the Ariége the first traces of cave art that greet the intruder
are some 510 metres (over 550 yards) from the mouth and those
deepest from the mouth as muchas 1114 metres, or well over two-
thirds of a mile. Again, there is ample evidence that the pre-
                                  56
             ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC       PEOPLES

historic artists were stimulated by the natural irregularities of
caves, such as bosses in the rock, stalagmitic columns, or drip-
marks on the floor, which they were fond of improving or in-
corporating in the shapes of wild animals; or again by the muddy
slime on the floors or the walls of caves, that led by way of
ape-like doodling not only to meanders drawn by the fingers
and, thus, ultimately to naturalistic outlines but also to plastic
modelling.
    During the first or Gravettian (later Perigordian) cycle of cave
art, both engraving and painting were carried out. Engraving was
done by flint graving tools or in the case of clay surfaces by the
finger-tip; and painting by means of various ochres, oxide of
manganese and carbon, ground on stone palettes and either applied
in powdered form by being blown from the mouth or through a
tube or mixed with animal grease and applied by means of brushes
or soft stumps. The engravings of this first cycle comprised
meandering lines made by fingers on clay and naturalistic engrav-
ings of animals, drawn in outline often with great vigour, though
with stiff legs and commonly having the horns depicted full-
face. Allied to these engravings were a number of low reliefs
like the five figures from Laussel, one male and four female,
one of the females carrying a bison’s horn in the right hand.
Paintings included red and yellow meanders drawn by several
fingers; human hands, either positive red ones or negative ones
silhouetted in various colours; crudely painted red animals and
club-shaped signs; line drawings in red, yellow and black; wide
blotted lines; flat washes; and the beginning of painting in two
colours.
   When the Gravettian hunters died they were given ceremonial
burial dressed in their finery and scattered over with red ochre.
From such finds and from discoveries made on dwelling sites it
is evident that the Upper Palaeolithic hunters of western and
central Europe were accustomed, unlike their Mousterian pre-
decessors, to wear head-dresses and girdles of perforated snail-
                                 v7
 ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC       AND   MESOLITHIC      CULTURES

shells, bracelets, necklaces and anklets of ivory, perforated animal
teeth and shells. Some of their bracelets in particular were
elaborately decorated with geometric engravings.

Szeletian and Solutrean
   The contrast between the makers of blade and burin industries,
more particularly the Gravettians, and the Mousterians and Leval-
loiso-Mousterians was thus considerable, not only in the more
versatile nature of their handwork and in the greater adaptability
of their dwellings, but still more in their aesthetic awareness and
above all in their capacity for cultural progress. Yet the fact that
evolution occurred and that fruitful contact was sometimes made
between the two ought to warn us against over-emphasizing
the immediate differences between them and remind us that the
essential contrast was one of potentialities. Thus, the Szeletian
culture, named after the Hungarian locality of Szeleta, combined
split-based bone points of Aurignacian type with bifacially flaked
points of Mousterian ancestry, recalling those of the Aterian and
Still Bay industries of Africa.    Again, flint work from levels
immediately overlying Gravettian deposits in South Russia shows
a recrudescence of the bifacial technique that prevailed in the
underlying ones and carried forward Mousterian traditions like
those manifested at the Caucasian site of Ilskaya. Equally, in
France, industries with bifacially-flaked points, named after the
site of Solutre, Sadne-et-Loire, directly succeeded the Gravettian.
At first, under the impact of impulses that probably came from
central Europe, plano-convex points were made with shallow
pressure flaking encroaching on part of one face; these were
followed by laurel-leaf points of characteristic shape; and, finally,
by shouldered or tanged points which sometimes combine flat
flaking with the steep edge retouch of the Gravettian. The best
indication that, alongside impulses from a more archaic industrial
source, substantial continuity was maintained with the blade and
burin tradition is afforded by the naturalistic art which persisted
                                  58
             ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC      PEOPLES

both in France and Spain, to flower again in the closing phases of
Upper Palaeolithic times.

Magdalenian and other specialized groups
   In the south and east, in Spain, Italy, central Europe and South
Russia, the heirs of the Gravettians maintained their traditions
with only comparatively minor changes right down into Neo-
thermal times. In north-western Europe and in south-west Asia
on the other hand new, regionally differentiated cultures appeared.
Of these the best endowed was the Magdalenian, which seems to
have developed locally from Gravettian sources and to have
flourished mainly in a limited territory extending from western
and south-western Germany across France to Cantabria, with an
extension for a time into eastern Spain. The Magdalenian is note-
worthy for a marked development in the use of bone and above
all of antler for the fabrication of a broad range of weapons,
implements and objects of personal adornment, including barbed
harpoon heads and eyed needles of a fineness unsurpassed by any
other prehistoric people; and secondly for carrying cave art and
the enrichment of smaller objects to a new peak of development.
In the field of cave art the Solutreo-Magdalenian phase was
marked by renewed attempts to suggest fullness. Figures might
be thrown into apparent relief by cutting deeply into the sur-
rounding limestone: good examples are the friezes of horses,
oxen, ibex and the rest from the Solutrean and Early Magdalenian
sites of the Dordogne and the even more splendid one at Angles-
sur-Anglin to the north in Vienne which included representations
of the waists and thighs of three women. An alternative method
was to suggest relief by means of fine hatching such as can still be
seen at Altamira or Marsoulas. Similarly in painting, after passing
once again through the sequence of simple line to blotted and
flat-wash work, the artists attained to polychrome representations
outlined in black, as seen in some of the best work at Altamira and
Font de Gaume, before relapsing at the close of the Pleistocene
                                 59
 ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC       AND   MESOLITHIC      CULTURES

into small red drawings. Quite as remarkable in its way was the
work of Magdalenian artists in bone and antler. This is parti-
cularly well displayed in the reindeer-antler spear-throwers charac-
teristic of the middle phases of the culture: two kinds were made,
weighted ones with figures carved in relief at the lower or hooked
end and unweighted ones that might be carved all the way down
the shaft, but in each case the artist showed admirable skill in the
way in which he enriched an object of great functional importance
by his renderings of horses, ibex, bison and other animals in full
or partial relief. Altogether the art of this last phase of the Upper
Palaeolithic in western Europe reflects the apogee of an advanced
hunting culture operating in conditions that must have been
highly congenial and productive of leisure.
   In Palestine and Syria the Aurignacian was followed by a local
derivative known as the Atlitian and this in turn was succeeded
at the close of Upper Palaeolithic times by one of generalized and
debased Gravettian affinities (the Kebaran or Nebekian) charac-
terized by narrow micro-blades with blunted back, a few micro-
liths of lunate and triangular shape of the type used to back and
tip projectiles, and small burins and scrapers. A rather similar
industry, though somewhat closer to the Gravettian, has been
located in caves in the Zagros Mountains at Zarzi and elsewhere.
Further north, on the South Russian plain, the Gravettian
industries with traces of bifacial retouch were succeeded by ones
of somewhat degenerate type with smaller implements in less
variety like those from Gontzi and Timonovka. Meanwhile
hunters especially adapted to hunting reindeer were beginning to
colonize the North European plain as far west as northern Holland
and southern England and more or less up to latitude 55° N.; for
the most part they were compelled to live in the open and there
are signs that, in North Germany at least, they occupied skin tents,
though in Britain they took the opportunity of occupying caves
where these were available. Although the antler harpoon-heads
made by the Hamburgians recall in general terms those of a
                                 60
             ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC        PEOPLES

certain stage of the Magdalenian, the antler-work as a whole is
unique in character and the flint-work reminds one of the flint
industries of South Russia and central Europe rather than of
western Europe, and there seems little doubt that the northern
plain was colonized from the south or south-east. During the
final cold spell of the Late Glacial period reindeer hunters had
penetrated Denmark and the number of distinctive cultural groups
(Ahrensburgian, Swiderian, Bromme, Tjonger) had continued to
multiply.

Colonization of Siberia
   Finally, it was during Late Glacial times that Siberia seems to
have been first occupied by man. Although the total extent of the
territory is so vast, the area open to human settlement was in fact
limited in the north by the existence of a great zone of lake and
marsh south of the northern glaciated zone, between the Urals and
the Yenisei and on the south by the mountain zone of Inner Asia,
much of the outer rim of which was glaciated. Traces of Upper
Palaeolithic settlement have so far been found in the Upper Ob and
Yenisei, the Angara and Selenga basins near Lake Baikal and the
Upper Lena River up to latitude 61° N. To judge from the fauna,
two phases of Late Glacial settlement appear to be represented—
an earlier one by Mal’ta and Buret’ in the Angara Valley and a
later one by Afontova Gora near Krasnoyarsk in the upper
Yenisei—and these were followed by one of Neothermal age well
seen at Verkholenskaia Gora. The flint industries from Mal’ta and
Afontova Gora are both basically Mousterian in tradition with
typical tortoise cores, points and side-scrapers. On the other hand
the presence of blades, burins and, at the latter site, of microlithic
points with battered backs points clearly to a contribution from
the Upper Palaeolithic blade and burin tradition, a contribution
which is emphasized by the wealth of antler, bone and ivory
artifacts (including eyed needles, slotted bone handles, perforated
batons, and objects of personal adornment such as plaques and
                                  61
 ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC       AND   MESOLITHIC       CULTURES

pendants decorated with pits as well as tubular and disc beads);
and still more by the presence of female figurines. The easiest way
to account for this apparent mixture is to suppose that Gravettians
moving east from the South Russian Plain came in contact with
descendants of the Mousterians spreading northward from Uzbeki-
stan. The wealth of ornaments found with the ceremonial burial
of a child at Mal’ta suggests that the early settlers of the Baikal
region had come to satisfactory terms with their environment,
which to judge from the fauna shared certain characteristics of
steppe and tundra. One way in which they managed to survive
the cold winters was to build semi-subterranean houses with
entrance passages, a type which in its basic character still survives
in the circumpolar zone. Another, testified by the fine-eyed
needles and by a figurine from Buret’ on the Angara river, carved
from a mammoth tusk and apparently clothed in furs, was the use
of sewed skin clothing, for which there is also good evidence at
the other end of the Upper Palaeolithic world in the Magdalenian
of western Europe.
    One of the main interests of these early Siberian industries is
that they provide an obvious source for those earliest intruders
into North America who laid a basis for the prehistory of the
New World as a whole. In this connection especial significance
attaches to the presence already at Mal’ta of bifacially flaked points
of a kind that emerged from similar antecedents in many parts of
the Old World. Up to the present it is true that no sites of Late
Glacial age have been encountered north of latitude 61°, but
research in this remote part of the Soviet Union is still in its early
days and it should not be overlooked that much of the low-lying
plain to the north of the inhospitable mountainous interior of
easternmost Siberia, a plain that once linked Alaska with the
Lower Lena Valley, has been submerged by the rise of sea-levels
during the Neothermal period.


                                 62
ADVANCED       PALAEOLITHIC        AND    MESOLITHIC       CULTURES


             MESOLITHIC            COMMUNITIES
The onset of Neothermal conditions about ten thousand years ago
exerted a profound influence on the course of prehistory. This
applied particularly to the Advanced Upper Palaeolithic peoples
occupying regions subject to Late Glacial or Pluvial climate.
There the changes in ecological conditions were so great and so
relatively sudden as to upset the balance of the human societies
involved and so gave rise to major readjustments in the sphere of
culture, which serve to define Mesolithic from Advanced Palaeo-
lithic communities. Conversely, in intermediate territories like
Italy and Spain, where no such marked or sudden change occurred
in the natural environment, it is frequently difficult to distinguish
on purely cultural grounds between the two stages, and Advanced
Palaeolithic cultures grade almost imperceptibly into ones of
Epi-Palaeolithic character.

Origins of domestication
   As a generalization one might say that the Mesolithic peoples of
the Old World bridged the transition from the old hunter-fisher
mode of life to one based on the new economy of farming. They
did this in several ways. To begin with, it was Mesolithic people
who, early in Neothermal times and almost certainly somewhere
in western Asia, initiated the domestication of animals and plants.
This process, gradual and difficult to trace in its earliest stages, led
in the course of a few centuries to the rise of economies in which
hunting and fishing had sunk to roles altogether subsidiary to that
of agriculture and stock-raising and which provided a firm basis
for the earliest civilizations of the Old World. Equally it was
Mesolithic people who carried on the old way of life throughout
the very extensive regions over which farming spread, in the
course of millennia, from the earliest centres to the outermost
limits imposed by contemporary climate and vegetation. More-
over, it was these Mesolithic survivors who helped to diversify the
                                   63
 ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC       AND   MESOLITHIC      CULTURES

provincial Neolithic cultures, which arose essentially by a process
of acculturation.
   It is a reasonable hypothesis that the domestication of animals
and plants was carried out under stress of the arid conditions that
followed immediately on the end of the last Pluvial period in
parts of western Asia. The existence of these conditions has been
demonstrated particularly clearly from the Neothermal levels of
rock-shelters on Mount Carmel, Palestine, in which the pre-
ponderance of antelopes and specifically of gazelles over the wood-
land fallow deer was greater than during any previous period
represented in the deposits. The change must not be over-
emphasized, since we know from other sites that woodland and
scrub must have survived in certain localities of Palestine, but
from the point of view of early man it was certainly for the worse.
The desiccation created a situation that could only be met by a
reduction in population or by improvements in the means of
subsistence.

Mesolithic groups in south-west Asia
   The Mesolithic people about whom we know most in western
Asia are the Natufians, so called after the Wady en-Natuf, where
their traces were first recognized. They were centred on a strip of
territory mostly within some forty miles of the East Mediterranean
between Beirut in the north and the Judaean Desert in the south,
with outliers in Syria and far away to the south-west at Heluan,
some twenty miles south of Cairo. Over the greater part of their
territory the Natufians occupied rock-shelters, though recent
discoveries at Eynam and Jericho make it clear that already
during an early stage in their history they had begun to live in the
open. The dead were commonly buried at their place of settlement;
for instance the Mugharet el-Wad produced a cemetery of 87
individuals, including 64 adults, most buried on the platform but
a few in the interior, though it is fair to point out that not all of
these were of one period. The earliest Natufians habitually buried
                                 64
                  MESOLITHIC      COMMUNITIES

more than one person in the same grave, though in such cases one
individual was marked out from the rest by being accompanied by
personal ornaments. The settlement of Eynam included a monu-
mental circular tomb, sunk nearly a metre into the ground and
having walls lined with plaster, which appears to have been used
on more than one occasion. The Eynam tomb also yielded, above
two layers of burials, a complete skull with two neck vertebrae,
suggesting that it had been severed from the trunk while still
clothed with flesh.
   The material equipment of the Lower Natufians reflects an
economy based primarily on hunting, but in which fishing,
indicated by slender bone spearheads barbed on one edge and by
plain fish-hooks, played locally an important part, and in which
cereal grasses were harvested for the first time by reaping-knives
formed by flint blades inset into slotted handles of bone (and
presumably also of wood) and converted into meal by stone
pestles and mortars. The production of blades and burins and the
use of bone and antler on a considerable scale carried on Advanced
Palaeolithic traditions; so did the vigorous art, in which animal
forms were rendered in a more or less naturalistic style; and so did
the wearing of personal ornaments, comprising head-dresses and
thigh-bands made from Dentalium shells, necklaces made up of
perforated ends of gazelle phalanges, bored teeth, and twin-
pendants of carved bone separated by Dentalium spacers. On the
other hand the abundance of microliths, though not unknown in
certain Advanced Palaeolithic cultures, is more characteristic of
Mesolithic ones. The lunate form that predominated in the
Natufian was retouched on the convex back by flaking from two
directions, producing the so-called ridge-back retouch, designed
to make them, like the blades of reaping-knives, fit more snugly
into grooves or slots when mounted in handles or the heads of
projectiles. The use for reaping of narrow blades with ridge-back
retouch, inset in bone handles, of which several more or less
complete examples have been preserved, is indicated by the
                                65
ADVANCED       PALAEOLITHIC       AND   MESOLITHIC      CULTURES

presence of diffuse lustre of the kind that results from friction with
the silica in cereal stalks, but it is important to emphasize that as
yet we have no biological evidence of the precise nature of the
cereals reaped by the Natufians, nor above all of the extent to
which these had been domesticated and improved by breeding.
The fact that even the reaping-knives bore carved animal heads on
their handles and that stone pestles were shaped in the form of
animal hoofs suggests that hunting was still the main source of
food and this is supported by the absence of bones of domestic
animals from deposits certainly of Lower Natufian age; even the
dog, which commonly precedes domestic food-animals, did not
certainly appear before the Middle Natufian. On the other hand
it has been argued that the mere fact that specialized reaping
equipment had been developed points to the harvesting of cereals
improved by breeding to a point at which they retained their
seeds for a period after ripening instead of shedding them almost
at once.
   That the Mesolithic inhabitants of Palestine contributed vitally
to the early development of settled life based on stable farming
will become more apparent when we consider the sequence
brought to light in the early levels at Jericho (p. 81, below). Yet
the probability is that when more is known about the prehistory
of the area extending from the Mediterranean to the Iranian
plateau, over which the earliest settled communities made their
appearance, it will be found that the process of readjustment to less
friendly environmental conditions caused more than this one Meso-
lithic group to seek closer relations with selected species of animals
and plants in a way that led ultimately to their domestication.
Further, one has to remember that, even in remote prehistoric
times, men and therefore knowledge crossed tribal boundaries and
so were capable of influencing groups with quite distinct cultural
traditions, provided that they stood at an appropriate technological
level. The question ‘who invented agriculture?’ is one that is
hardly worth asking, since there is no prospect, certainly in the
                                 66
                    MESOLITHIC    COMMUNITIES

foreseeable future, of its receiving a convincing answer. Mean-
while hints that the earliest farmers in different parts of western
Asia preserved traces of Mesolithic ancestry emphasize the essen-
tially transitional character of the Mesolithic peoples: thus, the
pre-pottery farmers of Jarmo in Iraq used microliths and the
formally Neolithic, if not Chalcolithic (that is using some copper
alongside flint and stone), inhabitants of Sialk in Persia made
reaping-knives by setting flint blades into slotted bone handles
carved at one end with animal heads. How far this implies that
any particular group shared in the original transition from hunting
and gathering to farming and how far that they merely adopted
the new way of life from more advanced neighbours can only be
decided in this key area when a much closer net-work of radio-
carbon dates has been established.

Mesolithic Europe
   In the case of territories such as the greater part of Europe, into
which farming is known to have spread from outside, the Meso-
lithic peoples can be considered as transitional only in the latter
sense. By the same token the span of Neothermal time during
which Mesolithic societies prevailed was determined by the
relative remoteness of different areas from the early centres of
civilization, so that, to quote an extreme example, the Mesolithic
period lasted much longer in say Denmark than it did in
Palestine. Another fundamental difference is that, whereas in
western Asia the Neothermal period began as one of stress, an
era of aridity succeeding the plentiful rainfall of pluvial times, in
northern Europe it was, on the contrary, one in which glacial
conditions were relaxed and replaced by more genial ones. Thus,
whereas in Asia worsening conditions promoted the development
of a new way of life at the expense of the old, in Europe the
emphasis was on adapting the old way of life to the spread of
forest and on extending its geographical range to include regions
formerly covered by ice-sheets or at least subject to periglacial
                                 67
 ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC      AND   MESOLITHIC      CULTURES

conditions.   Between these extremes, over much of the West
Mediterranean zone for example, the change in ecological con-
ditions was much less marked and no outstanding cultural
developments occurred.
   Over a large part of Europe, including Iberia and Italy and
much of France, Britain, central Europe and South Russia, the
archaeological remains of Mesolithic cultures showed a marked
falling away from those prevailing earlier in the same localities,
suggesting a general impoverishment, due perhaps to some quite
minor disturbance of the old equilibrium. A noticeable feature of
the flint industries is an abundance of microliths shaped by a steep
retouch from narrow flakes of small size and used in many cases to
provide tips and barbs for wooden arrows; microliths had indeed
played an important part in certain Advanced Palaeolithic
industries, but the widespread dominance they now assumed was
something new. Apart from this there was a marked reduction in
forms, though scrapers continued to bea feature of most industries
and burins continued, usually in greatly reduced numbers. In
keeping with the decline of the burin went a general reduction in
the importance of antler and bone as materials for implements and
weapons and a scarcity of any form of art. The only exception to
this was provided by the Azilian culture, named after the site of
Mas d’Azil in the Ariége, which included numerous harpoon heads
made from stag antler and barbed on one or both edges, and stone
pebbles painted in red with conventional designs of ultimately
anthropomorphic origin: and this culture, which was centred
on the Dordogne, the northern slopes of the Pyrenees and the
Cantabrian mountains, evidently evolved directly from the Late
Magdalenian of the region. The precise sources of the cultures
represented by minute geometric microliths and found over large
parts of southern, western and central Europe are more difficult to
trace, partly owing to their impoverishment and partly due to the
effects of migration. The Grimaldian culture of Italy, indeed,
seems to have developed without a break into an Epi-Grimaldian
                                68
                  MESOLITHIC         COMMUNITIES

of Neothermal age, but no precise line of descent is evident for
the Sauveterrian of France      or    the comparable   industries   of
Britain or central Europe.

The Maglemosians
  The hunter-fisher peoples who began to develop on the North
European Plain in Pre-Boreal and reached their peak in Late Boreal
times, stand in vivid contrast in that they exhibit something of the
creative drive characteristic of the Advanced Palaeolithic peoples
of southern and central Europe. The Maglemose people, named
from the big bog (magle mose) at the Danish site of Mullerup
where their remains were first recognized, have sometimes been
classified as possessing a Forest culture but it is important to
emphasize that they differed from those just described not so much
in their environment—France and central Europe were forested as
much as Denmark during Neothermal times—as in the use they
made of it. The heart of the Maglemosian territory comprised the
eastern part of Britain, the marshy region now covered by the
North Sea, the North German plain and the lands bordering the
western part of the Ancylus Lake, the form taken by the present
Baltic Sea during Boreal times. From there they spread west as
far as Ulster, east into the forest zone of Russia, and north to
Middle Sweden and Norway as these territories were made
accessible through the isostatic recovery of the earth’s crust from
the diminishing weight of retreating ice-sheets. The Maglemosians
settled the banks of rivers and the margins of the lakes abound-
ing in their territory, so that much of their refuse found its
way into waterlogged deposits. This has led to the survival
of an unusually large number of objects made from organic
materials.
  Like their contemporaries in central and southern Europe, the
Maglemosians depended for their living on hunting and fishing
supplemented on occasion by fowling and plant-gathering. The
presence of quantities of antlers and bones at a number of their
                                69
ADVANCED       PALAEOLITHIC       AND   MESOLITHIC      CULTURES

sites makes it possible to be sure that they killed large numbers of
the elk, aurochs, red and roe deer and wild pig that sheltered in
the virgin forest. Further, the discovery of microliths still
mounted in resin on their pine-wood arrow-shafts proves beyond
dispute that a main function of these was to barb and tip arrows.
In addition to arrows of this type, blunt-ended ones of wood,
intended for birds or small mammals with precious pelts, were
found, together with bows made from single pieces of tapered
wood and provided in the middle with carefully made hand-grips.
As well as bows and arrows the Maglemosians used spears
mounted with antler or bone heads barbed on one edge, either
singly, or in pairs, for hunting and fishing. As might be expected
from the nature of their habitat, they went in for fresh-water
fishing on a considerable scale, using, in addition to fish-spears or
leisters, lines with barbless bone fish-hooks resembling those
from the Natufian culture of Palestine and nets made from twine
twisted from fibres taken from the inner surface of line-bark and
provided with sink-stones and floats of tree-bark. Numerous
finds of wooden paddles, including one of late Pre-Boreal age
from Star Carr, England, show that boats were in use and a well-
made dug-out canoe from Pesse in Holland has been dated to
c. 6250 B.C. by radio-carbon analysis.
    One of the chief ways in which the Maglemosians differed from
other Mesolithic groups lay in the positive attitude they adopted
towards the forests that marked the climax of Post-Glacial vegeta-
tion in the temperate zone. Already before the end of Pre-Boreal
times, during the period when birch forests were predominant,
there is evidence that axes and adzes chipped from nodules of
flint and sharpened and re-sharpened by blows struck transversely
to the blade were used to fell trees and work timber. At first the
blades were small and crudely made, but from the beginning they
must have been mounted on handles in some form of holder or
sleeve to absorb the impact. Larger and more regular ones were
made during Boreal times and from this period we have a number
                                 70
                   MESOLITHIC      COMMUNITIES

of examples fixed in their original sleeves of antler or wood, into
which wooden handles were inserted. By means of such tools the
Maglemosians were able not only to initiate, though on a very
restricted scale, the clearance of forest, which was not to be under-
taken in earnest until the adoption of farming, but also to utilize
wood on a more extensive scale, for example in making the dug-
out canoe already mentioned.
   Another difference lay in their very extensive utilization of
antler and bone. Whereas such peoples as the Epi-Grimaldians and
the Sauveterrians contented themselves with awls, bodkins and
various spatulate tools, the Maglemosians used these materials for
making various forms of mattock-head, sleeves for axe- and adze-
blades, barbed spearheads of various shapes and sizes, fish-hooks,
netting-needles, leather-working tools, and objects of apparently
ceremonial character.
   Lastly, at the height of their development the Maglemosians
practised art on a much more considerable scale. This took the
form mainly of decorating objects of daily use, perforated and
often smoothed antler beams or pendants or amulets. The
techniques employed included line engraving, sometimes so fine
as to escape casual scrutiny, and pits neatly drilled, presumably by
fine flint awls, into the surface of the object decorated. The
commonest motives were geometric patterns such as linear chey-
rons, criss-cross lines and various kinds of barbed line, all of which
might on occasion be tied together to form an overall net-like
design; in addition animal and anthropomorphic designs might
be employed, the latter particularly on pendants or amulets.
Occasionally, also, amber lumps might be carved into the forms
of animals. The explanation for the flowering of this art at the
peak of the Maglemosian culture and at the heart of its area of
distribution may well be no more than that it represents a response
to an environment peculiarly well-endowed for hunting and in
which communities of hunters might be expected to have ex-
perienced some degree of cultural intensification.
                                  71
ADVANCED       PALAEOLITHIC      AND   MESOLITHIC      CULTURES


Coastal settlement
  During their final phase there is evidence that Mesolithic
people in coastal areas were paying considerable attention to sea
mammals, fish and shell-fish as sources of food, though there
is doubt how far this represents a new departure and how far
it is due simply to the submergence of the earlier Mesolithic
coasts over most of Europe. Evidence that the resources of
the sea were being vigorously exploited during the Atlantic
phase of climate is available from the numerous        middens   of
Denmark and South Sweden; from cave and midden sites occupied
by Larnians and Obanians on either side of North Channel in
north-east Ireland and south-west Scotland, from midden sites
on islands off the present coasts of Morbihan and near the estuary
of the Tagus in Portugal, occupied by makers of flint industries
with trapeziform arrowheads; and from middens in cave-mouths
abounding in the North Spanish province of Asturias but
extending as far west as North Portugal.

Neolithic contacts

   A significant aspect of the later stages in the history of some
Mesolithic groups in Europe is the traces they show of influence
from intrusive Neolithic economy. Thus, at a certain stage in the
coastal settlement of Denmark, well exemplified at Ertebolle in
North Jutland, we find a number of cultural traits that must have
been Neolithic in origin, namely pottery, flat and radial flaking of
flint axes, chisel-ended arrowheads made from sections of flint
blades, and, most suggestive of all, agriculture and stock-raising
alongside the older sources of food. Admittedly these have been
explained in two ways, either as pointing to contact between
indigenous hunter-fishers and intrusive farmers in Denmark or as
evidence of the impact on the native Mesolithic culture of in-
fluences from Neolithic peasant cultures somewhere to the south.
What is in any case reasonably sure is that the contacts set in
                                72
                  MESOLITHIC      COMMUNITIES

motion a process of acculturation which serves to explain the
distinctive character of Early Neolithic culture in the north.
Again, in south-west Europe we find that peoples making flint
blades and trapeziform arrowheads and living an otherwise
Mesolithic way of life appear to have herded goats or sheep.
Among such one may include midden-dwellers on the estuary of
the Tagus or on the coast of Morbihan and the Tardenoisian cave-
dwellers of Guyenne, who take their name from Fére-en-Tardenois
in the Ile de France. Here also there are alternative explanations,
but the fact remains that in both northern and southern Europe
the later Mesolithic peoples bridged the gap between societies
based exclusively on a wild economy and those who depended
overwhelmingly on farming.

Expansion in northern Eurasia
   Early Neothermal times also witnessed a certain enlargement
in the area of human settlement, more particularly in northern
territories as these were released from the grip of glacial or peri-
glacial conditions. In the British Isles occupation was restricted
during Late Glacial times to territories south of a line between
Settle and Scarborough; and though much of Ireland provided
lush grazing for giant Irish deer and reindeer, at this time the land
was empty of men.     Settlement seems to have expanded into the
empty lands by two main thrusts: on the one hand makers of
flint industries analogous to the French Sauveterrian, but with
elements from native sources, moved up the Pennines to north-
eastern England and eastern Scotland, sending a westward branch
to the Isle of Man; and on the other off-shoots from the Magle-
mosian centre, established in east Yorkshire as early as Late Pre-
Boreal times, spread westwards across the sea to Ireland where
they concentrated in the flint-rich province of Ulster. The
Larnian—Obanian culture, which grew up on either side of the
North Channel and ultimately spread up the west coast of
Scotland, may well have received impulses of ultimately Azilian
                                 73
ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC       AND   MESOLITHIC     CULTURES

character from the Biscayan area to the south and quite certainly
developed a regional character of its own, to which adaptation to
coastal activities may well have contributed.
   At the end of Late Glacial times the greater part of the Scandi-
navian peninsula was still buried under ice, the southern margin
of which, marked by the Fenno-Scandian moraine, passed well
south of Oslo and Stockholm; moreover, south of the ice-sheet
a broad zone subject to isostatic depression was still submerged by
the sea. As the ice-sheet shrank and the land was recovered,
human settlement was able to expand, but it is worthy of note that
the Mesolithic colonization was in fact restricted to territories
outside the Fenno-Scandian moraine, and to the Atlantic coasts.
The discovery of lithic industries at intervals around the Atlantic
coasts of Scandinavia up to Finnmark and on to the Murmansk
shore suggests a coastwise expansion of the coastal cultures
identified in Denmark and West Sweden from early Atlantic times
and in all probability established much earlier. The difficulty of
overland movement up the fjord-indented coast of Norway and
the discontinuity of settlement alike suggest that the northward
spread of the Fosna-Komsa culture was effected by means of
boats, the use of which enormously increased the possibilities of
migration under primitive conditions.
   Further east, in European Russia, a definite expansion in the
area of settlement can also be noted. Thus, the Oka Valley into
which Advanced Palaeolithic man had barely penetrated was
occupied comparatively thickly by Mesolithic hunter-fishers.
Further north there are signs that inroads were beginning to be
made into the southern portion of the belt of pine forest that
stretched from the East Baltic to the Urals. At Kunda and other
sites in Esthonia abundant bone and antler gear for hunting and
fishing, comparable but not identical with that of much the same
age in the West Baltic area, is known from deposits of Boreal
and younger age. Closely similar finds relating to an Eastern
Maglemosian are known from north-west Russia and a further
                                74
                 MESOLITHIC      COMMUNITIES

800 miles or so east in the Schigir culture around Sverdlovsk,
beyond a slight gap in the Ural mountains. Although, however,
the Eastern Maglemosians had penetrated the coniferous forest
over a front of more than a thousand miles, they did not do so very
deeply, and much of the northern part of European Russia
remained unoccupied. Further east in central Siberia no very
marked change seems to have occurred in the external environ-
ment and in consequence no clear line can be drawn in cultural
history until the appearance of pottery. The material from
Verkholenskaia Gora, near Irkutsk, was associated with a modern
fauna and dated from Neothermal times, but in all essentials it
represents a continuance of the Advanced Palaeolithic of the
region.




                                75
                           CHAPTER 4

  THE INVENTION OF FARMING AND
     THE RISE OF MESOPOTAMIAN
            CIVILIZATION

Mixed farming as the basis of Old World civilization
   The possibility of advancing towards civilization depended in
the first instance on a new relationship between man and the
animals and plants on which he depended for food. So long as he
had to subsist on the game animals, birds and fish he could catch
and trap, the insects and eggs he could collect and the foliage,
roots, fruits and seeds he could gather, he was limited in the kind
of social life he could develop; as a rule he could only live in small
groups, which gave small scope for specialization and the sub-
division of labour, and in the course of a year he would have to
move over extensive tracts of country, shifting his habitation so
that he could tap the natural resources of successive areas. It is
hardly to be wondered at that among communities whose energies
were almost entirely absorbed by the mere business of keeping
alive, technology remained at a low ebb. It is true that peoples like
the Kwakuitl and Nootka tribes of British Columbia, who were
able to win a basic supply of food by catching and storing the
salmon that came up their rivers at the spawning season, could
maintain permanent settlements, build massive timber houses and
support elaborate social institutions involving the ceremonial
destruction of wealth. Yet the fact remains that no such peoples,
other than the pioneers of farming, were able by their own
efforts to emerge from the Stone Age. It was only through the
control of breeding of animals and plants that early man was able
to ensure himself a reliable and readily expandable source of food
                                 76
       THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN       CIVILIZATION

and thereby establish a secure basis for cultural advance. The
invention of farming was indeed revolutionary in the sense that it
alone made possible the rise of literate civilizations, though one
does well to remember that the new economy was established so
gradually and its effects upon other aspects of culture were at
first so imperceptible as to be hardly discernible in the archaeo-
logical record.
    The historic civilizations of the Near East were centred on
great rivers: the Euphrates and Tigris, the Nile and, somewhat
later, the Indus; but archaeology, supported by radio-carbon
dating, makes it clear that the antecedent stages, which witnessed
the genesis of farming, metallurgy, urban settlement and a complex
social hierarchy, were passed through elsewhere. The birth of
farming and the origins of settled life in the Near East occurred
somewhere in the zone extending from Palestine, Syria and Cilicia,
and thence across the piedmont or foot-hill zone of Turkey and
northern Iraq to Iran, the Caspian shore and Turkestan (Map 3).
Whereas the alluvial lands had an arid climate and needed irriga-
tion to render them fertile, the upland territories have a rainfall
to-day exceeding 16 inches a year and even at the driest phase of
Neothermal time must have been relatively more favourable to
primitive farmers. Moreover, it was precisely in these latter
territories that the prototypes of the relevant crops and livestock
flourished in the wild state. At least it is the case that Triticum
dicoccoides and Hordeum spontaneum, progenitors respectively of
Emmer wheat and barley, the two cereals that dominated agri-
culture in this zone, are both found wild in just these regions to-
day; there is no evidence that either was available in Egypt before
being introduced by man; and the only cereal growing wild in
Europe, Triticum aegilopoides, known from Albania, Yugoslavia
and northern Greece, is unlikely to have played a significant part,
since Einkorn T. monococcum, to which it gave rise, seems never
to have been cultivated as a separate crop and, having as a rule
only one grain on a spikelet, was not much use for breeding
                                td.
3. The heartland of Old World civilization, c. 8000-2
                                                      500 B.¢.



                            78
A City- dwellers            ©   _—-Hunter-fishers and gatherers

@ Established farmers           Land between 200 and 1000 m.

@ Incipient farmers             Land over 1000 m.




                        7
               THE   INVENTION       OF   FARMING

purposes. Again, though wild prototypes of oxen and swine were
rather widely distributed in the temperate zone during Neo-
thermal times, wild sheep were much more narrowly confined,
the Mouflon variety to a zone from Syria and southernTurkey
to Iraq, the Urial to one from the Caspian across Iran to Afghani-
stan and northern Pakistan, and the Argali to the region from
Turkestan to the Uzbek republic. Equally it was the piedmont and
mountain zone that held metal ores and so offered conditions
favourable to technological advance among societies whose
economies long remained on a subsistence basis. It was not
until social development was comparatively advanced that occupa-
tion of the alluvial territories, involving irrigation of the soil
and wholesale importation of basic raw materials, first became
feasible.
   If the original focus of farming is to be located somewhere
within the territory just defined, it is among the advanced hunter-
fishers and food-gathers occupying the area at or near the
beginning of Neothermal times that we have to seek the in-
novators, who in a sense were responsible for the whole future of
civilization in the Old World. Insufficient is yet known about the
Mesolithic peoples of western Asia to allow any firm conclusions
to be drawn about those most likely to have been responsible.
The possibility has to be allowed that in reality several different
groups rose to the same challenge—the desiccation that marked the
onset of Neothermal times in this area. In any case, even if some
one group was in fact ahead of the others, conditions were such
that people were more receptive than usual to new ways of easing
the burden of subsistence, so that the picture would soon be
blurred by diffusion. It would seem therefore that we must await
a more exact definition of the Mesolithic groups occupying the
region, and above all a network of radio-carbon dates sufficiently
close to make it possible to trace the areas where the new form of
economy first emerged.

                                80
I   Reconstructed skull of Peking man (Pithecanthropus pekinensis)




                                                           (facing p. 80)
If   Skull of Proto-Neolithic man from Jerich
                                              o with face
                     modelled in clay
    AND   THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN      CIVILIZATION


The * Proto- Neolithic’ ofJericho and Jarmo
    Meanwhile excavations in the Tell es-Sultan, the site of the
ancient Jericho, in Jordan and at the mound of Jarmo in the
Kurdish foothills of northern Iraq have thrown some welcome
light on an early stage in the history of farming. The base of the
tell at Jericho yielded traces of the Natufian hunter-fishers,
whose remains, previously known from rock-shelters and open
stations, mainly in Palestine (see p. 64), are the most complete
for any Mesolithic group in western Asia. According to radio-
carbon dates they were camping around the spring at Jericho about
7800 B.c. and to judge from the constricted space they occupied
it would seem that they formed only a small group, probably a
few primary families such as might have lived in the mouth of
a large cave. Like their relatives at Mount Carmel they lived
mainly by hunting gazelle, and supplemented their diet by
harvesting grain by means of reaping knives inset with flint
blades. Whether this grain was wild or in any sense domesticated
has been much discussed, but it is worth pointing out that wild,
self-grown cereals grow in the immediate neighbourhood at the
present day and there is no evidence that the Natufians had any
special arrangements for storing their grain or that they had
developed any true querns or milling-stones, though they certainly
used stone rubbers of the type employed in many parts of the
world for preparing wild plant foods. Until specimens of the
grain harvested by the Natufians have been examined by a
competent botanist, one can hardly be sure about its precise
status. What is certain is that the Natufians had hardly gained
enough control over cereals to affect in any noticeable way their
mode of life.
   By contrast the forty-five feet or so of archaeological deposits
overlying the Natufian layer, though they still yielded no real
pottery, gave clear indications of greatly enlarged social groups
and of more permanent settlement, and it seems reasonable to
    4                           SI                          cP
                THE   INVENTION       OF   FARMING

expect that when the plant remains have been reported upon they
will show that definite progress had been made in the domestica-
tion of cereals; already comparison of the horn cores of the
numerous goats from the site with those of wild ones has given
some evidence for domestication. Two distinct stages have been
distinguished in the Proto-Neolithic deposits. The earlier one,
which yielded a flint industry in the Natufian tradition, though
lacking certain types and supplemented by ground stone axes, was
characterized by well-constructed round huts with sunken floors
and beehive walls made from long oval bricks with flat bases and
curved or hog-backed upper surfaces. In the course of this earlier
or ‘hog’s-back’ stage of the Proto-Neolithic, which to judge
from the flints was an outgrowth from the Natufian, the settle-
ment, which by now extended over the whole area of the tell,
was defended by a ditch cut in the solid rock to a depth of
3 metres and a width across the top of 9 metres, backed by a
massive stone wall with great round towers set at intervals and
incorporating inner stairways for manning the defences.
   The fact that such primitive people found it necessary to erect
defences on such a scale suggests the presence of rivals at an
analogous stage of development and it seems likely that these are
represented in the upper Proto-Neolithic layer that began to form
around 6000 B.c. This need not of course imply that the transition
to a more settled form of life based on incipient farming, added to
the hunting of plentiful game, was made by more than one
Mesolithic stock in the region. More likely it reflects the possi-
bility that the attainment of a more settled way of life favoured the
development from the same basic Natufian stock of locally
differentiated communities, and it is noteworthy that the lithic
industry in the upper Jericho level, with its pressure-flaked tanged
arrowheads and heavy, serrated reaping-knife blades compares
closely with that of the Tahounian, previously recognized in the
Judaean cave of El-khiam overlying successive stages of the
younger Natufian. A feature of the upper Proto-Neolithic of
                                 82
    AND    THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN       CIVILIZATION

Jericho is the appearance of a specialized type of quern, wedge-
shaped with a grinding hollow running out at the broader end,
another sign that the use of grain for food was already long-
established. The houses at this level consisted of rectangular
rooms grouped round courtyards in which the cooking was done:
the walls were built of sun-dried bricks on a stone foundation
course and the floors were characteristically made of clay coated
by burnished lime-plaster and covered by rush mats. Indications
of what may have been family shrines were found in the houses,
but the most telling evidence for spiritual development it so be
found in the treatment of the dead. Already in the lower level the
custom of severing the heads from the trunks and burying them in
separate nests seems to have been established, a practice paralleled
in a Mesolithic context in South Germany at Ofnet and Kauferts-
berg near Nordlingen. A notable feature of the rite as practised
by the plaster-floor people at Jericho was the way in which the
skulls were filled with clay, the eyes inlaid with shell and the faces
finely modelled in clay, the expressions of which are so personal
as to suggest veritable portraits (Pl. II). Burial had been accorded
to the dead since early in Late Pleistocene times and among
Advanced Palaeolithic peoples it had become customary to inter
them clothed and with their ornaments in place; but though burial
had become formalized as a means of separating the dead from the
living and though some differentiation in the objects placed with
the dead might be made according to sex, there is no indication
that individuals were memorialized as such in those early times.
The modelled faces from Jericho on the other hand point the way
to the funerary masks and portraits of later and more sophisticated
cultures from Pharaonic Egypt to Stuart England. More vividly
than anything else, unless it be the scale of the settlement and its
defences, they emphasize the significance of the change initiated by
hunter-fishers and carried forward during the seventh millennium
B.c. by men who added to a plentiful supply of gazelle meat the
increment of domesticated cereals and herds of goats, citizens of
                                  83                            4-2
                 THE   INVENTION       OF   FARMING

no mean community who were yet ignorant of pottery, for long
regarded as a symbol of settled life.
   Primitive farming communities also lived in the Kurdish foot-
hills of northern Iraq, where descendants of the Advanced
Palaeolithic Zarzi culture are known to have occupied, as at the
open site of Karim Shahir, territory well supplied by species
capable of being domesticated. Excavations at the mound of
Jarmo on a promontory hill-top have yielded abundant evidence
for a primitive Neolithic community that made no use of pottery
until the last third of its existence. The houses, like those of the
upper Proto-Neolithic of Jarmo, had rectangular rooms with mud
walls built on stone footings and reed mats on the floors. The
lithic industry combined blades and microliths of Mesolithic
aspect with blades of reaping-knives and polished stone axes.
Pestles, mortars and milling-stones bear further witness to the
importance of plant-food, and what have been described as ‘floor-
basins’ of clay baked in place may have been the bases of silos.
The grains of emmer, spelt and two-rowed barley suggest that
these cereals were still at a comparatively early stage of their
emergence from wild prototypes. Among the meat bones wild
animals accounted for only 5 per cent and the villagers evidently
kept herds of sheep or goats, cattle and swine. If we were to
follow the radio-carbon dates obtained from the original samples,
the site would be no earlier than the first half of the fifth millennium
B.c. and would therefore rank in relation to sites like Hassuna as
a poor outlier rather than as an ancestor. Even so the site would
remain of the highest interest, not merely as confirming that a
simple kind of mixed farming might be carried on by people who
had not yet acquired the art of potting, but as illustrating the
process whereby the new way of life spread in a relatively primitive
form at a time when in the main centres it was passing through a
more advanced stage of development, a process which we shall
find exemplified ever more vividly when in a later chapter we
consider a secondary area of diffusion like Europe.
                                  84
     AND   THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN       CIVILIZATION


The ‘ Neolithic’ of Syro-Cilicia
   A new stage in the advance towards civilization in south-west
Asia was reached when settled communities, depending on a
mixed farming economy and still limited by a technology based
substantially on lithic tools, took to potting, probably some time
towards the end of the sixth millennium B.c. Three main foci may
be noted, one centred on Cilicia and western Syria with contacts as
far south as Jericho, another on northern Iraq and eastern Syria
and a third on the Iranian plateau. In each case the villagers lived
in rectangular-roomed houses that formed the nucleus of settle-
ment mounds or tells. The pottery of the Syro-Cilician zone, best
exemplified from the lowermost layers (XXV-XXXIID) of the
Yiimiik Tepe at Mersin, Ugarit (Ras Shamra), and Byblos,
comprises simple pots, often hole-mouthed, of dark burnished
ware decorated by horizontal rows of impressions by a shell-edge
that was sometimes rocked back and forth. Associated with this
was a rich lithic industry, including blades of reaping-knives,
polished axes and tanged lanceheads, often with pressure-flaking
broadly analogous to those of the Tahounian industry of Palestine.
To judge from the impressions of a textile garment under a
crouched burial at Mersin (X XVI), weaving was practised as well
as potting and flint- and stone-working.

The ‘ Neolithic’ of Iraq: Hassuna and Halaf
    Traces of broadly similar culture were found in the basal layer
(Ia) of the great stratified mound of Tell Hassuna near Mosul in
northern Iraq. To judge from the stratification and the absence of
structural features, the earliest phase was marked by hardly more
than camps and the emphasis evidently lay on stock-keeping, even
if, as suggested by the use of straw for tempering the coarse pot-
tery, cereals were also cultivated. The rich lithic industry including
tanged projectile heads with pressure-flaking and the burnished
pottery both point to the Syro-Cilician region as a source of the
                                   85
                 THE   INVENTION      OF   FARMING

earliest culture represented at Hassuna and in this connection it
should be noted that burnished ware occurs in the intervening
Khabur drainage area at Tell Shaghir Bazar and at Tell Halaf; only
the carinated storage vessels made from the coarse straw-tempered
ware suggest local development. A further indication that at this
time the whole area from the East Mediterranean to the Tigris
formed in effect a unitary zone is that during the immediately
ensuing period the same multi-chevron design was found painted
on pottery from Mersin (XX-XXIV) as on that from Hassuna
(Ib, c; Il) or Nineveh (1). Moreover, pottery with incised
herring-bone and chevron designs, associated with this at Nine-
veh I, is known from as far west as Mersin, Byblos and Jericho.
   The first real indication that Assyria was beginning to form a
distinct focus of early culture came with the last phase of this
stage in northern Iraq, when the vigorous and distinctive pottery
named after the original finding-place at Tell Halaf was developed.
Halafian pottery is outstanding on account of the variety of its
forms and above all of its painted decoration and because of the
excellence of its firing; but it was still hand-made, and there is no
reason to think it was necessarily or even probably made by whole-
time potters. In addition to dishes and flasks the forms included
bowls with sharp-shouldered bodies and flaring necks and bowls
and flasks on hollow stands. The decoration comprised geometric
patterns like triangles, chevrons, lozenges, chequers, stars, Maltese
crosses, quatrefoils and rosettes; stipples, including egg and dot;
and stylized representations of men and animals, including
designs based on the bull’s head. It was applied to a buff or
cream slip by glaze paint. At the climax of the industry the
decoration was polychrome; red, orange, yellow and black paints
being used, sometimes high-lighted by white spots. The pottery
was apparently fired to temperatures up to 1200° C. in great domed
kilns with rectangular annexes, like those preserved at Carchemish
with walls and ceilings of clay on stone footings. Some archaeo-
logists, misled by the formal analogy in plan with tholoi (the
                                 86
    AND    THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN       CIVILIZATION

circular underground tombs of Greece approached by sloping
passages), have interpreted these structures as funerary or in some
way religious, but there is no evidence that they were used for
any other purpose than that revealed rather clearly at Carchemish.
The Halafians appear to have depended on lithic tools and quarried
obsidian as far afield as Lake Van. Metal tools have come from
a number of Halafian sites, but these were either, as at Tell
Halaf, from levels contemporary with the early Ubaid stage in
southern Iraq or, as at Samarra, were in all probability intrusive
from much younger deposits. Before the period of Ubaid influence
copper was only used for such things as beads and then most
probably from native metal. The Halafians were skilled at working
hard stone, which they made into button seals, beads, amulets and
small vessels, and they imported shells from the Persian Gulf to the
Khabur area. Suggestions that they used wheeled transport should
be discounted, being based on an incomplete and enigmatic vase
painting. On the other hand there are indications that cult activities
were well developed. Clay figurines of women, sometimes shown
with exaggerated breasts and rump andat Arpachiyaassociated with
doves, suggest fertility cults, as do models in clay, bone and stone
of the common farmyard animals, notably including bulls, and
representations of bulls’ heads on pots and stone amulets. There are
also signs in double-axe amulets and signs painted on pots that a
thunder-god was recognized. At its greatest extent Halafian
pottery extended westwards over the Syro-Cilician region to the
West Mediterranean at Mersin (X VII-XIX) and Ras Shamra (III),
northward to Lake Van and southward as far as the region of
Baghdad and even further on the east of the Tigris; on the other
hand it did not penetrate the alluvial lands of southern Iraq, which,
as we shall see, were first settled by the Ubaid people from the east.

Iran: Bakun, Sialk and Hissar
  The Iranian plateau, together with Baluchistan and Afghanistan,
shared with the piedmont zone of Syria and northern Iraq an

                                  87
                THE   INVENTION       OF   FARMING

endowment that favoured the early emergence of societies based
on mixed farming and capable of fixed settlement, societies that
soon learned to exploit the copper ores of the region and to
practise metallurgy. Although Iran formed part of the primary
zone in which prototypes of cultivated cereals and domesticated
sheep flourished in the wild state, very little is yet known of
peasant communities contemporary even with the early levels at
Hassuna. Crude, hand-made plain pottery found with a rich
lithic industry and numerous bone tools in the basal layer at the
tell of Bakun B near Persepolis suggest that the mountainous area
of south-west Persia was occupied before the development of the
painted wares chiefly characteristic of the region. Further north,
on the eastern slope of the mountains forming the western rim
of the Iranian desert, the lowest level (Ia) of the northern tell at
Sialk near Kashan has yielded well-documented material com-
parable in age with the Hassuna culture. The earliest settlement at
the base of the tell was evidently little more than a camp, but very
soon mud huts began to be built and the mound to grow. The
presence of lustred reaping-knife blades and saddle-querns and
of the bones of domestic cattle and sheep alongside those of some
game animals shows that the Sialk I people practised a form of
mixed farming and in the upper levels of this stage they had
already begun to hammer copper into small objects like pins and
awls. The most interesting feature of the pottery is that it includes
several distinct hand-made wares—plain undecorated, pale with
black paint, red oxidized (at first plain but later decorated with
black paint) and rare sherds of black—an indication that the
Sialk pottery is the product of a considerable history. Even so it is
significant that the Sialk I culture preserves some traits of Meso-
lithic ancestry, notably microliths and slotted bone reaping-knife
handles with animal head terminations, that recall in a general way
those of the Natufian. Another hint of the antiquity of Neolithic
culture in the region is the occurrence of soft pottery at the Belt
Cave on the south-east Caspian shore in a deposit formed
                                 88
     AND   THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN       CIVILIZATION

according to radio-carbon dating during the sixth millennium B.c.
Yet until more systematic work on Pre-Sialk phases has been
done it will hardly be possible to be sure at what stage Iran began
to contribute to the history of cultures based on farming.
   In common with the piedmont zone of northern Iraq and
Syria, Iran was too arid to develop civilizations comparable in
antiquity with those of the great riverine zones and indeed it was
not until the first millennium B.c. that it effectively crossed the
threshold of literacy. On the other hand this great upland
territory formed so to speak a reservoir from which human floods
broke out from time to time to interrupt, but on occasion to
stimulate, the development of civilization in the riverine lands.
Two main provinces of painted pottery have been distinguished
for this region, one characterized by predominantly reddish, the
other by predominantly buff wares. The former and more
northerly group is found on sites like Sialk, Ravy and Hissar on
the western and northern rim of the Iranian desert and at Anau in
the former Turkestan: apart from the pottery, it is distinguished
by a general absence of the clay figurines found in the southern
group and by the practice of burying the dead among the houses
instead of in separate cemeteries. The latter, on the other hand, is
centered on the highlands of south-western and southern Iran,
from Elam to Fars and eastward to Seistan and probably Makran
in south Baluchistan, representative sites including Tepe Giyan,
Susa I and Bakun A and B.                                .

The ‘Chalcolithic’ of Iraq: Ubaid, Eridu, Ur and Tepe Gawra
   It was from the buff-ware province that the first colonizers of
the alluvial lands of southern Irag came to lay the basis of the first
historic civilization of Mesopotamia, that of the Sumerians. The
Ubaid people, who take their name from a low tell not very far
from the ancient site of Ur, arrived with a fully developed mixed
farming economy and almost certainly with a knowledge of
metallurgy acquired during their earlier history in the highlands.
                                 89
                THE   INVENTION       OF   FARMING

They entered a territory lacking in minerals, building stone or
even timber (other than palm stems), a land moreover which
combined an arid climate with an absence of annual inundations
and which therefore required artificial irrigation to provide a
plentiful and assured supply of food. Yet it was a land of oppor-
tunity: given a certain level of technology and above all a degree of
social integration permitting the growth of the political authority
needed for public works, it was capable of producing food
sufficient to support societies of increasing levels of complexity;
and the great rivers both allowed access to distant raw materials
and provided a means of exerting control ultimately over the
whole of Mesopotamia. To anyone capable of occupying them
the alluvial lands of southern Iraq presented a challenge, one that
evoked in response nothing less than the development of a new
form of city life and within less thana thousand years the emergence
of a specific Sumerian civilization, embracing the whole Tigris—
Euphrates basin.
   The Ubaid people settled to begin with in the southern part
of Iraq at a time when the northern parts of the country were
occupied by the Halafians in the closing stage of the fifth millennium
B.c.; but within a very few centuries they had imposed their
culture over the whole of Mesopotamia and influenced much of
Syria. The name site of Al Ubaid was a humble village set on a low
mound or island of river silt close to the course of the Euphrates.
The huts were built of the most abundant raw materials of the
area; some hada flat roof, the walls formed of reed mats suspended
between palm-stems and plastered with mud, and others a rounded
one formed by bending bundles of reed over from one side to
another, creating a structure like a Nissen hut. The peasants lived
by farming: cereal crops were harvested by reaping-knives or
sickles set with flint teeth, like those used on the highlands and in
the Syro-Cilician region, or alternatively by sickles made of baked
clay; and, though no bones have survived, the use of dung as
plaster and the manufacture of animal figurines confirm that
                                 90
     AND   THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN      CIVILIZATION

domestic livestock were kept. There is some evidence also for
hunting and fishing in the marshes and rivers. To judge from a
clay model with upturned ends, it would appear that they were
already using boats made from bundles of reeds like the modern
bellum to navigate the rivers. Potting was still mainly done by
hand during the early stage of the culture, but already the foot-
rings added to certain vessels before firing were being shaped on
a slow-moving wheel or tournette turned by the potter’s hand.
The finer wares, of a light buff colour which turned when over-
fired to a greenish hue, were decorated by painting with a smooth
ferruginous paint having a matt surface, generally blackish but
sometime reddish in colour. The patterns were made up pre-
dominantly of relatively simple geometrical designs, such as zig-
zag lines, triangles, lozenges and cross-hatching, but very oc-
casionally animal motives, like those used more freely in the
highlands, were employed. Although forming a distinctive ware
on its own, the Ubaid pottery clearly relates to the buff-ware
province of Iran and it is significant that figurines of women and
animals were also a marked feature of the Mesopotamian culture.
   The picture of village life given by the exploration of Al Ubaid
has been corrected by later work on a number of town sites.
Excavation of Tell Abu Shahrain (the ancient Eridu) and Ur in
the south and of Tepe Gawra (XII-XIX) in the north has shown
that the Ubaid people also lived in towns and erected their
buildings from sun-dried bricks. Another sign of their relative
advance over predecessors in Mesopotamia was that they practised
metallurgy. In the south few copper objects have been recovered
from Ubaid deposits, but at Tepe Gawra and Arpachiya and
further afield at Tell Halaf a number of cast copper axes and other
tools have been found; even at Al Ubaid the peasants made baked
clay copies of copper tools, notably shaft-hole axes with expanded
blades. The most striking monuments of the Ubaid people, not
only on account of their physical size but even more because of
what they imply in social organization, are their temples. At Abu
                                oI
                THE   INVENTION       OF   FARMING

Shahrain no less than thirteen, the two bottom ones known only
from a few walls, were found in the Ubaid levels underlying
structures dating from the third Dynasty of Ur. The earliest
temple of which a plan could be recovered (level XVI) was a
small, nearly square room with a door near one corner, two short
screens suggesting a division of the inner space, an altar in a niche
in the rear wall and an offering-place showing signs of burning
in the middle; by level VIII, on the other hand, the tripartite plan
with a central cella flanked on either side by rows of small rooms
had been evolved. This latter type occurred again in the two
lowermost Ubaid layers (XVIII—-XIX) at Tepe Gawra and was
to recur throughout the succeeding Warka and Protoliterate
stages of southern Iraq. The construction and above all the
frequent reconstruction of temples, which might be of very
substantial size, go to show that the Ubaid people had already so
to speak created the characteristic form of early civilization in
Mesopotamia, the sacred city whose economic, social and re-
ligious life was centered on the temple and its priests.

Warka
    On the Ubaid foundation Sumerian civilization developed
comparatively rapidly in the south, where its progress can most
conveniently be followed in the sequence of deposits found in
the precinct of the Eanna Temple at Warka (= Sumerian Uruk,
Semitic Erech), Here the Warka stage proper is represented by
the bottom six layers (XIV-IX), the succeeding six (VIII-III)
being assigned to the Protoliterate stage. The Warka stage is
marked by the spread of a new kind of pottery which first co-
existed with evolved forms of Ubaid ware and then replaced it.
Culturally this pottery is interesting because it belongs to a ware
at home in Anatolia and suggests an enrichment of Mesopotamia
by impulses from the north. Economically its main significance is
that it was turned on a free-spinning wheel, generally a sign that
its manufacture had ceased to be a domestic craft and was in the
                                 92
     AND    THE    RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN      CIVILIZATION

hands of whole-time potters. No architectural remains of out-
standing interest were found in the levels of this phase at the
Eanna site, but in another part a succession of temples was
erected at this time to the god Anu. The earliest of these, rep-
resented only by a ramp, may have been earlier than Eanna XIV,
but those whose plans have been recovered were probably
contemporary with Eanna XI—VIII. The culminating structure
of the Warka phase was the White Temple, built on the traditional
threefold plan and having on the central axis of the cella a
rectangular pedestal with a low semicircular step bearing traces of
burning, presumably in connection with offerings or incense.
The White Temple measured 22:3 x 17:5 m. and it was set on a
great platform 70 m. long, 66 m. broad and 13 m. high, built of
rectangular mud bricks. The size of the temples erected during
the Warka phase and above all, perhaps, the frequency with which
they were rebuilt go to emphasize their importance in the social
structure of the day. Another feature to appear at this time,
destined to be of even greater importance in Sumerian society,
was the cylinder seal, which first occurred between two under-
lying building phases most probably of Eanna X-IX age.

Protoliterate     Sumer
   The Protoliterate phase at Warka was marked by a renewed
activity in the construction of temples. On the Anu site a true
ziggurat or stepped platform was erected for the first time in
Eanna VIII; on the Eanna site a tripartite temple was raised on
a limestone footing during period V and above it in period IV
a building with great free-standing columns; and on another part
of the site a temple was built directly on the level soil, the surface
being decorated by vast numbers of small cones of variously
coloured stones pressed into gypsum plaster, that gave the effect
of a vast mosaic covering not only the building itself but also
the wall round the court. The phase further witnessed a number
of innovations, including the use of vessels of copper and silver,
                                  93
                THE   INVENTION       OF   FARMING

monumental sculpture and pictographic writing. The uppermost
Protoliterate level at Warka (Eanna III) yielded an almost life-
size human head of marble and a number of large sculptures of
animal heads. Again, from a hole beside an altar at Tell Asmar
we have a series of human figures (Pl. III) carved from yellow
limestone with the eyes inlaid by shell, figures which are thought to
represent in most instances individual devotees of the god whose
temple they originally helped to furnish. It is significant, in view
of the central role of the temple and its priests in Protoliterate
society, that the earliest traces of writing and numeration belonged
to the temple accounts. Pictographic signs first appeared in
Eanna IV and by Eanna III they had become notably more
conventionalized. The numerical system associated with these
primitive scripts combined features of the decimal and sexagesimal
systems and emphasizes the way in which economic activities
were controlled from the centre by the temple community. That
means of transport over land as well as on rivers had been
developed at this time is shown by the occurrence among the
pictographic signs of representations of wheeled vehicles and of
boats with upturned ends,

The Early Dynastic period
   The Early Dynastic phase of Sumerian civilization, which began
between 3200 and 2800 B.c., was marked from a material point of
view by an overall increase in wealth rather than by any notable
innovations in the sphere of technology. Many of its basic traits
were already present in the Ubaid culture and, as we have seen,
the use of the wheel for potting and for transport, monumental
sculpture, cylinder seals and pictographic writing were all added
during the ensuing Protoliterate phases. Among the most potent
signs of increased wealth should be mentioned the greater
abundance and elaboration of metal tools, weapons, ornaments
and vessels, among which forms were evolved that spread in time
to Syria, Anatolia, the Aegean, the Caucasus, central Europe and
                                 94
    AND   THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN       CIVILIZATION

vast tracts of Russia. By the end of Early Dynastic times the
Sumerian smiths were riveting and soldering, as well as casting,
and were making bronze with a content of from 6 to 10 per cent of
tin. Quantities of gold and silver were used for ornaments and
vessels, as well as a wide range of more or less hard stones.
Representations on painted pottery, models and remains from
tombs give us more detailed information about the wheeled
transport available at this time: chariots and waggons were
evidently mounted on solid wheels, made from three pieces of
wood held together by cross-pieces and bound by tyres held
in place by copper nails, and drawn by Asiatic asses (onagers)
or oxen harnessed by collars and yokes. From this time
also engravings on cylinder seals indicate that animal traction
was being applied to light wooden ploughs for cultivating the
soil.
    The rise in material well-being was accompanied by major
changes in social structure, the most notable of which was the
emergence of kings or officials of comparable status, at first as
temporary war leaders, but in due course as established rulers of
the city states. The immediate cause of this was undoubtedly the
rise of warfare as an institution and this itself was linked with the
increase in wealth already noted: thus, the growing affluence of
the cities only served to increase their attraction to marauding
pastoralists of the highland and the desert; the citizens needed to
secure raw materials in increasing variety and volume from more
or less remote territories inhabited by poorer and more barbarous
peoples; and, even more to the point, rivalry between the cities
grew as the opportunities for enrichment increased and this
occurred at a time when armament was becoming more effective
and the inhabitants found themselves able to support warriors.
Whatever the factors responsible there can be no doubt that war
had by this time become a well-organized institution: on the so-
called ‘Royal Standard’ of Ur we see depicted not only the royal
chariot with prisoners under guard, but three distinct grades of
                                 95
                THE   INVENTION        OF   FARMING

combat troops, namely ass-drawn chariots riding men down, a
phalanx of heavy troops helmeted and cloaked, and light skir-
mishers in contact with the enemy. Eloquent insight into the
status achieved by the Sumerian rulers is given by the Royal Tombs
at Ur, which show that a whole procession of grooms, guards,
courtiers and women, together with the oxen drawing the funeral
car, were slaughtered to accompany the royal personage to the
next world.

Mesopotamia down to Alexander
    The political history of Mesopotamia during the two thousand
years or so that elapsed before it passed under Persian dominion
was in many respects depressing. Ever since its emergence in the
fifth millennium the city state had been the basic political unit of the
Sumerians and at least eleven of these, Eridu, Ur, Erech, Larsa,
Kish and Nippur among them, supported independent dynasties.
The struggle for predominance among these was seldom relieved
by statesmanship or by the appearance of higher forms of political
integration and on the rare occasions when these were achieved
the promise was dissipated by the intrusion of desert or mountain-
dwellers inferior in civilization and bent only on appropriating
the wealth of the richer alluvial lands. Predominance won by
piecemeal defeat of rivals was generally limited to the active life
of the victor. It was not until Sargon founded his city of Akkad in
c. 2340 B.C. that we find ourselves in the presence of a political
innovator of genius, able not merely to conquer, but to secure his
conquests by basing his regime on something more permanent
than force. Sargon may well have owed his ability to weld into
an imperial state the lands sharing in Sumerian civilization and
extending from the Mediterranean to the Persian Gulf to the spread
from the north of Semitic ideas and language with their greater
emphasis on kinship and tribal loyalties. A uniform dynasty and
calendar, indeed, secured his realms to his immediate successors,
but around 2180 B.c. the Sargonid Empire was overthrown by
                                  96
    AND   THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN       CIVILIZATION

hillmen from the east. Despite this set-back, Ur, under its Third
Dynasty, was destined to enjoy its most splendid days, only to be
overwhelmed around 2025 B.c. by Amorites from the west and
Elamites from the east.
   The victories of Hammurabi (c. 1800-1760 B.c. ), by expelling
the Elamites and establishing the First Dynasty of Babylon,
ushered in a new cycle. Like Sargon before him, Hammurabi
appreciated the need to establish an imperial organization:
governors were appointed to rule over city states, a body of laws
was promulgated and a state religion based on the cult of Marduk
was established. This time it was Hittites from the north and
Kassites from the east who overwhelmed the empire, the former
sacking Babylon (c. 1595 B.c.) and the latter establishing a dynasty
that lasted down to 1171 B.c. In the twelfth century B.c. the
Assyrians emerged as a powerful military state and, though the
Babylonians were able to maintain their trade with the Phoenicians
and others bordering the Mediterranean, they lived, more
particularly after the great period of Assyrian expansion during
the ninth century, under the shadow of their ruthless neighbours
to the north. This was only brought to an end by yet another
irruption from the eastern highlands. By an irony of history it was
the destruction of Elamite power by the Assyrians (640 B.c.) that
made possible the rise of the Persians, who under Cyrus II of the
Achaemenid dynasty first overthrew the Medes (c. 550 B.c.) and
then descended on Babylon (c. 539 B.c.). The Assyrian dominions
were overrun and before long the Achaemenid empire was ex-
tended east to the Oxus and the Indus and west to include Egypt.
Soon almost the whole of the western focus of Old World
civilization was engulfed in the Persian empire. Only the Athenian
hoplites who on the plain of Marathon (490 B.c.) turned back the
hosts of Darius, the Greek sailors who destroyed Xerxes’ fleet at
Salamis (480 B.c.) and the Lacedaemonians who defeated his
army at Plataea (479 B.c.) preserved the growing point of
European civilization. Within a hundred and fifty years or so the
                                 7
               THE   INVENTION    OF   FARMING

Greeks under Alexander the Great had conquered the whole of
the ancient world from Asia Minor and Egypt to Iran and the
Punjab (334-323 B.c.). Alexander’s conquest marked far more
than the end of the Persian empire: it symbolized the eclipse
of the ancient civilizations of western Asia and the Nile Valley
and the advent of a European power on the stage of world
history.




                             98
                             CHAPTER §

    ANCIENT EGYPT AND THE LATER
        PREHISTORY OF AFRICA

It is no longer seriously disputed that the arts of farming on
which the Old World civilization were based were first learned in
those parts of western Asia where alone the wild prototypes of the
more important cereals flourished in the wild state. From this it
follows that the spread of farming from this focal territory must
have involved the introduction of domesticated species into new
and unfamiliar environments. The first area to which cereal
farming and stock-raising were diffused was probably Egypt and
it will in any case be convenient to describe this next, because the
Nile Valley gave birth to the earliest distinctive literate civiliza-
tion outside western Asia.

                              Le EG a?Ie
Diffusion offarming
   How and when farming first spread to Egypt and incidentally
to Africa is still uncertain. The most obvious route is the overland
one from Palestine to Lower Egypt, and traces of cultures of
Neolithic aspect have been found there, notably at Merimde-
Benisalame near the head of the Delta and on old shore-lines of
the former Fayum lake (Map 3). On the other hand the fact that
the main focus of the Predynastic cultures, in which the form of
ancient Egyptian civilization had already begun to take shape,
lay in Upper Egypt between Asyiit and Luxor suggests that
influences from Asia may have reached Upper Egypt by way of
the Wady-el-Hammamat and the Red Sea. The direction from
which these impulses first arrived has an obvious bearing on the
                                 oo
                ANCIENT     EGYPT      AND   AFRICA

relations between the ‘Neolithic’ cultures of Lower and the Pre-
dynastic ones of Upper Egypt: if the southern route was used, or
at least used first, the existence of certain parallelisms between the
two groups would argue that the former were poor, retarded
relations of the latter; whereas, if the seminal influences moved
upstream, quite opposite conclusions might be drawn. Present
indications are that, though some of the ‘ Neolithic’ communities of
Lower Egypt in fact persisted during the early Predynastic period
of Upper Egypt, the Fayum peasants have a clear priority,
going back well into the latter part of the fifth millennium B.c.,
whereas the earliest radio-carbon dates for early Predynastic sites go
back no further than the fourth millennium. Whether farming was
established earlier in the lower Nile Valley we may never know,
since in the course of six thousand years or so the river could well
have eroded traces of any earlier settlements that may have existed.

Fayum, Merimde and El Omari
   The earliest Neolithic communities yet known from Africa
belong to the period of heavy rainfall following the arid period
that formed the background to the invention of farming in western
Asia. When the Fayum basin was first settled by farmers the
level of the lake stood 180 feet higher than it does today and forest
trees and swamps existed in what is now an arid environment.
At the height of Altithermal times, indeed, the Fayum was no
isolated oasis, but formed part of a zone of relatively favourable
environment extending over large tracts of the Sahara. Traces of
hunter-fisher peoples have been found there, with remains of
crocodiles, hippopotami and fish, indicating conditions wetter
than those of to-day. The widespread occurrence of barbed bone
harpoon-heads suggests that a broadly similar way of life prevailed
at the height of Altithermal times as far west as the Fayum
depression and the Nile Valley down to the neighbourhood of
Khartoum. Indeed the Fayumis can best be regarded as hunter-
fishers who had adopted a Neolithic way of life originally
                                 100
                              EGYPT

developed in western Asia, and it is worthy of note that they used
bone harpoon-heads and winged arrowheads of flint paralleled
in the French Sudan.
   The Fayumi people kept sheep or goats, cattle and swine, and
cultivated emmer and flax. The equipment used in harvesting,
storing and grinding the grain, like the cereals themselves, were
those developed long previously in western Asia. The silos lined
with coiled basketry, in addition to carbonized cereals, yielded
fine baskets, used in all probability for sowing, and wooden
reaping-knives with flint blades set in slots, like the much older
bone ones of the Natufians. Although fire-holes were noted in
the mounds of midden material, no definite traces of dwellings
were observed, from which it has been inferred that tents or
similar structures were used. Numerous axe and adze-blades made
from polished flint or stone suggest that timber was nevertheless
utilized on a considerable scale and it may prove that more
substantial dwellings were in fact made. Traces of linen show that
weaving was practised. Pots were made by hand in simple shapes,
mainly undecorated flat-based bowls without handles, spouts or
other features. Apart from shells, some of which were brought
from the Red Sea and the Mediterranean, and beads of amazonite
or microcline felspar of uncertain, but certainly exotic origin, the
Fayumis made do with local materials and their economy was of
simple subsistence type.
   Traces of communities practising the same economy and whose
way of life and material equipment closely resembled that of the
Fayumis, are also known from Merimde and from El Omari near
Helwan. The exact age of the Merimdian is still unknown, but a
radio-carbon date for El Omari (c. 3300+ 230 B.c.) suggests that
poor peasant cultures of this type could survive for some time
alongside more advanced communities. An apparent difference is
that the Merimdians buried their dead, as a rule contracted on
their right side and without grave-goods, among their dwellings
rather than away from the settlement. They occupied light shelters
                                IO!
                ANCIENT     EGYPT     AND   AFRICA

of oval or horseshoe plan. They sometimes used large pots as silos
as well as baskets, and supplemented the produce of farming by
hunting and fishing; like the Tasians of Upper Egypt they made
barbless fish-hooks resembling in general those used long earlier
by the Natufians of Palestine.

Badarian of Upper Egypt
    Other communities of relatively simple farmers, depending on
flint and stone for their basic technology, established themselves
in Upper Egypt, notably in the region near Badari, where they
seem to have laid the basis of the Early Predynastic culture.
Traces of the temporary settlement of such early farmers were
found at Hammamiya stratified below Early and Late Predynastic
levels, but the bulk of our information comes from burials. The
Badarian peasants cultivated emmer and barley which they
harvested with reaping-knives set with bifacially flaked sickle-
teeth and stored in clay silos; and they kept cattle and sheep or
goats, though not apparently swine. In addition they hunted,
using arrows tipped with heads of leaf- or hollow-based and
winged form. As craftsmen they also wove, made baskets and
turned out pottery by hand. This latter comprised bowls and open
dishes, commonly black inside and near the rim, the lower part of
the body being red or brown through oxidization; the finer ware
was finished with a burnished rippled surface and patterns were
sometimes made on the inner face of open vessels by means of
burnished lines. Flint, stone and bone were freely used, but
copper appeared only in the form of beads that had been hammered
into shape, presumably from native metal. The dead were interred
in a contracted attitude in oval trench graves clothed in linen with
skin outer garments, as a rule with the head at the west end,
facing south and so lying on their right side. The men were clean-
shaven, but wore their hair long; and the women plaited theirs and
wore ivory combs carved with animal heads. Finds of stone
palettes, occasionally with red pigment or with malachite, suggest
                                102
                              EGYPT

the use of cosmetics. Perforated shells were used for head-dresses,
girdles and necklaces; and anklets, bracelets, rings and ear- or
nose-plugs were also worn. A feature of Badarian practice of
special significance for the future was their careful burial of
domestic animals wrapped in textiles.
   Among the graves with Badarian grave goods were others with
distinctive, though evidently closely related, furniture, which is
commonly attributed to a separate culture named after the site of
Der Tasa. Although no radio-carbon or absolute dates are
available for the Tasian it is generally held on not very impressive
evidence to have preceded the Badarian. The absence of copper
beads, on which some stress had been laid, could well be due to
chance; and in any case the presence or absence of small trinkets
of native copper has no real economic or technological signifi-
cance. The distinctive beaker pots, slender, with round base and
flaring rim, are decorated by incised patterns that suggest basketry
prototypes.

Early Predynastic
  The Early Predynastic or Amratian culture has been found at
Nakada sandwiched between the Badarian, from which it appar-
ently developed, and the overlying Later Predynastic. Radio-
carbon dates suggest that it was flourishing about a third of the
way through the fourth millennium (3627+ 300; 3794+ 300 B.c.).
Whereas the villagers of Merimde and Badari camped on spurs
overlooking the Nile and the Fayumis settled the margins of the
Fayum lake, the Predynastic peoples seem to have been the first
to exploit the possibilities of the naturally irrigated valley. The
size of the Nakada settlement, an aggregation of mud and reed huts
at least 100 yards across in either direction, and the number of the
graves in the cemetery both suggest enlarged social units.
Schematic representations of a variety of animals painted or
scratched on pottery may have been intended as symbols of
totems and it is significant that similar ones recur as emblems of
                                103
                ANCIENT    EGYPT      AND   AFRICA

nomes or territorial divisions during the historic period. It may
well be therefore that the Amratian villages were occupied by
totemic clans. Their technology was still basically lithic, copper
continuing to be used only in its native form and for such small
objects as pins with rolled heads.    On the other hand, flint was
no longer obtained merely in the form of surface nodules; it was
now mined and the roughing out and manufacture of tools was
carried out on the site of the quarries. Bifacially flaked arrow-
heads continued to be made in numbers, including leaf and
triangular as well as hollow-based forms. The finest pieces were
fish-tail lanceheads and long dagger blades, which had been
ground into shape before being subjected to a final process of
superbly controlled pressure flaking. This process, the object of
which was no doubt to impart a surface finish, was also applied
to polished flint axes and adzes. In general Amratian pottery was
coarser than Badarian, probably because the Predynastic people
were beginning to develop elegant stone vessels, cylindrical ones
from alabaster and footed ones from basalt. Black-topped ware
continued to be made, but a new departure was White Cross-
lined ware in which patterns recalling basketry, together with
others depicting animals, men and boats, were applied in dull
white paint to a polished red surface. To judge from the clay
figurines found in the graves, men appear to have gone unclothed
apart from penis sheaths and sandals, though they wore plumes in
their hair, and both sexes went in for a variety of ornaments, most
of them elaborations of ones used by the Badarians, such as ivory
combs carved with animal figures, glazed beads and a variety of
bracelets. Stone palettes show that making up was still popular
and indeed their more elaborate character—they might be shaped
to animal profiles—suggests an even greater accent on cosmetics.
In addition to personal ornaments the dead were accompanied by
food and figurines, which might be carved from ivory, as well as
being modelled more roughly in clay, in graves that were still
simple holes in the ground.
                                104
                              EGYPT


Late Predynastic
   The Late Predynastic culture, represented by Nakada II,
extended further north into the northern part of Middle or the
southern part of Lower Egypt and indeed takes its name from
Gerza near the entrance to the Fayum depression. In the
extreme south, however, it never displaced the Amratian in
Nubia, nor at the opposite extreme did it penetrate northern
Lower Egypt with the Delta which was occupied by a quite
different culture, represented by the settlement of Maadi near
Cairo and by the cemetery of Heliopolis on the margin of the
Delta. The Gerzean culture probably arose in Middle Egypt on an
Amratian basis enriched by the permeation of cultural elements of
Asiatic origin. Thus, whereas Black-topped pottery continued to
be made for a while, White Cross-lined ware gave place to
Decorated ware, painted in Asiatic fashion with dark red paint on
a pale buff ground, to represent the natural markings of the stone
vessels on which the forms were based. Stone vessels themselves
continued to be made and the use of hard porphyry marks a further
advance in an exacting craft.
   A highly significant innovation was the introduction of metal-
lurgy, which had appeared in western Asia a thousand years or so
previously: in addition to the small objects which the Badarians
and their immediate successors had made from native copper, the
Gerzeans were now able to cast flat axes, ribbed daggers and flat
knives. Swallow-tailed blades and curved knives continued to
be thinned by polishing and finished off by controlled pressure-
flaking, which on the latter might take the form of oblique,
parallel fluting of extreme regularity. On the other hand new
features to appear at this time, almost certainly from Asia,
included the widespread use of blades struck from carefully
prepared prismatic cores, and the introduction of chisel-ended or
transverse arrowheads and pear-shaped stone mace-heads. In
place of glazed stone, faience began to be manufactured, a complex
                               105
                ANCIENT     EGYPT     AND   AFRICA

substance consisting of an artificial core of finely powdered quartz
grains cemented by fusion and coated with a glass glaze. Im-
portant raw materials were obtained from a distance: copper came
from the eastern desert or from Sinai, but lead and silver were
imported from Asia, and lapis lazuli from an ultimate source in
northern Afghanistan, presumably by way of Mesopotamia. In
this latter connection it is significant that a local copy of a Meso-
potamian cylinder seal of Protoliterate type was found in one of
the Gerzean graves at Nakada. Boats made of bundles of reeds,
but of substantial size and provided with cabins, served for the
transport of materials like mined flint or stone vessels on the
Nile. These native boats were propelled by oars, but foreign-
looking ones with upturned prow and stern painted on Gerzean
pots were fitted with a sail. For overland portages asses were
used, and it should be noted that wheeled vehicles, though long
known in Mesopotamia, were not introduced in Egypt until the
New Kingdom, which began c. 1570 B.c.
   Gerzean society was firmly based on farming, and hunting
had markedly declined as an economic activity. The villagers lived
in more substantial houses, rectangular in plan and fitted with a
wood-framed doorway in the side. Graves were no longer orient-
ated regularly and it is noteworthy that they began to show a
greater range of wealth in terms of burial offerings, some being
provided with ledges, others with compartments separated off by
wattle partitions, to contain extra offerings; the most one can say
is that during Gerzean times there were signs of a growth in
wealth accompanied by a more integrated social structure.

Unification
  The ancient Egyptians attributed the unification of their country
to a single individual, Menes, whom they supposed to have
welded the twenty-two nomes of Upper and the twenty nomes of
Lower Egypt into a single realm and to have initiated in his own
person the First Dynasty of pharaohs. In reality the process must
                                106
                               EGYPT

almost certainly have been a gradual one, lasting for at least two
or three generations. The unification is unlikely, for one thing, to
have been accomplished without a good deal of fighting, and we
have evidence for this on a number of well-known archaeological
objects. For instance scenes of royal conquest are carved in low
relief on either face of a great stone palette some two feet in length
from the old royal capital of Hierakonpolis in Upper Egypt: one
(Pl. IV) depicts king Nar-mer, the crown of Upper Egypt on his
head, despatching an enemy with a stone-headed mace and sur-
rounded with captives and enemy dead; and the other shows the
same ruler, this time with the crown of Lower Egypt, confronting
four chiefs of nomes and surmounting a heap of decapitated
enemies. It is interesting to note that two animals are depicted on
this latter face with their necks intertwined, a convention also found
on a dagger handle from Gebel et Tarif, but only at home in
Mesopotamia. Another knife handle, this time of ivory from
Gebel el Arak, has been carved to show on one face combats
between men and boats with standards and upturned ends and on
the other a man dompting two lions. This last is especially
interesting because the man is wearing a hat and skirt of Sumerian
type and because the whole scene recalls the Sumerian epic of
Gilgamesh.
   The occurrence of elements of Mesopotamian origin among the
representations on these key objects raises the question how far
the unification of Egypt was brought about by foreign influence or
even by alien intruders. There can be no doubt of the existence
precisely at the period of transition from the Predynastic to the
Protodynastic or Archaic period of Egyptian history of innova-
tions that stemmed from Mesopotamian sources of Protoliterate
(Jamdat Nasr) age. In addition to the cylinder seals and the art
motives already mentioned, one could cite brick architecture,
which after a long history in Mesopotamia appeared suddenly in
Egypt during the First Dynasty in the construction of tombs and
which exhibited a series of detailed agreements, such as the size
                                 107
                 ANCIENT    EGYPT     AND   AFRICA

of bricks, the use of three rows of stretchers alternating with one
of headers and the decorative use of buttresses and recesses.
Another innovation to appear about the same time was writing,
with ideograms, phonetic signs and determinatives, even though
at first mainly as an element in monumental art rather than for the
practical purposes for which it had been devised in Mesopotamia.

Dynastic Egypt
  Yet it has to be emphasized that, important though Asiatic
impulses undoubtedly were at this decisive juncture, the civiliza-
tion that emerged in the Dynastic period was essentially Egyptian,
the culmination of a thousand years or so of prehistory in the Nile
Valley, distinct from and in some respects in marked contrast to
that of Mesopotamia. The continuity of Egyptian civilization
from its prehistoric beginnings down to the Hellenistic Age and
even to the spread of Islam owes much to geography. Whereas the
inhabitants of Sumer had to contend with rich and warlike moun-
tain dwellers both in the east and north, as well as with occasional
incursions from the western desert, the ancient Egyptians were
comparatively insulated in the Nile Valley. They were not so
remote as to be cut off from the stimulus of Asiatic civilization,
deriving from that quarter first the arts of agriculture and then
metallurgy and the techniques of incipient civilization, but they
were far enough off to escape invasion, save at periods of excep-
tional weakness; and even when this did occur their civilization
was too deeply rooted to be much affected by temporary political
domination. Meanwhile the economic wealth conferred by the
Nile floods and the cultural advantages derived from proximity
to Asia ensured that the Egyptians were at all times so superior
that they had nothing to fear from their immediate neighbours in
the Libyan and Eastern Deserts and in tropical Nubia.
   The main political danger was rivalry between Upper and
Lower Egypt arising from the narrowness and great length of the
alluvial zone of the Nile. It was because of this that the conquerors
                                108
                              EGYPT

from the south found it worth while to set up an important centre
at Memphis to match their old capital at Heirakonpolis and that
down to the end of the New Kingdom the Pharaohs wore the two
crowns. The river Nile provided a physical means for uniting the
country, but it was the supremacy of the Pharaoh that guaranteed
that unity. Asa divine ruler he symbolized the whole community
and it was his unchallenged sovereignty that engendered confi-
dence and stability. The whole administration was carried on by
authority delegated from the Pharaoh, whether through governors
of nomes or through officials of the central government, one of
whose main concerns was to channel a sizable proportion of the
social surplus into the hands of the ruler. The importance of
leading officials even during the Archaic phase of the Dynastic
period is witnessed by the scale and richness of their tombs
recently explored at Sakkara. On the other hand the supremacy of
the Pharaoh is well displayed on one of the great ceremonial stone
maces from Heirakonpolis, showing Nar-mer raised up nine steps,
on his throne, confronted by captives and attended by a priest,
a sandal-bearer and fan-bearers. Another shows the ‘Scorpion’
ruler presiding at the opening of a canal, a symbolic act emphasiz-
ing how the people of Egypt depended for their very sustenance
on the mediation of the Pharaoh. From the beginning crops must
have benefited from the natural irrigation brought about by the
Nile flood, but for any great extension of the fertile zone it was
necessary to cut channels and lift the Nile water into them by
some such device as the schaduf. The increase in population that
seems from all appearances to have marked the Predynastic
period, suggests that some such works must have been initiated
before the end of the prehistoric period. On the other hand the
institution of a highly centralized government, while in itself
expensive to maintain, made it possible to undertake public works
on a scale not hitherto possible.
   In addition to centralizing sovereignty and administration, the
Pharaohs were careful to promote an official religion. This was
                                109
                ANCIENT    EGYPT      AND   AFRICA

centred on the solar cult whose priests evolved a cosmogony,
accounting for the genesis of nine main deities, at their head-
quarters in Heliopolis (the ancient Egyptian On), a little north of
Memphis. Of the progeny of Ra-Atum, the sun-god, the most
influential was Osiris, lord of the regions of the dead, whose cult
wasa direct counterpart. Preoccupation with death, or rather with
the continuance of life after physical death, played an immensely
important part in the life of ancient Egypt. The basic belief was
that the spirit could survive only if the body was adequately
preserved and provided with what was needed for its well-being
in the after life. As the Egyptians grew richer and their social
structure became more elaborate the tombs of the more important
members of the community took on a monumental form and were
furnished richly to accord with the position in life of the dead. By
the First Dynasty substantial structures of sun-baked bricks,
known as Mastabas, began to be erected over the graves of promi-
nent people, and by the Third Dynasty stone was employed for
royal tombs. The first or Stepped Pyramid, erected by Zoser at
this time, was built over a Mastaba, already twice enlarged, the
burial being made amid a maze of passages and rooms at the foot
of a deep shaft beneath. The Old Kingdom was symbolized above
all by the regular pyramids, which began to be made in the Fourth
Dynasty and reached an early climax in the Great Pyramid built
for Cheops and his queen. The dimensions of this structure—
approximately 756 feet square at the base, which covered over
13 acres, and rising, when complete, to a height of 481 feet—are
impressive in themselves, but the great cause for wonder is the
sheer labour involved in the preparation and transport of the
stone. Approximately 2,300,000 blocks, weighing on the average
some 24 tons, were used and the mere transport of these by man-
power would have involved the labour of perhaps 100,000 levies
for a three months’ spell in each of twenty years, the time it took
to complete the work, according to the story recorded by Hero-
dotus; and in addition to this a permanent force of masons and
                                IIo
                                EGYPT

labourers would have been needed on the site, perhaps as many as
4ooo in all. When it is recalled that upwards of twenty pyramids,
none so large, but all substantial, were erected during the Old
Kingdom alone, the overwhelming force of the idea behind them,
the conservation of the bodies of the Pharaoh and his consort and
their provision for life after physical death, and the almost
incredible concentration of the forces of an essentially poor society
on the needs of one man will be even more apparent.
   By contrast, no trace of the houses or even of the palaces of
these divine rulers survives. For the purposes of transient life
even the greatest were content to live in flimsy structures, while
lavishing their power and substance on the construction and
provisioning of their own tombs. In this respect the difference
between Egypt and Sumer is marked, even when we remember the
tiches of the Royal Tombs of Ur. Although in abstract terms
civilization had developed by way of the same broad stages of
development, the actual expression or form of the two civilizations
was markedly distinct. Nourished by the Nile and sheltered by
protective deserts and their own superior technology, the ancient
Egyptians were able to maintain their way of life with remarkably
little change over something like three thousand years of recorded
history. The breakdown of central authority that marked the end
of the Old Kingdom would in an Asiatic state almost certainly
have led to alien domination, but in Egypt it was the local
nomarchs who profited and when the royal power was re-
established with the Middle Kingdom (c. 2132-1777 B.c.) the
construction of pyramids was begun again as though no interrup-
tion had been. During the second intermediate period, it is true,
Egypt fell under the yoke of foreign rulers, the Hyksos or
Shepherd kings, but it is significant that their eviction (1573/0 B.c.)
inaugurated, in the New Kingdom, the greatest phase in the
history of the land, during which Egyptian armies warred against
the leading powers of western Asia and campaigned as far east as
the Euphrates. Even during the period of decline that followed
                                  III
                ANCIENT     EGYPT     AND   AFRICA

the close of the Twentieth Dynasty (c. 1090 B.c.) and witnessed
conquests by Assyrians, Persians and Greeks the fundamentals of
Egyptian civilization survived: indeed, under the earlier Ptolemies,
whose rule began with the death of Alexander in 323 B.c., the
Egyptian state experienced something of an imperial revival; and
independence was only ended with its conversion into a province
of the Roman Empire on the death of Cleopatra in 30 B.c.

     THE.    LATER,     PREHISTORY,           OF     AFRICA
Ancient Egypt owed its history to the twin facts of being near
enough to share in the basic advances made in the creative zone
of south-west Asia, while at the same time being remote and self-
suficient enough to mature and conserve its own distinctive
civilization over what in terms of other and later traditions must
be accounted an immensely long period. For the rest of Africa the
consequences were less happy. The ancient Egyptians, secure in
their homeland, made no conscious effort to extend their civiliza-
tion or even their sphere of influence over other peoples: they
defended their frontiers and during the New Kingdom extended
these far into south-west Asia; but in their African homeland they
contented themselves with holding their neighbours at arm’s
length. In effect therefore Ancient Egypt served as a buffer rather
than as a connecting link between the progressive territories of
western Asia and a continent that had already during Late
Pleistocene times slipped far behind in the race of progress.
   This is not to say that the ancient Egyptians refrained from all
contact with other African peoples: apart from anything else they
were constrained from time to time to campaign in Nubia, send
trading expeditions to the land of Punt or employ Libyan
mercenaries, each of which might in one way or another result
in a limited degree of cultural exchange. Whatever the precise
mechanism, certain elements of higher culture managed, however
fitfully and belatedly, to spread over more or less extensive tracts
of Africa, even if outside a limited zone of the Nile Valley Africa
                                II2
III   Sumerian statue of Early Dynastic times from
             Tell Asmar, Mesopotamia


                                                     (facing p. 112)
                                                     WG




I\ 7   Relief carvin 8 of K ing Nar mer On stone palette from
                  H ie rakonpol 1s, Upper Egypt
            THE   LATER     PREHISTORY    OF   AFRICA

remained in the Stone Age until the diffusion of iron-working.
Such feeble impulses as can be discerned from societies depending
to a significant degree on farming spread on the one hand west-
ward to North Africa and on the other southward by way of the
Sudan to East, central and West Africa.

The Neolithic of Capsian tradition in North Africa
   Neolithic impulses passed westward along the northern fringes
of the Sahara to enrich the lives of the Capsian hunter-fishers of
the Maghreb. Examination of caves and open-air middens has .
shown that, though they continued to rely to a large extent on
hunting and on the collection of molluscs, these people had
begun to keep domestic animals as an additional source of food.
They continued to make lunate and trapeziform microliths for
arming their arrows,      but in addition they used chisel-ended
arrowheads. Other acquisitions from the east included polished
stone axes and coil-built pottery, mainly in the form of round- or
conical-based bowls with perforated lugs and impressed decora-
tion. Blades of reaping-knives or sickles, on the other hand, were
notably absent and there is no evidence that agriculture was
practised. Confirmation that they lived by hunting and pastoral
activities is provided by the rock-engravings, which in addition to
elephants, rhinoceroses, buffaloes, giraffe and a number of carni-
vores, depict domesticated sheep. In style and content and
technique—they were either pecked or deeply incised and
polished—these early naturalistic engravings of the Maghreb
compare closely with those of Upper Egypt with which they are
linked geographically across Libya. Similar engravings, together
with paintings, are widely distributed over the Sahara. The tradi-
tion of engraving and painting rocks certainly endured into the
New Kingdom, because horse-drawn chariots occur as far west as
the western Sahara; indeed, representations of domesticated
camels shows that it must have been continued into the Christian
era. The art of potting seems to have spread by the fourth
   75                            113                         CP
                 ANCIENT     EGYPT     AND   AFRICA

millennium B.c. to communities of hunter-fishers in the Khartoum
area, whose barbed bone spear and harpoon-heads recall those of
the Fayum and to less degree those of the French Sudan. They
also made lunate armatures for arrows of a type stemming
ultimately from Epi-Levalloisian sources (p. 46). The first signs
of domestication in the form of small straight-horned goats
appeared at the site of Shaheinab (3493 + 380 B.c.) on the left bank
of the Nile some thirty miles north of Omdurman, together with
pottery and hollow-ground adzes like those from the Fayum, in
a context best described as Sub-Neolithic: lunate microliths, bone
harpoon heads and barbless hooks testify to the importance of
catching activities; and it is important to stress both the absence
of any trace of agriculture and the fact that only 2 per cent of the
animal bones were those of domesticated species.

Pastoralism in East Africa
   It was presumably from the upper reaches of the Nile that the
practice of breeding and maintaining herds of sheep or goats as an
adjunct to wild sources of food spread south to Kenya. Here it
occurred already at Hyrax Hill, the first of a series of cultures
marked in the archaeological record by stone bowls and pestles
used presumably for crushing wild plant foods, by coil-built
pottery decorated in a variety of styles including some suggesting
basketry prototypes, and by lithic industries with lunate micro-
liths like those widespread in the Late Stone Age of Africa. The
precise age in terms of years of the sequence formed by the Hyrax
Hill, Gumban A, Gumban B and Njoro River cultures cannot yet
be told, but it is suggestive that a faience bead of a kind that spread
most widely during the period 1500-1300 B.c. has been found
with a burial at Nakuru assigned to Gumban B. There is no certain
evidence that pastoral activities spread further south until much
later, but isolated ‘neolithic’ traits, like polished stone axes and
pottery, were adopted by Nachikufu and Wilton groups in the
Rhodesias and even as far south as the Union of South Africa
                                 114
            THE   LATER    PREHISTORY       OF   AFRICA

without disturbing their hunter-fisher mode of subsistence. No
doubt it is to this southward drift of culture that we may attribute
the earlier styles of naturalistic rock art characteristic of much of
East and South Africa.

Polished stone-axe cultures of the equatorial forests

  Although polished stone axes have been found sporadically in
Kenya and occur with implements of Wilton type in the Rhodesias
and even in South Africa, it is only in the northern part of the
forest zone from French Guinea to the northern and eastern parts
of the Congo that they are present in really large numbers. The
fact that the densest concentration of these tools falls in the forest
zone, where many have been encountered in modern clearings, as
well as on tracks and in a variety of diggings, argues that they were
discarded in the process of temporary clearance of the ground for
raising crops, in the manner practised in the same region down to
modern times. What crops were grown is still unknown, but
modern analogy might suggest yams, more than one species of
which is native to the region. Cultivation today is simply
effected by removing the eyes from tubers and planting them in
plots temporarily cleared from the forest to admit light: as the
yield declines after a year or two the plots are abandoned and new
ones cleared; this process, practised in the past, would naturally
have led to a wide distribution of discarded axeheads. The
excavation of rock-shelters in French Guinea and Ghana has
shown that the people who first adopted polished stone axes also
made pottery with impressed decoration and possessed a lithic
industry of Late Stone Age type with lunate microliths, backed
blades and some chisel-ended arrowheads. The upper levels at the
Bosumpra cave at Abetifi, Ghana, testify that in due course these
same people adopted iron-working and made more advanced
pottery decorated with grooves. Recent discoveries in alluvial
tin-workings at Nok and other localities in Nigeria have brought
to light a series of remarkable terracottas of Negroid type (Pl. V),
                                 115                            5-2
                ANCIENT     EGYPT     AND   AFRICA

which appear to belong precisely to the time when iron tools were
beginning to supplement ones of polished stone.

The diffusion of iron-working
   The first community in Africa to make general use of iron tools
seems to have been at Carthage, founded near the site of modern
Tunis by Phoenicians from Tyre at a date set traditionally at
814/13 B.c. From Carthage the new technology spread to the
borders of Cyrenaica by the end of the sixth century B.c. The
ancient Egyptians made no general move to adopt iron until
subjected to intensive Greek influence under the Saite or Twenty-
sixth Dynasty around the middle of the sixth century B.c., but it
was ultimately from Egypt that iron metallurgy spread far and
wide over central and southern Africa. The immediate source of
diffusion was probably Meroe, fifty miles or so above the con-
fluence of the Nile and the Atbara, and which served as capital of
the kingdom of Nubia or Ethiopia from the fifth century B.c. to
the third century A.D. From this centre iron-working seems to
have spread westward along the steppe corridor between the
Sahara and the forest belt, where, as at Abetifi, it was adopted by
the local Late Stone Age people, and southward by way of East
and central Africa.
   The southward spread of iron-working came with immigrants,
many of whom were probably Bantu-speaking. Everywhere they
brought with them a high standard of potting and also the practice
of agriculture, generally associated with stock-raising. Various
millets were cultivated, together with ground nuts and peas, all of
them derived from wild species indigenous to Africa and each,
together with maize introduced by the Portuguese, still cultivated
by Africans to-day. Although compelled through ignorance or
lack of manure to shift their cultivation at frequent intervals, the
prehistoric farmers found it worthwhile to terrace valley slopes
for their crops. Already before the end of the first millennium
A.D. the Arabs, who controlled trade in the Indian Ocean until
                                116
             THE   LATER   PREHISTORY       OF   AFRICA

they were displaced in the sixteenth century by the Portuguese,
had established trading-posts on the east coast of central Africa.
From these they were able to draw precious substances like ivory,
gold and presumably copper in exchange for such things as cloth
and beads of Indian manufacture. One result of this trade and of
the contacts which it involved was the adoption among the Bantu
peoples of building in dry-stone technique. The commonest
structures of which the ruins confront us today were clusters of
round huts in irregular enclosures. One of the most impressive of
these kraals at Zimbabwe, Southern Rhodesia, was built on such
a scale as to attract the misleading designation of ‘temple’. Other
outstanding structures are best interpreted as forts, and many of
these were doubtless erected against the Portuguese colonists.

European exploration and colonization
   South of the Nile Valley and of the strip of territory north of the
Sahara, which were successively absorbed into the Roman Empire
and, in the mid-seventh century, overrun by the Moslem religion
and the Arabic language, the greater part of the continent of
Africa was brought within the range of civilization through
maritime exploration from without. Between them the moun-
tainous country of Abyssinia and the Sahara imposed formidable
barriers to the expansion of civilization overland, even if we must
not overlook the influence of camel-riding Moslems in the forma-
tion of the ancient kingdoms of the western Sudan. On the east
it was Arab traders who controlled the Indian Ocean and through
their trading stations on the coast created a market and so
stimulated mining activities in the interior. On the west it was not
until the middle of the fifteenth century that the Portuguese under
the lead of Henry the Navigator emulated the voyage undertaken
around 450 B.c. by Hanno the Carthaginian and reached the
Senegal; the first European settlement was effected in Guinea in
1481; in 1488 Batholomew Diaz rounded the Cape of Good Hope
and ten years later Vasco da Gama crossed the Indian Ocean to
                                 117
                ANCIENT     EGYPT      AND   AFRICA

Calcutta. Within the next few years the Portuguese wrested
control of the Indian Ocean from the Arabs and established their
influence on the east as well as on the west coast of Africa. When
in due course the Dutch gained maritime supremacy they founded
a station at the Cape and so inaugurated the European settlement
of South Africa.
   Down to the beginning of the nineteenth century Europeans
occupied only comparatively small areas of what is now the Cape
province. The prehistory of large parts of central and East Africa
were first brought to an end during the latter part of the century,
through the extension of exploration, missionary endeavour,
trade, settlement and government administration. It is well to
remember that at a time when North Americans and Europeans
were already riding in railway trains and reading newspapers the
Bushmen of South Africa were still practising a culture in many
respects comparable with those existing during Neothermal times
in the northern temperate zone. Even today the Bushmen of the
Kalahari and the pygmies of the equatorial forests maintain a
basically ‘Mesolithic’ mode of life, modified by barter with their
agricultural neighbours. Of even greater relevance to our times is
the circumstance that many of the Africans working in mines
operated by Europeans return to families whose general way of
life recalls that prevailing in Britain during the earlier part of the
pre-Roman Iron Age.




                                 118
                            CHAPTER      6


   THE    FOUNDATIONS OF EUROPEAN
         CIVILIZATION: ‘NEOLITHIC’
           PEASANTS AND ARCTIC
              HUNTER-FISHERS

The status of European ‘ Neolithic’ cultures
   The beginnings of settled life in Europe and the possibility ofa
distinct European civilization depended in the first instance on the
spread of farming from the focal territories in which cultivated
forms were first elicited and on the adoption in due course of this
new and alien way of life by indigenous hunter-fishers. The only
part of Europe in which possible prototypes of cultivated cereals
have been found in a wild state extends from Greece to Yugoslavia
and even here it is only with wild forms of einkorn and millet that
we have to do: over the continent as a whole, up to the northern
margin of the temperate zone that formed the boundary of cereal
cultivation during early times, all cultivated cereals had to be
introduced into environments differing to some extent from those
in which they were originally domesticated.
   Even in those parts of Europe first colonized by farmers,
settled life began much later than in Palestine, Cilicia, Syria and
northern Mesopotamia; though to judge from radio-carbon dates
no more recently than in the Nile Valley. Although the earliest
peasant communities in Europe were ‘Neolithic’ in the sense that
they were ignorant of metallurgy and that their technology was
governed by the possibilities inherent in the utilization of flint and
stone tools, they were contemporary with societies in western Asia
conversant from the latter part of the fifth millennium B.c. with
                                 119
    THE      FOUNDATIONS    OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

the casting of copper and from the middle of the fourth with
that of bronze. Even more to the point, early in the third
millennium the Minoan civilization had already begun to develop
in Crete along independent lines, though under the influence of
those of Asia Minor, Syria and Egypt; and active centres of
culture were established in the Cycladic islands and on the main-
land of Greece. Already during the latter half of the third
millennium B.c. both central Europe and the Mediterranean were
permeated by a knowledge of copper metallurgy, and even in
western and northern Europe, where Neolithic communities were
unable to afford metal tools, flint and stone axes might be in-
fluenced by metal prototypes. Another striking illustration of the
status of these northern ‘Neolithic’ peoples is that they adopted
the rite of collective burial from the technologically more
advanced Aegean world and felt impelled, despite their com-
parative poverty, to share the funerary customs of peoples much
richer than themselves and to erect megalithic chamber tombs.
   The basic reason why parts of south-west Asia were so far in
advance of Europe in adopting farming is the differing conditions
to which the rather drastic transition from Late Pleistocene to Neo-
thermal times gave rise in the two areas: whereas in the former the
desiccation of hitherto rich hunting grounds presented a challenge
to people now fitted biologically and culturally to respond by
a fundamental change of outlook towards their environment, in
the latter a gradual increase of temperature, while bringing
ecological changes in its train, offered no comparable challenge to
prehistoric man. Thus an environmental change which precipitated
the so-called Neolithic Revolution in one, encouraged in the
other the persistence under progressively more genial conditions
of old ways of life stemming from the Old Stone Age and expressed
in the Mesolithic cultures described in a previous chapter (see
pp- 67£.).
   The new farming economy, giving a hitherto unknown degree
of control over the supply of food, was inherently expansive, but
                                 120
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS     AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

it was not until the return of wetter conditions in the neighbour-
hood of the focal region during Altithermal times that the Neolithic
way of life was able to spread to North Africa, south-eastern
Europe and Inner Asia. As a field for colonization by farmers,
Europe fell into three major ecological zones. The first was a
Mediterranean zone which formed an extension, progressively
modified as one moves west, of that in which the basic discoveries
were made and into which in consequence they were able to
penetrate without the need for major changes. The second was
a temperate zone, differing more or less markedly in climate,
vegetation and soils and into which the new economy was only
able to penetrate selectively and sometimes with difficulty. The
third was a circumpolar zone into which only certain elements of
Neolithic culture were able to filter and over which the old hunting
and fishing economy continued to reign supreme.
   Since men learned to farm in parts of western Asia long before
they began to make pottery vessels, the question arises to what
extent agriculture was introduced into Europe in advance of
pottery-making. The only certain evidence for this comes from
Thessaly, where traces of huts and fire-places were found at the
base of mounds at Argissa near Larissa and at Sesklo, stratified
below the earliest pottery-levels, but belonging to farmers who
grew cereals and pulse, kept sheep or goats and presumably made
do with baskets or other non-ceramic containers. These pre-
pottery farmers had a flint industry producing blades and trapeze-
shaped points, together with stone palettes and simple bodkins and
skin-working tools of bone. Similar blade and trapeze industries
from the Mediterranean area may indicate a wider extension of a
pre-pottery Neolithic and it is significant that remains of sheep
or goats have been found with industries of similar type in France
known as Tardenoisian: decisive evidence might well be obtained
by an exhaustive study of the organic refuse from a site like
Chateauneuf-les-Martigues, near Marseilles, where a blade and
trapeze industry underlay early Neolithic impressed pottery.
                                I2I
    THE      FOUNDATIONS        OF      EUROPEAN           CIVILIZATION:

Another reason for thinking that agriculture may have been
introduced to Europe by people ignorant of pottery is that few
of the earliest pottery vessels from most of Europe can plausibly
be traced to specific Asiatic sources.

The Balkans, central and eastern Europe
   Nevertheless, the first farmers certainly verifiable over any
extensive tract of Europe made hand-built pottery, comprising
bowls and flasks with round bases, simple rims and handles in the
form of lugs perforated so that the pots could be carried or

 TABLE       F. Sequence of early peasant cultures in parts of Europe
                            down to C. 1200 B.C.
   South                                                   South-east
   Britain      Denmark      Danube             Greece      Balkans      Ukraine
                                VI                                      Black
                                                                         burnished
Bronze Age     Bronze Age       Vv            Late         Karanovo
 (Wessex)                                      Helladic
                                               (Mycen-
                                               aean)
               Late            IV             Middle
Secondary       Neolithic                      Helladic
 Neolithic                                    (Minyan)                  Tripolje
              Middle           III
                Neolithic
Primary        Early            II            Early        Gumelnita
 Neolithic      Neolithic                      Helladic
                                              Late                      Izvoare
                                               Neolithic
                                               (Dimini)
                                I                             Boian
                             (Spiral-         Middle
                             meander           Neolithic
                             ware)             (Sesklo)
                                              Early        Startevo
                                               Neolithic
                                               (Impressed ;
                                               Otzaki)
                                              Proto-
                                               Neolithic

                                        {22
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS    AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

suspended. The most important region settled during this early
phase was the Balkan peninsula, which formed as it were a funnel,
the narrow end open to western Asia and the broad one to the
expanses of central and eastern Europe. The earliest pottery-using
farmers to penetrate the Balkans were shifting agriculturists who
cultivated temporary clearings in the forest and moved on after
cropping the initial fertility of the virgin land. The Startevo
people, named after the site on the north bank of the Danube
near Belgrade, seem to have spread north from the Aegean coast
mainly by the Vardar—Morava route into what is now eastern
Yugoslavia and on into the Middle Danube valley. Western
Bulgaria may have been colonized partly by way of the Struma
Valley, in part from the Morava Valley by way of the NiSava, and
in part by following the Danube downstream. Further north they
pressed into Hungary where they concentrated on the Tisa and
KGrGs rivers. It may prove significant that the Staréevo people
cultivated einkorn and millet, the wild prototypes of which are
known from the south Balkans; and it is noteworthy that they had
reaping-knives with flint insets and querns like those from
western Asia; in addition they kept livestock and did some
hunting. Some of their pottery vessels were more specialized in
form, including bowls with ring feet and, more particularly in the
KGérés Valley, lop-sided flasks with perforated lugs, probably
designed for slinging on the back. Impressed decoration was
common, though cardium shells were not used for this purpose as
they were in parts of the Mediterranean area, and other favoured
varieties included roughening of the surface and plastic relief,
including representations of animals and men; and footed bowls
in fine ware might be decorated by painting. The widespread use
of the Aegean mussel Spondylus gaederopus as a material for beads
and bracelets shows that contact was maintained with the south.
Clay seals, apparently barbaric versions of stone stamp seals of
ultimately Asiatic origin, marble vessels, bone and clay idols
and four-footed pottery stands that may have served some cult
                               123
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

purpose are among enrichments which may well have been
acquired from the more settled villagers whose settlement mounds
had begun to accumulate in Greece and the south Balkans.
   Immediately north of the Star¢evo province, over a territory
which extended from south of Lake Balaton to near the estuary
of the Oder—a distance of nearly six hundred miles—and laterally
from the Rhine and the Maas to the Vistula and the Upper
Dniester—a span of a thousand miles—the earliest peasants made
pottery decorated with spiral-meander patterns and exhibited a
cultural uniformity so great as only to be explained if we suppose
that the whole area was colonized comparatively rapidly. From
the Middle Danube region, comprising much of central Hungary,
Lower Austria and Bohemia, the pioneer farmers pushed along
the great rivers, east to the Vistula and the Upper Dniester; north
down the Vistula, Oder and Elbe; and west by way both of the
Upper Danube and overland across Saxony and Hesse to the
Rhineland and the Maas. The rapidity of their spread—according
to radio-carbon dating they had reached South Germany and
Dutch Limburg before the end of the fifth millennium B.c.—was
due in part to their extensive system of agriculture, in part to the
discontinuous distribution of the fertile and easily worked loess
on which they settled, and in part to the lack of opposition.
Emmer and barley were grown, as well as einkorn, peas, beans and
flax, and the common farmyard animals were kept. Material
equipment remained very simple during this first phase in the
settlement of the Danubian zone. There is no evidence either for
weaving or for metallurgy. The pottery was made from carefully
prepared clay that required neither slip nor burnish, and took the
form of the standard early Neolithic shapes, round-based bowls
and flasks, the latter sometimes flattened on one face, having plain
rims and no handles other than lugs. Plastic ornament, like that
on StarCevo ware, was used, especially in the Middle Danube area,
but the most characteristic form of ornament consisted of bands
defined by two or three more or less parallel incised lines and
                                 124
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS      AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

conforming to spirals or meanders; in addition designs were
sometimes painted on the surface after firing. Where flint was
readily available it was flaked into the form of blades which might
be inserted into slots to provide cutting-edges for reaping-knives,
or worked into end-scrapers and trapeziform arrowheads. The
commonest stone tool, a polished stone adze-blade of D-section
with a slightly hollow-ground working edge, was probably used
mainly for dressing the timbers needed for building. The peasants
lived in large houses, generally of rectangular plan, but in parts of
Germany and in Poland often wedge-shaped with one end
markedly broader than the other. They were commonly of twenty
or thirty and might be up to fifty metres in length and it is
thought that they must have provided space for storage and
possibly for sheltering livestock as well as for the peasant family.
The Danubian I peasants seem to have lived in fair-sized villages,
which at first they found no need to defend by more than a
palisade; but the nature of their economy caused them to shift
their cultivations at frequent intervals, though commonly re-
building on the same site. Like the Staréevo people they continued
to import Spondylus shells from the far distant Aegean and to
deposit with the dead, interred in cemeteries of single graves,
ornaments that more vividly than anything else recalled their
southern origin.
   Permanent settlement that gave rise to tells on the Asiatic model
was confined to the Balkans. In Greece settlement mounds began
to accumulate immediately over the encampments of pre-pottery
peasants and it is significant that two layers, the lower of which
yielded a primitive painted ware, had been formed at Otzaki before
the appearance of cardial-impressed and Staréevo pottery. After
the Staréevo culture had passed north, Thessaly was the scene of
the flowering of a culture named after the site of Sesklo, a culture
which, though having Syrian analogies, is distinctively Thessalian
and may have developed there from an earlier Neolithic spread.
The Sesklo potters made a fine burnished ware which they baked
                                 125
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

to reddish colour in kilns. Many of the finer pots, which included
flat-bottomed dishes with flaring sides, footed bowls, and mugs
with well-made handles, were painted by hand before firing with
red paint on a white slip or alternatively with white on a red
ground. The designs were geometrical in character: these included
a variety of multiple linear chevrons; and in the ‘block-painted’
ware rectangles, lozenges and triangles, probably inspired by the
ornament on birch-bark vessels. In addition to the use of the
kiln for firing painted pots, mud-bricks, stone button seals and
the use of the sling all point to Asia as an ultimate source; but
shoe-last adzes, the use of Spondylus shell for bracelets and
portable clay altars were among features widely spread in the
Balkans. Late Neolithic layers containing a local ware named
after the site of Dimini commonly overlie Sesklo ones in the
Thessalian mounds. The distinctive pottery is more elementary
in form, bases being flat and lugs replacing the handles, but
designs painted on the surface now included spirals and meanders.
   Outside Greece the kind of settlement that gave rise to tells did
not begin until the basis of a farming economy had been laid by
pioneers who moved their corn-plots and their livestock at
frequent intervals and occupied no more than temporary villages.
Thus the mound at Vinéa near Belgrade, type site of a culture that
extended over much of Yugoslavia and parts of western Roumania
and Bulgaria, overlay traces of Startevo people. Again, the
Gumelnita mound-culture of central and eastern Bulgaria replaced
a pioneer peasant culture that took its name from the Boian lake
near the head of the Dobrudia.
   The Boian pioneers cultivated einkorn and millet and occupied
rectangular houses with matting on the floor. For felling and
working timber they used a variety of stone tools, including
polished adze-blades of bevelled and shoe-last form. Their pottery,
which included bowls with ringed-feet, biconical jars and large
pear-shaped storage jars, was decorated by several different
methods, but most commonly by incising or excising the surface
                                 126
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS      AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

to form in the first case either spiral or other curvilinear patterns
and in the second rectilinear ones, each of which were emphasized
by encrusting with red or white paint. The Boians were of more
than local interest because they initiated the spread of peasant
economy over much of Roumania and the Ukraine as far east as
the river Dnieper. The first stage in their expansion, well exempli-
fied at the site of Izvoare in Moldavia, penetrated the Alt valley on
the west of the Carpathians and on the east extended as far as the
Bug; it was only during the developed or classical phase of the
culture, commonly named after Cucuteni on the Pruth or Tripolje
near Kiev, that the full extent was attained. The excised technique
continued to be fashionable during the Izvoare stage, but this was
replaced by painting before firing, a technique already practised
by the Staréevo peasants, or by U-sectioned grooves designed to
hold encrustation. The spiral, a motive already exploited by the
Staréevo and Danubian peasants and one that may well have been
suggested originally by making coiled basketry, continued to play
a leading part in decorating pottery. As regards the forms of pots,
the simple rims, flat bases and absence of handles other than lugs
are all persistent features. Other Balkan elements include polished
stone adzes, a lithic industry based on blades, and clay stamps and
female figurines made from baked clay. Like the Danubians,
whom they dispossessed on the Upper Dniester, the Tripolje
peasants shifted their settlements at frequent intervals as they took
into cultivation fresh areas of the fertile black earth that directly
overlay the loess. Likewise they lived in substantial rectangular
houses, up to 30 metres in length, but they differed at least in the
Ukraine in arranging these in circles or even in concentric rings,
as at Kolomiishchina or Vladimirovka. It seems likely that this
circular arrangement may have beer designed for security against
their warlike pastoral neighbours of the steppe who decorated
their pots with cord imprints.
   In the Middle Danube area there is evidence for the penetration,
possibly as early as the beginning of the third millennium B.c., of
                                 127
    THE   FOUNDATIONS      OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

renewed impulses from the south-east. The pottery ascribed to
the Danubian II stage of settlement in this cortical area is more
sophisticated in form than that of the Danubian I stage, having
flat bases and including footed bowls. It was also much more
diversified and one may distinguish even in Hungary between the
monochrome ware of Lengyel and the encrusted ware, painted
after firing, of the Theiss Valley. Apart from the painting of
pottery, southern traits include female figurines and model houses
of fired clay, clay stamps reminiscent of stone seals, cubical clay
block vases recalling Early Minoan ones of stone, and spiral
ornaments made of copper wire.
    While these innovations were making themselves felt in the
Middle Danube area and spreading thence over Czechoslovakia
and into Germany, the heirs of the original colonists occupying the
extensive outer tracts of the Danubian I territory were undergoing
a certain degree of barbarization. In default of any more intensive
occupation of the loess soil, such as might be implied by the
growth of settlement mounds, the peasants were driven to spread
on to poorer soils and develop hunting as an accessory source of
food, both processes that brought them into contact with Meso-
lithic hunter-fishers. Among the leading features of this time was
the disappearance of the spiral and meander from the decorative
motives used by potters and the substitution of horizontal lines
and chevrons—designs that reproduced the webbing in which
round-based pots were commonly carried; and further the incised
line was replaced or at least supplemented by impressions made by
toothed stamps or combs, producing the so-called stroke-
ornamented ware. Other more specialized wares included that
named after the cemetery of Réssen near Merseberg in Saxo-
Thuringia, which spread over much of the Middle and Upper
Rhineland and beyond, and was decorated by broader furrowed
lines apparently made by a jabbing motion and intended to secure
white incrustation. Wild animal bones show that the Réssen
people went in for hunting on a considerable scale and it is
                                128
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS     AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

significant that the arrowheads belonging to the younger phases
of the Danubian were of devolved Tardenoisian type, trapeziform
and triangular and commonly with flat flaking. A final point to
mention is that on the margin of their distribution in the west the
Danubian peasants in their later phase began to come into contact
with others of alien culture. No doubt it is this which explains
why in its last period the great settlement at K6In-Lindenthal was
defended and why in South Germany the Réssen people chose to
occupy such a natural fortress as the Goldberg. What is certain
is that Réssen pottery occurs on settlements of the earliest
peasants of Switzerland, whose cultural affinities lie in the west.

The Mediterranean and western Europe
   The earliest pottery from western Europe is that from the
islands and shores of the Mediterranean, simple bowls and flasks
with round bases and lugs, plain or decorated by impressions of
cardium shells. Closely similar pottery has been recovered from
western Asia, for example from the lowest levels in the tells at
Mersin in Cilicia and Ras Shamrah (Ugarit) in Syria. The distribu-
tion of cardial impressed ware in the Mediterranean area strongly
suggests that it was transmitted by sea: it is found on the islands
of Leukas and Corfu; on the coast of Yugoslavia and the Adriatic
coast of Italy, including the Tremiti islands; on Malta, Sicily,
Elba and Sardinia; on the coast of Liguria; in the French provinces
of Languedoc and Provence; and on the east and south-east
coasts of Spain and the south coast of Portugal. The impressions,
which were frequently made by toothed stamps and other objects
as well as by cardium shells, were most commonly arranged as
horizontal or vertical lines, zig-zags or hanging arcs. Most of the
settlement material has come from caves or rock-shelters and
represents what appear to have been temporary occupations. The
lithic industries of these early farmers were based on the produc-
tion of blades, from sections of which trapeze and transverse
arrowheads were made; hunting evidently played some part in
                                129
    THE   FOUNDATIONS      OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

a mainly pastoral economy. Polished stone axes and adzes testify to
the felling of trees and the working of wood. Among the simple
objects made from bone the most noteworthy were spatulae used,
in all probability, for eating cereal food. For personal ornamenta-
tion perforated animal teeth, shells and foot-bones of hare were
used as beads, and bracelets were made from polished stone or
shell.
   Whether the predominantly plain, round-based wares associated
with Neolithic farmers in France, parts of Iberia and beside the
Swiss lakes stemmed from the same source as the impressed wares
or whether they represent a distinct and to some extent parallel
tradition remains uncertain. Although the pottery from the Camp
de Chassey in the French department of Sadne-et-Loire was
frequently plain it was sometimes decorated by geometrical
patterns incised before firing or scratched on afterwards, and the
pots of the younger stage of the Swiss Cortaillod ware, named
after the locality on Lake Neuchatel, might be ornamented by
patterns cut out of birch-bark and applied to the surface of the pot
by means of resin. Plain western ware is found with flint blades,
trapeziform arrowheads and polished stone axes and adzes on
settlements like El Garcel in Almeria and with collective burials in
southern Iberia. The Chassey culture spread extensively over
France from the Mediterranean, by the valley of the Rhone and
Sane to the Paris basin and west of the Massif Central to the
Atlantic coast of Brittany; and it is significant that fired clay
female figurines have been found as far north as Fort-Harrouard,
Eure-et-Loire. The makers of the Cortaillod pottery, which has
a counterpart to the south of the Alps in the Lagozza culture of
North Italy, occupied rectangular wooden houses resembling
those made by the Réssen and other Danubian II groups from
whom they may well have derived them. The lakeside locations
of their settlements favoured the survival of a much greater range
of material equipment than is normally available from Neolithic
sites and has shown that the Cortaillod people made an extensive
                                130
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS      AND    ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

use of wood and bark for containers and other things, as well as
making baskets, nets and a great variety of linen textiles. Yet the
Alpine countryside set limits to agriculture, and the proportion of
wild animal bones shows that hunting contributed in a significant
way to the supply of food; moreover, stag antler played a con-
spicuous role as a raw material for making a wide range of objects,
such as mattock-heads, holders for adze- and axe-heads, harpoon-
heads and personal ornaments.

The West Baltic area

   Meanwhile a distinctive culture, characterized by beakers with
flaring, funnel-shaped necks, was beginning to develop on the
North European Plain beyond the frontiers of the Lengyel and
Réssen groups of the Danubian II tradition. In spite of many
differences of detail between its various sub-groups, the Northern
culture was marked by features common to its whole extent from
Mecklenburg to the Vistula and from central Prussia to Denmark
and South Sweden. Its distinctive character rules out the pos-
sibility that its appearance can have been due solely to the
expansion of any of the Neolithic cultures previously established
in territories further south; and yet, at the same time, the appear-
ance of basic Neolithic traits, notably stock-raising, cereal-growing
and the making of pottery containers, can only be attributed to
impulses from the south. On geographical grounds the most
likely source is the Danubian province, and indeed pottery of
Danubian II-III character has commonly been found in the same
graves as Northern forms in Silesia and Poland. Quite plainly the
northward spread of Neolithic civilization was accomplished by
means of acculturation rather than of colonization. The North
European Plain supported in the Maglemosian culture and its
successors the most vigorous Mesolithic settlement in Europe.
The hunter-fisher populations of the region were correspondingly
selective in their borrowings: thus, the coast-dwelling Ertebdlle
people, while adopting the arts of domestication, continued to
                                131
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

rely substantially on hunting, fishing and the gathering of shell-
fish, and, in taking over the art of potting, applied to the manu-
facture of their larger, coarse vessels the technique of coiling used
in basketry; similarly, the stone shoe-last adze failed to penetrate
in face of flint forms evolved over millennia in a territory lavishly
provided with the essential raw-material, though flint celts were
now for the first time in this region finished by polishing. The
vigour of the indigenous ‘Mesolithic’ heritage is shown in other
ways, for example in the lavish use of amber, but the adoption of
rectangular houses as far north as the Vra culture of middle
Sweden shows the force of the intrusive impulses. In burying
their dead in single graves, the Funnel-neck Beaker people con-
formed to the general Danubian practice, but in constructing
stone monuments they were making the most of their own
habitat and giving expression to their own genius. Definition of
individual graves by means of the glacial boulders so widely
distributed on the North European Plain was practised by the
Danubian groups north of the Sudeten mountains as well as by
the Funnel-neck Beaker people, but the use of thin stone slabs
or large blocks of megalithic proportions to form closed cists was
peculiar to the northerners. Still more was this the case with the
mounds erected over the graves and frequently themselves defined
by boulders: in Denmark these mounds might be circular, but
over the North European Plain in general they were built like
the houses of the living on the elongated plan, which in the west
was generally rectangular, but in the east, again corresponding
with the local house-plan, was characteristically wedge-shaped.
   The primary Neolithic culture of southern and more parti-
cularly of south-western Britain drew some elements from French
sources, but it is becoming increasingly evident that much of its
inspiration came from the North European Plain to the east, a
conclusion which in view of the common Maglemosian heritage
should hardly occasion surprise. The earthen long barrows,
occasionally parallel-sided, but more often wedge-shaped in plan,
                                 132
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS     AND    ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

have been notoriously difficult to parallel in France, but find
analogues as far east as the Kujavian graves of Poland, even
though, apart from the Medway group, their structural elements
are of timber and turf rather than stone. The causewayed camps,
for which again no adequate parallel has been adduced from
France, have been wrongly compared with the fortified sites of
Urmitz and Mayen in the Middle Rhineland; a more significant, if
rather loose, analogy lies with enclosures formed by radial settings
of houses noted at Kolomiishchina and other Tripolje sites in
South Russia. Again, the flint-mines for which parallels admit-
tedly exist in North France and the Low Countries, can be
matched by the examples with vertical shafts and radiating
galleries at Krzemionkach Opatowskich and other sites in Poland.
   On its western margins the Northern culture came into contact
with the Western province both in the Middle Rhenish and
Alpine zones.   From these contacts arose the Michelsburg and
Pfyn cultures respectively, the former named after a hill-fort over-
looking the Rhine plain a few miles north of Karlsruhe and the
latter designated by the locality to which it is confined in the
eastern part of Switzerland. The Michelsberg culture, typified by
the tulip beaker and a series of ceramic forms, was centered on the
Main, the Middle Rhine and the Neckar, whence it spread east
into Bohemia, south into Alsace-Baden and north into the
Koblenz area and Belgium.

Copper-working in central Europe

   Meanwhile impulses emanating ultimately from the East Medi-
terranean had already begun to carry exotic burial rites, metallurgy
and the use of metal tools over wide zones of Europe. Several
central European groups of the Danubian III stage, notably the
Bodrogkeresztur of north-east Hungary, the Jordansmiihl of
Bohemia and Silesia and the Baden of Austria and much of
Czechoslovakia, fabricated copper artifacts, including perforated
axe-adzes and a variety of ornaments. The sources of the copper
                                3]
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

ores used by these early smiths are still not fully known, but it is
likely that the copper ores of the eastern Alps and of central
Germany were already being worked, and certain that flat axes
made from copper won in the latter region were being traded to
the peasants of the Northern neolithic culture before this had
emerged from its early phase. The replacement of the flint axe
with pointed butt and lozenge section by one polished all over and
having a thin butt and flattened sides, which took place towards
the end of the Northern Early Neolithic, was almost certainly
inspired by the flat copper axe that was too costly for general use.
Before considering any further how the comparatively simple
peasant societies of temperate Europe were affected by impulses
from the East Mediterranean, it will be necessary to turn to the
relatively advanced civilizations of Crete and the Greek mainland.

Minoan civilization

   The island of Crete, legendary home of the Minotaur and hence
of the Minoan culture, was originally colonized by immigrants
from Asia Minor in a Neolithic stage of culture, but from an
early period Egyptian influences made themselves felt in the
central and southern regions. The Early Minoan culture grew up
in eastern Crete under the impact of fresh immigration from Asia
Minor, but it was on the Messara Plain in the area cross-fertilized
by Egyptian contacts that the richer culture of Early Minoan II-III
developed. During this time copper came into more prominent
use for daggers and axes, and circular dry-stone structures up to
13 metres in diameter, having portals made from heavy stone
lintels resting on monolithic jambs, were built as collective tombs
to house successive generations of the dead. The Early Minoans
stood at the same general level of culture as the Early Helladic
people of the Greek mainland, who were likewise largely recruited
from Asia Minor. On the other hand, like the Early Cycladic
islanders, they were better placed to enrich themselves by mari-
time trade: indeed, their situation at the southern margin of the
                                 134
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS      AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

Aegean world was even more favourable, since it encouraged
contact with Egypt and the eastern coasts of the Mediterranean.
   It was a combination of wealth gained by trade and of inspira-
tion derived by contact with the civilized peoples to the south and
east that made possible the decisive advance that led to the develop-
ment in Crete of the first distinctively European civilization. The
Middle Minoan period (c. 2000-1580 B.c.) was marked by many
of the features associated with the rise of the earlier oriental
civilizations: a finer sub-division of labour made possible advances
in technology reflected in the manufacture of bronze and the
adoption of the potter’s wheel; population increased in density
and concentrated in the larger units represented by towns with
two-story buildings; authority was centralized in the hands of
rulers who combined religious and political authority and whose
palaces were also centres of economic importance; and centralized
control was assisted by improved communications in the shape
of wheeled transport and roads as well as by the development of
writing, primarily for purposes of accountancy. The first approach
to literacy took the form of hieroglyphs engraved on seals, but
by Middle Minoan III times a true linear script—linear A—was
being inscribed on unbaked clay tablets.
  The zenith of Minoan civilization was reached during Late
Minoan I-II times (c. 1580-1400 B.c.) between the rebuilding of
the palace of Cnossos after its second wrecking by earthquake and
its final destruction, presumably at the hands of the mainland
power centred at Mycenae, that took over the hegemony of the
Aegean world during Late Minoan III times. Although they owed
much to Asiatic and Egyptian influences, the Minoans were
unique in far more than the style of their decorative art, for they
created the first European civilization and the first one anywhere
to depend for its well-being on maritime contacts. Their art, as
expressed most freely on the palace frescoes and on some of their
finest pottery, betrays a pleasure in the representation of natural
forms, maritime as well as terrestrial, for which no parallel exists
                                 135
    THE   FOUNDATIONS         OF   EUROPEAN   CIVILIZATION:

in the ancient oriental world; and by comparison with the bearers
of earlier civilizations the Minoans were freer from either priestly
or militaristic oppression.

Early Helladic
   The Early Helladic people of the Greek mainland, like their
contemporaries in Asia Minor or in Macedonia, Bulgaria and
southern Roumania, occupied permanent villages or townships
and these were set as a rule on the mounds of their Neolithic
predecessors. Yet innovations in pottery and architecture and the
rise of metallurgy itself speak, if not of ethnic movement, at least
of trade or other contacts with various parts of Asia Minor, some
of which may have passed through intermediate islands. The rite of
collective burial in rock-cut tombs or built ossuaries on the other
hand reminds us that Greece was a Mediterranean land. Another re-
minder is the facility with which the Early Helladic people entered
upon maritime trade that extended directly or indirectly to Egypt.

Aegean trade
  The vigorous civilizations that arose in the East Mediterranean
early in the third millennium were the first in the ancient world
to rest primarily on the basis of maritime trade. The Neolithic
colonization of the larger Aegean islands and of Crete presupposes
traffic over the sea, and the flowering on these islands of cultures
based on metallurgy and on the utilization of raw materials from
a distance indicates a close and well-maintained network of sea-
borne commerce. An excellent example is given by the Cycladic
islands, many of which, left to themselves, would have been too
barren or too small to sustain more than a handful of poor
peasants on a subsistence basis. The islanders owed the possibility
of developing the kind of urban life displayed by the ruins of
Phylakopi on Melos to their activity as traders: indications of this
are indeed provided by the distribution of raw materials narrowly
localized in nature, like the copper of Parosand Siphnos, the emery
                                   136
 ‘NEOLITHIC’      PEASANTS     AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

of Naxos and the obsidian of Melos, or by evidence for the export
of manufactured objects like marble idols and vases to Greece,
Thermi, Troy, Crete and Egypt. Equally, there can be no doubt
that trade relations extended as far afield as the West Mediter-
ranean. Thus idols of local marble from Sardinia reflect Cycladic
influence; one might also cite beaked pottery, flagons of Melian
type, not to mention a tanged dagger of Cypriote form from the
Rhéne delta. Again, though it is known that Crete entered on a
phase of intensified trade activity in the East Mediterranean during
Middle Minoan II times, there are signs, for instance in the pottery
or the bossed bone plaques, representing female forms, from the
Tarxien culture of Malta and from Castellucio in Sicily, and in the
copper daggers of the Remedello culture of North Italy, that
impulses may have begun to reach the Middle Mediterranean
before the end of the Early Minoan period. The Aegean peoples
had long been practised mariners: their boats, probably up to 20
to 30 metres long, were provided with oars and projecting keels
to reduce the impact on landing; and, though incapable of
tacking or sailing close to the wind, they could presumably have
run fairly rapidly before it. It seems likely therefore that the
coasts of Tuscany, the south of France or Iberia could each have
been reached quite quickly from the East Mediterranean.
   The main drive behind early exploration in the Mediterranean
may well have been, as was the case with the Vikings, the com-
parative poverty of the homeland, but prospecting for metals may
also have been a particular attraction so far as the far west is
concerned. Yet, while there is no evidence that the mariners were
impelled by missionary zeal, they certainly carried their religious
convictions with them, and these were sufficiently strong to
impress themselves in due course on many of the native peoples with
whom they came into contact. Many of the elements of Aegean
religion, notably the mother goddess, the sacred bull, the horns of
consecration and the double-axe, stemmed directly from western
Asia, but the practice of collective burial, whether in natural caves
                                 137
    THE   FOUNDATIONS        OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

or in artificial tombs hollowed out of the rock or constructed in
dry-stone masonry, seems to have been a peculiarly Mediterranean
development. Collective use of natural caves for places of burial,
in itself'a practice of very remote antiquity, was undertaken in Crete
in Early Minoan I times; by Early Minoan II the islanders were
building circular dry-walled tombs above ground; and in the South
Cyclades collective tombs were being provided with corbelled or
cupola roofs. Again, on the southern part of the Greek mainland
Early Helladic folk were burying their dead in family vaults that
might be cut from the rock or built in dry-walling.

Diffusion of chamber tombs
   It is hardly possible to doubt that it was from the Aegean area
that the rite of collective burial, associated with belief in a mother
goddess, spread widely over the Middle and West Mediterranean
or that this was associated with the voyages of exploration and
prospecting at which we have already hinted. The earliest
collective tombs in Malta, Sicily, the Balearic islands, the south of
France and southern Iberia were as a rule cut in the rock, as
though they were artificial caves, but in the latter case they might
be rendered in dry-walled structures at ground-level to form
corbelled graves approached by passages. These rock-cut and dry-
walled collective tombs emanating from the East Mediterranean
were reproduced in Sicily, Sardinia and the Balearic islands by
diverse structures of cyclopean masonry, and in Malta, the south
of France and Iberia by megalithic chambers walled and roofed
by upright and transversely laid stones. When the idea of collective
burial spread widely over western and north-western Europe it
was embodied mainly in tombs of megalithic construction, though
the chalk-cut grottoes of the Marne and the corbelled vaults of
certain Breton, Irish and Orcadian chambers remind us in out-
lying regions of ultimate Mediterranean sources, as do the repre-
sentations of goddesses on the grottoes and gallery-graves of the
Paris basin or the more schematic ones on passage-graves in
                                  138
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS     AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

Brittany, Anglesey or Ireland. The diffusion of the idea of
building megalithic chamber tombs, like that of Neolithic economy
itself, was accomplished partly by primary intrusions of adven-
turers from without and partly through adoption by aboriginal
populations with a more or less devolved culture.
   The route followed by the pioneers is marked by megalithic
chamber tombs approached by passages and covered by round
mounds (Map 4): from Atlantic Iberia they sailed across the Bay
of Biscay to the southern shore of Brittany, up the western sea-
ways to Ireland, Anglesey, the Hebrides, northern Scotland and
the Orkneys, and ultimately either down from the north or by
way of the English Channel to the West Baltic area. Although
noticeably concentrated in the western part of their distribution
on areas rich in copper, it was only in southern Iberia that the
passage-graves yielded metal objects: elsewhere it was only in the
forms of lithic artifacts, like the greenstone axes of Breton tombs,
that their chalcolithic background finds any reflection in their
contents. The vast majority of megalithic chamber tombs were
secondary to the pioneer spread: they were erected by Neolithic
peasants and pastoralists, who themselves were often compara-
tively recent converts from a Mesolithic hunter-fisher way of life.
Although they adopted the rite of collective burial, they departed
more or less widely from the architectural prototypes. Over
large parts of western Europe they built tombs that were clearly
degenerate passage-graves, often no more than small chambers
with or without some kind of portal.
   An alternative to the passage-grave that was widely adopted
was the gallery-grave, a long chamber, generally under a long
mound, which, though it might be sub-divided, had no separate
entrance passages. Among the many variants of this type one
might mention the gallery-graves of the Severn—Cotswold area
of Britain having pairs of opposite side-chambers or transepts,
prototypes of which probably came from the Biscayan area of
France, and the segmented ones with concave forecourts, which
                                139
        THE        FOUNDATIONS                       OF   EUROPEAN              CIVILIZATION

with their elaborations are found in Ulster and south-west
Scotland, both associated with variants of the Western Neolithic
pottery. Another important group is that of the Paris basin,
comprising long subterranean chambers lined and roofed with




                                                                                                Xl
                  ©      Early bronze industries:         ©)    Myeenacan-Minoan civilization
                                                                                   t TT T T1               1
         .    .               .
 1, Aunjetitz 2, North Italian     3, Tomaszow              > Direct trade links
                                                          ~<«—                                 sbichnag! AaBarge ti
                                                                                                                  amin
 4, Hungarian 5, South-west German 6, El Argar                                     WZ          Passage graves
| 7, Breton       8, Wessex               9, Boyne        <---> Distant trade


                         4. Europe in the mid-second millennium B.c.

 megalithic slabs, often with porthole entrances. Representations
 of what may be funerary goddesses were occasionally carved on
 slabs at the entrance to the tomb and this was more frequently the
 case in the tombs of the upper Marne Valley that were cut
 entirely from the chalk rock. The people of the Seine—Oise-
                                                          140
 “NEOLITHIC”     PEASANTS      AND    ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

Marnearea, though they continued to depend toa significant degree
on hunting and made crude pottery, nevertheless used daggers of
honey-coloured chert from the quarries at Grand-Pressigny in
Touraine that were evidently designed as substitutes for copper.
   Small tombs of megalithic construction (dysse) were already
being built in Denmark during the final phase of the local Early
Neolithic, but these were only variants of cist graves intended for
single burials. The idea of collective burial reached the West
Baltic area from outside in two main waves. Passage-graves came
in at the beginning of the northern Middle Neolithic, evidently by
one or other of the western sea-routes; and gallery-graves or long
cists appeared in the final stage of the northern Stone Age, the
period of the flint daggers that ran parallel in time with the Early
Bronze Age both in central Europe and in the Hiberno-British
province. Although a few of the northern passage-graves stand
fairly close to the prototype in plan, none show signs of corbelling
or traces of rock-engravings, and the great majority diverge more
or less markedly: some have oval plans, but often the chamber was
long and rectangular leading with the passage to a T-plan. The
grave-goods were in the main indigenous; the pottery comprised a
succession of styles identified from settlements and originating in
different parts of the North German plain; the thick-butted flint
axe was evolved locally from the thin-butted one with squared
sides, itself inspired by copper prototypes; and the commonest
ornaments were beads and pendants of West Baltic amber.

‘Secondary Neolithic’ groups
   The diffusion of collective burial and of megalithic tomb-
construction in the west and the rise of copper-working in central
Europe and North Italy, at a time equivalent to Danubian ITI in
central and Early Neolithic C in northern Europe, are only
symbols of the influence exerted from the Aegean towards the
close of its Early ‘Bronze’ Age on the still predominantly Neolithic
peasantries of barbarian Europe. By contrast, in the more marginal
                                I4I
    THE   FOUNDATIONS      OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

territories of the temperate zone the process of acculturation, by
which surviving Mesolithic groups were led to adopt elements of
Neolithic culture, was still actively proceeding. Some such
process must have been involved in the genesis of secondary
Neolithic groups like the Tripolje, Funnel-neck Beaker and
Western, in territories immediately adjacent to zones of primary
Neolithic spread. Examples of what might be termed tertiary
Neolithic groups include the Alpine Horgen and the Seine-Oise-
Marne of the Paris basin, both of which continued to lay emphasis
on hunting and the use of stag antler and made pottery of debased
character. In the same category may be placed the Clacton-Rinyo,
Ebbsfleet and Peterborough groups of eastern Britain, though
from an insular standpoint these have been dubbed ‘secondary’.
Although in the case of the last two there is no evidence that
originally they practised farming, none of these groups seem to
have found difficulty in commingling with Western pastoralists and
cereal-growers: moreover it is worth noting that it was these most
recently acculturated groups which contributed the tradition of
ritual structures comprising ditches of horseshoe plan and settings
of ritual pits that formed the initial stage in the evolution of
 Stonehenge, in many respects the most outstanding monument of
barbarian society in Europe.

Battle-axe and beaker peoples
   The close of the Stone Age was marked over large parts of
temperate Europe by the rapid movement of ethnic groups, which
through their impact on the static peasantries and through their
blazing of new routes helped to prepare the way for the spread of
metallurgy. East of the Rhine pastoral groups, armed with stone
battle-axes, spread widely, burying their dead everywhere in
single-graves. They issued from the lands between the Vistula,
the Baltic and the Dnieper, from which the Funnel-neck Beaker
folk had emerged in a previous period, but the custom of barrow
burial, which not all of them adopted, came in all probability from
                                142
  ‘NEOLITHIC’      PEASANTS    AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

the steppe region further east. There were spreads in several
directions and each of the main regional groups that emerged was
distinguished by differences of style both in battle-axes and pottery.
To the north they spread across the Baltic to Sweden and Finland
and through the East Baltic lands to the Gulf of Riga; and in the
forests of the Oka—Volga watershed east of Moscow there grew
up the distinctive Fatyanovo group. To the south others moved
into central Europe and some few penetrated as far as Greece at
the close of Early Helladic times. Another main drive was to the
west: some turned north into Jutland, where they contrasted
notably with the megalith-builders, who practised mixed farming
on the richer soils of the drift; and others proliferated in Saxo-
Thuringia and spread into the Rhineland on a broad front from
the Alps to the Low Countries. In the Rhenish area they came
into contact with powerfully built, broad-headed bowmen,
having distinctive archer’s wristguards, barbed and tanged
arrowheads of flint, copper daggers, V-perforated buttons and
bell-shaped beaker pottery, the latter decorated in horizontal
zones by means of toothed stamps. These Bell-Beaker folk seem
to have spread immediately from Iberia, following the megalithic
sea-routes, but also finding their way into central Europe and in
small numbers into Denmark, as well as into the Rhine Valley and
thence, as well probably as from the south, to the British Isles.
In thus linking Bohemia, a major source of tin, with both the
Mediterranean and Denmark, the Beaker prospectors pioneered
routes essential to the development of metallurgical industries in
central and ultimately in northern Europe; and there is evidence
that another group, this time coming ultimately from the Rhine-
land, first opened up the copper deposits of Ireland and so
initiated the Hiberno-British industry.

Arctic hunter-fishers
  The development of bronze metallurgy in Europe will be
reserved for the next chapter. Meanwhile it needs to be emphasized

                                 143
    THE   FOUNDATIONS      OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

that the spread of Neolithic farming economy in Europe was
limited by ecological factors and that, beyond the northern
margin of the deciduous forest, hunting, fishing, fowling and
gathering provided the only or at least the principal means of
subsistence.   The circumpolar zone, with its great tracts of
coniferous and birch forest and areas of open tundra and extending
from the Atlantic coast of Norway to the Urals and far beyond,
supported a type of Arctic culture which, though overlapping in
South Scandinavia and the Baltic coasts with cultures based
primarily on farming, rested fundamentally on a ‘Mesolithic’ type
of economy. The emphasis laid on different aspects of the food-
quest naturally varied: on the Atlantic and Arctic coasts of
Norway deep-sea fishing with hook and line was particularly im-
portant; whereas the hunting of elk played a leading role in the
interior of Sweden, Finland and northern Russia; and seal-hunting
was a main activity on the coasts of the southern territories, in
which alone mixed farming was combined with catching activities.
Certain cultural elements of Neolithic origin were appropriated by
the Circumpolar people, notably the making of pottery, which
they built up by coils to conoid forms and decorated by sinking
pits in the thickness of the walls, as well as by impressing combs
or toothed stamps, commonly arranged in zig-zags over the whole
surface of the vessel. Although they turned out projectile heads,
knives and, in north-west Russia, some notable profiles of animals,
from flint or alternative materials by means of bifacial pressure-
flaking, the sub-Neolithic Arctic people were notable above all
for the extent to which they utilized slate. Both the forms, and
the techniques of sawing and polishing used to shape them,
suggest familiarity with the working of bone. The antlers and
skeletal material from game animals provided material indeed for
harpoon-heads perforated near the base for securing to a line,
barbed spearheads, arrowheads, handles slotted for flint insets and
fish-hooks; nearly all of these were of Mesolithic ancestry, though
the hooks were now commonly barbed and sometimes made in
                                144
V_   Terracotta Negroid head from Nok, Nigeria




                                           (facing p. 144)
VI   Plastic vase of kneeling boy, Agor
                                       a, Athens
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS     AND    ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

two pieces bound together at the base. Polished adzes, frequently
hollow-ground and evidently inspired by tools made from split
tubular bones, were another widespread feature and presumably
indicate the importance of wood-working.
   The Arctic people were aided in their quest for food by various
means of transport. On the sea and inland waters they almost
certainly used skin boats which, to judge from the north Nor-
wegian rock-engravings, were of umiak type and propelled by
paddles: vessels covered by seal-skin which would have been
tolerably resistant to floating ice. For traversing the snow, which
in Scandinavia lay for nearly half the year over most of the zone,
heavy dog-drawn sledges, built up on struts set in grooves and
braced to runners up to 12 feet long, were used as well as two
kinds of ski, one for compact snow, having straps passing through
a raised foot-rest, and the other for slushy snow with foot-
thongs threaded through side flanges. Boats and devices for
moving rapidly over land during the long winter made it possible
to carry on trade over surprisingly long distances; thus axes and
adzes of Danish flint were traded up the west Baltic coast and
across Sweden to the north-west coast and adjacent islands of
Norway; others roughed out of a kind of slate at Olonets in
Karelia found their way over much of Finland and the East Baltic
states; and amber pendants and figurines from East Prussia found
their way across Scandinavia to the west coast of Norway. The
existence of this trade helps to emphasize the broad homogeneity
of culture over very extensive regions, a homogeneity only partly
explained by an underlying ecological and economic unity.
  In Finland, Norway and Sweden settlement tended to con-
centrate on the coast so that advantage could be taken of the
resources of the sea and the shore as well as of the interior. In
Russia on the other hand and in the interior of Scandinavia the
shores of lakes and rivers were main foci of settlement. The
hunter-fisher way of life commonly involves migration and this
applies particularly to the circumpolar regions where seasonal
   6                           145                           ce
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN       CIVILIZATION

differences are so pronounced. Thus, where they were available,
as on the west and north-west coasts of Norway and on the island
of Karlsé off Gotland, caves might be used during the summer for
particular catches of seals or fish. As a rule, no doubt, tents or
other light structures were used at this time of the year. On the
other hand, during the winter, dwellers on the exposed coasts of
north-west and northern Norway built rectangular semi-sub-
terranean houses having thick walls of earth and rubble faced with
dry-stone work, the roofs supported on two rows of vertical
posts. Although it is difficult to be sure how many houses were
occupied at once, it seems that under favourable conditions the
Arctic hunter-fishers were able to live in sizeable groups. This is
confirmed by the existence of cemeteries like those of Olen on
Lake Onega in Russian Karelia and Vasterbjers on Gotland. The
first of these, though partly destroyed, yielded more than 150
graves. The dead were normally buried in an extended position
wearing skin garments fringed with perforated animal teeth and
accompanied by personal ornaments, weapons and tools.
   The wealth of grave-goods suggests that the Arctic people
practised their economy, the only one feasible at the time over
most of their territory, at least as successfully as their contem-
poraries practising farming further south. In addition to repetitive
patterns applied to pottery, which they shared with the peasant
communities of Neolithic Europe, they created an impressive
body of art—rock-engravings,           plastic models in fired clay,
carvings in amber, bone, slate, greenstone and wood, profiles
chipped from flint and outlines impressed by toothed stamps on
pottery—devoted primarily to representations of the animals on
which they depended, above all elk, bear, reindeer, seals, small
toothed whales, fish and water birds, but also including human-
beings and boats. In the case of the rock-engravings several
distinct local styles may be recognized, but the general style of
the carvings is remarkably uniform as far east as the bog of
Gorbunovo in the Mid-Urals.
                                 146
                          CHAPTER 7

   THE FOUNDATIONS OF EUROPEAN
     CIVILIZATION: FROM MYCENAE
       TO THE AGE OF EXPANSION

Mycenaean origins
   About the same time as the Battle-axe people were swarming in
central and eastern Europe, the Middle Helladic phase of Greek
prehistory was ushered in by warriors who apparently spoke the
Greek language and so belonged linguistically to the Indo-
European family. Their wheel-made, grey ‘Minyan’ pottery,
which included among its forms high-handled cups based on
silver prototypes, belongs to a ware found widely over Asia
Minor and as far afield as north-east Iran and Turkmenia, a fact
consistent with a homeland on the steppes of South Russia for
speakers of the pristine and undivided Indo-European language.
Whether the warrior incursion reached Greece by way of Asia
Minor or, as others think, from Macedonia, the event gave a
decisive flavour to the Late Helladic or Mycenaean civilization
that flowered in Greece during the sixteenth century B.c. Though
clearly subject to strong Minoan influences, Mycenaean civiliza-
tion is no longer believed to have been introduced fully formed by
conquerors from Crete. The mainlanders adopted many elements
of the island civilization, but the Mycenaeans and their culture
were deeply rooted in mainland Greece. This is illustrated by the
fact that the site of Mycenae was occupied already from Early
Helladic times and that the royal shaft graves, which yielded many
of the finest objects from the beginning of the Mycenaean civiliza-
tion, formed part of a cemetery of Middle Helladic origin. Again,
though sharing the centralized palace organization of the Minoans,
                                147                         6-2
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN    CIVILIZATION:

the Mycenaeans incorporated the megaron or great rectangular
hall with porch and inner chamber, a plan absent from Crete, but
which existed in Troy II and in Late Neolithic Thessaly. Even
more to the point, the records maintained by Mycenaean scribes
in connection with the palace economy introduced from Crete are
now known to have been written in the Greek language, though
the script (linear B) was palpably derived from one (linear A)
used by the Minoans as early as the seventeenth century B.c.
for a language yet to be identified; by common consent this
was not Greek and the suggestion has been made that the change
in script was in fact due to the need to adjust to a different
tongue.
   The mainland was a larger and naturally richer unit, which only
needed the stimulus of the ‘Minyan’ incursion to realize its
potentialities. No doubt it was this economic pull that drew
Cretan artificers as well as Minoan manufacturers to Greece and
led in due course to the introduction of the palace economy. The
most vivid picture of the wealth attained in Mycenaean Greece
already by the middle of the sixteenth century B.c. is to be gained
from the goods placed with the dead in the shaft graves. Vessels
of gold and silver, mirrors with carved ivory handles, lavishly
decorated personal ornaments and weapons and the use of exotic
substances give evidence not merely of wealth, but of wealth
concentrated in the hands of chieftains whose warlike attributes
and status are symbolized by light war-chariots, drawn by horses
and running on spoked wheels, vehicles of a type that had first
spread with the Hyksos to Palestine and Egypt and with the
Hittites to Anatolia. When it came to blows with the Cretans, it
was the mainlanders who won and the burning of the Cnossian
palace c. 1400 B.c. marked the beginning of Mycenaean dominance
in the East Mediterranean. It was during the following centuries
that Mycenaean trade reached its peak and it was to this period
that the cyclopean walls and the palaces of Mycenae and Tiryns
belong, as well as many of the tholos tombs, whose great circular
                                 148
       FROM    MYCENAE      TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

underground chambers approached by sloping passages are roofed
with domes that might be up to 45 feet high.

Bronze metallurgy in central Europe

   Until the intensified working of the East Alpine copper mines
had begun to cheapen metal and so to influence technology on a
broad front during the last century or two of the second mil-
lennium, the spread of tin-bronze metallurgy had only a limited
effect on the peasant and pastoral societies of prehistoric Europe.
The broad pattern of Neolithic cultures, as this was modified by
the spread of the Beaker and Battle-axe peoples, persisted; flint,
stone, bone and wood continued to be the most important
materials; and few important appliances came into use at this
time, unless we except the wooden ox-drawn ard or scratch-
plough and the farm waggon with solid one- or three-piece
wheels, of a type that was probably transmitted from South
Russia through the territory of the Funnel-neck Beaker people of
the north European plain. While metal was still expensive, its use
was mainly confined, apart from the all-important axe, to weapons
and persona! ornaments. The metal-smiths themselves were either
itinerant, peddling their own wares, as in the west, or, as in central
Europe, working at a few centres for middlemen who apparently
organized the sale of their products. The conjunction of copper
and tin needed for the rise of a bronze industry admittedly implied
trade that might extend over long distances, but neither this nor
the basic activity of mining was in itself new, since it had been
developed, even among hunter-fisher peoples, for the stone axe
and adze blades needed for felling and shaping wood. On the
other hand the metal trade opened up greater possibilities for the
concentration of wealth and there seems little doubt also that it
marked a further intensification of the prospecting activities of
more advanced peoples centred on the East Mediterranean, the
early stages of which have already been traced. This is confirmed by
the fact that the early smiths of central Europe practised techniques
                                 149
    THE   FOUNDATIONS        OF   EUROPEAN      CIVILIZATION:

invented earlier in the Near East. Among these was the use of valve
moulds consisting of two pieces pegged together, which allowed
the casting of objects having'raised features like mid-ribs and flanges
on either face, and of the cire-perdue process whereby wax models
were encased in clay and after firing replaced by molten metal,
a method which made it possible to produce a wide range of
complex forms with greater ease and economy. Many of the leading
metal types manufactured during the Early Bronze Age of central
Europe (Danubian IV, c. 1800-1450 B.c.) among the Perjamos,
Tészeg A, Aunjetitz and Straubing groups of the Maros, Upper
Theiss and Middle Danube, Bohemia and Bavaria respectively, such
as for example racket-shaped and knot-headed pins of bronze,
gold wire earrings and copper torcs or neck-rings with coiled ends
that served as metal ingots, were likewise of Near Eastern origin.

Mycenaean trade with barbarian societies
   Although bronze metallurgy was thus established in limited
parts of central Europe before the rise of Mycenaean civilization,
it was the Mycenaean market (Map 4) that more than any other
factor was responsible first for its spread to other centres and then
for its intensification. Although copper was worked in Crete and
certain Cycladic islands on a small scale and in Cyprus on a
larger one, the requirements of the Minoans and later of the
Mycenaeans grew with every advance in their technology. The
adoption of standard bronze in Middle Minoan times accentuated
the need for prospecting and trade, because the East Mediter-
ranean area was notably deficient in tin. It was the need for metals
that in the first instance attracted Mycenaean attention to central
Europe and it was doubtless there that their emissaries came into
contact with the Jutish amber that was already during the final
phase of the Northern Neolithic being traded south. Their
interest in the fossil resin with its magical ‘electric’ properties
seems to have been aroused at first sight because Danish amber,
distinguishable from that found in the Mediterranean, was already
                                  150
       FROM    MYCENAE     TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

being buried in the shaft-graves of Mycenae; as it turned out it
was their sustained appetite for this substance, as well as their
hunger for metals, that determined in large measure the course of
trade in Bronze Age Europe down to the breakdown of Myce-
naean power in the twelfth century. The original route by which
amber travelled south from the west Jutland coast was up the
Elbe to the junction with the Saale, thence by way of both rivers
across the territory of the Aunjetitz culture to the Brenner pass
and so by way of the Po Valley to the head of the Adriatic and
down by sea to Greece. When in the second phase of the central
European Bronze Age a distinctive bronze industry, associated
with tumulus burial, arose among descendants of Corded-ware
folk occupying the highlands of south-west Germany, a western
loop was added, making first for the Middle Rhineland, passing
up the Neckar, thence across to the Danube and so downstream
to join the old one. The amber route formed a veritable hub
around which the Early Bronze Age industry of much of Europe
revolved. East of the Saale and extending as far as the Warthe
another distinct centre marked by rich tumulus burials grew up,
which like that in south-west Germany, was carried by descendants
of the Late Neolithic Corded-ware people. Another distinctive
industry developed in North Italy adjacent to the southern end
of the overland route, and at its northern end the Danes, still
in the final stage of their Stone Age, were importing bronze
manufactures both from central and also from western Europe.
   The only manufactured objects of East Mediterranean origin
found in barbarian Europe and sufficiently numerous to define
commercial routes are beads of faience, an artificial substance
consisting of a core of fused quartz grains and a covering of glass
glaze. Almost certainly the trade in these beads to the west and
north-west was in the hands of Mycenaeans or their emissaries.
The large numbers present in the Aunjetitz territory and in that
of the adjacent Tomoszéw culture of the Upper Vistula and a
single find from north Jutland confirm the importance of the
                                151
    THE   FOUNDATIONS        OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

central European trade, but equally the distribution of the beads
points to an alternative route by way of the Mediterranean and
the western sea-ways. Faience beads from the cremation cemetery
of Hal Tarxien, Malta, and from sites with Late Helladic NIA
pottery on Sicily and the Lipari islands mark the passage of
traders towards the western Mediterranean. On the other hand
the scarcity of finds on the coast of eastern Spain and their relative
abundance in the south of France from Languedoc to Provence
makes it plain that the main routes to the west no longer encircled
Iberia. The El Argar culture that followed and carried forward the
Almerian in the east of Spain was relatively provincial in character,
and its metal-smiths had to make do with an insufficient supply of
tin. Trade now flowed north of the Pyrenees, down the Garonne
to Morbihan, itself a source of tin, and on across the open sea to
Great Britain and Ireland, attracted no doubt by the tin of Cornwall
and possibly of Wexford, by the copper of Waterford, Cork and
Kerry and by the copper and gold of Wicklow.
   Although two main routes can be distinguished, these were
themselves interconnected; for instance the chieftains’ tumulus
burials in Brittany probably indicate a movement from the Saale-
Warthe province, and the Hiberno-British region was linked by
two-way movements both with this and with the West Baltic
area. Indeed, it was the position of Wessex at the cross-roads of
the two routes that made it possible for the ruling class to gain
riches from Irish gold, Cornish (and possibly Irish) tin and Baltic
amber. Clues to the ultimate destination of at least some of the
tin are given not merely by the presence of segmented faience
beads in a fair proportion of the Wessex tumulus burials, but also
from the many indications that Wessex goldsmiths had learned
from the more sophisticated practitioners of Mycenaean Greece.

Wessex and Stonehenge

   In the wealth of their tumulus burials the Wessex chieftains
have many analogues on the Continent, but in the lintelled circle
                                  Maye.
       FROM    MYCENAE      TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

and horseshoe setting of trilithons erected from sarsen blocks at
Stonehenge they can show a monument unique in barbarian
Europe and one which they have autographed by means of
engravings pecked on certain of the uprights. Much attention
has rightly been paid to the representation of a metal dagger of a
kind found in the shaft-graves at Mycenae, but it is at least as
significant that more    than sixty representations     occur   of an
ordinary Wessex type of cast flanged axe. Further, while it is
true that the sarsen settings stand apart in sophistication both as to
form and finish, it should be remembered that they relate to a
comparatively late stage in the history of the monument. Stone-
henge began, as we have noted, as a circle of ritual pits surrounded
by a penannular bank and ditch, and was originally constructed
during the Secondary Neolithic phase. The first stone erections
on the site were made from bluestones quarried on the Prescelly
Mountains, and dragged and floated all the way to Salisbury Plain
by the Beaker people. In view of the role of these people in
opening up the copper resources of Ireland and initiating a native
Hiberno-British metallurgical industry, it is worth noting that
according to an old tradition incorporated in the chronicle of
Geoffrey of Monmouth (c. A.D. 1136) the bluestones were derived
from Ireland. It is also a fact that under the right conditions
it is possible to descry Wicklow from the crest of the Prescelly
mountains.

Recession in the East Mediterranean
    Enough has been said to make it evident that the Mycenaeans
or their agents played a decisive part, both in fostering the de-
velopment of native bronze industries in central and north-western
Europe and in creating conditions that favoured the enrichment of
chieftains whose wealth was conspicuously displayed by indi-
vidual tumulus burial. It is possible also, though in the existing
state of knowledge this is only a hypothesis, that Mycenaean skill
and technical knowledge and the pull of the Mycenaean market
                                 153
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN    CIVILIZATION:

were between them responsible for intensifying the winning of
copper in central Europe, which made possible the far-reaching
industrial changes of the Late Bronze Age in temperate Europe.
It has been suggested that it was expansion from central Europe
that precipitated the fall of Mycenaean civilization and helped to
set in motion movements of peoples which troubled the whole of
the East Mediterranean world during the first half of the twelfth
century B.c. Of the existence of disturbances at this time there
can be no doubt. We know from the records of Ramses III
 (1198-1166 B.c.) that the Hittite confederacy, previously
threatened during the closing decades of the thirteenth, was
broken up by an eastward thrust of population during the first
 part of the twelfth century, at a time when Philistines were
 settling on the coast of Palestine and Egypt herself was threatened
 by islanders from the north. Again, according to later sources,
 Troy VIIA was destroyed some time around the end of the
 thirteenth or the beginning of the twelfth century (between 1209
 and 1183 B.c.); and Thucydides tells us that the Dorians entered
 the Peloponnese some eighty years later. Archaeology confirms
 that many of the leading Mycenaean cities were destroyed by
people whose immediate source was Mount Pindus, but who prob-
ably originated in Macedonia. Yet many of the detailed analogies
between central European, Greek and Anatolian material used to
support the idea of movements from the Middle Danube area
might equally suggest movement in an opposite or even from a
third direction and no definite answer can be expected until the
chronology has been more exactly worked out.

 Urnfield cultures in central Europe

   A notable feature of this time in central Europe was the
adoption by the descendants of the Aunjetitz people of the
practice of burying their dead in urnfields, a practice that presum-
ably spread from Hungary and which, significantly, occurred at
Troy VI as early as the fourteenth century B.c. Likewise the
                                 154
        FROM    MYCENAE      TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

warts and fluting on the cinerary urns themselves have Hungarian
affinities and fluted pottery had a very long history in Anatolia, as
well as being used by the destroyers of Troy VIIA and of Late
Mycenaean villages on the Vardar. The Urnfield cultures of central
Europe are symbols of the independent potentialities of European
peasants at a time when civilization in the East Mediterranean was
undergoing a temporary eclipse. They are immensely significant
as laying the basis on which, under Greek, Etruscan and Scythic
influence, the prehistoric Iron Age civilization of Europe de-
pended. The earliest Urnfield group was that established in
Hungary and exemplified by the C-level of the mound at Tészeg.
Another grew up in the old Aunjetitz territory of the Lausitz
between the Elbe and the Oder and north of the Sudeten
mountains and later spread east to the Vistula and south to
Lower Austria. A third, of special importance to the genesis of
the Hallstatt Iron Age civilization of temperate Europe, was
located in the North Alpine area, where two distinct cultures
flourished, namely the Knoviz of Bavaria and south-west Bo-
hemia and the Hétting of Austria.

Copper-mining in the Tyrol
   It was the Hétting people who were mainly responsible, under
the initial stimulus of the Mycenaean market, for opening up the
copper-mines of the Tyrol. The best explored mines are those of the
Miihlbach—Bischofshofen area near Salzburg, which tapped deep
veins of copper pyrites. The miners had bronze-headed picks,
but their main weapons were fire and water. Veins would first be
attacked where they outcropped, but as soon as the miners had
worked themselves into the hillside they were able to bring the
fire to bear on the ceiling as well as on the rock immediately
ahead. Very soon it would be necessary to build a wooden
staging to carry the rock-waste and support the fires, and under
this a passage would be left for the air currents needed to keep the
fires burning and the atmosphere clear. By the time the workings
                                  T}}
    THE   FOUNDATIONS      OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

had reached a practicable limit they might be as much as 160 metres
in length and 30 metres in height at the entrance. Such a mine at
the peak would probably have called for a labour force of some
180 men, a third of whom would have been employed on felling
the wood needed for fuel and staging purposes. The total quantity
of crude copper produced by the Miihlbach—Bischofshofen mines
during the Late Bronze Age has been estimated at around
20,000 metric tons.
   Mining operations on such a scale greatly increased the supply
of copper and it must be remembered that the collapse of the
Mycenaean market soon left the whole of this to the peasant
societies of prehistoric Europe. Some of the metal was un-
doubtedly exported, to be incorporated for example in the
products of the Nordic bronze-smiths in their splendid hey-day;
but the bulk was used by the Urnfield people themselves, either
directly or for fabricating wares for export. Among the tech-
niques first practiced by Urnfield people in temperate Europe was
the art of hammering vessels, an art long previously practised in
in the East Mediterranean world. Socketed axes, the idea of which
may have originated in central Eurasia, were among the numerous
forms that required core-casting. The cheapness of metal made it
practicable to turn out an increased range of tools and these
included such things as chisels, gouges and saws, which in turn
made possible notable advances in wood-working. The scale and
number of the urnfields, the highly organized character of the
extractive industries and the advanced standards of bronze-
smithing suggest a denser population and a more productive basis
of subsistence than that which sufficed for the earlier peasant
communities of much of Europe. Although there is evidence
that the ox-drawn ard or light scratch-plough may have started to
be taken into use during an earlier stage of the Bronze Age, it
would seem that the Urnfield people consolidated a system of
settled mixed farming that was to prevail over extensive parts of
Europe down to the Roman period.
                                156
       FROM    MYCENAE     TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION


Expansion of the Urnfield cultures
   It is hardly surprising therefore that after a period of consoli-
dation in the North Alpine area, during which they elaborated
their way of life and accumulated wealth from copper- and salt-
mines, the Urnfield people should have entered on a phase of
further expansion at the expense of their less developed neigh-
bours, an expansion which took the form of a series of thrusts
over a period of centuries and continued into the time during which
iron had come into use for tools and weapons. The expansive
power of the Urnfielders, based in the first instance on an enlarging
population, was enhanced by the mobility made possible by a
fuller use of horse-drawn vehicles and given a sharp cutting edge
by the slashing swords first introduced to central Europe from
Asia Minor during the disturbed period that ushered in the break-
up of the Hittite empire and the decline of Mycenaean power. The
expansion of the Urnfield people, by displacing the populations
that existed in the territories into which they first penetrated,
brought about movements of population far more widespread
than those involved directly in their own migrations. Moreover,
through their control of vital commodities like copper and salt
and as a result of their pre-eminence as metal-smiths, they
exercised an important influence through the medium of trade,
and it is often difficult from the imperfect evidence of archaeology
to determine the precise historical significance of particular Urn-
field influences.
    The Urnfield expansion is significant both on account of the
movements of population and of trade that it set in motion and
because it laid the economic foundations of the last major phase in
European prehistory, a phase in which iron tools were destined
to play a role of increasing importance. South of the Alps Urnfield
influence penetrated to the Po Valley and Latium, and round
about 1000 B.c. a distinctive culture marked by cremation ceme-
teries and known as Villanovan began to develop between the Po
                                157
    THE    FOUNDATIONS      OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

and the Tiber on the basis of the old Apennine civilization. The
Villanovans placed the ashes of their dead either in biconical urns,
decorated in the Apennine style and covered either by a small cup
or by a crested bronze helment, or in urns shaped like store-
houses with entrances high up in the walls and of a type probably
derived from the Middle Elbe. They grew prosperous by intensi-
fying the exploitation of Tuscan metal resources initiated long
previously, probably under Minoan influence; developed a rich
bronze industry, of which many of the leading forms, including
swords with antennae-like projections at the base of the hilt,
razors, helmets, girdles, safety-pins or fibulae and cult objects,
were of Danubian derivation; and in due course adopted iron-
working. North of the Alps on the other hand Celtic-speaking
people seem actually to have penetrated as ethnic groups as far
west as Catalonia and ultimately as far north as southern Britain,
incidentally setting in motion a number of groups with traditions
formed in the Middle Bronze Age. The earliest incursion seems to
have passed through the Belfort gap into south Alsace and north
Franche-Comté. Late movements during the first quarter of the
first millennium B.c. reached as far south as the Sadne, pressed
forward in a westerly direction towards the Atlantic coast, and
during the latter half of the eighth century B.c. crossed the south
of France to complete the movement into Catalonia. Meanwhile a
distinctive bronze industry grew up in the Atlantic zone of Iberia,
based on    Cantabrian   copper and Galician tin, the original
stimulus for which was probably given by refugees from the
Loire region displaced by the westward thrust of Urnfielders. By the
seventh century B.c. the region had apparently entered into active
trade relations with Brittany and the British Isles, a commerce that
greatly enriched the later bronze industries of the islanders.
   Southern England was strongly influenced from across the
Channel by the economic growth and ethnic expansion of the
Urnfield people. Doubtless it was through trade that such conti-
nental types as socketed axes and slashing swords first came into
                                 158
        FROM    MYCENAE     TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

 the country, and it must be significant that it was during the
 opening centuries of the first millennium that the distribution of
 the products of metallurgical industry was reorganized on conti-.
 nental lines and the travelling tinker replaced by the more elabo-
 rate organization implied by large hoards of finished wares or of
 scrap. Ethnic movement, on the other hand, seems to be implied
 by the adoption of globular urns recalling prototypes in northern
_France, and above all by the introduction of the new system of
 agriculture based on the cultivation of short, broad fields by
 means of ards or light scratch-ploughs, a system destined to
 provide the principal base of the agricultural economy of much of
 lowland England throughout the prehistoric Iron Age and the
 Romano-English period.

 Protogeometric Greece
   As we have seen, the catastrophes which temporarily eclipsed
 Aegaean leadership redounded to the economic advantage of
 central Europe, and set in motion changes which transformed the
 way of life prevailing over extensive tracts of the then barbarian
 world. Even in Greece itself the disaster failed to impair the basis
 on which civilized life was recreated during later centuries. The
 destruction of Mycenae and of other urban centres is a fact
 attested by archaeology, whoever       the attackers, traditionally
referred to as Dorians, may have been in particular cases. Urban
sophistication gave place to rustic simplicity; economic life re-
verted very largely to the activities immediately concerned with
subsistence; trade languished; and crafts like masonry-building,
gem-cutting and writing fell into desuetude. Yet even at a
material level the decline was not unrelieved; Protogeometric
pottery may have been ruder in some respects than Mycenaean,
but it was by no means without merit; and the importation of iron
ornaments and weapons marked the onset of a new era in Euro-
pean technology. Moreover, the break was by no means equally
marked in all the Greek lands. If Mycenaean civilization was
                                 159
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN      CIVILIZATION:

destroyed in the Peloponnese, substantial continuity was main-
tained in Attica, Boeotia and Ionia, and it can hardly be a co-
incidence that it was in these latter regions that, to quote Miss
Lorimer, ‘all Greek poetry, both archaic and classical, all the
great forms which the literature of Europe was destined to imitate
and elaborate through the centuries, have their ultimate origin’.
No doubt it was this continuity also that helps to explain why it is
that Greek mythology, with the gods dwelling on Olympus in
subjection to Zeus, is Mycenaean in conception and the Greek
temple a descendant of the Middle Helladic megaron. Again, it is
a striking fact that the oriental influences that brought Classical
civilization to birth were transmitted through territories like
Rhodes and Cyprus, where Mycenaean civilization had been
subject to the least disturbance.

Genesis and diffusion of iron-working
   As so frequently happens, the decline of one phase of culture
marked the genesis of its successor. Thus the fall of the Hittite
empire at the beginning of the twelfth century was the immediate
cause for the spread of iron technology. Although much more
widely spread in nature than copper and still more than tin,
telluric iron did not come into general use until much later than
bronze, even though insignificant quantities were occasionally
produced accidentally in early times in the course of such acti-
vities as firing pottery in closed kilns. Traditionally the earliest
skilled iron-workers practised their craft in the lands bordering
the southern shore of the Black Sea, and it is significant that the
first historical references occur in the archives of the Hittite kings
at Boghaz-Keui. There are grounds for thinking that the Hittites,
conscious of the advantages conferred by iron weapons in war,
guarded the secret of their production and restricted exports to
daggers, personal ornaments and the like, designed as presents for
rulers of foreign states. What is certain is that it was not until the
downfall of the Hittites that iron-working spread for example to
                                 160
       FROM    MYCENAE      TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

Palestine, where it soon came to be applied to general economic
activities such as farming in the shape of hoe-blades, plough-
shares and sickles. It must have been from Anatolia or Syria,
probably by way of Cyprus, that the Greeks of the Protogeo-
metric period obtained their sword- and dagger-blades and in due
course the knowledge needed for establishing their own iron-
working industry.

The alphabet

   It was in the same historical context and from the same quarter
that the Greeks derived the alphabet. The fall of the Hittites, the
decline of Egypt, following the death of Ramses III (1166 B.c.),
and the collapse of Mycenaean power combined to play into the
hands of the Phoenicians, a Semitic trading people of the coasts
of Lebanon and Syria, who even managed to enjoy political
independence from the twelfth to the ninth centuries. During an
early phase of this period and most probably by c. 1100 B.c. the
Phoenicians had evolved, probably to assist them in the conduct
of their commerce, the first alphabetic script, the actual symbols of
which were adapted from Egyptian hieroglyphs. Considering
that the alphabet had to be adapted to the needs of a non-Semitic
language, the agreement between the symbols on the earliest
Greek inscriptions and those of the Phoenician alphabet is so
close as to leave no doubt of their source, in addition to which the
names and order of letters and the direction of writing from right
to left in many inscriptions are all features of early Greek practice
and only readily explained on the hypothesis that the alphabet was
originally devised for inscribing a Semitic tongue. The prob-
ability is that the Phoenician script was first adopted around the
mid-ninth century B.c. by Greek traders based on the Asiatic
coast of the Aegean and operating through the Phoenician
trading station on Cyprus. Although devised and spread in the
cause of commerce, the alphabet was doubtless a main factor in
reducing the Homeric poems, hitherto passed on by word of
                                 161
    THE   FOUNDATIONS      OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

mouth, to their final form, probably towards the end of the eighth
century, just as it was destined in its variously modified versions
to transmit down to our own day the literature of western man.

Greek colonies
    Ever since Neolithic times the coasts and islands of the Aegean
had been the subject of exploration by mariners eager for trade or
new areas for colonization; at the height of their power the
Mycenaeans had posts as far west as South Italy, Sicily and the
Lipari Islands and trade connections over broad tracts of Europe
from Iberia and southern Britain in the west to the Ukraine and
even Transcaucasia in the east. It is a sign of their renascent
energy that the Greeks of the Geometric period not merely
caught up with, but in due course eclipsed their predecessors.
This is particularly true of the Euxine, into which Mycenaean
trade had penetrated only feebly and settlement not at all. Al-
ready during the eighth century Ionian Greeks had begun to
explore the northern shore of Asia Minor and in due course
trading stations were established at Trebizond and Sinope, the
first for loading iron, copper and gold from Transcaucasia and
the latter perhaps for transhipment into larger craft. Doubtless it
was the adventures of these pioneers which nourished the myth
of the Argonauts in search of the Golden Fleece that we find
incorporated in the Odyssey. During the following century
exploration was extended to the western and northern shores and
here no doubt the leading attractions were the fish that abounded
in the great rivers of South Russia, the Bosporus and the Sea of
Azov and which were traded dried or preserved in jars; the salt
that could so conveniently be prepared in the great estuaries; and
the honey and wax, known to have abounded in medieval Russia
and of which the importance was already implied by Herodotus.
In addition to its importance as a source of food and metals, the
Euxine also offered scope for settlement, and numerous colonies
sprang up at favourable points on the coasts. Among the most
                                162
       FROM    MYCENAE       TO   THE    AGE   OF   EXPANSION

prosperous were those which paid tribute to and lived in profitable
harmony with the Scyths, such as Olbia at the mouth of the Bug
and close to that of the Dnieper, Pantikapaion on the west shore
of the Bosporus and Tanais at the head of the Sea of Azov.
   In the Mediterranean the Greeks met formidable rivals in the
Phoenicians and Etruscans. To begin with they had to content
themselves with establishing colonies in South Italy, from Calabria
to as far north as Naples on the west coast, and in Sicily. They were
effectually prevented from venturing further over the open sea
by the Phoenicians, who had founded Carthage and other
colonies on the Tunisian coast and established depots on the
coasts of Sicily and Sardinia as early as the eighth century B.c.
Assyrian pressure on the trading cities of the Lebanese and Syrian
coasts first made it possible for the Greeks to spread to Egypt and
Cyrene and ultimately to the western Mediterranean, where they
founded Massilia (Marseilles) around 600 B.c. and Emporion
(Ampurias) on the modern Catalan coast, approximately 550 B.c.
From Massilia Greek traders reached out to remoter parts of
Europe for tin and other materials. By the middle of the sixth
century they had ventured through the Straits of Gibraltar to
Tartessos, the modern Cadiz, probably to collect Asturian tin.
But once again Greek enterprise was affected by events far away
at the east end of the Mediterranean. The destruction of the
Ionian cities by the Persians weakened the Greeks and made the
Carthaginians powerful enough to close the Straits of Gibraltar.
One effect of this was to deflect the Greek quest for tin to the
deposits of Morbihan and Cornwall. These were reached by way of
the Carcassonne gap, the Garonne river and the Biscayan sea-
route with a port of call at Corbillo by the mouth of the Loire.

Athenian repulse of Persia
   The overwhelming of the Ionian cities also constituted a mortal
threat to the Helladic homeland where the arts of Classical
civilization were already beginning to develop (Pl. VI). Before
                                   163
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

long Athenian support for Ionian rebels incurred the active
enmity of Darius, who set his armies in motion to stamp out the
distant source of disaffection. Conversely, it was the defeat of the
Persian army at Marathon in 490 B.c. and the destruction of the
fleet ten years later at Salamis that, in dispelling the Persian
menace, ushered in the greatest age of Classical Greece. That this
proved to be brief was due to a fatal flaw in political life: the
existence of so many sovereign city states in a land as small as
Greece was bound to lead to destructive rivalry and conflict. In
the event the state which emerged as victor from the Pelopon-
nesian war (431-404 B.C.) was the most disciplined, but also the
most philistine. With the predominance of Sparta the most
creative, though not necessarily the most influential, phase of
Classical art and thought was over. Before long the emergence of
a strong Macedonian kingdom under Philip II (359-336 B.c.) put
an end to the Greek city state as a political entity of importance.
Yet in other respects Philip’s achievements were immensely
significant, since they made possible the conquests of Alexander
the Great and so ultimately brought within the sphere of Hellenic
influence the ancient civilizations of western Asia and Egypt and
prepared the way for the expansion of the Roman Empire in the east.

The Etruscans

   Both on the Italian mainland and in the North Tyrrhenian sea
the Greek colonists encountered the Etruscans: a people of non-
Indo-European tongue, whose literature has yet to be deciphered
and whose origins have long excited interest. The idea that the
Etruscans arrived in Italy with a ready-made culture from the
Lydian homeland in western Asia Minor attributed to them by
Herodotus has few supporters today. The culture which appeared
in full view around 700 B.c. between the Arno and the Tiber was
in essence no more than an enrichment of that of the Villanovans,
explicable in terms of economic growth and the impact of exotic
influences; Phoenician, Cypriote and Greek. The Etruscans drew
                                 164
       FROM    MYCENAE     TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

their wealth from the deposits of copper, iron and tin in the
mountains and from their own skill as metal-workers. From their
early homeland they gained control over most of western Italy
north of the Greek zone, though, except in the north, they no-
where crossed the Apennines or disturbed the Italic bearers of the
old Apennine culture: Elba was seized early on account of its iron
deposits and Corsica fell into their possession as a result of a sea-
victory in league with the Carthaginians over the Greeks around
540 B.c. In the course of the sixth century Etruscan civilization
spread widely over the old Villanovan territories in the Po Valley
and southward as far as the Campanian plain, where the northern
Greek colonies on the Gulf of Naples were enveloped.
  Whereas the Villanovans were essentially villagers, the
Etruscans preferred, like the Greeks, to live in stone-built towns
with public buildings: it was after all Etruscans who first enclosed
the Seven Hills of Rome with a wall and converted a cluster of
Villanovan villages into a city with forum and temple. The most
impressive signs of their wealth are furnished by their tombs,
great stone chambers domed or vaulted and heaped over with
earthen mounds: the scenes painted on the inner walls, no less
than the sculptured urns, the bronze figures, mirrors and vessels,
the ivories, the imported Greek vases and the exquisite gold
smithery testify to a society that was not only affluent, but
sophisticated and highly stratified. Politically the Etruscans were
organized in self-governing cities, each with its dependent terri-
tory, a system which, as with the Greeks, was favourable to a high
level of culture, but which was unable long to survive the pressure
of larger and more coherent units. The overrunning of their terri-
tories in the Po basin by Celtic-speaking warriors between 450 and
350 .B.c. began the process of disintegration which the Romans
did so much to accelerate. By the middle of the third century B.c.,
indeed, Etruria had submitted to Rome, even if culturally the
absorption was not complete until just before the beginning of
the Christian era. Although the Roman republic ostensibly owed
                                165
    THE   FOUNDATIONS        OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

its birth to the expulsion of the Tarquinian dynasty and its growth
was largely at the expense of the Etruscan state, Roman civiliza-
tion was deeply indebted to the Etruscans: apart from their capital
city and its forum, the Romans owed them many of their leading
characteristics, such as their prowess with drains, their system of
land survey by centuriation, their preoccupation with divination
by the Aaruspices and, in the fasces, their very emblem of authority.

The Scyths
   By the middle of the sixth century B.c. the Phoenicians,
Carthaginians, Greeks and Etruscans had thus between them
settled the coasts, islands and peninsulas of the Mediterranean Sea
and had already begun to penetrate by means of trade and
exploration the extensive territories to the north that still remained
prehistoric. Before tracing the impact of these influences on the
heirs of the Urnfield and earlier prehistoric inhabitants of western
and middle Europe, it will be convenient to consider the nomad
peoples of the Eurasian steppes, who contributed important
influences of their own to the cultural life of the Celtic and
Teutonic peoples. Everywhere the natural grasslands of the steppe
were defined on the north by the forest zone. At their western
extremity the steppes came down to the shores of the Euxine, and
east of the Volga they graded on the south into deserts. In this
way the steppes formed a natural corridor linking the northern
margins of China with the Altai, the southern Urals, Caucasia and
the southern Ukraine, along which nomad horse-riders could
move rapidly. Moreover, the fact that the nomads depended for
their bare existence on the natural pastures of the steppe meant
that pressure at any one point was liable to involve progressive
displacements of population over vast territories.
    To gain a living from the steppe called for a highly specialized
knowledge of animal husbandry and a notable degree of cultural
adaptation, notably in riding, clothing and habitations, so it is
hardly surprising that well-defined nomad groups did not make
                                  166
       FROM    MYCENAE      TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

their appearance until well into the first millennium s.c. One of the
first indications dates from the end of the ninth century, when fore-
runners of the Huns began to harass peasant cultivators in the
frontier lands of North China, and it may well have been the
driving of these raiders to the west by the Chou emperor Suan
that set in motion the widespread displacement of nomad groups
which brought the Scyths to South Russia, probably around
7oo B.c. Although mainly concentrated in the South Ukraine and
the Kuban, the Scyths penetrated in some numbers into Hungary,
where they formed immediate neighbours of the central European
Celts, with whom they appear to have intermixed in Hungary and
Transylvania. The Scyths were pre-eminently nomads: by the
fifth century, it is true, some groups in contact with settled peoples
had adopted agriculture and even occupied townships on the
Dnieper and in the Crimea; but the overwhelming proportion
were at home on the open steppe. There they subsisted to a large
extent on mare’s milk and cheese, helped out by game and fish.
Ever on the move from one pasture to another, the men rode on
ponies, on whose harness they lavished the best materials and the
most skilled craftsmanship, and the women and children reclined
in waggons under the shelter of felt roofs. It is likely that when
stationary they lived in felt tents, which, to judge from the frozen
tombs of the Altai, where such things survived in a wonderful
state of preservation, had wool-pile rugs and brightly worked
wall-hangings. Leather, wool, felt and fur provided materials
for clothing, which in the case of men included soft boots,
trousers for riding, jackets pulled in tight round the waist to
allow maximum freedom in the use of the bow while in the
saddle, and conical hats. They wore plenty of jewellery, and bronze
mirrors of Greek manufacture or copied from Greek models were
common possessions.
   A notable feature of Scythic culture was the decorative art
manifested in metal belt-plaques, harness-fittings, scabbards,
dagger-hilts, drinking-vessels and jewellery and also in wood-
                                 167
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

carving, leather- and felt-work and even tattoo marks. Although
much of the metal-work was executed by alien craftsmen and
though the art derived elements from south-west Asia and
Ionia, Scythic art was essentially barbaric in style and feeling.
It was animated above all by a lively feeling for animals—stags,
goats, lions and birds of prey prominent among them—such as
one might expect to animate men who spent much of their life
in the open and for whom hunting was a main interest. Yet there
is a strong tendency towards stylization: the artist sometimes com-
bined several aspects of a single animal into one representation, or
he might use parts of one creature, such as the head and beak of
a bird of prey, to enrich a representation of another quite different
one; nor did he hesitate on occasion to contort and manipulate the
beasts to conform to some decorative pattern. Among the tricks
which the Scyths could have derived either from China or from
south-west Asia, and which they probably transmitted in turn to
Celtic art, was the rendering of projecting muscles on shoulders,
haunches and other joints by means of curls.
   As might be expected of a people to whom war, the chase and
the management of animals were all-important, Scythic society
was strongly masculine and authoritarian. This is strongly
brought out in the burials, which seem to have provided a main
focus of religious sentiment and which incidentally have yielded
by far the greater part of our information about the Scyths. The
dead were buried under barrows in chambers roofed over with
timber and provided with grave-goods. In the case of the leaders
the tombs were sometimes of vast size and the grave-goods of
outstanding wealth. The barrows of the royal Scyths in the
Alexandropol region of South Russia, for example, might range
up to from 30 to 70 feet in height and from 400 to 1200 feet in
circumference and the chamber might exceed 4o feet in depth
below the old ground surface. The archaeological evidence
strongly bears out the account left by Herodotus, who records
that the body of the dead leader, having been embalmed, was
                                 168
       FROM    MYCENAE     TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

laid on a waggon and for a period of forty days was drawn in
procession round his territory. The great man would be accom-
panied to the grave, not merely by material possessions, such as
clothing, jewellery, weapons, food, drink, drinking-vessels and
containers, but also by his favourite horses, his wife and his chief
servants, recalling the practices of the Han emperors of China or
from much earlier times those of the Sumerian rulers, witnessed
by the contents of the royal graves at Ur.

Hallstatt Iron Age
   The spread of iron-working north of the Alps gave rise to a
new group of cultures which takes its name from the cemetery of
Hallstatt near Salzburg. Although most of the bearers of Hallstatt
culture must have been direct descendants of the Urnfield people,
the ruling class probably stemmed in part from the old Tumulus
culture, and in part from immigrants from the east. The most
notable find relating to the earlier phase of the Iron Age Hallstatt
culture, defined by the characteristic long swords of bronze or
iron with scabbards having metal terminals, or chapes, of winged
type, are the burials of the chieftains. Instead of being cremated
and deposited in flat urnfields, they were now inhumed under
timber chambers covered by substantial burial mounds. Some of
the richest burials in the cortical area of Austria, Bavaria and
Bohemia have yielded remains of four-wheeled waggons that
remind one vividly of the funeral carts described by Herodotus
in connection with the burial of Scythic leaders. Although they
had adopted iron-working for some purposes, the Hallstatt
peoples made great use of bronze: for instance, they used a
variety of vessels, helmets, shields and greaves of sheet bronze in
the North Italian style, as well as a variety of smaller objects and
ornaments; and on occasion they even made their characteristic
swords in this metal. Whether these were really designed for
fighting from horseback, as many have held, is far from certain.
There is no doubt that the Hallstatt warriors rode horses, but
                                169
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

there is no proof that they used them for true cavalry fighting;
it could well be that they treated them, as the La Téne and other
early charioteers did their vehicles, as means of transporting
warriors to the most advantageous point for ground combat. In
any case their ability to ride, which they doubtless owed to
impulses from the east, enabled them to spread fairly rapidly over
the old Urnfield territories in the west, down the Rhine to the
Low Countries, into the Alpine area and across France to northern
and central Iberia. In an opposite direction elements of Hallstatt
culture appeared in several distinct Urnfield groups, among them
the Lausitz culture, regarded by Polish prehistorians as the basis
of the Slav people; the East Alpine, occupying much of the
Middle Danube basin; and the Bosnian, extending over much of
Yugoslavia south of the Sava and the Danube. The wealth of
personal armament and above all the widespread prevalence of
military defences in the form both of hill-forts and marsh-
fortresses like Biskupin in Poland leave one in no doubt that the
period was one of warlike activity, but how far the diffusion of
Hallstatt types was due to mere fashion, how far to raids by warriors
and how far to anything like folk-movements are problems
which need to be considered on their merits in particular cases.
  During the final phase of Hallstatt culture, defined by short
swords and beginning around soo B.c., the centre of gravity seems
to have moved west, and it was then that Greek influence,
stemming from the colony at Massilia and passing up the Rhéne
and across to the Upper Rhine and Danube, began to play directly,
at least on the upper classes of Celtic society. The most numerous
imports from the Greek world were concerned             with wine-
drinking, which seems to have been taken up by Celtic chieftains
almost as a symbol of status: amphorae, still retaining traces of the
pitch commonly added to wine in the Mediterranean down to the
present day, pottery wine-cups, bronze mixing-bowls and flagons
of Rhodian type combine to give a convincing picture of a trade
symbolizing an influence that was to do far more than transform
                                 170
       FROM    MYCENAE      TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

the drinking habits of the Celtic aristocracy. Another striking
instance of Greek influence at this time is given by the brick bastions
of the Heuneburg hill-fort near the headwaters of the Danube.

La Téne

   During the last quarter of the fifth century a new art style,
taking its name from the famous votive find of La Téne at the
eastern end of Lake Neuchatel in western Switzerland, came into
being in the territory between the Upper Danube and the Marne.
Many elements of La Téne art are most easily explained by the
breakdown of Classical Greek motifs like the tendril and the
palmette (an ornament with narrow divisions somewhat resem-
bling a palm-leaf), in the hands of craftsmen schooled in the geo-
metric Hallstatt style. Some of the earliest vehicles of Greek art
to reach the area in question were bronze wine-flagons with
beaked spouts, manufactured in the Etruscan workshops of the
Po Valley, but carrying Greek patterns on the handle-attach-
ments, which crossed the Alpine passes in the course of trade;
it was not until the conquest of the Po Valley by Celtic-speaking
people and the inauguration of Cisalpine Gaul around the middle
of the fourth century that contacts with Italo-Greek art proceeded
on a broader front. The fantastic treatment of animals or parts of
them was on the other hand almost certainly derived from the
Scyths, who as we have seen were immediate neighbours of the
Hallstatt peoples in east central Europe. Celtic society was
oraganized on an aristocratic basis and the finest products of La
Téne art flashed in bronze or gold on the helmets, shields, spears,
scabbards, harness-mounts, lynch-pins and terret-rings (driving
rein rings) of warriors, their horses and their chariots as well as
on the head, limbs and clothing of their women; but some of the
basic motifs were reflected in the work of humble potters and
wood-carvers. From its original focal area La Téne art spread east
into the Danube Valley, where was probably made the silver vessel
found in the bog of Gundestrup (Pl. VII) in Denmark, south
                                 r71
    THE   FOUNDATIONS        OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

into Cisalpine Gaul and west and north over France, the Low
Countries and the British Isles. Over the whole of this territory
it continued to flourish until replaced by Roman provincial
culture within the advancing frontiers of the Empire; and on the far
north-west perimeter of Europe, in Ireland and the highland zone
of Britain, it continued to survive until much later historical times.
   During the prehistoric La Téne period the Celtic peoples of
Gaul and Britain borrowed much from their more civilized con-
temporaries in the south. Thus, the revival of chariots was almost
certainly due to contacts with the Etruscans. Again, during middle
La Téne times the rotary lathe, used mainly for working wood
and shale, reached south-west Germany from North Italy, where
it had been introduced by the Etruscans, and from there spread
widely over temperate Europe. The rotary quern, invented in the
Graeco-Roman world for large-scale milling by means of donkeys
and slaves, was introduced to barbarian Europe in the portable
form used by legionary troops. The native coinage developed in
Gaul stemmed from two main sources: the gold coinage was
modelled on Macedonian staters; and the silver one on coins of
Massilia and the western Greek colonies. The appearance of
native coinage in Gaul, and in due course in southern Britain,
marked an important advance in political consciousness and
organization and it is significant that the late La Téne period also
witnessed the development in Gaul and South Germany of the
considerable fortified townships or oppida described and in some
cases stormed by Caesar.

Expansion of the Roman Empire

   Meanwhile the tiny and rather rustic Roman republic, born in
509 B.c. of the eviction of the Tarquins, was making ready to
extend the boundaries of the civilized world. By the time the
Gauls irrupted into Italy around 400 B.c. the Romans had began
to dominate their Latin neighbours, but it was not until the
victory of Sentinum in 295 B.c. that they finally emerged as the
                                  172
        FROM    MYCENAE     TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

dominant power in middle Italy. In the second stage of their
expansion they consolidated their hold on Italy as a whole: they
began by bringing under control the Greek colonies of Magna
Graecia, went on to evict the Carthaginians from Sicily in the
course of the First Punic War (264-241 B.c.) and within the next
twenty years had subdued the Po Valley. The third stage, during
which they gained control of the Mediterranean, was initiated by
the Second Punic War (218-201 B.c.), which not only brought
them Spain, but also, as a result of the battle of Zama, Carthage
itself and with it full control of the straits of Sicily; further than
that, through the Carthaginian alliance with Macedon, Rome
became involved in campaigns in the East Mediterranean which
led indirectly to the conquest of Pergamum and so to Roman
intervention in the affairs of Asia. The annexation of Syria and
Crete in 62 B.c., and of Egypt in 30 B.c., virtually completed the
encirclement of the Mediterranean, which became in effect a
Roman lake. Meanwhile the fourth and final phase of expansion,
during which the Romans incorporated within the Empire most of
the remaining territories of the Celtic La Téne peoples, had
already been initiated with the conquest of the rest of Gaul by
Caesar between 59 and 51 B.c. The subjugation of Britain, much of
the southern part of which had since Caesar’s incursion been
subject to strong influences from Roman Gaul, was begun by
Claudius between a.p. 43 and 47 and completed even beyond the
Firth of Forth by Agricola (A.D. 78-84), appointed for the task
by Vespasian.    By the death of Trajan in a.p. 117 the Empire
had reached the Rhine—Danube line, which it was destined to hold
until the collapse of imperial authority in the west; and beyond this
it had extended to the Low Countries, the enclave between the
Middle Rhine and the Upper Danube, and the province of Dacia.

The Germanic Iron Age and the migration period
   Meanwhile, beyond the most extended limits of the Empire the
forces that were ultimately to disrupt it were gathering strength.
                                 173
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

The heirs of the Nordic Bronze Age had acquired a knowledge of
iron-working from the south by around 4ooB.c.: during the
ensuing four centuries they drew their main inspiration from the
Celtic La Téne peoples with whom they came into contact on
their southern borders; but during the opening centuries of the
Christian era they came predominantly under Roman influence.
By means of trade, to quote just one instance, bronze accessories of
wine-drinking, manufactured in Italy, Gaul or the Rhineland, were
taken into use by prosperous farmers as far north as the Trondelag;
but even more important than trade in many respects was the
return of individuals from service in the Empire. Thus the free
Germans were growing in wealth and knowledge at a time when
the inhabitants of the Roman provinces were being thwarted by
bureaucratic interference and fiscal exactions; moreover the pro-
vincials’ power of war-like resistance was progressively lowered
by the very peace secured within the frontiers by an army in which
the barbarian element was ever on the increase. Beyond the
frontiers the small possibility of internal growth allowed by sub-
sistence farming and the barrier to northward colonization set by
the adverse climate of Sub-atlantic times led inevitably to southern
thrusts of population. The first of these indentified in history was
the drive of the Teutones and Cimbri from northern Jutland, that
began in 120 B.c. and was only checked by the destruction of the
Teutones on the field of battle near Aix-en-Provence in 102 B.C.
More widespread movements occurred during the second century
A.D., when for example the Goths crossed the Baltic from their
homeland in South Sweden and drove north of the Carpathians
down to the region of Olbia on the north-east shore of the Black
Sea. Such movements as these increased the flow of new ideas back
to the old homelands. It was from the Goths in their new terri-
tories that many exports from the Roman world, and art conven-
tions from the steppes, reached the north. Another feature to
spread north was the runic script, first adapted from the Latin
in all probability by the Marcomanni of Bohemia, a script that was
                                 174
        FROM   MYCENAE       TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

to reach Britain with the Anglo-Saxon invaders and to survive
in Scandinavia in full flower down to the Christian Middle Ages.
   Although it has been argued that westward thrusts of Huns
from the steppes, by engaging the eastern Germans delayed their
assault on Italy, in the long run it was the complex system of folk-
movements which they set in motion that brought down the
Empire in the west. The death of Theodosius I in a.p. 395 and the
division of the Empire, the Latin west falling to Honorius and the
Greek east to Arcadius, was the signal for wholesale invasions. The
full brunt of these was borne by the western half of the empire.
Although the formal end, symbolized by the deposition of Romulus
Augustulus, was delayed until 476, the invasion of Italy and the
sack of Rome by Alaric and his Visigoths in 410 was really decisive
in that, bereft of an effective head, the provincial limbs proved un-
able to withstand the multiple and often lightning thrusts of the
barbarians (PI. VIII). No account of these can be offered here, but
it is important to recognize a primary distinction between those of
the eastern and western Germans. Whereas relatively small bands
of the former, Visigoths, Ostrogoths, Burgundians, Lombards and
Vandals, penetrated great distances and left little ethnic trace
behind—the last-mentioned for example passed through Gaul and
Spain and across North Africa to fall upon Rome from the Car-
thaginian shore—the latter, spreading only over neighbouring
territories, laid the foundations of Anglo-Saxon Britain and
Frankish Gaul.

The spread of Christianity
    The prehistoric peoples beyond the old imperial frontiers were
first brought within the sphere of civilization by Christian mis-
sionaries.   Although   subject at times to severe      persecution,
Christianity spread widely throughout the Empire during the
Antonine period (138-92) and between 313 and 325 it achieved a
settled status through its recognition by Constantine and the
clarification of its doctrines at the council of Nicaea. When the
                                  175
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

western Empire collapsed, much of its ecclesiastical organization
survived even though in the areas most overrun by barbarians
there was some relapse into paganism. Thus the continuity of
civilized life in south-east Britain was so disrupted by the Anglo-
Saxon invaders that Christianity had to be reintroduced from Rome
when more settled conditions set in by the end of the sixth century.
In the long run the Anglo-Saxons brought about an enlargement of
the Christian world by displacing Christians from the most
populous parts of the Roman province and driving them to the
remoter parts of Britain and even across the sea to Ireland. Asa
result thriving centres of Celtic Christianity grew up in northern
Britain and in the far west, separated from the remainder of
Christendom by a welter of Germanic barbarians, and it was only
during a lengthy period after St Augustine’s mission (597), in the
aftermath of which the Synod of Whitby (663-4) wasan outstanding
episode, that the two were reunited. Even so the Celtic church con-
tinued asin a sensea separate force, making for examplea distinctive
contribution to the conversion of Bavaria and West Germany.
   The bringing in of northern and eastern Germany had to wait on
political progress. The defeat of the Huns at Troyes (451) and the
conversion of the Frankish ruler Clovis to Christianity encouraged
the emergence of a well-founded state under the Merovingian
dynasty (486-751).    Great advances were made under Charle-
magne, who extended the Frankish frontiers to the Elbe and the
Pyrenees and was crowned in the year 800 as emperor of the
Romans at the hands of Pope Leo III. Yet the ninth century was to
witness the temporary return of conditions reminiscent of those
prevailing some four hundred years earlier, with Vikings taking
the place of Germans and Magyars that of Huns: the former issued
from Scandinavia to ravage the coasts of the Baltic, the North Sea,
the Western Isles, the Irish Sea, the English Channel, the Bay of
Biscay and even the West Mediterranean; and the latter, of re-
motely east Ural origin, were pushed by the advancing Petcheneg
hordes from their immediate homeland in the Ukraine across the
                                 176
VII   Representation of the Celtic god Cernunnus on a panel of the
                bowl from Gundestrup, Denmark




                                                          (facing p. 176)
VII   Bronze mould showing Teutonic perso
                                          nages of the Migration
                   Period, Torslunda, Sweden
        FROM   MYCENAE      TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

Carpathians into the Middle Danube basin, where their forays
terrorized more settled peoples.
    It was not until the middle of the tenth century, after half a
millennium of unrest, that the German kings Henry the Fowler and
 Otto were able to establish more or less settled conditions in
central Europe, the latter beating the Hungarians decisively at
Lech and reviving the Holy Roman Empire at his crowning in 962.
The extension of Christianity and indeed of literate civilization
itself to the remaining parts of Europe was the work of missionary
endeavour from Rome and Byzantium, the twin capitals of the
 Roman Empire. Henry and Otto had carried the frontier up to the
 Oder and the closing years of the first millennium were marked by
a series of dramatic advances, among them St Adalbert’s mission to
 Prussia (997), the adhesion of Hungary (1000), the conversion of
 Olaf Tryggvason, king. of Norway (995-1000) and a former
Viking, and the establishment of Christianity in Sweden, whence
in the twelfth century missionaries crossed to Finland. Meanwhile
Byzantine missions had already before the end of the ninth century
gone among the Bulgars, Croats and Serbs. In 988 Vladimir the
prince of Kiev introduced Christianity to his dominions, which
extended north to Novgorod over territory crossed by the old
trade routes linking the Swedish Vikings with Byzantium. Pres-
sure of nomads from the eastern steppes led to Novgorod taking
the lead from Kiev during the later twelfth century, but during the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries Moscow rose to prominence, and
when at length the ancient capital of the East Roman Empire fell
to the Turks it was to the metropolitan of Moscow that the head-
ship of Orthodox Christianity passed and it was the principality of
Moscow that formed the core of the future Russian Empire. It was
the expansion of Muscovite power and Orthodox Christianity that
brought the remaining areas of prehistoric Europe within range of
literate tradition. By the death of Ivan III in 1505 the frontiers had
reached the Arctic territories and the Urals and the prehistory of
Europe was to all intents and purposes concluded.
    ;                            177                            cP
    THE   FOUNDATIONS        OF   EUROPEAN      CIVILIZATION:

   A counterpart to the northward expansion of Christianity, which
followed the achievement of more stable conditions towards the
end of the first millennium, is to be seen in the staying and reversal
of Islamic expansion in the south. Within twelve years of Moham-
med’s death in 632 his followers had overrun much of the By-
zantine Empire, including Cyrenaica, Palestine, Syria and Iraq,
and in addition Persia and Armenia; and by 700 they had added
to their conquests the rest of North Africa, Afghanistan, West
Turkestan and north-west India. At the peak of their power in the
mid-tenth century the Moslems had come near to engulfing the
entire Mediterranean, having occupied most of Spain, as well as
Provence, Sicily and South Italy, and threatened Asia Minor and
Byzantium itself. From this point of view the stability that made
possible the Crusades came to Christian Europe only just in time:
in the event not only was all Spain regained by the middle of the
thirteenth century, but the fall of Byzantium was delayed suffi-
ciently long for it to be in some respects an advantage to western
Christendom.

The age of exploration
   By the middle of the thirteenth century Christendom was no
longer on the defensive in the west and was indeed ready to reach
out into other continents. Already by 1260 Venetian and soon
after Genoese merchants had begun to establish trade relations
with China from bases in the Crimea using the same route as that
followed a thousand years previously for conveying silk to the
Roman world; and during the earlier half of the fourteenth century
envoys were reaching China by sea from the Persian Gulf. The
conditions on which this eastern trade was based ceased to exist
when the Mongol was replaced by the Chinese Ming dynasty
(1368/70) and xenophobic influences regained the upper hand. The
Europeans had to turn elsewhere for the spices and other eastern
produce to which they had become accustomed. A new age of
geographical discovery and as it turned out a new era in the history
                                  178
       FROM    MYCENAE     TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

of mankind was inaugurated, in which the lead passed from the
Mediterranean to the nations of the Atlantic sea-board. The
Portuguese began by edging round the west coast of Africa and
by 1498 had succeeded in reaching India by way of the Cape of
Good Hope (see p. 117). Meanwhile, six years before Vasco da
Gama’s culminating exploit, Christopher Columbus, a Genoese
holding the commission of Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain, made
landfall on one of the Bahama islands and before returning planted
a small colony of Spaniards on Haiti. Christendom had thus in the
course of two or three centuries initiated a process that within the
ensuing three or four was destined to bring the whole world
within the purview of literate civilization.
                          CHAPTER       8


          INDIA       AND      THE      FAR      EAST

                             INDIA
India, like the greater part of Africa, lay outside the realm of the
Advanced Palaeolithic peoples whose successors initiated early in
the Neothermal period the processes that led in due course to the
emergence of civilized life in the Old World. Ata time when tells,
marking permanent settlements by peoples subsisting on the pro-
ducts of cereal farming and stock-raising, had for centuries been
incorporating the ruins of successive houses and temples over a
great tract from Palestine, Cilicia and Syria to northern Meso-
potamia and the Iranian plateau, the greater part of the Indian sub-
continent remained the refuge of low-grade hunter-fishers, whose
microlithic flint-work stemmed from Lower Palaeolithic sources
(see p. 49).

Early farmers in Baluchistan and Sind
   The earliest traces of communities based on farming in India are
confined to Baluchistan and to a contiguous area of Sind on the
right bank of the lower reaches of the river Indus (Map 5). At the
present day Baluchistan is so arid that most of the inhabitants are
perforce nomadic, but the numerous tells indicating permanent
settlement, together with the stone-built dams (gabarbands),
suggest that rainfall must have been higher during the third mil-
lennium than it is to-day. Although a few of the mounds have
yielded assemblages lacking in pottery or with only hand-made
wares, as in the first and second phases respectively of the site of
Kile Gul Muhammed, near Quetta, the great majority relate to
communities using copper tools and turning pottery on the wheel.
                                180
                                         INDIA




                         Periano G
 Kile Gul
   Muhammed&               4
             Togau&
                       Rana GhundaS aS



       KuliA




       A     Highland villages
 F_=jHarappan civilization
  O          Chalcolithic cultures
       A     Grey ware

       B_    Gangetic copper hoards

       C_ Chalcolithic
 4°"! Stone axe cultures
  ee

 BT     hd




 5- The Indian sub-continent in late prehistoric times (c. 2300-500 B.C.).

   Several distinct varieties of wheel-turned pottery have been
detected in different parts of the territory, differing in the colour
of the ware and the character of the designs painted on its surface,
local differences analogous to those observed over the same terri-
tory in the designs of rugs made at the present day. Wares of reddish
hue are found in the Zhob valley in the north and again in central
Baluchistan, where the Togau pottery exhibits designs based on
                                          181
                  INDIA    AND   THE   FAR   EAST

naturalistic animals and humans and on friezes of stylized ibex
heads. Buff-coloured wares, on the other hand, occur in the area
round Quetta, painted predominantly in geometric designs; in
south Baluchistan, where the Nal and Kulli wares each combine
geometric with naturalistic and stylized animal designs; and in the
outlying area of Sind, where Amri ware was painted almost ex-
clusively with geometric designs. The chronology of these wares
relative both to oneanother and to the urban civilization of Harappa
and Mohenjo-daro is still uncertain. Yet already it seems clear that
some of the Zhob and Quetta wares began to be manufactured
before that of Amri, a fact of some importance when it is re-
membered that this ware underlay remains of the Indus Valley
civilization at several sites in Sind. On the other hand many
of the hill-villages of the Nal, Kulli and Quetta groups were
without doubt broadly contemporary with the great riverine
civilization.
   Too little is yet known about antecedent stages in the human
settlement of the Indus Valley for the origins of the Harappa
civilization to be anything but obscure. Yet already it is known that
painted wares of ultimately Iranian origin—Amri ware in Sind,
and Rana Ghundai (Zhob Valley) ware at Harappa—underlay a
number of the settlements, and it can hardly be doubted that a
formative part was played by colonists from the hills, endowed
with a technology that included metallurgy and the manufacture
of pottery on the wheel. What is more problematical, and too often
overlooked, is the contribution made by the aboriginal population,
most probably represented by the proto-Australoid stock which,
together with Mediterranean and Alpine elements, made up the
population buried in cemeteries of the Indus Valley people.
Direct contacts with the older civilization of Sumer, for which
concrete evidence exists mainly in the form of small objects of
value, such as engraved seal-stones and etched beads, may well
have provided stimuli, but one has only to compare the Indus
Valley and Sumerian civilizations to see that they are distinct and
                                 182
                               INDIA

largely independent entities. Both responded to the challenge and
opportunity of great river plains on each flank of a vast highland
region peopled with settled metal-using farmers who delighted to
decorate their wheel-turned wares in paint.

Indus Valley civilization
   Thanks to the trade contacts just mentioned, it is possible to say
that, by around 2500 B.c., the Indus Valley civilization had assumed
the form it was destined to maintain with comparatively little
change over the best part of a millennium. Geographically it
covered a larger area than either the Egyptian or Sumerian civi-
lizations: the great metropolitan centres, Harappa on the river
Ravi and Mohenjo-daro lower down on the main river, were
themselves over 350 miles apart as the crow flies; but smaller
townships and trading: centres covered a much more extensive
area from the foot of the Simla hills to the neighbourhood of
Karachi, nearly 700 miles apart, and again over a distance of some
950 miles extending from Sutkagen-dor near the coast of the
Arabian Sea to Lothal and Rangpur in Gujarat.
   Culturally speaking the Indus Valley people (Pl. IX) stood at a
level comparable with that of the Early Dynastic peoples of Egypt
and Sumer. They inhabited cities with monumental architecture
and exercised political authority over extensive territories. Eco-
nomically they could show a relatively advanced degree of sub-
division of labour: urban populations were maintained on food
grown in surrounding rural areas; many distinct crafts were
practised, including metallurgy, potting on the wheel, faience-
manufacture and gem-cutting; and trade connections were main-
tained by means of ships with lands as far afield as Sumer. On the
intellectual level they had achieved partial literacy, even if their
script, essentially pictographic in character and mainly engraved on
seals, though also stamped or scratched on pottery and inscribed
on small copper tablets, is confined to texts of hardly more than
twenty characters that have yet to be deciphered.
                                 183
                   INDIA   AND    THE   FAR   EAST

   On the other hand the general configuration of the Indus civi-
lization was quite distinct. The leading characteristics betrayed by
the excavated remains include a high degree of civic discipline and
organization, uniformity over an extensive area and stability over
long periods of time. The rectangular grid of the street plan,
differing so notably from the cramped irregularity prevalent in
ancient Mesopotamia, the elaborate system of sewers and rubbish
shoots, the carefully maintained wells, the great communal
granaries and the standardized systems of weights and measures all
reflect an ordered and settled society. What was the basis of this
discipline maintained over so long a period of time? There is no
indication that military authority was at all prominent: weapons
were relatively inconspicuous and defences were apparently con-
fined to the citadels, a reflection no doubt of the comparative iso-
lation of the Indus people from neighbours at a comparable level
of technology. Nor has any obvious sign of royal authority been
found, whether in the form of palaces, outstanding tombs or
regalia. A likely alternative is that the sanctions behind this
ordered way of life were religious and that the Indus Valley civi-
lization, like that of modern Tibet, was essentially theocratic. The
existence of a definite institutionalized form of authority seems to
be indicated by the great citadels at each of the capital cities, which
stand to a present height of some 4o feet and measure between
200-300 by 450~500 yards in length and breadth. The buildings on
the citadel at Harappa were too much robbed to interpret, but those
at Mohenjo-daro, though incompletely explored, are of out-
standing interest: in addition to a massive granary and loading
platform, the citadel was crowned by a great bath or tank sur-
rounded by a veranda and cell-like rooms suitable for changing,
the whole suggestive of ceremonial cleansings, such as are featured
by modern Hinduism; and close by was an extensive range of
buildings that may have housed a high priest or even a college of
priests or monks. As to the religious life of the people, there is
evidence, in the form of numerous terra-cotta figurines, of a
                                  184
                               INDIA

domestic cult of the mother goddess, a widespread feature of the
ancient world. Of special interest are features which, like the
bathing tank already mentioned, suggest a pre-Aryan beginning
for modern Hindu practices: these include stones suggestive of
phallus- or /inga-worship and a variety of deities engraved on seals,
including ones combining animal and human characteristics: in
particular a figure with a horned head-dress and arms loaded with
bracelets, squatting on a low seat, an evident prototype of Siva in
his aspect of Lord of the Beasts.
   It may well be asked why so well-organized and stable a civiliza-
tion should have collapsed apparently so suddenly. The possibility
should not be overlooked of an ecological upset sufficient to dis-
turb irretrievably a finely balanced economy. There are many signs
that in the Indus Valley, as on the highlands, rainfall was sub-
stantially higher when the civilization was taking shape during the
third millennium than it has since been, and it is likely that the
adverse effects of any decline in rainfall would have been magnified
by deforestation brought about by the need for timber for the
brick-kilns and other industrial purposes and by the effect of
grazing by livestock. Any serious weakening of the rural economy
would soon have brought down the urban superstructure in
ruin. Yet there is no satisfactory evidence that the civilization was
dying from the roots. The oft-cited evidence for civic dis-
organization during the final phase of Mohenjo-daro, the hovels
and kilns encroaching on the streets, may well in fact relate to more
barbarous peoples camping in the city after its fall and it is worthy
of note that many of the best works of art came from the upper
levels. While it is possible that resistance was weakened by some
underlying ecological cause, it seems certain that the Indus Valley
civilization, essentially civilian in character, was toppled over by
assault on the part of barbarous but militarily effective invaders;
vivid evidence of massacre is provided by the skeletons of men,
women and children, some bearing clear marks of sword-cuts on
their skulls, lying unburied in the streets of Mohenjo-daro.
                                 185
                  INDIA   AND   THE   FAR   EAST



The Aryans
   There are many indications that the opening centuries of the
second millennium were a period of widespread folk movement
over much of temperate Europe and western Asia, and it may well
be that it was through this movement that climatic change exerted
its most powerful influence. Even a slight reduction of rainfall
among peoples living close to the margin of subsistence in the
confined valleys of Baluchistan and the contiguous highland zone
may well have been enough to trigger off a series of movements of
people, and it is doubtless in such a context that we must view the
burning of Baluchi villages and possibly, even at some remove, the
fall of the Indus Valley civilization. The suggestion has often been
made that the agents of at least some of this destruction may have
been Aryans or refugees displaced by their incursions. As we
know them from the Rigveda—a collection of upwards of a
thousand hymns, spells, prayers and epic-chants, first committed
to writing only a comparatively few hundred years ago, but com-
posed by the Aryan priests during the latter half of the second
millennium B.c.—the Aryans were barbarians who lived in houses
of timber and thatch; worked bronze, but were not yet acquainted
with iron; and gained a livelihood by stock-raising and cereal
farming. Their leaders were hard-drinking cattle-raiders whose
horse-drawn chariots, used for war and sport, closely resembled
those of the Hittites, Mitannians and Mycenaeans, and their
priests, who composed the Vedic hymns, ministered to a pantheon
of gods headed by Indra, an apotheosis of the war-leader.
Attempts to identify the intruders described in the literature
with specific archaeological material are bound in the absence
of coins or inscriptions to rest on conjecture, and this is likely
to be particularly hazardous for the initial period when the
warriors travelled light and brought peoples of higher culture
into subjection.
   Until recently very little indeed was known archaeologically of
                                186
                               INDIA

the long period during which the Aryans first consolidated their
hold on the Upper Indus basin, established a main base in the
Bramavata, expanded into the Gangetic basin and laid the founda-
tions for the dynasties of the historical period. Latterly research
has been concentrated on this gap, in many respects the most
formative phase of Indian prehistory, and this has led to the
recognition at a number of sites between the Sutlej and the Upper
Ganges and Jumna rivers of a culture defined by a grey ware made
from well-levigated clay, having a smooth surface and decorated
in matt black paint with dotted and linear patterns. The fact that
this painted grey ware overlies Harappa ware, occurs at many
traditional sites and occupies approximately the area of the Brama-
vata, has suggested that it relates in some way to the Aryans,
though it is important to note that there is as yet no firm indication
of its absolute age. Of the fact of the Aryan conquests and of the
general lines of their advance traditional sources leave no doubt,
but it seems certain that these were much less disruptive of con-
tinuity than the composers of the epics would have us believe. One
reason for this view lies in the pre-Aryan elements in Hindu
religion, elements which we encountered in the Indus Valley
civilization and which include phallicism, ritual cleansing by
bathing, reverence for animals and the attributes of Siva. The
ancient emphasis on kinship between animals and men, for example,
which may well go back to a pre-Harappan stage in India, contri-
buted to ideas concerning re-incarnation in the guise of animals,
which in turn led to abstention from their flesh, concepts in marked
contrast with beliefs about personal immortality and the future life
entertained by the Aryans and with the emphasis on meat-eating
in the Vedic tradition. No doubt the conquerors consorted far
more with the despised peoples of the Indus Valley than their
panegyrists allowed, even if it should prove that this admixture was
more pronounced in marginal territories.
                  INDIA   AND   THE   FAR   EAST


Chalcolithic of the Ganges and the northern Deccan
   While there is no evidence that the Harappans were able to
withdraw in compact units and colonize territories to the south or
east, there is a distinct possibility that refugees may have contri-
buted to the culture of such regions and in this way have helped
perpetuate some of the old traditions. In this connection mention
should be made of hoards of copper objects from the Gangetic
basin found in two main groups, one in the Upper Ganges and
Jumna valleys, the other centering on the Ranchi plateau of Bihar
and extending south into Orissa, and each corresponding to early
centres of copper production. Although clearly stemming from
the Harappan school of metallurgy, the Gangetic types show con-
siderable differences: flat axes, for instance, having more con-
stricted butts and expanded cutting-edges, as well as entirely new
forms like harpoon-heads barbed on either edge which were
doubtless suggested by ones made by the hunter-fisher peoples of
the Ganges from more perishable substances. Unfortunately little
is known of the age of these hoards, except that they appear to be
associated with ochre-coloured pottery like that found stratified
below painted grey ware at Hastinapur.
   Again, communities occupying the region between the Upper
Chambal and Godavari basins in Malwan and the western part of
the northern Deccan seem to have shared in a devolved form
certain attributes of the Harappan culture, though living at a
humbler standard much more equivalent to that of the hill-villages
of Baluchistan. Recent radio-carbon determinations from the
Maheswar settlement in the Narbada Valley suggests that this
Chalcolithic culture may have begun in this region around
1500 B.c.; and it appears to have been brought to an end by the
spread of iron technology around 400 to 500 B.c. The people lived
close to the soil in houses of wood, wattle and daub. Their flint
industry resembled that of the Harappans in that it was based on
the production of blades from carefully prepared cores and in-
                                188
                              INDIA

cluded some simple forms of microlith; they made use of copper,
though more sparingly; their pottery, red in colour and painted in
black with geometric patterns and floral, animal and human repre-
sentations, was turned on the wheel; and their personal ornaments
significantly included beads of faience, as well as of agate and
carnelian.

Stone-axe cultures of the Kistna-Cauvery area
   Further south one encounters cultures at successively lower
levels of complexity. From the Kistna to the Kaveri basins there
flourished the South Indian Stone-axe culture first found clearly
stratified at Brahmagiri. The stone axes, which generally had
pointed butts and lozenge sections and were manufactured at
factory-sites located close to the sources of raw material, were
presumably used first and foremost by comparatively primitive
agriculturists, unable to afford metal axes, for clearing forest and
working timber. Copper was very rare, and the pottery was hand-
made rather than turned on the wheel. On the other hand the blade
technique of the Stone-axe people, the prepared cores and simple
forms of microlith, all match closely the flint inventory of the
marginal Chalcolithic and Harappan culture areas. To judge from
the rock-engravings clustering round the stone-axe sites in certain
localities and presumably related to the same culture, hunting was
carried on as well as the keeping of long-horned cattle, terracotta
figurines of which have also been found at Piklihal. The Stone-axe
cultures occupied the marginal zone of farming that encroached on
the hunter-fisher economy practised by the mesolithic aborigines of
the sub-continent, and in turn persisted down to the spread of iron-
technology during the closing centuries of the first millennium B.c.

Hunter-fishers of the extreme south and Ceylon
   Lastly, in the extremity of the sub-continent, and notably in
Ceylon, the hunter-fishers maintained their old way of life into the
historic period, continuing to arm their arrows with microliths
                                189
                   INDIA   AND    THE   FAR   EAST

chipped from quartz and other materials. Although polished axes
failed to penetrate this zone, some of the ‘ Mesolithic’ people in this
area acquired the art of potting, for instance those who left the
midden of Bellan Bandi Paldssa in Ceylon, dated by C4 analysis to
around the beginning of the Christian era.

Spread of iron-working
   The use of iron, by whatever means it was introduced, spread
rapidly over the sub-continent during the latter half of the first
millennium B.c. and incorporated within one technology agricul-
tural communities relying hitherto on copper or stone. At the
same time new classes of pottery made their appearance: Northern
Black Polished ware from the Gangetic plain to the Godavari and
Black-and-Red ware over much of the rest of the Deccan. More-
over, megalithic tombs came into use over large tracts of southern
India: the chambers, designed to receive the long bones and skulls
of up to half'a dozen bodies, from which the fleshy parts had decayed,
were partly sunk in the ground, frequently had a port-hole en-
trance through one slab and were protected by dry-stone walling
that might be supplemented by a circle of undressed boulders.
With these changes the prehistory of all but the most backward
parts of India was ended, even if the beginnings of recorded history
are still very obscure.

The Mauryan Empire

   It is possible to infer the existence during the later Vedic period
of numerous warring kingdoms in the northern part of the country,
and it was no doubt this that made it comparatively easy for the
invader. The conquest of the northern Punjab by Darius in 516 B.c.
and its incorporation as a satrapy within the Persian Empire seems
to have had no wider repercussions in India. The impact of
Alexander the Great, who entered the country by the Kabul
river in 327 B.c. and pressed down the length of the Indus basin,
proved to be much greater: by playing off one petty king against
                                  190
                                INDIA

another he succeeded not only in conquering a remote province,
but in arousing strong centralizing forces. Alexander’s death at
Babylon in 323 B.c. was the signal for something like a national
rising and led to the establishment by Chandragupta Maurya of a
dynasty that marks the true beginning of an Indian history. As we
know from the report of the Greek Megasthenes at the Mauryan
court, even in Chandragupta’s lifetime northern India was ad-
ministered by an elaborately organized bureaucracy. By adding
the Gangetic plain to that of the Indus, Chandragupta laid a firm
basis from which his grandson Agoka was able to extend the
Mauryan Empire to the limits of the wide territories over which a
farming economy prevailed, as far south as the northern limits of
Mysore. One of the main forces that impelled ASoka was his con-
version to the teaching of Buddha (c. 560-480 B.c.) and, indeed, it
is propaganda for his faith cut into rock-surfaces in Brahmi script
(incidentally the earliest inscriptions to survive in India since the
eclipse of the Indus Valley civilization) that most clearly defines the
extent of his realms. Yet as an organized religion Buddhism failed
to endure in India. It needed the invasion and conquest of the
north by Arabs, Afghans, Pathans and others of Moslem faith
between the tenth and twelfth centuries a.p. to detach any sub-
stantial part of the sub-continent from the ways of Hinduism,
based as these were on the Aryan conquest, but stemming in part
from Harappan and possibly even more ancient sources.

                              CHINA
Chinese civilization originated and took the form destined to
endure in essentials down to modern times in the basin of the
Hwango-ho, and it was not until the period of the Han dynasty
(202 B.c.-A.D. 9) that its centre of gravity shifted south to the
Yangtze river. Among the factors favouring the north were its
situation and its soil: geographically it formed part of the vast
temperate zone of East Asia, extending southward from the Amur
basin, and at the same time was accessible, albeit remotely, by
                                  I9I
                  INDIA    AND   THE   FAR   EAST

routes skirting north of the Tibetan plateau, to influences from early
centres of Old World civilization; and geologically the loess, that
blanketed high ground in Shansi, Shensi and Kansu and spread
over much of the North China plain in the form of alluvium
brought down by the Yellow River, endowed it with a soil at once
fertile and easily worked. Yet, though the northern part of the
country enjoyed certain advantages over the south during the
initial formative stages, the whole of China was relatively remote
from the focal area of Old World civilization, and the appearance
of settled life based on farming was correspondingly retarded.

Hunter-fishers
   The extent to which China was occupied by hunter-fisher
peoples during early Neothermal times is still uncertain, and it has
even been suggested that there was a break at this time in the
human settlement of what was destined to be the cradle of Chinese
civilization. The probability remains that the Late Pleistocene
hunters of the Ordos desert and Choukoutien represent a popula-
tion that survived into the Neothermal period and that future
research will reveal their presence. North of the Great Wall in the
Gobi and the highlands of Manchuria, marginal areas in which
hunter-fishers in fact maintained their mode of life throughout the
prehistoric and early historic periods of the Hwang-ho basin, there
are flint industries with microlithic blades like those used as insets
for slotted bone tools in the Advanced Palaeolithic, Mesolithic and
Sub-neolithic industries of Siberia. Further south, traces of crude
pebble industries, that stem ultimately from a tradition going back
to Middle Pleistocene time, have been found on the surface in the
old forested areas of Szechwan on the Upper Yangtze and in lime-
stone caves at Kwei-lin and Wu-ming in Kwangsi, associated with
pebbles with hour-glass perforation and tools of antler and bone.
Although there is thus evidence for the occupation of different
parts of China by hunter-fishers during the Neothermal period,
there is nothing to suggest the existence of conditions likely to
                                 192
                                 CHINA

have given rise to the independent invention of farming in the
Hwang-ho basin, and the mere fact that the earliest evidence for
this comes from the part of China most accessible to influences from
the west goes to emphasize that the Neolithic way of life was
intrusive.

Neolithic peasants of North China
   The material equipment of the Neolithic peoples of North
China, notably the hand-made pottery with textured surface and
the extensive use of polished stone for wood-working equipment,
knives and projectile-heads, falls broadly speaking into the same
category as that associated with Sub-neolithic groups over a large
part of the circumpolar zone. On the other hand one can hardly
look to the north as a source of domestication, and it seems that to
account for this and for such cultural innovations as painting
pottery and in due course bronze metallurgy it is necessary to turn
to the west. The most likely route linking the Hwang-ho basin
with early centres of farming in west-central Asia is that later
followed by the silk route, skirting south of the Gobi and traversing
Sinkiang by way of the Tarim basin and Kashgar.
   The probability is that while the earliest farmers of North China
were laying the foundations of settled life the loess still carried forest
vegetation, and that, like the Danubians of central Europe, they
practised ‘slash and burn’ agriculture while maintaining livestock
largely on forest products. Their main crop was millet and their
most important domestic animals the pig and the dog. It is evident
that the peasants lived in substantial village communities—the
settlement of Pan Po near Sian in Shensi seems to have covered
about 24 acres—but the nature of their economy involved move-
ment at fairly frequent intervals; and though they seem, like their
analogues on the European loess, to have resettled the same site
several times over, they never stayed long enough to accumulate
tells like those of the Near East. This, and the fact that the loess soil
has been intensively dug over and cultivated, has made it difficult
                                   193
                  INDIA    AND   THE   FAR   EAST

to recover detailed information about the nature of the settlements
and above all about their history. Although, as we shall see, dif-
ferent groups can be distinguished by their pottery, the Neolithic
peasants shared in other respects the same basic culture. Their
houses, which might be round, or rectangular with rounded
corners, and were sometimes sunk into the subsoil, were built of
wattle and daub, the roof being carried on timber posts. The floors
and inner faces of the walls of the Pan Po houses were plastered.
Partition walls joining the front roof uprights to either side of the
entrance formed a kind of internal porch, the roof of which was no
doubt raised to allow easy access, and a clay oven set in the middle
of the house between the roof posts helped to keep the interior
warm in winter as well as providing for cooking. Crops were
stored in beehive pits sunk into the loess, the walls being undercut
to reduce the size of the aperture. Burial was by inhumation;
children were often placed in pots among the houses; but adults
were buried in cemeteries away from the settlement, sometimes in
 plank-lined graves and as a rule accompanied by rich grave goods
 that might include a dozen pots as well as other things. The skeletal
 remains suggest that Neolithic peasants were already of essentially
 the same racial type as that predominant in North China at the
 present day.
    Important light is thrown both on their mode of life and their
 afhliations by the minor artifacts. The widely distributed stone
 axes, pecked out of hard rock and polished at the edges, point to
 forest clearance, as do the bevelled adze-blades to the working of
 timber. That hunting continued to play an important role is
 suggested by the wealth of leaf-shaped and tanged arrow-heads,
 commonly made from polished stone or bone and more rarely of
 shell or bifacially flaked stone. Among the more frequent artifacts
 were the stone knife-blades of lunate or oblong form, polished on
either face and along the edge and perforated to secure the handle,
tools which find ready analogies in north-east Asia and even in the
Eskimo territories of North America. Another trait widely spread
                                 194
                               CHINA

over northern Eurasia and North America is the bone handle
slotted to receive flint flakes, examples of which have been met
with, though rarely, in Kansu. Of more significance is the general
emphasis on polishing rather than flaking stone artifacts and the
use of bone for a wide range of tools and projectile heads.

Grey, Yang-shao and Lung-shan wares
    Into this same context fits the hand-made grey pottery with
 textured surface that is predominant in North China, occurring
 both separately and alongside each of the other leading wares and
 surviving to provide the bulk of the pottery used under the Shang
 dynasty. The roughening of the surface was done by impressing
 basketwork, cords and toothed combs, as was the case over vast
 tracts of Russia from Karelia to Lake Baikal and the Lena River
 and from the Pontic steppes to Turkestan; but during the Shang
 period a similar effect was produced by a wooden beater or paddle
 with a grooved surface or wrapped with cord or textile, a technique
 which seems to have spread from South China.
    The shapes of the grey ware pots in North China conformed to
those of the red and black wares next to be described (Map 6). The
red ware, often named after the site of Yang-shao in western Honan,
extends over the loess territories of northern Honan, southern
Shansi, a zone across Shensi and much of the southern half of
Kansu, where it reached across the frontier almost to the Kuku
Nor; indeed, traces of red ware, some of it painted, have been
found in Sinkiang, for instance at Miao-erh-ku some §o miles east-
south-east of Hami and at several sites in the Turfan oasis. Froma
technical point of view this pottery falls into the context of painted
wares found in many parts of western Asia and contiguous areas
and it is tempting to view it as a product of some degree of western
influence; however, it must be admitted that nothing certain has
yet been established about where it was first made in China or
about the direction in which it spread. The fine red ware, which
despite some earlier reports seems to have been substantially hand-
                                 195
                    INDIA        AND   THE   FAR   EAST

made, was characteristically flat-based and included bowls, flat
dishes and various kinds of jar, that might be provided with
perforated lug handles. The decoration of the funerary pottery was
on the whole richer than that of domestic wares, as little as 8 per
cent of which might be painted. The decoration was mostly
abstract, composed of simple patterns like bands and triangles, but




          wminnan   Great Wall               ==     Lung-shan ware
          (1001)-«~Yang-shao ware                   Limits of the Yin state


           6. China: the prehistoric core of the earliest state

in Kansu spirals were employed as well as zoomorphic and even
on occasion anthropomorphic designs.
   The black ware, named after Lung-shan in the province of
Shantung, was distributed widely over the flood-plain of the lower
Hwang-ho. Geographically the black and red wares were largely
complementary and the fact that the red ware underlay the black at
certain sites in Honan does not of course prove any broad succes-
sion in time. Until the chronology and true epicentres of the two
wares have been worked out, no valid estimate of their historical
                                       196
                               CHINA

relationship can be made, but it is pertinent to note that the makers
of the painted pottery of the Tripolje culture of the Ukraine, on the
other side of the Russian steppes, seem to have turned over about
the same time to the production of black polished ware without any
apparent cultural break. Technically the fine black Lung-shan ware
was more advanced than the others because it was made on the
potter’s wheel and its thin polished walls and fine finish lend it an
air of sophistication wanting from other prehistoric wares in China.
On the other hand the bulk of the pottery, and particularly of
cooking vessels, was made of grey or dark brown ware already
described and it was this, rather than the black ware, that dominated
the overlying early historic levels. Among the pottery used for
cooking, special interest attaches to various forms of tripod that
form evident prototypes for the bronze ones of the following
period, namely the z’ing with solid feet, the Z with hollow ones, the
Asien, comprising a with an upper pot for steaming having a
perforated base, and the kuei with hollow feet and spout. Another
feature pointing ahead to the early historic period was the practice
of scapulomancy: although as yet there were no indications of
actual inscriptions in the form of petitions, there is no doubt that
bones, notably ox scapulae, were scorched in order to provide
clues in the form of cracks, a clear forerunner of the oracle bones
that provided the earliest Chinese inscriptions.

Shang, Chou and Han dynasties
    The contrast between the peasant communities just described
and those of the Shang dynasty, the earliest attested by archaeology,
is so pronounced that it almost certainly points to a major gap in
our knowledge, which the recent excavations at Chéng-chou have
only partly filled. The first insight into society as it existed under
the Shang dynasty was provided by the exploration of a number of
sites in the neighbourhood of An-yang, northern Honan, to which
the capital was moved by King P’an-Kéng, probably about
1300 B.c.; but recent excavations at Chéng-chou carry the story
                                 17
                 INDIA   AND   THE    FAR   EAST

back to the earlier phase, thought to have begun around 1520 B.c.
At An-yang we are confronted with a veritable city laid out in
zones, with palace and artisan quarters and rectangular wooden
houses set on terraces of beaten earth and with gabled roofs sup-
ported on rows of pillars resting on stone or even bronze bases.
From this city the kings of the Yin or later Shang dynasty ruled a
stable and to some degree literate state, in which the art of the
bronze worker had reached a high pitch of perfection and in which
the leaders rode to war and the chase in chariots mounted on
spoked wheels and drawn by pairs of yoked horses, vehicles re-
calling those of Mitannian and Mycenaean princes far away to the
west.                  .
   Although the more elaborate pieces and notably the ritual
vessels from the earliest Shang levels were already specifically
Chinese in style, it seems highly unlikely that bronze metallurgy
was invented independently in the valley of the Hwang-ho and the
probability is that this, like the basic elements of farming and
possibly the painting of pottery, spread to the area from much
earlier centres in western Asia. Many of the leading bronze forms,
also, including knives with incurving edge, certain types of dagger
and socketed axe and leaf-shaped spearheads with a small loop near
the base of the socket, are widely distributed over the steppe and
forest zones from Baikal to the heart of European Russia. Detailed
analogies between finds from places as far apart as Seima on the
Upper Oka, Turbino and Gorbunovo on either side of the Mid-
Urals, Minusinsk and Karasuk on the Upper Yenisei and Anyang
itself suggest that lively trade contacts were maintained at some
time during the period from the fifteenth to the eleventh centuries
B.C. Over a zone covering some 100 degrees of latitude: indeed,
links can be detected as far west as Borodino near the Black Sea
coast of Bessarabia, which itself seems to have been in touch with
the central Caucasus and the Mycenaean world, and further north
with the Arctic hunter-fishers of Finland and Middle Sweden. The
rapidity of movement over such wide territories even in pre-
                                198
                                 CHINA

historic times makes it difficult to assess the historical meaning of
such analogies. Certain features, like the modelling of animal heads
as terminals for dagger hilts, knife- and ladle-handles and the heads
of axes and maces seem to have been a common inspiration of the
peoples of northern Eurasia, whether carried out in bronze, stone
or wood. On the other hand certain elaborations of the beast style
at this early period were the product of the richer cultural environ-
ment of the Shangs. Again, it seems likely that some at least of the
leading types mentioned above were first produced in Shang work-
shops and from there diffused among the metal-workers of the
poorer societies of hunters, nomads and part-time farmers of the
northern steppes and forests.
   The splendid bronze vessels made by the Shang smiths provide
one source of inscriptions, but a much more prolific one is afforded
by the pieces of bone or tortoise-shell, on which questions were
inscribed to ancestors or gods in the hope of obtaining answers
by applying heat and watching the course of the ensuing cracks.
From An-yang alone upwards of 100,000 such inscribed pieces
have been examined and this has shown that the diviners made use
of some 3500 characters, of which around a third can be read in the
light of existing Chinese characters. The fact that inscribed oracle
bones have been found in the earlier levels at Chéng-chou em-
phasizes that the Shang civilization was already Chinese in character
as far back as it can be traced, and it will be recalled that the practice
of scapulomancy, though not of writing, can be traced back to the
‘Neolithic’? Lung-shan culture.
   As was to happen so often in the future, the reigning dynasty
was overthrown by another less highly civilized without destroying
the continuity of Chinese culture. In this case it was the Chous,
issuing from the borderlands of Shensi, who overthrew the Shangs
and destroyed their capital around 1030 B.c. Even at this early
stage Chinese civilization was sufficiently robust to absorb rela-
tively barbarous intruders and it was under the Chou dynasty that
Chinese manners and customs largely took the form they were to
                                   ee)
                  INDIA   AND    THE   FAR   EAST

retain down to modern times. Politically the period was one of
expansion, and during it the Chinese state extended its boundaries
north to Manchuria, east to the neck of the Shantung peninsula
and south to the Hwai valley. In the course of this expansion many
outlying parts of northern China, where, during Shang times, the
old ‘Neolithic’ peasant cultures had continued very largely in their
ancient ways, were brought for the first time within the sphere of
civilization. To the south of the Shang territories, in an area on
which the Chous began to encroach, there is evidence from the
lower Yangtze basin of communities living at a Neolithic level of
culture comparable with, though poorer than, those of the
Hwang-ho. The Yangtze valley people made their cooking pots
mainly by hand, occasionally employing the paddle to shape the
vessel and apply cord-impressed decoration; but most of them
used the wheel for their finer wares and some made highly bur-
nished black ware in a devolved Lung-shan tradition. Likewise
they finished their stone tools and weapons mainly by polishing in
the northern fashion. Remoter areas in the upper Yangtze valley
and in South China (see p. 204) remained prehistoric down to the
last centuries before Christ.
    The last five hundred years of nominal Chou rule, though they
witnessed the rise of Chinese philosophy, and notably of Confucius
and his pupil Mencius, and saw the introduction of iron-working,
were notable in the political sphere for the disintegration of the
central power, the growth of feudalism and the prevalence of war-
fare between minor states. This state of affairs was first brought to
an end, though temporarily, by the Ch’ins, a clan from the steppe
border who gained and for a brief time held the imperial power. It
was under this dynasty that the Great Wall was built on the north
and that the Empire was extended as far south as the Canton delta
and even the northern part of Annam. Although some advances
were lost during the years of anarchy that followed the death of the
first Ch’in king in 210 B.c., these were more than regained during
the Han dynasty (202 B.c.—A.D. 220) under whom the centre of
                                200
                                CHINA

gravity of the Empire shifted south from the Hwang-ho to the
Yangtze basin. At the height of this dynasty the Chinese Empire
covered almost the whole of the mainland of East Asia from Man-
churia to northern Annam with an extension from Inner Mongolia
to the Pamirs at the western frontier of Sinkiang. It was at this
time that the development of the silk trade linked China to the
Roman world: two distinct routes were followed, an overland one
subject to interruption by the Parthians and a maritime by way of
the Indian Ocean, the Coimbatore gap across the extreme south of
India, and the Malacca straits.

           SOUTH-EAST           ASIA, INDONESIA
                 AND      THE    PHILIPPINES
Origins of rice cultivation
   One of the main reasons why the mainland of south-east Asia
merits study is that it forms a kind of funnel through which peoples
have spread over Indonesia, Melanesia and farther afield. Another
is its intermediate position between the two main foci of culture in
India and China respectively. Claims that it was in itself the cradle
of an early civilization based on the cultivation of rice are not sub-
stantiated by the archaeological evidence; indeed, although
regional sub-groups can be detected, which no doubt correspond to
the beginning of settled life in the several areas, the indications are
that the fundamental arts of pottery-making and the manufacture
of finely polished stone tools spread down from China. As regards
the origins of rice cultivation, which has made possible the dense
populations of parts of India, south-east Asia and China, very little
is yet known, except that on botanical grounds this must have
occurred within the tropical zone of south-east Asia. According to
the Greek Theophrastus, active during the latter half of the fourth
and the early third centuries B.c., rice had been cultivated in the
Ganges basin since time immemorial, but the earliest traces so far
revealed by archaeology in India are the carbonized spikelets of
                                 201
                  INDIA   AND   THE   FAR   EAST

cultivated rice from the painted grey ware site of Hastinapura,
dating most probably from early in the first millennium B.c. As it
happens, the oldest trace so far discovered comes from the opposite
end of the zone of ancient rice-cultivation, in the form of impres-
sions of husks on a sherd from Yang-shao Tsun, the classic site of
the Honan painted pottery and dating in all probability from the
middle or earliest half of the second millennium B.c.; the presence
of cultivated rice as far north as the valley of the Hwang-ho means
that it must already have been cultivated by the Neolithic peasants
of the Lower Yangtze which in due course became the centre of
gravity of the Chinese Empire.

Hoabinhian culture
   So far from south-east Asia being an early focus of settled life,
the indications are that Neolithic culture arrived there somewhat
belatedly. Cultures of Mesolithic character were correspondingly
well developed. On the mainland and in part of Sumatra plant
food evidently played a leading part in the subsistence of the
Bacsonian or Hoabinhian culture, so called from sites in Tonkin,
Indo-China, where it was first explored; and it was presumably the
bearers of this culture who discovered and then began to improve
the properties of wild rice. Doubtless the heavy axe-like tools
flaked from stone pebbles in a manner reminiscent of the Palaeo-
lithic pebble tool tradition, though in some cases ground smooth at
one end, were used in clearing wild vegetation, and the grinding-
stones and pounders found in some abundance testify to the pre-
paration of plant food. The Hoabinhian culture has since been
recognized to the north in the Chinese provinces of Kwangsi and
of Szechwan, also remotely situated on the upper course of the
Yangtze, and to the south in Malaya and Sumatra; moreover to
judge from preliminary accounts of the excavations in the Niah
Cave, it spread as far east as Borneo. The Hoabinhians were fond
of sheltering under overhanging rocks or in the mouths of caves,
and the bones of animals which they hunted to supplement their
                                202
  SOUTH-EAST      ASIA,   INDONESIA     AND    THE   PHILIPPINES

plant food have therefore survived, including the mud turtle and
various kinds of oxen, deer and swine; the cave and shelter deposits
have also yielded shells of fresh-water molluscs, pointing to another
gathering activity, for which the shell-middens on the north-east
coast of Sumatra offer more impressive evidence. The human
skeletal material recovered from the caves suggests that the bearers
of the Hoabinhian culture were of the same basic stock as that
represented to-day by the Melanesians and Papuans.

Microlithic industries
   Contrasting with this heavy equipment are the industries, based
on the utilization of small flakes and blades and relating to hunters
depending primarily on the bow, found on a number of the main
islands of Indonesia. Among these are obsidian industries from
caves in the Djambi district of inner Sumatra, from sites bordering
a former lake at Bandoeng in western Java and from the Manilla
district of Luzon in the Philippines, each of which feature micro-
liths with steep retouch. An industry of broadly similar character,
but using triangular hollow-based arrowheads as well, has been
recovered from caves in the south-west Celebes with remains of
animals, which apart from the dog were exclusively of wild species.
It may well be, as some authorities believe, that these industries
came to be identified with hunting peoples of Negrito stock, but
there seems little doubt that culturally they represent a drift south
from the general area extending from Manchuria to Japan.

Lozenge and quadrangular polished adzes
   Two main spreads of Neolithic culture have sometimes been
distinguished in south-east Asia and Indonesia according to
whether axes and adzes were made with lozenge or quadrangular
sections. Geographically the two are to some extent comple-
mentary in distribution, though in places overlapping, the lozenge-
sectioned or lentoid type making little impact on Malaya or West
Indonesia, though abounding in the Philippines, Borneo, the
                                203
                    INDIA   AND    THE   FAR   EAST

Celebes, New Guinea and Melanesia. Yet it must be remembered
that the lentoid celt is after all the basic form over a large part of the
world and is hardly in itself a trait of much diagnostic value.
   The quadrangular adze on the other hand is much more clearly
defined. Although present alongside ones of lentoid and ovoid
section in the Hwang-ho basin, the type was particularly charac-
teristic of Formosa and the coastal region of South China, where it
was often highly finished. The indications are that it spread south
in two main waves, one penetrating Indo-China, north-east India,
Malaya and western Indonesia, overlying Hoabinhian levels
where these were present, the other by way of the Philippines to
North Borneo and the Celebes. Such a diffusion clearly implies
sea-transport, and indeed boat-making was probably one of the
main crafts for which the quadrangular adze was employed. The
quadrangular adze people depended for their livelihood mainly on
swine-keeping and the growing of rice and yams. They made
pottery by hand, often with the help of a pad and beater, the latter
frequently being wrapped with cord to give a characteristic cord-
textured finish to the outer surface of the vessel. Over a territory
which is as extensive as the continent of Europe it is not surprising
that local variations should have occurred in the form of the adzes.
In Malaya, where, if the radio-carbon date for Lengong in Perak is
accepted, they were present already by the middle of the second
millennium B.c., the quadrangular adzes were generally of simple
type, the frequently bevelled cutting-edge being slightly wider
than the butt; on the other hand a local beaked form, bevelled
obliquely from two directions, was also present. Particularly fine
quadrangular adzes were made in Java from such materials as
jasper and agate, and here again a special form emerged in the
pick-adze, having a keel on one face. In other areas the shouldered
or tanged adze, constricted at the butt in various ways to facilitate
hafting, played a leading role, a type which in Fukien and Kwan-
tung and on Formosa flourished mainly during the Chou period
and would seem to indicate a diffusion during the earlier half of the
                                   204
 SOUTH-EAST       ASIA,   INDONESIA     AND   THE   PHILIPPINES

first millennium B.c. Adzes of this type were common in northern
Indo-China and it was presumably thence, ifultimately from South
China, that they spread over Burma and north-east India, where
they are confined to regions with the strongest Mongoloid racial
element, mainly in Assam, Bengal, Orissa and the eastern margins
of the Central Provinces.

Dongson bronzes
   Neither south-east Asia, Indonesia nor the Philippines ex-
perienced a phase of technology fully comparable with the Bronze
Age in the more advanced parts of the Old World. Yet, while
stone tools continued in general use into the Christian era, a
certain number of bronze artifacts, named after the rich settlement
and cemetery of Dong So’n in northern Annam, found their way
over these territories during the latter half of the first millennium
B.c. and in the richer graves of Annam these were sometimes ac-
companied by objects made of iron. The leading types of Dongson
bronze, which as a rule was a lead alloy, included daggers, socketed
axes, hoes and spear-heads, and kettledrums of a kind used by the
Karens of Burma and western Siam down to modern times for
calling up spirits, rain-making, casting spells on enemies and
similar purposes. Scenes of horsemen wearing costume of Late
Chou character point to the north as a likely source: it has been
suggested that the Dongson style and industry was introduced
from the north by barbarians from the steppe, forming part of the
movement that overwhelmed the Western Chou dynasty; and
even that certain decorative elements may be linked remotely with
those employed by peoples far away in the Caucasus and the
Thraco-Cimmerian zone of the Pontic steppes. However this
may be, the Dongson bronzes affected only a small segment of the
population, which remained as a whole in a basically Neolithic
stage until the general use of iron was spread by Hindu merchants
trading as far afield as Sumatra, Java, Bali and parts of Borneo
during the early part of the Christian era.
                                205
                   INDIA   AND   THE   FAR   EAST



Melanesia
   The Melanesian islanders, beyond the range both of the Dong-
son bronzes and of the Hindu traders who introduced iron tools to
Indonesia, remained in the Stone Age down to the European
period, so that as recently as the second world war communities
could be found in the interior of New Guinea in a ‘Neolithic’ state
of culture. Rice was not eaten in Melanesia until modern times,
and the natives lived mainly by cultivating such things as bananas,
breadfruit, coconuts, tara and yams by the slash and burn method,
helped out by raising pigs, dogs and chickens and by sea-food. For
felling and working timber for boats and houses the Melanesians
used adzes and axes of polished stone. They made all their pottery
by hand, using two different techniques: coil-building, which
probably came down from the north, and shaping by anvil and
paddle, the immediate source of which was Malaya. Melanesian
prehistory must remain obscure until sequences have been
established in the various islands and the age of suitable samples
correctly determined by radio-carbon dating, but already it seems
to be established that a culture resembling the earlier Neolithic of
the Philippines had reached New Caledonia at the latest by the
middle of the first millennium B.c.

                              JAPAN
Earliest occupation
   Although Japanese civilization was a late development and de-
pended largely on infusions from the continental mainland, notably
from Korea, its very insularity favoured the growth of distinctive
features and a tenacity of cultural tradition which has enabled it to
survive in some measure the impact of modern industrial society.
Very little can yet be said of the earliest traces of human activity on
the islands. There is no indication that Honsu was occupied earlier
than Neothermal times: no reliable associations have been proved
between stone implements and Pleistocene fauna; nor does the
                                 206
                               JAPAN
surface of the Kanto loams from which the implements come show
signs of any marked erosion or other changes indicating a high
antiquity. Finds made in the Gumma prefecture include pebble
tools flaked on one surface which recall industries from Java and
Sumatra and like them stem ultimately from the Palaeolithic tradi-
tion of East Asia. On the other hand the northern island, Hokkaido,
could have been reached during the Ice Age by dry land from the
mainland by way of Sakhalin and it may be that the earliest level
recognized there and defined by a blade industry with some burins
represents an extension of the Advanced Palaeolithic of Siberia.

Jomon hunter-fishers
   The first phase of Japanese prehistory about which much is
known is represented by the J6mon culture named after the cord-
markings commonly imprinted on the outer surface of the pottery,
a Ware common to Korea and Manchuria and which provided the
common background to the ceramic history of North China.
Although generally described as ‘Neolithic’, there is no evidence
that the Jomon people practised farming, at least until the closing
phases of their culture. Economically they belong to the same Sub-
neolithic category as many other predominantly hunter-fisher
peoples of the circumpolar zone. For the greater part of their
history their only domestic animal was the dog, and it was only
latterly that they began to cultivate millet, buckwheat and beans.
As a rule Jémon man preferred to live within reach of the sea to
take advantage of a wide range of sea-foods: clusters of middens
around Tokyo Bay and many other localities have yielded vast
quantities of discarded shells of mussels, oysters and other shell-
fish and in addition plenty of fish-bones. Most of the fish taken for
food were of kinds like mullet and perch that could be taken from
inlets at high tide, but remains of shark, sting-ray and tunny show
that boats, dug-out varieties of which have survived, must also
have been used for angling. Jomon fishing-gear includes fish-
hooks with plain or externally barbed tip and harpoon or detach-
                                207
                  INDIA   AND   THE   FAR   EAST

able spear-heads, perforated for attachment to a line. In addition
inland game, including deer and wild pig, was hunted by arrows
tipped with hollow-based triangular flint heads flaked on either
face, and wild plants were prepared for food by grinding stones and
mortars. The Jémon people lived in settlements of trapeziform or
circular houses, having floors lowered below ground-level and
central fire-places, around which were set timber uprights for
carrying the thatched roof. Like other Sub-neolithic peoples the
Jémon hunter-fishers made pottery by hand, and this they decor-
ated with simple geometric patterns imprinted with cords or shells
or executed with grooves: in form the earliest pots were conoid,
but flat bases soon appeared and as time went on handles and
spouts were successively added; and from the beginning human
figurines were also made from fired clay. Their flint-work, as seen
in the arrowheads and numerous scrapers, was of a relatively high
standard, but the stone axes were generally crude—to begin with,
hardly more than natural pebbles lightly ground at one end.

Yayoi farmers
   An altogether moreadvanced economy, one that laid an adequate
foundation for the relatively wealthy society of the Protohistoric
period, was introduced to northern Kyushu from Korea along with
other elements of the Yayoi culture some time during the third
century B.C., probably as an indirect result of the expansion of the
power of the Han dynasty of China. Although initially the Yayoi
culture spread rapidly into western Honshu, reaching the Yamato
Plain by around 200 B.c., its momentum slowed down, and it was
not until A.D. 100 that it penetrated Tohoku. The interrelations be-
tween the Yayoi and older J6mon cultures were quite complex and
it would seem that in some parts of the country there was some real
continuity between them. The most important single innovation
was probably the introduction of rice-cultivation, which by middle
Yayoi times had created in the western part of the country a pre-
dominantly agrarian society. Tangible evidence of thenew economy
                                208
[X   Stone carving of bearded man from Mohenjo-daro, Pakistan
                                                        (facing p. 208)
x   Model of Mayz ay 7O = = Ww = 5 s he dad, Paler
                               JAPAN
includes traces of paddy fields and irrigation channels; carbonized
grains and also impressions of rice; and granaries raised on timber
piles and approached by ladders. Stone continued to be used for
axes, adzes and arrowheads, but bronze weapons and mirrors were
first imported from the mainland and thenin duecoursecastin Japan
itself, or alternatively copied in stone; and many tools began to be
made of iron. Asa further symbol of the sub-division of labour, it
may be added that at this time the potter’s wheel came into use.

Protohistoric   Japan
   Around A.D. 400 Japan entered on the Protohistoric phase that
only ended with the introduction of Buddhism towards the end of
the sixth century A.D. and the committal to writing between a.p.
712 and 720 of traditional claims surrounding the imperial dynasty.
The main information about this intermediate period is derived
from very numerous tombs, often of monumental construction
and occasionally occupying areas, including surrounding moats, of
as many as eighty acres. These testify to increasing wealth and
technical skill, a growing density of population and a feudal
organization of society with numerous clans owing allegiance to
the imperial clan. Clay models buried with the dead indicate
not merely the differentiation of town and country houses, but the
emergence of palaces and shrines. Already during this period,
coinciding more or less with that of the barbarian migrations into
the European territories of the Roman Empire, the main social
institutions of recent Japanese history were in being. As if to
emphasize the continuity, wooden Shinto shrines have continued
to be rebuilt on the same site and after the same pattern as examples
first erected during the Protohistoric period. Again, though it
seems likely that Shintoism itself was first institutionalized in com-
petition with Buddhism, its basic belief in the need to offer thank-
offerings and sacrifices to a multitude of natural spirits, inhabiting
such places as groves, mountain tops, sources of water or stones of
unusual size, must surely stretch far back into the prehistoric past.
    8                            209                            cP
                   INDIA    AND   THE    FAR   EAST


                     NORDH-EAS EE ASIA

Hunter-fishers
   The vast funnel-shaped territory of Siberia east of the Yenisei
and north of the Amur owes its interest largely to its position in
relation to the New World. Doubtless it was through this region
that the first immigrants must have passed on their way to America,
presumably at a time when the land-connection was still intact, and
doubtless, also, when means of communication had been developed
during Neothermal times, it provided a main avenue for cultural
movements, not necessarily always in one direction, between the
Old World and the New. On the other hand the climate of Siberia
must throughout prehistoric times have imposed narrow limits on
the possibility of local cultural development: even in modern times
agriculture has been confined to the uppermost Yenisei and to the
Angara Valley and hunting, gathering and fishing have provided the
main and for most of the region the sole source of food-supply.
Yet, if the possibility of sharing fully in the kind of life permitted to
peasant farmers, still less of progressing towards urban civilization,
was denied to the prehistoric inhabitants of Siberia, this did not
prevent them developing effective cultures based on various forms
of catching activity or of acquiring elements of technique, such as
potting, originally developed among communities based to a
greater or less degree on food-production.
    The best sequence of Sub-neolithic cultures in Siberia is that
established in the Angara Valley and Lake Baikal regions. Pottery
first appeared in the Isakovo stage and comprised conoid jars with
straight sides ornamented by net-impressions. Among the hunting-
gear were bone spearheads armed by flint micro-blades inset in
slots, a type found with a number of burials in the region lacking
pottery and assigned on not very conclusive evidence to a distinct
Khini phase of settlement. The device is also interesting because of
its occurrence over northern Eurasia as far west as the Atlantic coast
of Norway and as far south as Mongolia and Kansu; and because it
                                   210
                         NORTH-EAST        ASIA

turns up in North America in the context of the Denbigh culture of
Alaska and the younger Dorset culture of the Hudson’s Bay area.
Other and more specifically Sub-neolithic elements to appear in
the Isakovo culture include partially polished adzes, polished stone
knives and bifacially flaked arrowheads. In the later Serovo and
Kitoi stages a greater emphasis seems to have been placed on
fishing, for which lures, barbed spears and fish-hooks were used.
In the Glaskovo stage, contemporary with the Bronze Age in
south-west Siberia and probably with the Shang dynasty, the
pottery shows signs of contact with North China.
   Abundant traces of Sub-neolithic people at the level of those of
 the Baikal area are known from the Lena Valley and even from as
 far east as the Kolyma. Over all this territory the hunter-fishers
 continued to combine the use of burins and bone tools inset with
 micro-blades with coarse, hand-made pottery, a sherd of which
 from a late site in the Lena Valley was found, significantly, to have
 had fish-scales mixed with the clay as tempering. Further east there
 are indications of well-developed maritime cultures. The Old
 Bering Sea culture probably grew up during the centuries immedi-
 ately B.c. on either side of the strait and it occupied the coast of the
 Chukchi peninsula as far west as the Bear Islands on the north.
 Middens at the mouth of the Amur river suggest that coastal
settlement may have begun there as far back as the middle of the
second millennium B.c. and in this context it is worth recalling that
the Jomon people who occupied the main island of Japan possibly
as far back as the fifth millennium B.c. were primarily coastal
midden-dwellers. Whether or not the modern Ainu are remnants
of the Jomon people as was once thought, it is certain that they
retreated before the Yayoi cultivators until by the end of the first
millennium B.c. they were concentrated on Hokkaido; it was prob-
ably about this time and doubtless under the same pressure that
they spread northward into Kamchatka and the Kurile Islands. The
native peoples of north-east Siberia remained prehistoric down to
the Russian colonization of the first half of the seventeenth century.
                                  211                             8-2
                          CHAPTER 9

                  THE      NEW WORLD

The first immigrants
   By comparison with most of the Old World the Americas were
settled quite recently: no traces of human occupation have ever
been found truly stratified in deposits of Early or Middle Pleisto-
cene age, and it is significant that all hominid remains from the New
World are of recent Homo sapiens type. Although recent dis-
coveries have shown that the first immigration took place rather
earlier than had previously been regarded as probable, there is still
no valid evidence that it preceded a comparatively advanced stage
of the Late Pleistocene. Whenever they came the first Americans
must have been hunter-fishers, since they had to traverse nearly
four thousand miles beyond the range of farming across territories
ill-provided with wild vegetable food.
    One may reasonably assume the earliest immigrants to have
taken the same route as a number of the larger mammals, including
the bison and the mammoth—two of those most keenly sought
after by prehistoric man—namely the route across the Bering Sea.
Precisely when and where and under what conditions the first
crossing from Asia was made is still uncertain: a drop in sea-level
of only 150 feet, such as could easily be envisaged for an advanced
stage of the Late Pleistocene, would be sufficient to ensure a land-
bridge between the continents, and the probability is that it was
during an interstadial of the last Ice Age that the immigration took
place. What we do know for certain is that Palaeoindian hunters
were active on the High Plains of North America by a period
assessed by radio-carbon analysis at the tenth millennium B.c.:
immediately prior, that is, to the final glacial episode of major
                                212
                        THE   NEW      WORLD

importance. How much, if at all, earlier they may have arrived is
still obscure. From what is known of the physiographic develop-
ment of the territories through which the migration must have
passed it seems clear that the movement can hardly have taken
place at the height ofa major glacial onset: at sucha time north-east
Siberia was blocked by a great ice-sheet, and though north-west
Alaska was mainly free of ice, access to the High Plains would have
been barred by the conjunction of the Laurentide ice-sheet,
spreading from the Hudson’s Bay region to the Rocky mountains.
The probability is that the migration took place before the eustatic
rise of sea-level was sufficient to breach the land-bridge between
Asia and North America, but after the ice-sheets had retreated
sufficiently to leave a free passage at either end. Such conditions
may have obtained during the stage represented by the forest-bed
at Two Creeks in Wisconsin, which according to radio-carbon
dating dates from the tenth millennium B.c. and so is equivalent in
age to the Allergd oscillation of north-west Europe, and possibly
also during earlier warm phases towards the end of the Wisconsin
glaciation.

Hunters on the High Plains: Folsom, Sandia, Clovis and other groups
   It was the discovery by a party of palaeontologists in 1926 of two
pieces of worked flint in apparent association with bones of extinct
bison at Folsom in New Mexico that first opened up wider per-
spectives in New World prehistory (Map 7). Within the next two
years systematic digging had established beyond reasonable doubt
that bison of an extinct species (Bison taylori) had been hunted by
projectiles tipped by flint heads of a very particular type. These
‘Folsom points’ had been carefully flaked on both faces to a rather
obtuse point, and longitudinal flakes had been struck on either face
of the concave base, presumably to facilitate mounting on a shaft.
Similar points from near Lipscomb, Texas, were found alongside
scrapers and utilized flakes with the remains of numerous bison,
including nine skulls and the articulated remains of fourteen
                                 213
                                           THE          NEW        WORLD

animals, suggesting the sites of an actual butchery. Exploration of
an actual settlement site at Lindermeier in north-east Colorado
confirmed that the makers of these fluted points were hunting on




                                           @Angostura
                                           @Scousblut
                                                    @Meserve

                                                                   @Graham Cave
                                                                                               b&
                                                                                                    Hardaway
                                                   @ Lipscombe                 G *                      @
                                               Plainview              A   B®
                                           Clovis                              @Quad
                                     %@        @ Lubbock
                                 Burnet Cave




   (1D) Areas ofhigher culture                                                         >   ~                   ‘   |      i WE




       ey Land  over 6000ft.                      CE             .        Co                        \                   SASK
          (not shown on inset map)         .                         ~         ~ ~~ SS                             AY   ee8Gaver ;
                                                                                 CC
                                                                                  SSE                   EEE                          i
                                                                                                                                     ULE




                                          7. New World prehistory

the High Plains at a time when the fauna differed profoundly from
that found in the same territory in recent times. Yet there was still
no indication of precisely when the various fossil forms became
extinct. Nor did the archaeological material itself give any indi-
cation of high antiquity: it differed markedly from the Advanced
                                                             214
                        THE   NEW     WORLD

Palaeolithic industries of the Old World, notably in the complete
absence of true burins, and on the other hand showed some affinities
with industries of Sub-neolithic character in northern Eurasia; and,
moreover, the characteristic Folsom fluted point has not been
found in the Old World, a fact which caused it to be dismissed by
some as a marginal and probably retarded development. In
parenthesis, it may be added that this last objection has lost much
of its force in the light of what is now known about the character
of the Late Pleistocene industries of Siberia which stand closest to
those of the New World: the Siberian industries in fact have a
strong ‘Mousterian’ element, one which by analogy with the
Szeletian of central Europe might almost have been expected to
give rise to bifacially flaked points.
   Whatever doubts may have been entertained about its age, the
Folsom find was immensely stimulating and soon fresh discoveries
were made. New types of chipped projectile-head were found with
remains of extinct animals, and on two occasions these were over-
laid by deposits containing Folsom material. The significance of
these and other finds was only emphasized when the results of
radio-carbon analysis of samples from a Folsom site at Lubbock,
Texas, were published in 1949, establishing its age as somewhere
in the eighth millennium B.c. The Palaeoindians were not only
established on the High Plains near the beginning of the Ana-
thermal or earliest phase of the Neothermal period, but were seen
to have appeared even earlier.
   Since the original Folsom discoveries two types of projectile-
head have been found at still older levels. One may begin by
mentioning the one first identified at the Sandia Cave, New Mexico,
in association with extinct forms of horse, bison, camel, mastodon
and mammoth. The Sandia point is typically asymmetrical in out-
line, having a shouldered tang; and stray specimens have been
found over a fairly wide area. Precisely how far back in time the
Sandia point extends is not yet known: the radio-carbon date of
20,000 + for the pre-Folsom level at Sandia itself is discounted;
                                215
                       THE   NEW   WORLD

but two specimens, distinguished by short flakes struck longitu-
dinally from the base of the tang, were recovered at Lucy, in the
same state, from a deposit immediately preceding the last major
glacial phase and dating therefore from around 8500 to 10,000 B.c.
The second variety was first identified at Clovis, also in New
Mexico, where it was separated by two disconformities and an
intervening bed of brown sand from an overlying Folsom level.
Clovis points are characteristically heavy, run to three inches or
more in length, as a rule are more tapered than Folsom points and
are fluted for only about half their length. At the same site they
were found with traces of mammoth, and a number of similar
associations have been noted in this part of North America; no less
than eight Clovis points were found with a single mammoth
skeleton at Naco in Arizona; a single one accompanied an articu-
lated skeleton at Dent, Colorado; and at Lehner, Arizona, an
industry of Clovis type occurred with mammoth, bison, tapir and
possibly horse. As in the case of the Sandia points, dating remains
inconclusive. The geological evidence at Naco, where the archaeo-
logical level rested on pebbly sand deposited by a stream, and was
directly covered by laminated water-laid beds, only to be suc-
ceeded by deposits indicating progressively more arid conditions,
suggests that the Clovis hunters lived during a pluvial period. On
the other hand the radio-carbon dates from Lehner and from the
lower level at Burnet Cave point to a survival well into the Ana-
thermal period. The fact that Clovis points have been found
stratified below Folsom ones on more than one occasion is not
inconsistent with their persistence into later periods: indeed, it
may well prove that the distinction between Folsom and Clovis
points is functional rather than cultural; and in this connection the
persistent association of Clovis points with mammoths and Folsom
ones with bison is at least suggestive.
   There is good evidence that on the High Plains the specialized
hunting economy lasted from Late Glacial down to well into the
Neothermal period. Many distinct forms of projectile head, mostly
                                216
                       THE   NEW     WORLD

associated with bison-hunting, have been recognized. Thus points
of the Portales group—comparatively small, with parallel sides and
obtuse points—have been found stratified above ones of Folsom
type, and radio-carbon dates indicate a span from Anathermal to
well into Altithermal times. Again, lanceolate points with slightly
concave base and parallel oblique flake-scars (Brown’s Valley and
Angostura points) seem to have lasted down to the sixth millen-
nium B.c. Lastly, the tanged or stemmed forms with parallel trans-
verse flaking of the Cody group—thin-sectioned ones named after
the bison-hunters’ station of Scottsbluff, Nebraska, and thicker
ones after Eden Valley, Wyoming—appear to date from the fifth
millennium B.c. Incidentally, the type station of this group, the
Horner site near Cody, Wyoming, yielded flint scrapers, a special
type of asymmetrical tanged knife and remains of upwards of
180 bison, of which the tops of the skulls had in many cases been
removed.

Expansion of the Palaeoindians east and south
   That the High Plains should have been a main focus of early
settlement is fully consistent with the hypothesis that the Palaeo-
indian hunters pressed south through a gap between the Laurentide
and Cordilleran ice-sheets and along the eastern margin of the
Rocky Mountains. It must be remembered that the High Plains,
now an arid region, enjoyed Pluvial conditions during the Late
Glacial period, and the evidence suggests that it was around lakes
and ponds that the hunters of bison and mammoth habitually
camped. On the other hand it is hardly surprising that they should
have spread widely into the virgin hunting grounds that sur-
rounded them. The precise significance of stray finds in north-
west Canada and Alaska will only be known when more systematic
excavations have been made, but in the case of fluted points, ad-
mittedly an American invention, it can only be supposed that
examples from Alberta and Saskatchewan represent a movement
from the south facilitated by the eastward contraction of the
                               217
                        THE   NEW      WORLD

Larentide ice-sheet. Much more important was the expansion to
the east. Fluted points, often having a more pronounced con-
cavity at the base than the classic Folsom type, are known from
Alabama, east Tennessee, North Carolina and Virginia and up to
Massachusetts and north Vermont. As the Palaeoindians pushed
into more brokenand forested ground they seem to have broadened
the basis of their subsistence to include the gathering of shell-fish
and plants, and in this way to have entered upon a new phase of
culture, the Archaic of eastern North America. Equally, when they
turned west, the Palaeoindians entered an environment ill-adapted
to a way of life based on specialized hunting. The arid conditions of
the Great Basin region necessitated heavy reliance on plant food
and the capture of even the smallest animals, the basis of a distinc-
tive Desert culture. More will be said later about both the Archaic
and Desert cultures. Meanwhile it remains to consider the south-
ward expansion of the Paleoindians.
   This is marked in Mexico and in parts of South America by
projectile heads of laurel-leaf form, the so-called Lerma Points,
associated with mammoth skeletons. These include two skeletons
of Mammuthus (archidiskodon) imperator showing clear signs of
having been butchered—the base of one of the skulls had been
smashed open, probably to facilitate the extraction of the brain,
and many bones had been cut or grooved by stone tools—found
at a distance of half'a mile in the bed of an old lake at Santa Isabel
Iztapan, near Tepexpan in the Valley of Mexico, accompanied in
one instance by a Lerma point with slightly serrated edge and a
lanceolate point with a squared base and in the other by a point with
a weakly defined tang, a convex scraper and a spokeshave. The
deposit in which the deposits lay formed part of the Upper Becerra
formation assigned by geologists to the tenth millennium B.c., and
radio-carbon analyses have given dates ranging from 9050 + 300 to
14,000 + B.c. Another Lerma point from Tamaulipas in north-
east Mexico has been radiocarbon-dated to the eighth millennium
B.c. Further south the Palaeoindian trail is marked by laurel-leaf
                                 218
                        THE   NEW      WORLD

points at El Jobo in Venezuela and at Intihausi and Ayampitin in
central Argentine, where bifacially flaked projectile heads have
been dated by radio-carbon analysis of associated organic traces to
the end of the seventh millennium B.c. Indeed it would seem from
the finds at Fell’s Cave and from numerous middens that by this
time, if not before, the Palaeoindians had reached the north shore
of the Strait of Magellan—impressive testimony, as was the spread
to the Atlantic shore of North America, to man’s inborn drive to
explore his environment.
   The culture developed by the Palaeoindians on the High Plains
during the closing phases of the Wisconsin glaciation was based
on the hunting of big-game, notably bison and mammoth. Indeed
most of the finds relate to the places where the game was actually
killed and dismembered, though Lindenmeier and a few other sites
have provided us withabroader range of settlement material. The
abundance of flint scrapers argues for the use of skin clothing, but
burins are conspicuously absent, and it is worthy of note that by
comparison with many Upper Palaeolithic cultures relatively little
use was made of bone and antler. The impression remains of a
highly specialized hunting culture in which projectiles, in this case
darts tipped with flint heads and propelled by spear-throwers
(atlatls), played a leading part. Although there is no evidence that
the Palaeoindians practised art, as did the Advanced Palaeolithic
hunters of parts of the Old World, it is certainly true that they
fabricated their projectile heads to a standard well beyond what was
functionally necessary, and perhaps we can see in the perfection
and multiplicity of form of the various bifacially flaked points some
counterpart to the engraving and painting through which the
hunters of the Dordogne relaxed their tension.

Desert culture
   West of the High Plains in the Great Basin area, from the
Rockies to the Pacific the Palaeoindians encountered a desert en-
vironment, which called for adiligent quest for all available sources
                                 219
                        THE   NEW      WORLD

of food, rather than for the specialized hunting of particular kinds
of big game. Where opportunity offered, indeed, the Desert
culture people killed their bison, antelope or mountain sheep, but
often they had to be content with lesser game, carnivores like desert
fox, bobcat, coyote or skunk or rodents such as desert wood-rat,
bushy tail rat, gopher or kangaroo rat. In catching these and any
other animals they could get, they used nets, snares and traps as
well as darts tipped with chipped heads (lanceolate or stemmed and
notched, sometimes with indented base) and propelled by wooden
atlatls or throwers. Further, considerable reliance was placed on
plant food, particularly seeds and rhizomes, the former of which
seem to have been parched, abraded on grinding-stones and eaten
as a kind of mush or gruel. The necessity to exploit every source of
wild food in an inhospitable land meant that the Desert people
must have lived in small groups and moved over considerable
territories in the course of a year. Fortunately they were in the
habit of sheltering at some periods in caves and under rock-shelters
and the exploration of some of these—notably Danger Cave,
Utah; Roaring Springs and Fort Rock Caves, Oregon; Leonard
Shelter near Lovelock and Gypsum Cave, Nevada; and Ventana
Cave, Arizona—has given us a remarkably complete picture of
their equipment. The relatively small size of the shelters and the
intermittent character of their occupation confirm the impression
that they lived in small, nomadic groups. Their equipment was
easily carried; they used baskets—at first twined, later supple-
mented by coiled—and a variety of nets, cordage and matting;
their digging-sticks, fire-drills, darts and atlatls were easily
carried; and even their milling-stones were portable. A depressing
feature of their way of life is that the food-quest can have left them
but little leisure and it is hardly surprising to find no evidence for
decorative art—no sign of contrasting colours in their basket-work,
no fringes to their leather garments and but few signs of personal
ornaments. By the same token, though the Desert culture
appeared with most of its basic traits already by around 7000 B.c.,
                                 220
                        THE   NEW     WORLD

there were few signs of progress over much of the territory; the
adjustment to an unfavourable environment once made, there was
small inducement to change. Yet, even though in some parts of
California a similar way of life has lasted down to the present day,
the Desert culture was by no means wholly a backwater; it was
apparently Indians of this foraging-stage economy who in the
southern zone of their territories—in New Mexico and in the
Valley of Mexico—initiated the domestication of maize, on which
the higher cultures of Mesoamerica and the Andean region alike
were reared.

The origins of Mesoamerican and Andean civilizations
   When the material productions of Aztec, Maya and Inca were
first brought to light by archaeology, the tendency of European
scholars was to seek their inspiration in the Old World: leaving
aside those who were mesmerized by the supposed journeys of the
Egyptian Children of the Sun, sober scholars looked with more
discrimination across the Pacific to south-east Asia and even to
 China for sources of these civilizations, for which they could see
no convincing native origins. Against this, American scholars
have by and large maintained that the higher cultures of the New
World represented no more than intensifications of the indigenous
American Indian cultures with which they shared a basically
common style; that though more elaborate they were nevertheless
subject to many of the same basic limitations vis a vis the Old
World as were the lowlier ones—for example in the lack of the
plough and the wheel; and that they were grounded on the culti-
vation of distinctively New World crops, suchas maize, squash and
potato, rather than on the cereal grains on which the Old World
civilizations depended. This does not exclude the possibility of
trans-Pacific contacts in comparatively early times—many
authorities for instance have found it difficult to believe that such
a specialized process as tie-dying, by which patterns were produced
on textiles by folding the material and tying it so as to prevent
                                221
                        THE   NEW   WORLD

certain parts coming into contact with the dye, can have been
practised independently in Pre-Incan Peru and Indonesia—but it
does reduce the importance of these contacts in the process of
building the higher cultures of the New World. The findings of
modern archaeology have already strongly confirmed that by and
large the higher civilizations of the Americas were indigenous
growths, for not only do we now know that parts of each continent
had been occupied from some thousands of years before the first
appearance of these civilizations, but we can now view them as the
climax of a long period of progressive development in time.

Cultivation of maize.
   The cultivation of maize is basic to the higher civilizations of
the New World. The early history of maize is difficult to study
because it has never yet been found in a living state, since the wild
prototype was apparently swamped genetically by cultivated
varieties. The discovery of fossil pollen from deposits under
Mexico city dating from a period long prior to the arrival of man
in the New World confirms that maize was certainly an indigenous
plant. There is evidence from the valley of the Tehuacan that wild
maize was gathered during the period 5200/3400 B.c.; and between
3400/2300 B.C. it was cultivated by people who also grew gourds,
squashes, beans, and other food plants, though still depending for
much of their nourishment on wild resources. Settled village life
and pottery-making did not begin until the middle of the second
millennium B.c. and it was only in the next one that we find evi-
dence for irrigation and ceremonial sites, definitely marking the
Formative Stage of Mesoamerican civilisation.

Chicama, Chavin and Classic cultures of Peru
   South of the Isthmus of Panama a stage of culture broadly com-
parable with that of the Desert cultures of North America has
been revealed rather more fully during the exploration of middens
at Huaco Prieta in the Chicama Valley of the northern coastal
                                 222
                        THE   NEW      WORLD

district of Peru. Here, between the mid-third millennium and
about 1200 B.c., there lived people who depended in large measure
on sea-food: gathering shell-fish, catching fish in seine nets
weighted by stone sinkers and supported by gourd floats, and
hunting porpoises. They supplemented their diet by gathering wild
roots, tubers and fruits and by cultivating beans, gourds, squash
and presumably cotton, but noticeably they were not growing
maize. They occupied subterranean one-roomed dwellings roofed
by whale-bones or timber beams. They used cotton and bast-fibre
to make bags, nets and fabrics, and they twined mats and baskets,
for some of which activities there is evidence from much earlier
cave-deposits as far north as New Mexico, Nevada and Utah; and
like their northern fellows they got along without pottery.
    The Formative Stage in Peru, particularly well documented in
the Virti Valley settlements of the Chavin culture, was, as in the
Valley of Mexico, marked by the appearance in embryo of many
of the basic features of the civilization that was ultimately to
develop in the region. The Chavin people, who lived in rect-
angular gabled houses, cultivated maize as well as manioc, squash
and, for industrial purposes, cotton, and kept dogs and, almost
certainly, llamas. Ceremonial pottery elaborately moulded into
animal and human forms, and stone-faced terraced pyramids, em-
bellished with reliefs featuring felines, serpents and humans, point
to the growing elaboration of religious practice. Furthermore the
beginning of irrigation during the closing phase of the culture
argues for an increase in the density of population and in the degree
of social integration. The fact that the Chavin Culture appeared in
Peru several hundred years later than a comparable one in Mexico,
taken in conjunction with the presence in both areas of such
specialized traits as stirrup-spouted jars, the preoccupation with
felines in decorative designs, the terraced pyramid and the practice
of cranial deformation, suggests that the Peruvians of the Forma-
tive Stage owed much to impulses from the north during the broad
period 1200-Goo B.c. Indeed, the antiquity of maize in the north
                                 223
                        THE   NEW     WORLD

and its absence from the Preformative in Peru would alone suggest
that Mexico was the main originative focus at this stage.
   In both regions cultural development reached a climax during a
so-called Classic or Florescent Stage, following the long period of
incubation: at this time we recognize fully-formed and distinct
civilizations each equipped with a technology sufficient for its
needs and each having its own individual style. Once the civili-
zations of Mesoamerica and the Andes had achieved their Classic
form, technical progress, though it did not cease, was much slower,
and change took the form in the main of political vicissitudes within
an established cultural framework up to the time when Spanish
intervention and conquest brought to an end the independent
histories of the higher civilizations of the New World. Modern
research, notably the application of radiocarbon analysis, suggests
that the Classic stage began substantially earlier than some recent
authorities have been willing to admit, though confirming in the
case of the Maya Old Empire with curious exactitude some earlier
estimates based on study of the ancient calendars carved on stelae.

Early civilization in Mexico Valley
   Mesoamerican civilization found classic expression both on the
high plateau of Mexico, where at Teotihuacdn in the Valley of
Mexico there flourished a city of some 50,000 people equipped with
ceremonial pyramids and monumental buildings as early as the
sixth century a.p. and, by contrast, in the tropical rain-forests of
Northern Guatemala and Honduras, where under the Old Empire
the Maya civilization passed through its most creative period
between the third and the seventh centuries A.D.
   The Post-Classic phase in Mexico was marked less by significant
advances in technology than by the successive rise to dominance of
different peoples. It is noteworthy that stone continued to provide
the main material for tools and weapons, and indeed it was only in
the south-west coastal area, most accessible to influences from
Ecuador, that metallurgy played a role of any importance and then
                                224
                        THE   NEW     WORLD

only from late Post-Classic times. Among the first conspicuous
groups of which we have knowledge were the Toltecs of Tula and
the Chichimecs who overthrew them in the twelfth century,
peoples who subscribed to a comparatively mild religion sym-
bolized by the plumed serpent Quetzalcoatl carved on the columns
of many of the public buildings. The Aztecs, from whom the
Spaniards were to wrest the sovereignty of Mexico, first began to
move into the Valley of Mexico from the north during the twelfth
century, and it was not until around 1325 that they founded their
capital city and ceremonial centre of Tenochtitlan on two islands in
Lake Texcoco. By contrast with their predecessors and with the
Maya the Aztecs were a fierce and cruel people: their social struc-
ture was hierarchical, comprising serfs, freemen, officials, nobles,
priests and over all a semi-divine king; they worshipped a god
Huitzilopochtli who demanded human sacrifice on a grand scale
for his propitiation; and they exercised a ruthless domination over
weaker neighbours, Huaxtecs, Mixtecs, Zapotecs and the like. In
the long run it was some of their less amiable qualities that led to
their downfall. Excessive veneration of their ruler Montezuma II
made them incredulous of his seizure by Hernando Cortés and it
was hatred of their Aztec overlords that prevented the peoples of
Mexico from rallying against the Spanish invader. Thus it became
possible for Hernando and his followers to topple over a populous
empire in the full pride of power and growth within a period of two
or three years (1519-21).

The Mayas

   The classic Maya civilization, memorialized at such sites as
Uaxactun, Tikal, Copan and Palenque (Pl. X) by stone buildings
and inscribed stone stelae, and boasting a priestly caste learned in
astronomy and mathematics, likewise made do with a technology
based on the use of stone tools; copper tools did not appear until
late Classic times and then only as foreign imports. The most
prominent structures were temples, set on terraced pyramids
                                225
                        THE   NEW      WORLD

with flights of steps for access, and dwellings for priests and rulers
set round courts. Although outwardly imposing, these buildings
were in fact archaic in character; their mode of construction with
rubble core and ashlar facing and the lack of any such device as the
true arch meant that within their massive walls the chambers were
narrow and dark. The Maya religion, though having features in
common with the Mexican, was milder in its requirements. Like-
wise the Maya state seems to have beena relatively pacific confedera-
tion of cities, dominated to a large degree by a priestly caste. One
of the main preoccupations of the priests was the measurement and
recording of time by observing the heavenly bodies and con-
structing an intricate calendrical system. To do this they employed
a vigesimal system of numeration. Furthermore, they made use of
hieroglyphs for recording outstanding events which they were
careful to date by reference to their calendar, though as far as we
know writing was restricted to this particular function in Maya
society. For some reason not yet definitely established, but which
may well have been connected with the limited possibilities of the
soil in a tropical rain-forest habitat, the Old Empire seems to have
died out in its original territories. By around a.D. 700 the focus of
settlement had shifted to the limestone plateau of Yucatan, where
the city of Chichén Itza had been among the first to be founded.
Around the tenth century the New Empire became involved in war-
fare and in the long run, after recourse to Mexican mercenaries, fell
under Toltec influence. The Post-Classic Maya culture, having lost
its autonomy, entered upon a period of sharp decline during the
thirteenth century, and by the end of the fifteenth had virtually
ceased to exist as a viable entity. In this particular instance the
demise of a New World civilization can hardly be set at the door of
the Spanish conquerors.

Peruvian civilization

   The Classic stage of the Andean civilization, represented on the
coast of Peru by the Mochica culture in the north and the Nazca in
                                 226
                         THE   NEW     WORLD

the south and on the southern highlands by such sites as Tiahua-
naco and Pucara, is tentatively dated to the period from the be-
ginning of the Christian era to around a.D. 650. It was marked by the
full development of technical processes, a flourishing period of art
and the establishment of highly organized and aggressive states in
each of several regions. The basis of subsistence was enlarged by
the cultivation of the potato, sweet potato and pineapple. Metal-
lurgy was now practised ona substantial scale and copper was used
for such things as the blades of digging-sticks, mace-heads and
lance-points as well as for ornaments. The fine, polished poly-
chrome pottery included in its repertoire of design representations
of pumas, condors and humans. Textiles of both cotton and wool
were outstanding and represented practically the entire range of
aboriginal American techniques of weaving. Many different pro-
ducts, including tapestry, brocades and gauzes, were produced toa
very high standard of fineness. This fine quality was due in part to
the standard of selection and spinning of the fibres and in part to a
traditional dexterity in weaving for which belt looms were em-
ployed, but in which the hands played a main part. The effect was
heightened by the use of vegetable dyes—indigo, red and yellow to
orange brown. Some indication of the rivalry between regional
units characteristic of the age is given by the marked differentiation
of local art styles and by the emphasis laid in vase painting on
warriors and by such scenes as the execution of prisoners of war.
   The immediate Post-Classic age was characterized by the
expansion of highland and specifically of Tiahuanaco influence to
the coastal regions. After this episode, which is thought to have
lasted for some three centuries, there followed a period during
which the population of the coastal tract tended to concentrate in
large cities organized in three states, of which Chimu in the north,
stretching from Timbeg to the region of Lima in the south, was the
largest and most powerful. The capital city of Chimu, Chan-Chan,
was approximately eleven square milesin areaand comprised tenor
more large rectangular enclosures averaging 1300x650 feet and
                                 227
                       THE   NEW       WORLD

having powerful walls up to 40 feet high. The concentration of
population implied by such cities was made possible by combining
irrigation schemes in two or more neighbouring valleys and it was
probably at this time that roads were constructed up and down the
coast. In the highlands of Peru broken topography and multiple
sources of water militated against large concentrations of popu-
lation, yet it was from small beginnings in the Cuzco Valley that
there issued the imperial race of the Incas.
  Like the Aztecs, the Incas of Peru (Pl. XI) established and en-
larged their empire with great rapidity, only to be cut down in full
career by the Spaniards. A decisive factor in their rise was a suc-
cession of exceptionally able rulers. Between his accession in
c. 1438 and 1460 Pachacuti had conquered the highlands of Peru.
From this base, aided by his son Topa Inca (1471-93), he incor-
porated first much of Ecuador and the empire of Chimut and later
the south coastal region of Peru, the highlands of Bolivia, northern
Argentine and Chile north of the Maule river. Over this consider-
able empire, rounded off under Huayna Capac (1493-1527) by the
acquisition of the rest of Ecuador, presided a divine ruler, assisted
by a hereditary nobility related to him by blood, by a priestly
hierarchy and by an army of appointed officials, who between
them controlled every aspect of the lives of the hapless people.
The Incan state, indeed, with its minute regulation of economic
and social life, forecast some of the worst features of modern
collectivist societies: a completely regulated economy was
associated with a relentless system of taxation exacted in the form
of labour for agricultural works, mining, road-making and the
army; marriages were arranged by appointed officials; and
conquered populations were forcibly transferred to distant pro-
vinces. The empire was knit together on a material plane by an
extensive system of narrow but well-built roads embracing the
sometimes precipitous highlands as well as the easier coastal
regions, a system equipped at intervals with rest- and store-houses
and traversed by llamas and human runners; and ona      spiritual one
                                 228
                        THE   NEW     WORLD

by means of a religious system administered by a priestly hier-
archy. Worship of a lord of creation and of the heavenly bodies
was carried on in stone temples decked with gold. Further, the
religion of the day called for sacrifices, on normal occasions of
such things as llamas and maize beer, but at moments of crisis,
such as the illness or death of the ruler, of the lives of women and
children. Yet the empire, though by far the most extensive and
the best organized in the New World, was much too weak to
withstand the impact of a small but resolute body of Spanish
adventurers. By comparison with that of sixteenth-century
Europe, the technology of the Incan civilization was miserably
defective: ahead of the rest of the New World in the ability to
make bronze tools and weapons, its lack of iron and gunpowder
was yet decisive; again, the Incas, though possessing a decimal
system of numeration, lacked any form of writing; and there were
inherent weaknesses in its constitution which made the state
exceptionally vulnerable on the death of a ruler—power was
excessively centralized in the person of the Emperor, but, the
Emperor having many wives, the succession, though passing to a
son, was not fixed on any particular one. As ill luck would have
it the Spaniards under the leadership of Pizarro reached the
country during precisely such a crisis of succession: Atahuallpa
had no sooner staged a successful revolt against his half-brother,
the new emperor Huascar, than he was seized by the Spanish
conqueror (1532). The Incan Empire fell at the height of its vigour
and glory, only local resistance surviving to remind the conquerors
of their victory.

Basket-maker and Pueblo cultures of the North American south-west
   Beyond the comparatively restricted zone of indigenous higher
civilization in the Americas there were vast tracts over which the
intruding white man encountered a varied but everywhere less
advanced level of culture; indeed, there were only two regions
north of Mesoamerica in which maize agriculture was practised
                                229
                       THE   NEW      WORLD

during Pre-Columban times, namely the South-West and the
East. The most clearly defined and vital focus of culture in the
South-West was centred on the present-day junction of the four
states of Utah, Colorado, Arizona and New Mexico. Here, in the
centuries around the beginning of the Christian era, there de-
veloped from a Desert culture basis a type of settled economy
that has managed to retain its essential pattern down to the
present day. Within this area ethnologists distinguish three main
cultures, exploiting rather different environments, laying a dif-
ferent emphasis on various aspects of the quest for food and dis-
playing individual styles: at the juncture of the four states the
Anasazi people, who for descriptive purposes we shall take as
typical, occupied a predominantly plateau region (4000-7000 feet) ;
by contrast, the Hohokam people to the south-west were desert-
dwellers, whose economy depended to an important degree on
irrigated maize-cultivation; and to the south-east the Mogollon-
Mimbres people, occupying a more mountainous territory with
forest and scrub, laid a greater emphasis on plant-gathering.
   The Anasazi people emerged, probably in the second century
A.D., from a generalized Desert culture background. They de-
pended for food on maize, which they cultivated by digging-sticks
and ground on saddle-querns, and on pumpkins, as well as on
gathering wild seeds and hunting mainly small game, in which
they used spears armed with stemmed and notched flint heads and
propelled by atlatls. They grew tobacco which they smoked in
tubular pipes. They had no domestic animals other than dogs.
Although practising agriculture, the earliest Anasazi people relied
for containers on bags made from vegetable fibres and on twined
and coiled baskets, for which reason they are often referred to as
Basket-Makers (second century a.D.—50o0 A.D.). They buried their
dead in caves, wrapped in skin blankets and cloaks and provided
with plaited sandals and with objects used in daily life. They lived
in small hamlets, commonly of two or three houses, which were
rounded in plan, had floors sunk below ground-level, and were
                                230
                        THE   NEW      WORLD

provided with storage-pits for food. During the thousand years
that ensued before the first intrusion of the Spaniards, the basic
pattern of the Anasazi culture persisted, though subject to a
number of important modifications. The so-called Modified
Culture Stage (500-700 A.D.) was marked by the introduction of
bean cultivation and turkey-keeping, by the substitution of the
bow and arrow for the spear and atlatl, by the adoption of potting,
at first moulded in baskets, later modelled by hand, by the aggre-
gation of dwellings to form villages and by the construction of
Kivas, the men’s club-houses or ceremonial centres that played a
leading part in later phases of the culture. The main trend in the
Pueblo stages of the Anasazi culture (Pueblo I, 700-900; II,
900-1050;   III, 1050-1300) was a progressive enlargement in the
size of settlements, culminating in great cliff-house settlements and
hill-top towns, compact masses of up to a thousand rooms of well-
built masonry from one to four stories high. During the reign
of Pueblo IV (1300-1700), while the Indians were still limited by
a Stone Age technology, the Spaniards appeared for the first time
in New Mexico (1540) and by the end of the period European
influence had spread over the whole region. Yet, although no
longer free to move their settlements, the Pueblo V Indians of
the present day still retain a considerable control over their affairs
and the painted pottery they sell to motorists carries on recogniz-
ably an ancient tradition.

Archaic culture of eastern North America
   The second area in which maize agriculture was practised
during prehistoric times to the north of Mesoamerica, was the
Mississippi Valley and the territories to the east, where it seems to
have appeared during the first millennium B.c. Initially the region
bounded by the St Lawrence and the Atlantic seaboard had been
penetrated by Palaeoindian hunters, but, as we have seen, the
broken country and the spread of forests during Neothermal times
combined to promote a widening of the food quest to include
                                 231
                       THE   NEW      WORLD

fishing, the gathering of shell-fish and wild plants, and also
hunting. On such a basis there arose the Archaic culture of
eastern North America, parallel in many respects with the Desert
culture of the West, but recalling rather, because of the simi-
larity in environment, the Mesolithic of northern Europe.
Specific features which support this European analogy include
among others: the domestication of the dog, the absence of
pottery, the utilization of antler and bone as materials for such
things as harpoon-heads, the heads of fish-spears and fish-hooks,
and in the later stages the polishing of stone for such purposes as
axes, spear-thrower weights, bowls and plummets. A feature of
the Archaic stage which is surprising at first sight is the working
of copper on a considerable scale for tools and weapons rather
than ornaments; but the industry was of course based on the
exploitation of outcrops of native metal in the southern region of
Lake Superior and of detached fragments carried by glacial action
over wide areas of Wisconsin, Minnesota and neighbouring states.
It implied no knowledge of metallurgy, any more than did a similar
utilization of native copper in more recent times by the Indians of
the Copper River district of Alaska or by the Eskimo and Indians
of the Coppermine River of northern Canada: as we are told by
Samuel Hearne, who travelled in the latter area between 1769 and
1772, ‘with the help of a fire and two stones, the Indians could
beat a piece of copper into any shape they wished’. From such
native copper the Indians of the Archaic period beat out awls,
tanged knives, projectile heads with wrapped-over sockets and
broad spud blades similarly wrapped over at either side to grip
the wooden handle. The products of this industry, though con-
centrated more densely in the area of production, were distri-
buted by trade to the Laurentian area, New England and New York
and as far south as the shell-heaps of the middle South. There is
indeed plenty of other evidence for widespread trade in objects
made of exotic materials among the Archaic people: for example,
bowls of Appalachian steatite were traded as far as Florida and
                                232
                       THE   NEW     WORLD

the lower Mississippi and objects made of shell were extensively
traded from the south-east. The dead were cremated or buried
flexed or seated and in either event might be scattered over with
red ochre. Antler head-dresses of copper recall ones made from
natural antler in the early Mesolithic of northern Europe.

Woodland culture
   Over a large part of the eastern area the Archaic was trans-
formed into the Woodland stage, mainly during the broad period
j00 B.C.—A.D. 500, under impulses from two main directions.
From the north came pottery-making and mound-building, the
two most prominent traits in the purely archaeological record,
but the practice of maize-cultivation, which doubtless helped to
sustain the elaboration of mortuary and ceremonial practices with
their attendant monuments so characteristic of the Woodland
stage, must have come from the south-west—most probably from
Mexico. Other innovations introduced from outside included
tobacco-smoking in tubular pipes and weaving. Two distinct
intensifications have been noted: the Adena, centred on south
Ohio, south-east Indiana, north Kentucky, north-west West
Virginia and south-east Pennsylvania; and the Hopewell, which
seems to have appeared somewhat later and to have been centred
on the south Ohio, Illinois and Mississippi area, with extensions
down to Louisiana and Florida and across from Oklahoma to
New York. In both cultures the burial mounds and associated
monuments testify to a pronounced degree of social stratification.
Thus, whereas the ordinary Adena individual was cremated with-
out much ado, people of higher status were given an elaborate
form of burial that took quite a long time to reach completion.
First the dead man was placed in a log tomb erected on the floor
of his house, together with suitable grave goods and the corpses
of other people, probably retainers slaughtered for the purpose.
After a while their bones were disinterred, painted and placed
once again in the tomb which was now heaped over by a small
                               233
                        THE   NEW       WORLD

mound. Finally a gigantic mound up to 70 feet high was erected
to cover both the grave and the burnt-out remains of the house.

Middle Mississippi culture
   A final step in the development of the eastern tradition occurred
somewhere around 1000 A.D. with the emergence of the Middle
Mississippi culture. Centred on a track from north-central
Georgia through north Alabama and Mississippi to west Tennes-
see, Kentucky, south Illinois and south-east Missouri, it radiated
influence over a much wider area. Even so, it had not everywhere
brought Woodland cultures to an end at the time of European
contact: when De Soto traversed the south-east in the middle of
the seventeenth century he encountered Indians with a Middle
Mississippi culture, but the English colonists of Virginia and the
Carolinas found the Algonquin and Siouan peoples still pre-
serving their Woodland heritage. The Middle Mississippi culture
was not marked by technical innovations of any note, but rather
by an intensification of the ceremonial aspect of social life. The
larger village centres were built round plazas or squares and were
marked by rectangular temple mounds, frequently built in tiers
as though several times reconstructed to a greater height. One
of the largest—at East St Louis in Illinois—covered an area of no
less than 16 acres, was 1080 feet long, 710 feet broad and around
100 feet tall. Although the temples themselves were only en-
larged versions of the ordinary domestic buildings, made of
timber, lath and plaster and provided with a gabled roof, the
whole arrangement recalls that found on a more elaborate scale in
Mesoamerica. Several new art motives executed in clay, carved
stone, shell and sheet copper—winged snakes, dancing bird-men
with speech-scrolls and human skulls—point in the same direc-
tion, even if it is only fair to state that no precise source has been
detected. Probably we should think in terms of inspiration,
perhaps through a very few individuals, rather than of any move-
ment of ethnic significance; indeed, as we have emphasized in this
                                 23.4
                       THE   NEW      WORLD

section, there was a very real continuity in the cultural history of
the eastern United States from Archaic and even Palaeoindian
times up to the moment of European penetration.

Hunting, fishing and gathering communities
   Over the rest of North America, as well as over the inhospitable
regions of the extreme South, communities subsisting exclusively
on hunting, fishing and gathering prevailed down to modern
times and in some instances still survive. Subject to this limita-
tion, there was scope for considerable variation according to
ecological conditions and to the nature of the response made by
different societies. Thus among the Indians of central and southern
California a pattern of subsistence formed at latest in the Ana-
thermal period in the sphere of the Desert culture persisted
throughout the prehistoric period well into the nineteenth
century. A leading part was played by wild seeds, among which
the acorn was of predominating importance, and these were pre-
pared by grinding-stones, supplemented in due course by pestles
reminiscent of those used so much earlier by the Natufians of
Mount Carmel. That hunting still had a certain role is shown by
the occurrence at each stage of chipped flint spearheads, at first
leaf-shaped or squared at one end, and later stemmed, and by the
introduction towards the end of the prehistoric period of the bow.
On the coast fishing and the gathering of shell-fish were often
leading sources of food. The prehistoric Californians depended
throughout on flint and stone and on such materials as antler and
bone from which they made fish-hooks and barbed spearheads.
Pottery was strictly local in occurrence and well-twined and coiled
baskets served for containing food and liquid, as well as cooking.

Coastal culture of the North-West
  The aboriginal culture of the north-west coastal region was
first brought into effective contact with European civilization at
the time of Captain Cook’s visit in 1778 and has survived, though
                                235
                       THE   NEW      WORLD

with modifications, down to the present day. To judge from the
small amount of material excavated, no change of note seems to
have occurred in the equipment of the coastal Indians of British
Columbia during the last five or six hundred years. Subsistence
was based on exploitation of the resources of rivers and the sea:
sea-fish and sea-mammals, like whales, seals, sea-lions and sea-
otters, were significant sources of food, but it was the plentiful
harvest of salmon, easily caught on their seasonal runs upstream,
that made possible the elaboration of culture exemplified for
instance by the historical Nootka and Kwatuitl. Although they
undertook some seasonal movements in the quest for food, the
assured supply of salmon made it possible to occupy permanent
villages and live in comparatively large communities. Their
villages might comprise upwards of thirty houses. These were
built on massive timber frames with shells of wooden planking
and might be as large as 520 feet long and 60 feet broad, providing
accommodation for more than 100 people. The material culture
included some elements, like twined basketry containers, derived
ultimately from the ancient Desert culture, but many items of
specialized coastal equipment show significant agreements with
analogous ones from the Aleut and Eskimo areas. On the other
hand the social system was highly complex: society was organized
on a hierarchical principle with noble or chiefly families, com-
moners and slaves; and surplus wealth was dissipated in cere-
monial feasting and competitive display.

Denbigh and Dorset cultures of the Arctic

   The Arctic territories of North America seem to have been
settled mainly by successive migrations from west to east, move-
ments that stemmed ultimately from Siberia, and which represent
no doubt only the latest of a series, the earliest of which brought
the first men into the New World. No certain trace of the earliest
migrations has yet been recognized in Alaska, and the oldest
assemblage of material yet recovered there, that from the Denbigh
                                236
                        THE   NEW     WORLD

River, relates not to the great southern migrations but to the
peopling of the Arctic Zone; indeed, Denbigh material has since
been traced across the Hudson’s Bay region to the Sargaq area
of West Greenland. The precise age of the Denbigh finds in
western Alaska is still uncertain, but there seems no good reason
for doubting the radio-carbon dates of up to c. 4000 B.c. already
obtained. The Denbigh people were skilled at knapping materials
like flint and turned out miniature burins, delicately flaked
projectile-heads and side-blades for mounting in handles, and
regular micro-blades, which at Trail Creek, Seward Peninsula,
were found set in slotted bone projectile heads. The burins are in
every respect similar to those made by the Advanced Palaeolithic
and Mesolithic peoples in Eurasia, but also by the Sub-neolithic
people of the Lena Valley of north-east Siberia; and the slotted
bone projectile points extend right across northern Eurasia to
western Norway. The lithic tradition of the Denbigh culture
seems to have contributed to the formation of the first well-defined
culture based on the Hudson’s Bay region, that named after Cape
Dorset on the south-west of Baffin Island. Although possessing
marked characteristics of its own, notably the delicacy with which
bone and ivory were worked and the art, comprising incised geo-
metric designs and carved animal and human figurines, the
emphasis on chipped stone and the presence of burins and micro-
blades both point to Denbigh influence; on the other hand ground
slate tools were also used and the culture shows some afiinities
with the early Eskimo cultures developing farther to the west.

Old Bering Sea, Thule and recent Eskimo cultures
   The earliest specifically Eskimo group yet recognized is the
Old Bering Sea culture of Alaska, St Lawrence Island and north-
east Siberia, which on the evidence of radio-carbon analysis
seems to go back to the last centuries before Christ. The people
were adapted to a coastal way of life and lived in semi-subter-
ranean houses, rectangular in plan and approached by narrow
                                237
                       THE   NEW   WORLD

passages, a type of dwelling that goes back to Upper Palaeolithic
times in Siberia. Their basic implements were made of chipped
stone and ground slate and they used pottery cooking vessels and
lamps. In course of time regional groups seem to have developed
on this basis, for instance the Punuk culture of St Lawrence
Island and the Birnik culture of Point Barrow and the Arctic coast
of Alaska. The last of these is of basic importance as the immediate
source of the widespread Thule culture centred on Hudson’s Bay,
but once covering a large part of northern Canada, including
Labrador, and extending to Greenland. The Thule people, who
spread east from northern Alaska, evidently came into contact
both with the Dorset culture, occupying the heart of their new
territories, and with the Norse settlers who had reached south-west
Greenland already during the tenth century. Their basic economy
and the type of houses in which they lived resembled those of
their forebears in Alaska and Siberia, but their technology now
depended on the iron borrowed from the Norse, rather than upon
stone. In some parts of Canada the Thule culture has persisted
in modified form down to the present day, but elsewhere it has
been replaced by that of the existing Eskimos: there is evidence
for a certain backwash of culture from the central regions to
northern Alaska, and on the west coast of Greenland a distinctive
Inugsuk culture grew up on the Thule basis. Since the Eskimo
were the first people in the New World to encounter Europeans,
and since they must always have been thinly spread—today
barely 40,000 of them occupy more than 6000 miles of coast—
their survival might at first sight seem surprising until we
remember that their way of life marks one of the most effective
adaptations to an environment of exceptional severity.

Yahgan, Ona and Alacu peoples of Tierra del Fuego
  At the other end of the New World in Tierra del Fuego the
Yahgan and their neighbours the Ona and Alacaluf maintained
down to modern times the most southerly settlements of mankind.
                                238
                       THE   NEW      WORLD

Isolation and an adverse environment combined to preserve a way
of life that seems hardly to have differed from that revealed in the
middens on the Beagle Channel which began to form at least
eight or nine thousand years ago. These lowly denizens of a
miserable land, as they were viewed by Charles Darwin, lived on
a diet of shell-fish, supplemented by fish, birds, seals, whales,
otters and wild vegetable food. Their dwellings were caves,
windbreaks or primitive huts and they wore little beyond a skin
mantle thrown over the shoulders in cold weather. Like many
early Americans they were ignorant of pottery and used coiled
baskets as containers. Their chipped stone projectile-heads, both
stemmed and hollow-based, recall Palaeoindian ones in many dif-
ferent parts of America, and their harpoon and barbed spear-
heads of bone recall in a general way those of many North
American groups, Archaic, North-western and Circumpolar.
Unlike the Eskimo, who were comparatively recent intruders, the
Tierra del Fuegians were survivors, in a modified and possibly
even degenerate form, of the early Palaeoindians who found their
way right down both the American continents. The contrast they
offer to the sophisticated citizens of Mexico and Peru at the time
of the Spanish conquests is a testimony to the achievements of
the aboriginal Americans in Mesoamerica and on the Andean
highlands.




                                239
                        CHAPTER Io

    AUSTRALASIA              AND      THE      PACIFIC

             AUSTRALIA       AND     TASMANIA

Wallace Divide
   Australasia, refuge of an archaic flora, recalling that of the
Secondary era of geological time, and of a fauna of monotremes
and marsupials, the most primitive and next most primitive of the
three groups into which the mammals are divided, was the last
continent to be settled by man. The barrier that sheltered these
living fossils and at the same time prevented the spread of the
earliest types of hominid was the trough in the ocean bed between
Borneo and Celebes, known among biologists as the Wallace
Divide (see Map 1). Since this would have been at least thirty
miles wide, even when sea-levels were at their lowest during the
maximum of glacial phases, the first men to reach Australia from
south-east Asia can only have crossed by means of boats or floats
and this may be why neither Pithecanthropus nor the Neander-
thaloid species from Late Pleistocene terrace deposits of the Solo
river in Java, Homo soloensis, was able to do so.
Tasmanians

   The least advanced of the inhabitants of Australasia at the time
of its discovery by white men were the Tasmanians, who failed
to withstand the impact for even three generations and were
exterminated before any complete record of their culture was
made. It would of course be quite wrong to interpret their
culture as though it was a mere fossil preserving primitive
Palaeolithic characteristics, but it remains true that they were
subject to the same limitations as the men of the Old Stone Age.
                               240
Mileviiaiioae   itt




                      XI   Inca figurines of gold (male) and silver (female)

                                                                               (facing p. 240)
&




    XII   Abor ifo)o ina | hunter, Austral la
                 AUSTRALIA     AND    TASMANIA

They were restricted for their food-supply to what they could
gather or hunt, and their equipment was very limited; they lacked
bows, and at the time of their discovery depended very largely
on woodenclubs and on spears of which the tips had been hardened
by fire. As a result they lived in small bands widely distributed
over the country and rarely settled in any one place for more than
a brief time. Although Tasmania was not lacking in resources and
extended over some 26,000 square miles, the aboriginal population
at the time of the white occupation is not thought to have
amounted to more than from two to four thousand. Individual
hunting bands rarely exceeded fifty souls and much of the year
was passed in smaller groups. Wind-breaks of tree-branches and
bark provided rudimentary shelter. There was little scope for the
sub-division of labour beyond that between the sexes, and
technology was correspondingly simple. Like the men of the
Old Stone Age the Tasmanians were ignorant of pottery and
depended on chipped stones for their basic implements. This does
not mean that their stone industries can usefully be compared with
ones of Pleistocene antiquity from Europe, as has sometimes been
done, since there can hardly have been any close historical con-
nection between them. Moreover, as yet we know neither the
sequence of Tasmanian industries nor their absolute age, beyond
the fact that the youngest of them were still flourishing in the
nineteenth century. What can be said is that they are limited to
flake tools and unifacial pieces with edge-trimming and that the
younger Australian types dating from the third millennium B.c.
and later are conspicuously absent. No doubt the archaic aspect
of Tasmanian culture resulted above all from the absence of
stimulus that followed from its isolated position.
   Racially the Tasmanians combined a tendency co the round-
headedness and woolly hair of the Negrito peoples of New
Guinea, the Celebes, the Philippines, Malaya and the Andaman
Islands, with basic Australoid characteristics.   Some anthropo-
logists were once inclined to believe that the Tasmanians reached
   9                            241                          CP
              AUSTRALASIA      AND   THE   PACIFIC

their territory direct by overseas migration from Melanesia, but
it is now thought that they came from Australia at a time when
Tasmania was still joined to the mainland. One reason for this
is that Negrito elements have been recognized on the mainland,
notably in the rain forest of the Atherton Tableland in north-east
Queensland, but also in marginal areas like Bathurst and Melville
Islands in the north and in the extreme south-east and south-west
corners of the continent, which may best be explained as relicts
of the earliest migration to Australasia.

Australoid migrations
  The Australoids, with wavy hair plentifully distributed on their
brown bodies, long heads with low foreheads and prominent
brow-ridges, noses with low and broad roots, prognathous jaws,
large palates and teeth and small chins, preserve a stage in the
evolution of Homo sapiens probably anterior to the emergence of
Negroids, Mongoloids, Whites and American Indians. It seems
likely that they came from South Asia and it is significant that
pockets of Australoids are found, though mixed with other
strains, in Ceylon and possibly in South India. The route fol-
lowed by the migration from south-east Asia passed through
Indonesia and is marked by the fossil skulls from Wadjak in
Java and by still living people on some of the Lesser Sunda
Islands. Further it would appear that some of the Australoids,
instead of pushing south, continued north of New Guinea to
Melanesia, where they are still to be recognized in the Bismarck
Archipelago and in New Caledonia. The high degree of homo-
geneity observed in all but a few enclaves of the aboriginal popu-
lation—all the more notable in view of the extent of the territory
and its varying ecology—and the fact that the known fossil
skeletal remains, and most notably the cranium from a river
terrace at Keilor a few miles north-west of Melbourne, are Austra-
loid in type confirms the view that prior to the European colo-
nization Australia was mainly peopled by a single stock.
                               242
                  AUSTRALIA     AND   TASMANIA

  Like the Tasmanians, the Australian aborigines (Pl. XII) were
limited by the possibilities of food-gathering and hunting, though
possessing highly complex social institutions. The population at
the time of the discovery is estimated to have amounted to some
250,000 tO 300,000, giving an average density about the same as
that estimated for Tasmania. On the other hand people were very
unevenly distributed over the 2,948,366 square miles of conti-
nental territory; much of the western and central parts was
either desert or too arid to support more than very sparse settle-
ment. Recent aboriginal habitation has been concentrated in the
far north, along the extensive coastal territories, in the forested
area of the south-east and in the valley of the Darling and Murray
Rivers, but it has to be remembered that the main climatic and
vegetational zones, and by consequence the distribution of popu-
lation, must have shifted considerably within the probable span
of human settlements: for instance at the height of the Pleistocene
Ice Age the arid zone must have been much further north and the
rain-belt in the south correspondingly more extensive, whereas at
the climax of Neothermal times the arid belt would have been
further south than to-day and tropical rain-forest must have
spread over Arnhem Land and south of the Cape York Peninsula.
Prehistoric settlement
   Although an immense amount of collecting has been done, the
scientific pursuit of prehistory is still in its infancy over large
areas of the vast Australian territories. Careful stratigraphical
excavations have however been made in rock-shelters over wide
tracts of the eastern half of the continent; and, also, successive
layers and their contained industries have several times been
dated by means of radio-carbon analysis. Although the results
of many investigations are still not yet available and despite the
fact that only a beginning has been made in scientific excavation,
some conclusions are already beginning to emerge. It is already
clear that early man reached Australia well back in the Late
Glacial period, when the Sahul Shelf was dry land and New
                                243                          9-2
              AUSTRALASIA        AND   THE   PACIFIC

Guinea was still connected with the Australian continent: existing
radio-carbon dates go back at least some 16,000 years.
  The earliest stone industries obtained from modern excavations,
notably that from Kenniff’s Cave between Charlesville and Rock-
hampton in southern Queensland, dated by radio-carbon to
between 3 and 14,000 B.c., and the similar one from the lower
level of the Ingaladdi shelter some 120 miles south-west of
Katherine in the northern part of the Northern Territories, were
of a comparatively simple type. The earliest knappers, who seem
to have maintained a remarkably uniform tradition over a period
of ten thousand years or more, made their artifacts mainly from
struck flakes and apparently concentrated on the production of
convex and concave scrapers, together with nosed tools and
heavy plane-like artifacts, an assemblage that can plausibly be
interpreted as designed in the main for shaping simple forms of
wooden tool or weapon.       It is of interest, in view of what has
been said of the physical origins of the Tasmanians themselves,
that closely similar assemblages have long been known from
Tasmania.
   Modern excavation has shown that there was great diversity
and regional variation in the later stone industries. Thus, careful
investigation of the stratified shelters at Devon Downs and
Fromm’s Landing on the Lower Murray River has revealed an
apparent overlap by the third millennium B.c. between two in-
dustries that differ both in their character and in their geographical
distribution. What may have been the earlier of the two in the
Murray Valley is that termed Pirrian after the native name (pirri)
for a type of symmetrical stone point the upper surface of which has
been trimmed by delicate surface flakes struck from either edge to
a median keel. The pirri point, which ranged from 1} to 74. cm.
in length and probably served to tip a spear, is apparently con-
fined in the south-east to South Australia north of the Murray
river and to the Darling Valley, being significantly absent from
the well-explored territories east of the Great Divide and south
                                 244
                 AUSTRALIA      AND   TASMANIA

of the Murray River. To judge from stray finds and occasional
excavations, there was an important focus of pirri points in
Arnhem Land and it is suggestive that similar points appear in
the middle Toalian industry of southern Celebes as well as in an
analogous assemblage from west Java. Until we know more of the
chronology of lithic industries in northern Australia and Indo-
nesia, on the other hand, the context of any movements from
Indonesia to Australia must remain in doubt.
   There is evidence for the appearance, probably a little later, of
a microlithic industry in the Murray Valley, which, though
resembling the Pirrian in its lightness and refinement, yet
differed from it both typologically and as regards its distribution
in the continent as a whole. The microliths, which must pre-
sumably have been used as insets for some kind of composite tool
or weapon, were made from narrow flakes or bladelets and given
definite form, most commonly crescentic or irregularly trapez-
oidal, by means of steep, almost vertical retouch. Although
comparable industries occur in Indonesia and further afield in
Ceylon and India, microlithic industries have yet to be found in
the northern parts of the continent through which any intrusive
movements must have come. In the south-east part of Australia
the distribution of the microlithic industries is to some degree
complementary to those with pirri points, being particularly dense
east of the Great Divide and south of the Lower Murray River.
On the other hand they also occur in the Darling and Lake Eyre
Basins, in central Australia and even in the far west. The fact
that they are apparently absent from Tasmania agrees well with
the fact that they do not seem to have appeared in the Murray
Valley until the third millennium B.c. at a time when the Bass
Strait had already long been formed through the eustatic rise of
sea-level. The absence of microliths or small battered-back
implements from ethnographic material argues that the tradition
had already died out in the prehistoric past, but recent excavations
have shown that it was still flourishing in the Sydney area at least
                                245
              AUSTRALASIA       AND    THE   PACIFIC

as late as c. 200 B.c.; and the inhabitants of rock-shelters in the
neighbourhood of Grafton in northern New South Wales were
evidently continuing the same tradition through much if not
the whole of the first millennium a.p. As well as making such
geometric forms as crescents, triangles and trapezes, some groups
of microlith makers applied the steep backing retouch to truncate
bladelets obliquely or blunt them down the whole of one convex
edge, producing forms known to Australian collectors as ‘ Woak-
wine’ and ‘Bondi’ points respectively. They also made ancillary
forms commonly found in backed-blade industries in other parts
of the world, notably small thumb-nail scrapers, utilised pieces
(lames écaillés) and occasional lateral burins, the facet character-
istically oblique to the primary flake surface. They also worked
bone, but as with other prehistoric groups in Australia bone was
less important than stone, which may explain the scarcity of
burins, one of the few recognisable types being the small pointed
muduk that may have served as a gorge for catching fish or birds.
   The animal bones from the Murray River shelters show that
the makers of pirri points and microliths alike hunted the same
kinds of game, notably kangaroo, rat kangaroo, wallaby, wombat,
bandicoot and possum; took goanna and lizards; caught fish and
birds and gathered crayfish, birds’ eggs and molluscs. No doubt
plant food was an important source of nourishment at all times;
and, especially it would appear in the later stages, the collection of
sea-food played a major role in coastal areas.
    Since neither the food-quest nor the temporary artificial
shelters used involved the felling of trees on any substantial scale,
it is hardly surprising that the elaborately polished axes or adzes
typical of so many ‘neolithic? communities should have been
absent from the normal tool-kit of the Australian aborigines. On
the other hand they made several kinds of implement, designed
to shape wood into a variety of essential gear, such as digging-
sticks and spear-throwers. These included pebble tools shaped by
removing flakes from one face to form a chopping or scraping
                                 246
                 AUSTRALIA      AND   TASMANIA

edge, closely resembling ones first recognized in shell-middens in
Sumatra (hence Sumatraliths) and known to have been used in
Malaya immediately prior to the appearance of neolithic culture,
probably in the middle of the second millennium B.c. It has indeed
been claimed, mainly on the ground of surface specimens found
on Kangaroo Island near Adelaide, that such pebble tools were
made by the earliest inhabitants of South Australia; but the fact is
that securely dated specimens from Australian rock-shelters do not
antedate the beginning of the second millennium B.c. Edge-ground
axes, made from chipped stone and lightly polished, were often
imported from quarries some distance off and seem first to have
come into circulation about the same time.
   The edge-ground axe was normally set in gum and mounted on
a short handle. The gum obtained from spinifex grass, while
easy to mould, sets so hard that down to modern times the
aborigines have done much of their wood-working by means of
adzes made up of scraper-like set-flakes (tw/a) set in substantial
lumps mounted either at the end of a spear-thrower or on a stout,
slightly curved piece of wood. To judge from the Murray Valley
sequence, tula flakes appeared already near the beginning of the
third millennium B.c. alongside pirri points.
    Over much of the southern part of the continent the standard
of stone-working apparently declined during the last phase of the
prehistoric period. In the Northern Territories on the other hand
a remarkable school of stone flaking developed, focused on the
Kimberley Hills, the main product of which, the leaf-shaped
spear-point with shallow flaking on either face, continued to be
made during the European period from telephone insulator or
bottle-glass. When the bifacial Kimberley point first appeared is
still uncertain, but it may prove significant that it occurred along-
side unifacial points resembling pirri in the Ingaladdi (upper
level), Sleisbeck and Oenpelli rock-shelters.



                                247
               AUSTRALASIA       AND    THE   PACIFIC


 Recent Australian aboriginal culture
   It is only for the brief period during which they have come
under the scrutiny of competent observers that we have any full
information about the non-material aspects of aboriginal life.
From the writings of Spencer and Gillen and their successors, it is
evident that, though economically and technically still at a level
comparable with that of the Mesolithic peoples occupying much
of north-western Europe between 5000 and 10,000 years ago, the
Australian aborigines had developed one of the most complex
kinship systems in the world as well as an elaborate ceremonial for
initiating adolescents into adult society. Their religion was equally
intricate, centring on myths concerned with the doings of more or
less remote ancestors and on totemism, a multitude of beliefs
based on a supposed intimate relationship between individuals,
                                                            but
more especially between classes of men, such as members of the
same clan or sex, and specific animals, plants or natural forces like
the sun or rain. Among the overt expressions of such beliefs were
tabus on the killing or eating of the totem, ceremonies aimed at
its increase and representations in art. These latter, which might
be crudely naturalistic or symbolic in style, were commonly
engraved or painted on rocks, stone cult objects, wooden shields,
boomerangs and spear-throwers or pillars and trees marking
burial or other ceremonial places. Of such art very little beyond
rock-engravings and, less frequently, paintings might be expected
to survive for very long.
   As to how far back in prehistory the Australian aboriginal art
goes, it has been pointed out that many of the rock-engravings in
widely separated parts of the continent, for instance in the Flinders
Range of South Australia, at Port Hedland on the north coast of
West Australia and on the courses of the Flinders and Burnett
rivers of Queensland, are unknown to the existing aborigines.
This need not of itself imply a high antiquity, but it has further
been pointed out that the pecked areas of some engravings are
                                248
                  AUSTRALIA      AND   TASMANIA

covered by surface films which must have taken some time to
form and that others are on rocks that have fallen as a result of
weathering since the execution of the art; again, engravings some-
times depict animals no longer found in the same locality. The
early engravings were frequently merely outlined, but sometimes
the area of the representation was pecked all over. In addition to
abstract patterns, the engravings include representations of
human beings, their foot-prints and their hunting equipment and
above all animals and their tracks, notably emu, kangaroo, lizards,
turtles and fish. Although it seems evident that some of the rock-
art is ancient, it is not yet possible to attach specific works of art,
still less specific styles, to individual prehistoric cultures. The
fact that rock-engravings have been found in Tasmania makes it
likely that some of them belong to one of the earliest spreads into
Australia, and a number of rock-shelters in eastern New South
Wales with red ochre drawings, paintings and stencils of human
hands, weapons and culture-heroes have yielded lithic industries
with Bondi points. We may feel reasonably sure that the rock art
goes far back in Australian prehistory, a reminder of the many
other elements in the spiritual life of the early aborigines that we
have lost.
    The Australian continent was first drawn within the purview
of history as a by-product of Dutch enterprise in the East Indies
during the early seventeenth century. By the middle of the century
the north, west and south coasts of Australia and that of Tasmania
had been explored, but it was not until 1770, when Captain Cook
sailed north from New Zealand, that the east coast was sighted.
Real progress in bringing Australian prehistory to an end was not
however initiated till the founding of a penal colony at Sydney in
1788 and the appointment of the first governor of New South
Wales in 1810. During the second quarter of the nineteenth
century rapid progress was made in exploring the interior. Al-
though it has been possible to undertake important field studies
in remote parts of the country down to very recent times, abori-
                                 249
              AUSTRALASIA      AND   THE   PACIFIC

ginal culture only continues to survive, like many forms of wild
life in much of the world to-day, because it is consciously pro-
tected.
                       THE     PACIFIC
It is hardly to be wondered at that the Pacific islands, spread out
over vast tracts of ocean, should have been occupied later than
the larger island groups of Indonesia, the Philippines and
Melanesia, that stood so much closer to south-east Asia, or even
than the Australian mainland and Tasmania. They were not only
more remote, but their very discovery and colonization implied a
high standard of boat-building, social cohesion and navigation.
Indeed the peopling of Micronesia east of the Marianas, which like
the Philippines seem to have been occupied as early as the second
millennium B.c., and of Polynesia was not accomplished until
towards the end of the first millennium a.p. Despite claims to the
contrary there is no real doubt that the migrations stemmed pre-
dominantly from East Asia. The discovery of Ecuadoran pottery —
dating from around A.D. 500 on the Galapagos islands some joo
miles from the American coast shows, it is true, that occasional
voyages were made ina contrary direction and by means of these
the diffusion of any New World elements, such as the sweet
potato, should be explained. The broad fact remains that the
livestock and almost all of the cultivated plants of the Poly-
nesians, as of the Melanesians, stem from Asiatic sources. The
same applies to their material equipment. Certain elements were
left behind—pottery for instance failed to spread into Polynesia,
or even into Micronesia beyond the Marianas, and the islanders
made do with bark cloth in place of textiles—and despite the late
date of their migrations the Polynesians used no metal until the
European period. On the other hand their fishing gear and the
quadrangular polished stone adzes with butts shaped for hafting,
both vital elements in their culture and often reaching a high
standard of workmanship, stem ultimately from Eurasiatic
                               250
                          THE   PACIFIC

sources. The discovery and settlement of the Pacific islands was
accomplished in double canoes hewn out of great trunks by stone
adzes, vessels capable of sailing rapidly before the wind, but which
had to be paddled against it. Moreover apart from their families
and supplies of food and drink for the voyage, the navigators had
to take with them livestock and plant tubers to stock their new
homelands, for the Polynesians no less than the Melanesians
depended largely on raising species which they themselves intro-
duced. On the other hand their environment provided important
additional resources: generally these were in the form of sea-food,
but in the case of the earliest settlers of New Zealand they included
the moa, a giant ostrich-like, flightless bird. The courage and skill
of the Polynesian navigators can be gauged from the fact that
without compasses or other scientific aids they sought out small,
often widely separated islands distributed over a third of the
globe’s circumference. The Pacific was first crossed by Europeans
in 1521, when Magellan sailed round South America and traversed
 the whole ocean before hitting the Marianas, but it was not until
 Captain Cook’s explorations between 1768 and 1779 that the
brief prehistory of Oceania was brought within immediate sight
 of its end.




                                 251
                      RETROSPECT

The story of mankind reflected in prehistory may be viewed most
simply as one of biological progress, of life lived more abundantly
and, however one defines this, more fully. It was, as we have
seen, as hunters that the Pithecanthropians—and conceivably
certain Australopithecines before them—emerged from their
basically vegetarian Primate relatives as the ancestors of Man.
For by far the greater part of their prehistory, a period to be
measured in hundreds of thousands of years, the progress of the
hominids was restricted by their abilities as hunters; and the
Advanced Palaeolithic cultures that flourished in restricted zones
of western Asia, northern Africa and Europe between some
thirty-five and ten thousand years ago, were characterized
above all by specialized hunting-gear, by the fuller utilization of
animal skeletal material and by a graphic art in which fertility
and the chase provided the main themes. Conversely, when man
first began to advance, around ten thousand years ago, towards the
threshold of civilization, he did so by extending his dominance
over wild animals and plants up to the point at which he was
able to control their breeding and genetic composition so as
to elicit new domesticated varieties in accordance with his own
needs.
    Another sign of growing biological effectiveness was enlarge-
ment of the area of settlement. It was not until Late Pleistocene
times that man extended beyond the territories of his fossil fore-
bears. Throughout the Early and Middle Pleistocene he was
confined to those parts of the Old World free from winter frost
and which could be reached on foot. These included the greater
part of continental Africa; southern Asia from Syria to Indonesia,
which during periods of low ocean levels must have formed a
south-eastern extension of the continent; and on the other hand
                               252
                           RETROSPECT

south-western Europe, extending as far north as lowland England
and the Elbe. There is no certain evidence that the colonization of
any part of the Soviet Union was undertaken until well into the
Late Pleistocene, when the Mousterian culture intruded into
territories marginal to the north-east of the Black Sea and further
east into restricted parts of central Asia, notably western Turk-
menia and south-eastern Uzbekistan. The remainder of the
southern parts of European Russia as far north as the river Oka,
together with extensive tracts of Siberia from the Upper Ob to the
Lena Valley, were first occupied by bearers of Advanced Palaeo-
lithic culture equipped with skin clothing and accustomed to erect
artificial dwellings in the open. Again, it was presumably at an
advanced stage of Late Pleistocene times that groups of hardy
hunters pressed through the funnel of north-east Siberia into
Alaska and down the foothills of the eastern Rockies to initiate
the first or Palaeoindian phase of New World prehistory. Large
areas of the globe were first settled during Neothermal times, due
partly to new territories becoming available as a result of the
melting of Pleistocene ice-sheets, notably in northern Europe, but
in large measure to the development of improved means of com-
munication; thus boats, however primitive, were needed before
the Wallace line could be crossed and the colonization of Australia
begun; again, the settling of most of Micronesia and of Polynesia
required navigation of a relatively advanced order; and in our own
times long-distance aircraft have served to open up some of the
few remaining lands hitherto inaccessible.
   As man grew more successful he not only spread farther afield,
but multiplied in numbers, and in due course was able to lead a
more settled existence in groups sufficiently nucleated to make
possible the development of civilization. So long as he was
limited to hunting and gathering the animals and plants naturally
available in the wild state, he was, with few exceptions, constrained
to exist in small groups and move over more or less extensive
territories to gain his food in the course of each year. One of the
                                 253
                           RETROSPECT

few sources of animal protein obtainable with comparatively slight
effort and expenditure of time were certain kinds of fish: as we
know from the Indians of the American North-west and as we
suspect may have been the case in the Dordogne during the Late
Glacial period, it was possible to settle comparatively densely and
to enjoy relative security on the banks of rivers having a strong
seasonal run of salmon; or, again, those who at a relatively
advanced stage of Neothermal times were first willing to venture
on the sea and fish from boats, were able to live in permanent
coastal settlements. On the other hand most land-bound peoples
were more restricted and it was only when advanced hunters were
confronted by altogether exceptional circumstances, like those
prevailing during the initial dry phase of Neothermal times round
the spring of Jericho, that it was feasible to live in settled groups
of any size while depending on a hunting and gathering mode of
life; and, as we have seen, at Jericho itself the big expansion in
population came with the establishment between men and animals
of a special form of relationship amounting to primitive domesti-
cation. It was the adoption of farming that alone provided the
assured basis of subsistence needed before men generally speaking
could live permanently in large groups; and it was life in cities
which first made possible the sub-division of labour and the social
integration needed to ensure rapid and far-reaching advances in
the subjugation of natural forces, advances on which the origins,
expansion and intensification of civilization itself depended.
   In the nature of things it is traces of the intensification and
spread of human settlement and of the advances in technology
whichaccompanied them that survive most palpably inthe archaeo-
logical record, but it would be a great mistake to suppose that
these are more than aspects of man’s success in the struggle for
dominance.    No less important are the social, intellectual and
spiritual advances which leave fewer material clues behind them.
Dependence on social cohesion for such purposes as winning a
livelihood, erecting shelters against the elements, ensuring con-
                                254
                           RETROSPECT

tinuity and soc on are common to the whole animal world and are
frequently carried much further in insect than in human society.
The special characteristic of human society, or rather, to express it
another way, the reason which causes one to describe a society as
human rather than animal, resides in the degree to which its
patterns of behaviour are artificial, institutional and traditional,
rather than instinctive; and it is because human society is artificial
that it is subject to an evolution far more rapid and striking than
that of animal societies. Social evolution proceeds by means of
culture, the possession of which beyond a certain level itself
provides the only valid criterion for distinguishing man and his
immediate hominid forebears from the other Primates. The possi-
bility of developing culture, by which one means the patterns of
behaviour and thought inherited by virtue of belonging to
society rather than through genetical inheritance, depended on
the possession of an adequate brain; but conversely, as we have
pointed out (p. 26), there are reasons for supposing that the
ability to acquire culture was adaptive, in the sense that the strains
most capable of doing so were those whose genotypes were propa-
gated most abundantly in the course of natural selection. At
least it is true that the period that witnessed the first essays in
cultural development was marked by unprecedented advances in
the growth of the brain. Equally, though, the physical evolution
of Homo sapiens in his modern form was already complete with
the first appearance of Advanced Palaeolithic culture, with which
indeed it seems to have been intimately connected. Quite clearly
the immense and accelerating advances in social evolution of the
last 50,000 years must, though conferring biological advantages in
the sense of permitting greater fullness and security of life, have
been independent of organic evolution; indeed it could be argued
that in certain respects cultural evolution may have been achieved
at some cost to man’s purely physical endowment.
   The ability to learn, on which culture depends, is widespread in
the natural world. In man this ability is not only more developed,
                                 255
                          RETROSPECT

but, thanks to speech, social institutions and, beyond the stage
of complexity termed civilization, to writing, advances made
by individuals can be absorbed into the traditional lore trans-
mitted from one generation to another. The cultural endowment
of humanity thus persistently grows. This occurs even though the
centre of cultural advance may shift and certain areas undergo
more or less pronounced cultural regression. Moreover, the
advance is not merely cumulative but tends to gain in momentum,
so that the advances of the last five thousand years exceed those
of the previous fifty thousand and are in turn eclipsed in many
respects by those of the last fifty. All this goes to emphasize the
immense importance of transmission or of what in modern
society we would speak of as the educational process.
    Much of the mounting weight of knowledge transmitted to
successive generations can be viewed as no more than the accom-
paniment of economic and technological advance, part of the
cultural apparatus by which men made themselves more effective
as biological organisms. There remain spheres of knowledge or
awareness which, though not immediately concerned with making
life more abundant for mankind in general, have been of supreme
importance to individual men and as a matter of fact, through their
influence on social life have ultimately served to enhance bio-
logical effectiveness. I refer to self-knowledge, awareness of
limitations in relation to others and apprehension of unseen
powers, qualities that differentiate human personality from those
of organisms wholly regulated by instinctive appetites and drives.
A crucial moment in the growth of personal awareness was
reached with the symbolic recognition of death as the fate of the
individual, and for this there is no evidence before the onset of
the last major glaciation, when Neanderthaloid people began to
give careful burial to the dead and deposited objects with them
for use after death. The first sign of aesthetic awareness, evidenced
by personal adornment and graphic art, two of the leading features
of Advanced    Palaeolithic culture, was delayed until the ap-
                                256
                           RETROSPECT

pearance of Homo sapiens in his fully developed form. Advanced
Palaeolithic art, particularly that applied to the walls and ceilings
of caves, is further revealing for the clear indications it gives of a
belief in magic, a belief that by going through prescribed motions
it is possible automatically to activate supernatural forces for the
accomplishing of human desires. It is in the Advanced Palaeo-
lithic art that we first encounter representations of human beings,
representations which though primarily intended as symbols of
fertility were nevertheless endowed with genuine human feelings
(frontispiece). The first portrayals of definite individuals are those
modelled in clay on human skulls from the earlier Proto-Neolithic
level at Jericho (Pl. II). This is particularly appropriate because it
was precisely at this critical juncture in human history that men
were beginning to enter an era marked by a progressive widening
of the range of social choice, a factor which together with the
adoption of settled life made for an increasing variation of cultural
style and expression.
   The growth of urban civilizations involved a progressive
elaboration of social organization, an ever greater subdivision of
economic and social functions and an increasingly complex nexus
of rights and obligations or, to put it another way, a growing
burden of ethical demands. Although individuals were nominally
free to reject these, they were under strong pressure to conform;
indeed, a certain standard of conformity was necessary if societies
were to cohere and survive in the face of internal stresses and
external competition, and it must be supposed that those societies
were favoured in the struggle for survival which most effectively
harnessed the energies of outstanding individuals to the overriding
social purpose of maintaining cultural continuity. Customary
constraints operated in part through family upbringing and the
complex net-work of social institutions and in part through his-
torical lore enshrined for most of human history in oral traditions;
but behind all these was the force of supernatural sanctions
embodied in religion.
    10                           257                            cP
                           RETROSPECT

   Speculations about the origins and earliest history of religion
based solely on what ethnologists have been able to discover
about the peoples of simpler culture living in our own time are
no longer held of much account, since the primitive stages must
have been passed through thousands of years ago under quite
different historical circumstances. On the other hand the archaeo-
logical traces relate solely to overt manifestations. As a working
hypothesis it may be assumed that awareness of superhuman
powers and of the need to establish some relation with them formed
part and parcel of the emergence of something that we can recog-
nize as human personality: the more consciously aware prehistoric
man became of his predicament, the more anxious he would have
been to resolve it. The most pressing anxiety, or at least the one
which elicited the first overt response, seems as we have already
emphasized to have been the full realization of death as a personal
fate. The careful disposal of the dead by Neanderthal man initiated
funeral rituals which down to our own day have served to re-
assure the living: the material settings of these rituals varied
according to the economic level reached, from shallow graves
scooped out of earlier cave deposits to the Pyramids of Egypt,
the royal graves of Ur or Mycenae, or the timber-lined shaft-graves
of the Altai; but their purpose        remained   fundamentally    the
same. Others of the main anxieties, those relating to subsistence
and reproduction, found their first expression in the figurines of
pregnant women and the representations of game animals ac-
companied by weapons and other signs on the walls and ceilings
of caves, attributable to various groups of Advanced Palaeolithic
hunters in Europe. The cult of the generative forces embodied in
various symbols of the male and female principles was a persisting
element in prehistoric culture that in due course became embodied
in the religious traditions of the great literate civilizations of man-
kind. In the same way subsistence continued to form the object
of religious preoccupation. Among agricultural peoples the
vegetative principle and forces powerfully affecting this, such as
                                 258
                           RETROSPECT

the sun, grew increasingly important and, together with fertility
and death, contributed most powerfully to the organized religions
that first grew up in the earliest civilizations of western Asia.
    Archaeology of itself can hardly answer the question, so often
raised, whether the concept of an overall, supreme power or god
appeared relatively late as the final outcome of a long evolution
or whether, as Wilhelm Schmidt and his followers have main-
tained, the notion of a transcendent deity was apprehended by
primitive man. Even if it were possible to study the oral traditions
of the pre-literate societies of remote antiquity, it is doubtful how
explicit an answer would be forthcoming, since it was of the
essence of primitive religion to be nebulous; clarification had to
wait on abstract formulation of speculative thought of the kind
first achieved by the philosophical schools of advanced literate
societies. The realities of religion among primitive peoples must
surely have resided in the ritual by which they assuaged their more
pressing anxieties and in the acts of worship by which they sought
to establish relations with supernatural forces; and these, whether
recognized as stemming from a deity or not, certainly manifested
themselves in a multiplicity of outward appearances. Of the
existence of ritual practices as far back as the middle of the Late
Pleistocene archaeology offers abounding evidence, more parti-
cularly of those concerning burial of the dead. Traces of the earliest
worship are more elusive, partly because at a certain level reli-
gions can hardly be separated from magical practices and partly
because of the difficulty of distinguishing for example between
sacred and profane structures or between votive offerings and
hoards buried for security. The first certain evidence for domestic
shrines and public temples comes from the earliest fixed settlements
of western Asia. In this region it can be said that the earliest cities
grew up with temples at their cores and that the earliest citizens
conceived themselves to be subjects of gods and members of
temple communities. Indeed it seems to have been for the purpose
of maintaining temple records that writing was first devised, as if
                                  259                          10-2
                          RETROSPECT

to emphasize that the earliest civilizations were as much the pro-
ducts of religion as of technology;    each in its own way served to
enhance the biological effectiveness of society, the former by
relieving tensions that would otherwise impede its smooth
working, the latter by improving the degree of control over
physical environments.
   To the individuals who comprise human societies the effect of
social evolution has been to enrich the quality of their lives. The
cultural endowment of mankind has become more variegated,
both in respect of the range of potential functions within indi-
vidual societies and on account of wider divergencies between the
form and style of different communities; and this occurred at a
time when men were becoming more keenly aware, both aesthetic-
ally and intellectually, of the nature and possibilities of their sur-
roundings. One of the most significant lines of progress in
human evolution has been a growth in the appreciation of the past
and the future. The whole possibility of economic advance has
been bound up with the notion of deferring immediate satisfaction
in the expectation of future benefits, as when seed corn was pre-
served even in times of famine to ensure the next crop; hard labour
sunk in extensive workings in the hope of reaching ores; or when
distant voyages were undertaken in the hope of trade or discovery.
Indeed one can say that speculation or prediction, whether in the
economic or purely intellectual fields, are among the most signifi-
cant attributes of man, serving to differentiate him increasingly
from the brutes. Again, the transmission of culture has been made
possible by storing up experience of the past; much of this com-
munal memory has in course of time been so to speak built into
the structure of society, for example into the means of production,
but a body of explicit tradition must also have been transmitted
largely by word of mouth. Most peoples at a simple level of
culture transmit mythological stories purporting to account for
outstanding features of their social organization, technology and
even physical surroundings. Stories of this kind served at once
                                 260
                           RETROSPECT

to invest the existing usages of the community with ancestral
sanctions and to enhance the feelings of solidarity of those
subscribing to them. In literate communities these functions
are to a large degree performed by histories: indeed the major
political and cultural units of the modern world owe their very
existence to awareness of their common pasts. This is why pre-
history, the only kind of history capable of being shared by men of
all levels of cultural attainment, whether heirs of ancient literate
traditions or only recently preliterate, is so peculiarly relevant to
a world which from the standpoint of science and technology is
already one.




                                261
