                            CHAPTER      6


   THE    FOUNDATIONS OF EUROPEAN
         CIVILIZATION: ‘NEOLITHIC’
           PEASANTS AND ARCTIC
              HUNTER-FISHERS

The status of European ‘ Neolithic’ cultures
   The beginnings of settled life in Europe and the possibility ofa
distinct European civilization depended in the first instance on the
spread of farming from the focal territories in which cultivated
forms were first elicited and on the adoption in due course of this
new and alien way of life by indigenous hunter-fishers. The only
part of Europe in which possible prototypes of cultivated cereals
have been found in a wild state extends from Greece to Yugoslavia
and even here it is only with wild forms of einkorn and millet that
we have to do: over the continent as a whole, up to the northern
margin of the temperate zone that formed the boundary of cereal
cultivation during early times, all cultivated cereals had to be
introduced into environments differing to some extent from those
in which they were originally domesticated.
   Even in those parts of Europe first colonized by farmers,
settled life began much later than in Palestine, Cilicia, Syria and
northern Mesopotamia; though to judge from radio-carbon dates
no more recently than in the Nile Valley. Although the earliest
peasant communities in Europe were ‘Neolithic’ in the sense that
they were ignorant of metallurgy and that their technology was
governed by the possibilities inherent in the utilization of flint and
stone tools, they were contemporary with societies in western Asia
conversant from the latter part of the fifth millennium B.c. with
                                 119
    THE      FOUNDATIONS    OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

the casting of copper and from the middle of the fourth with
that of bronze. Even more to the point, early in the third
millennium the Minoan civilization had already begun to develop
in Crete along independent lines, though under the influence of
those of Asia Minor, Syria and Egypt; and active centres of
culture were established in the Cycladic islands and on the main-
land of Greece. Already during the latter half of the third
millennium B.c. both central Europe and the Mediterranean were
permeated by a knowledge of copper metallurgy, and even in
western and northern Europe, where Neolithic communities were
unable to afford metal tools, flint and stone axes might be in-
fluenced by metal prototypes. Another striking illustration of the
status of these northern ‘Neolithic’ peoples is that they adopted
the rite of collective burial from the technologically more
advanced Aegean world and felt impelled, despite their com-
parative poverty, to share the funerary customs of peoples much
richer than themselves and to erect megalithic chamber tombs.
   The basic reason why parts of south-west Asia were so far in
advance of Europe in adopting farming is the differing conditions
to which the rather drastic transition from Late Pleistocene to Neo-
thermal times gave rise in the two areas: whereas in the former the
desiccation of hitherto rich hunting grounds presented a challenge
to people now fitted biologically and culturally to respond by
a fundamental change of outlook towards their environment, in
the latter a gradual increase of temperature, while bringing
ecological changes in its train, offered no comparable challenge to
prehistoric man. Thus an environmental change which precipitated
the so-called Neolithic Revolution in one, encouraged in the
other the persistence under progressively more genial conditions
of old ways of life stemming from the Old Stone Age and expressed
in the Mesolithic cultures described in a previous chapter (see
pp- 67£.).
   The new farming economy, giving a hitherto unknown degree
of control over the supply of food, was inherently expansive, but
                                 120
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS     AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

it was not until the return of wetter conditions in the neighbour-
hood of the focal region during Altithermal times that the Neolithic
way of life was able to spread to North Africa, south-eastern
Europe and Inner Asia. As a field for colonization by farmers,
Europe fell into three major ecological zones. The first was a
Mediterranean zone which formed an extension, progressively
modified as one moves west, of that in which the basic discoveries
were made and into which in consequence they were able to
penetrate without the need for major changes. The second was
a temperate zone, differing more or less markedly in climate,
vegetation and soils and into which the new economy was only
able to penetrate selectively and sometimes with difficulty. The
third was a circumpolar zone into which only certain elements of
Neolithic culture were able to filter and over which the old hunting
and fishing economy continued to reign supreme.
   Since men learned to farm in parts of western Asia long before
they began to make pottery vessels, the question arises to what
extent agriculture was introduced into Europe in advance of
pottery-making. The only certain evidence for this comes from
Thessaly, where traces of huts and fire-places were found at the
base of mounds at Argissa near Larissa and at Sesklo, stratified
below the earliest pottery-levels, but belonging to farmers who
grew cereals and pulse, kept sheep or goats and presumably made
do with baskets or other non-ceramic containers. These pre-
pottery farmers had a flint industry producing blades and trapeze-
shaped points, together with stone palettes and simple bodkins and
skin-working tools of bone. Similar blade and trapeze industries
from the Mediterranean area may indicate a wider extension of a
pre-pottery Neolithic and it is significant that remains of sheep
or goats have been found with industries of similar type in France
known as Tardenoisian: decisive evidence might well be obtained
by an exhaustive study of the organic refuse from a site like
Chateauneuf-les-Martigues, near Marseilles, where a blade and
trapeze industry underlay early Neolithic impressed pottery.
                                I2I
    THE      FOUNDATIONS        OF      EUROPEAN           CIVILIZATION:

Another reason for thinking that agriculture may have been
introduced to Europe by people ignorant of pottery is that few
of the earliest pottery vessels from most of Europe can plausibly
be traced to specific Asiatic sources.

The Balkans, central and eastern Europe
   Nevertheless, the first farmers certainly verifiable over any
extensive tract of Europe made hand-built pottery, comprising
bowls and flasks with round bases, simple rims and handles in the
form of lugs perforated so that the pots could be carried or

 TABLE       F. Sequence of early peasant cultures in parts of Europe
                            down to C. 1200 B.C.
   South                                                   South-east
   Britain      Denmark      Danube             Greece      Balkans      Ukraine
                                VI                                      Black
                                                                         burnished
Bronze Age     Bronze Age       Vv            Late         Karanovo
 (Wessex)                                      Helladic
                                               (Mycen-
                                               aean)
               Late            IV             Middle
Secondary       Neolithic                      Helladic
 Neolithic                                    (Minyan)                  Tripolje
              Middle           III
                Neolithic
Primary        Early            II            Early        Gumelnita
 Neolithic      Neolithic                      Helladic
                                              Late                      Izvoare
                                               Neolithic
                                               (Dimini)
                                I                             Boian
                             (Spiral-         Middle
                             meander           Neolithic
                             ware)             (Sesklo)
                                              Early        Startevo
                                               Neolithic
                                               (Impressed ;
                                               Otzaki)
                                              Proto-
                                               Neolithic

                                        {22
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS    AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

suspended. The most important region settled during this early
phase was the Balkan peninsula, which formed as it were a funnel,
the narrow end open to western Asia and the broad one to the
expanses of central and eastern Europe. The earliest pottery-using
farmers to penetrate the Balkans were shifting agriculturists who
cultivated temporary clearings in the forest and moved on after
cropping the initial fertility of the virgin land. The Startevo
people, named after the site on the north bank of the Danube
near Belgrade, seem to have spread north from the Aegean coast
mainly by the Vardar—Morava route into what is now eastern
Yugoslavia and on into the Middle Danube valley. Western
Bulgaria may have been colonized partly by way of the Struma
Valley, in part from the Morava Valley by way of the NiSava, and
in part by following the Danube downstream. Further north they
pressed into Hungary where they concentrated on the Tisa and
KGrGs rivers. It may prove significant that the Staréevo people
cultivated einkorn and millet, the wild prototypes of which are
known from the south Balkans; and it is noteworthy that they had
reaping-knives with flint insets and querns like those from
western Asia; in addition they kept livestock and did some
hunting. Some of their pottery vessels were more specialized in
form, including bowls with ring feet and, more particularly in the
KGérés Valley, lop-sided flasks with perforated lugs, probably
designed for slinging on the back. Impressed decoration was
common, though cardium shells were not used for this purpose as
they were in parts of the Mediterranean area, and other favoured
varieties included roughening of the surface and plastic relief,
including representations of animals and men; and footed bowls
in fine ware might be decorated by painting. The widespread use
of the Aegean mussel Spondylus gaederopus as a material for beads
and bracelets shows that contact was maintained with the south.
Clay seals, apparently barbaric versions of stone stamp seals of
ultimately Asiatic origin, marble vessels, bone and clay idols
and four-footed pottery stands that may have served some cult
                               123
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

purpose are among enrichments which may well have been
acquired from the more settled villagers whose settlement mounds
had begun to accumulate in Greece and the south Balkans.
   Immediately north of the Star¢evo province, over a territory
which extended from south of Lake Balaton to near the estuary
of the Oder—a distance of nearly six hundred miles—and laterally
from the Rhine and the Maas to the Vistula and the Upper
Dniester—a span of a thousand miles—the earliest peasants made
pottery decorated with spiral-meander patterns and exhibited a
cultural uniformity so great as only to be explained if we suppose
that the whole area was colonized comparatively rapidly. From
the Middle Danube region, comprising much of central Hungary,
Lower Austria and Bohemia, the pioneer farmers pushed along
the great rivers, east to the Vistula and the Upper Dniester; north
down the Vistula, Oder and Elbe; and west by way both of the
Upper Danube and overland across Saxony and Hesse to the
Rhineland and the Maas. The rapidity of their spread—according
to radio-carbon dating they had reached South Germany and
Dutch Limburg before the end of the fifth millennium B.c.—was
due in part to their extensive system of agriculture, in part to the
discontinuous distribution of the fertile and easily worked loess
on which they settled, and in part to the lack of opposition.
Emmer and barley were grown, as well as einkorn, peas, beans and
flax, and the common farmyard animals were kept. Material
equipment remained very simple during this first phase in the
settlement of the Danubian zone. There is no evidence either for
weaving or for metallurgy. The pottery was made from carefully
prepared clay that required neither slip nor burnish, and took the
form of the standard early Neolithic shapes, round-based bowls
and flasks, the latter sometimes flattened on one face, having plain
rims and no handles other than lugs. Plastic ornament, like that
on StarCevo ware, was used, especially in the Middle Danube area,
but the most characteristic form of ornament consisted of bands
defined by two or three more or less parallel incised lines and
                                 124
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS      AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

conforming to spirals or meanders; in addition designs were
sometimes painted on the surface after firing. Where flint was
readily available it was flaked into the form of blades which might
be inserted into slots to provide cutting-edges for reaping-knives,
or worked into end-scrapers and trapeziform arrowheads. The
commonest stone tool, a polished stone adze-blade of D-section
with a slightly hollow-ground working edge, was probably used
mainly for dressing the timbers needed for building. The peasants
lived in large houses, generally of rectangular plan, but in parts of
Germany and in Poland often wedge-shaped with one end
markedly broader than the other. They were commonly of twenty
or thirty and might be up to fifty metres in length and it is
thought that they must have provided space for storage and
possibly for sheltering livestock as well as for the peasant family.
The Danubian I peasants seem to have lived in fair-sized villages,
which at first they found no need to defend by more than a
palisade; but the nature of their economy caused them to shift
their cultivations at frequent intervals, though commonly re-
building on the same site. Like the Staréevo people they continued
to import Spondylus shells from the far distant Aegean and to
deposit with the dead, interred in cemeteries of single graves,
ornaments that more vividly than anything else recalled their
southern origin.
   Permanent settlement that gave rise to tells on the Asiatic model
was confined to the Balkans. In Greece settlement mounds began
to accumulate immediately over the encampments of pre-pottery
peasants and it is significant that two layers, the lower of which
yielded a primitive painted ware, had been formed at Otzaki before
the appearance of cardial-impressed and Staréevo pottery. After
the Staréevo culture had passed north, Thessaly was the scene of
the flowering of a culture named after the site of Sesklo, a culture
which, though having Syrian analogies, is distinctively Thessalian
and may have developed there from an earlier Neolithic spread.
The Sesklo potters made a fine burnished ware which they baked
                                 125
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

to reddish colour in kilns. Many of the finer pots, which included
flat-bottomed dishes with flaring sides, footed bowls, and mugs
with well-made handles, were painted by hand before firing with
red paint on a white slip or alternatively with white on a red
ground. The designs were geometrical in character: these included
a variety of multiple linear chevrons; and in the ‘block-painted’
ware rectangles, lozenges and triangles, probably inspired by the
ornament on birch-bark vessels. In addition to the use of the
kiln for firing painted pots, mud-bricks, stone button seals and
the use of the sling all point to Asia as an ultimate source; but
shoe-last adzes, the use of Spondylus shell for bracelets and
portable clay altars were among features widely spread in the
Balkans. Late Neolithic layers containing a local ware named
after the site of Dimini commonly overlie Sesklo ones in the
Thessalian mounds. The distinctive pottery is more elementary
in form, bases being flat and lugs replacing the handles, but
designs painted on the surface now included spirals and meanders.
   Outside Greece the kind of settlement that gave rise to tells did
not begin until the basis of a farming economy had been laid by
pioneers who moved their corn-plots and their livestock at
frequent intervals and occupied no more than temporary villages.
Thus the mound at Vinéa near Belgrade, type site of a culture that
extended over much of Yugoslavia and parts of western Roumania
and Bulgaria, overlay traces of Startevo people. Again, the
Gumelnita mound-culture of central and eastern Bulgaria replaced
a pioneer peasant culture that took its name from the Boian lake
near the head of the Dobrudia.
   The Boian pioneers cultivated einkorn and millet and occupied
rectangular houses with matting on the floor. For felling and
working timber they used a variety of stone tools, including
polished adze-blades of bevelled and shoe-last form. Their pottery,
which included bowls with ringed-feet, biconical jars and large
pear-shaped storage jars, was decorated by several different
methods, but most commonly by incising or excising the surface
                                 126
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS      AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

to form in the first case either spiral or other curvilinear patterns
and in the second rectilinear ones, each of which were emphasized
by encrusting with red or white paint. The Boians were of more
than local interest because they initiated the spread of peasant
economy over much of Roumania and the Ukraine as far east as
the river Dnieper. The first stage in their expansion, well exempli-
fied at the site of Izvoare in Moldavia, penetrated the Alt valley on
the west of the Carpathians and on the east extended as far as the
Bug; it was only during the developed or classical phase of the
culture, commonly named after Cucuteni on the Pruth or Tripolje
near Kiev, that the full extent was attained. The excised technique
continued to be fashionable during the Izvoare stage, but this was
replaced by painting before firing, a technique already practised
by the Staréevo peasants, or by U-sectioned grooves designed to
hold encrustation. The spiral, a motive already exploited by the
Staréevo and Danubian peasants and one that may well have been
suggested originally by making coiled basketry, continued to play
a leading part in decorating pottery. As regards the forms of pots,
the simple rims, flat bases and absence of handles other than lugs
are all persistent features. Other Balkan elements include polished
stone adzes, a lithic industry based on blades, and clay stamps and
female figurines made from baked clay. Like the Danubians,
whom they dispossessed on the Upper Dniester, the Tripolje
peasants shifted their settlements at frequent intervals as they took
into cultivation fresh areas of the fertile black earth that directly
overlay the loess. Likewise they lived in substantial rectangular
houses, up to 30 metres in length, but they differed at least in the
Ukraine in arranging these in circles or even in concentric rings,
as at Kolomiishchina or Vladimirovka. It seems likely that this
circular arrangement may have beer designed for security against
their warlike pastoral neighbours of the steppe who decorated
their pots with cord imprints.
   In the Middle Danube area there is evidence for the penetration,
possibly as early as the beginning of the third millennium B.c., of
                                 127
    THE   FOUNDATIONS      OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

renewed impulses from the south-east. The pottery ascribed to
the Danubian II stage of settlement in this cortical area is more
sophisticated in form than that of the Danubian I stage, having
flat bases and including footed bowls. It was also much more
diversified and one may distinguish even in Hungary between the
monochrome ware of Lengyel and the encrusted ware, painted
after firing, of the Theiss Valley. Apart from the painting of
pottery, southern traits include female figurines and model houses
of fired clay, clay stamps reminiscent of stone seals, cubical clay
block vases recalling Early Minoan ones of stone, and spiral
ornaments made of copper wire.
    While these innovations were making themselves felt in the
Middle Danube area and spreading thence over Czechoslovakia
and into Germany, the heirs of the original colonists occupying the
extensive outer tracts of the Danubian I territory were undergoing
a certain degree of barbarization. In default of any more intensive
occupation of the loess soil, such as might be implied by the
growth of settlement mounds, the peasants were driven to spread
on to poorer soils and develop hunting as an accessory source of
food, both processes that brought them into contact with Meso-
lithic hunter-fishers. Among the leading features of this time was
the disappearance of the spiral and meander from the decorative
motives used by potters and the substitution of horizontal lines
and chevrons—designs that reproduced the webbing in which
round-based pots were commonly carried; and further the incised
line was replaced or at least supplemented by impressions made by
toothed stamps or combs, producing the so-called stroke-
ornamented ware. Other more specialized wares included that
named after the cemetery of Réssen near Merseberg in Saxo-
Thuringia, which spread over much of the Middle and Upper
Rhineland and beyond, and was decorated by broader furrowed
lines apparently made by a jabbing motion and intended to secure
white incrustation. Wild animal bones show that the Réssen
people went in for hunting on a considerable scale and it is
                                128
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS     AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

significant that the arrowheads belonging to the younger phases
of the Danubian were of devolved Tardenoisian type, trapeziform
and triangular and commonly with flat flaking. A final point to
mention is that on the margin of their distribution in the west the
Danubian peasants in their later phase began to come into contact
with others of alien culture. No doubt it is this which explains
why in its last period the great settlement at K6In-Lindenthal was
defended and why in South Germany the Réssen people chose to
occupy such a natural fortress as the Goldberg. What is certain
is that Réssen pottery occurs on settlements of the earliest
peasants of Switzerland, whose cultural affinities lie in the west.

The Mediterranean and western Europe
   The earliest pottery from western Europe is that from the
islands and shores of the Mediterranean, simple bowls and flasks
with round bases and lugs, plain or decorated by impressions of
cardium shells. Closely similar pottery has been recovered from
western Asia, for example from the lowest levels in the tells at
Mersin in Cilicia and Ras Shamrah (Ugarit) in Syria. The distribu-
tion of cardial impressed ware in the Mediterranean area strongly
suggests that it was transmitted by sea: it is found on the islands
of Leukas and Corfu; on the coast of Yugoslavia and the Adriatic
coast of Italy, including the Tremiti islands; on Malta, Sicily,
Elba and Sardinia; on the coast of Liguria; in the French provinces
of Languedoc and Provence; and on the east and south-east
coasts of Spain and the south coast of Portugal. The impressions,
which were frequently made by toothed stamps and other objects
as well as by cardium shells, were most commonly arranged as
horizontal or vertical lines, zig-zags or hanging arcs. Most of the
settlement material has come from caves or rock-shelters and
represents what appear to have been temporary occupations. The
lithic industries of these early farmers were based on the produc-
tion of blades, from sections of which trapeze and transverse
arrowheads were made; hunting evidently played some part in
                                129
    THE   FOUNDATIONS      OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

a mainly pastoral economy. Polished stone axes and adzes testify to
the felling of trees and the working of wood. Among the simple
objects made from bone the most noteworthy were spatulae used,
in all probability, for eating cereal food. For personal ornamenta-
tion perforated animal teeth, shells and foot-bones of hare were
used as beads, and bracelets were made from polished stone or
shell.
   Whether the predominantly plain, round-based wares associated
with Neolithic farmers in France, parts of Iberia and beside the
Swiss lakes stemmed from the same source as the impressed wares
or whether they represent a distinct and to some extent parallel
tradition remains uncertain. Although the pottery from the Camp
de Chassey in the French department of Sadne-et-Loire was
frequently plain it was sometimes decorated by geometrical
patterns incised before firing or scratched on afterwards, and the
pots of the younger stage of the Swiss Cortaillod ware, named
after the locality on Lake Neuchatel, might be ornamented by
patterns cut out of birch-bark and applied to the surface of the pot
by means of resin. Plain western ware is found with flint blades,
trapeziform arrowheads and polished stone axes and adzes on
settlements like El Garcel in Almeria and with collective burials in
southern Iberia. The Chassey culture spread extensively over
France from the Mediterranean, by the valley of the Rhone and
Sane to the Paris basin and west of the Massif Central to the
Atlantic coast of Brittany; and it is significant that fired clay
female figurines have been found as far north as Fort-Harrouard,
Eure-et-Loire. The makers of the Cortaillod pottery, which has
a counterpart to the south of the Alps in the Lagozza culture of
North Italy, occupied rectangular wooden houses resembling
those made by the Réssen and other Danubian II groups from
whom they may well have derived them. The lakeside locations
of their settlements favoured the survival of a much greater range
of material equipment than is normally available from Neolithic
sites and has shown that the Cortaillod people made an extensive
                                130
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS      AND    ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

use of wood and bark for containers and other things, as well as
making baskets, nets and a great variety of linen textiles. Yet the
Alpine countryside set limits to agriculture, and the proportion of
wild animal bones shows that hunting contributed in a significant
way to the supply of food; moreover, stag antler played a con-
spicuous role as a raw material for making a wide range of objects,
such as mattock-heads, holders for adze- and axe-heads, harpoon-
heads and personal ornaments.

The West Baltic area

   Meanwhile a distinctive culture, characterized by beakers with
flaring, funnel-shaped necks, was beginning to develop on the
North European Plain beyond the frontiers of the Lengyel and
Réssen groups of the Danubian II tradition. In spite of many
differences of detail between its various sub-groups, the Northern
culture was marked by features common to its whole extent from
Mecklenburg to the Vistula and from central Prussia to Denmark
and South Sweden. Its distinctive character rules out the pos-
sibility that its appearance can have been due solely to the
expansion of any of the Neolithic cultures previously established
in territories further south; and yet, at the same time, the appear-
ance of basic Neolithic traits, notably stock-raising, cereal-growing
and the making of pottery containers, can only be attributed to
impulses from the south. On geographical grounds the most
likely source is the Danubian province, and indeed pottery of
Danubian II-III character has commonly been found in the same
graves as Northern forms in Silesia and Poland. Quite plainly the
northward spread of Neolithic civilization was accomplished by
means of acculturation rather than of colonization. The North
European Plain supported in the Maglemosian culture and its
successors the most vigorous Mesolithic settlement in Europe.
The hunter-fisher populations of the region were correspondingly
selective in their borrowings: thus, the coast-dwelling Ertebdlle
people, while adopting the arts of domestication, continued to
                                131
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

rely substantially on hunting, fishing and the gathering of shell-
fish, and, in taking over the art of potting, applied to the manu-
facture of their larger, coarse vessels the technique of coiling used
in basketry; similarly, the stone shoe-last adze failed to penetrate
in face of flint forms evolved over millennia in a territory lavishly
provided with the essential raw-material, though flint celts were
now for the first time in this region finished by polishing. The
vigour of the indigenous ‘Mesolithic’ heritage is shown in other
ways, for example in the lavish use of amber, but the adoption of
rectangular houses as far north as the Vra culture of middle
Sweden shows the force of the intrusive impulses. In burying
their dead in single graves, the Funnel-neck Beaker people con-
formed to the general Danubian practice, but in constructing
stone monuments they were making the most of their own
habitat and giving expression to their own genius. Definition of
individual graves by means of the glacial boulders so widely
distributed on the North European Plain was practised by the
Danubian groups north of the Sudeten mountains as well as by
the Funnel-neck Beaker people, but the use of thin stone slabs
or large blocks of megalithic proportions to form closed cists was
peculiar to the northerners. Still more was this the case with the
mounds erected over the graves and frequently themselves defined
by boulders: in Denmark these mounds might be circular, but
over the North European Plain in general they were built like
the houses of the living on the elongated plan, which in the west
was generally rectangular, but in the east, again corresponding
with the local house-plan, was characteristically wedge-shaped.
   The primary Neolithic culture of southern and more parti-
cularly of south-western Britain drew some elements from French
sources, but it is becoming increasingly evident that much of its
inspiration came from the North European Plain to the east, a
conclusion which in view of the common Maglemosian heritage
should hardly occasion surprise. The earthen long barrows,
occasionally parallel-sided, but more often wedge-shaped in plan,
                                 132
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS     AND    ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

have been notoriously difficult to parallel in France, but find
analogues as far east as the Kujavian graves of Poland, even
though, apart from the Medway group, their structural elements
are of timber and turf rather than stone. The causewayed camps,
for which again no adequate parallel has been adduced from
France, have been wrongly compared with the fortified sites of
Urmitz and Mayen in the Middle Rhineland; a more significant, if
rather loose, analogy lies with enclosures formed by radial settings
of houses noted at Kolomiishchina and other Tripolje sites in
South Russia. Again, the flint-mines for which parallels admit-
tedly exist in North France and the Low Countries, can be
matched by the examples with vertical shafts and radiating
galleries at Krzemionkach Opatowskich and other sites in Poland.
   On its western margins the Northern culture came into contact
with the Western province both in the Middle Rhenish and
Alpine zones.   From these contacts arose the Michelsburg and
Pfyn cultures respectively, the former named after a hill-fort over-
looking the Rhine plain a few miles north of Karlsruhe and the
latter designated by the locality to which it is confined in the
eastern part of Switzerland. The Michelsberg culture, typified by
the tulip beaker and a series of ceramic forms, was centered on the
Main, the Middle Rhine and the Neckar, whence it spread east
into Bohemia, south into Alsace-Baden and north into the
Koblenz area and Belgium.

Copper-working in central Europe

   Meanwhile impulses emanating ultimately from the East Medi-
terranean had already begun to carry exotic burial rites, metallurgy
and the use of metal tools over wide zones of Europe. Several
central European groups of the Danubian III stage, notably the
Bodrogkeresztur of north-east Hungary, the Jordansmiihl of
Bohemia and Silesia and the Baden of Austria and much of
Czechoslovakia, fabricated copper artifacts, including perforated
axe-adzes and a variety of ornaments. The sources of the copper
                                3]
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

ores used by these early smiths are still not fully known, but it is
likely that the copper ores of the eastern Alps and of central
Germany were already being worked, and certain that flat axes
made from copper won in the latter region were being traded to
the peasants of the Northern neolithic culture before this had
emerged from its early phase. The replacement of the flint axe
with pointed butt and lozenge section by one polished all over and
having a thin butt and flattened sides, which took place towards
the end of the Northern Early Neolithic, was almost certainly
inspired by the flat copper axe that was too costly for general use.
Before considering any further how the comparatively simple
peasant societies of temperate Europe were affected by impulses
from the East Mediterranean, it will be necessary to turn to the
relatively advanced civilizations of Crete and the Greek mainland.

Minoan civilization

   The island of Crete, legendary home of the Minotaur and hence
of the Minoan culture, was originally colonized by immigrants
from Asia Minor in a Neolithic stage of culture, but from an
early period Egyptian influences made themselves felt in the
central and southern regions. The Early Minoan culture grew up
in eastern Crete under the impact of fresh immigration from Asia
Minor, but it was on the Messara Plain in the area cross-fertilized
by Egyptian contacts that the richer culture of Early Minoan II-III
developed. During this time copper came into more prominent
use for daggers and axes, and circular dry-stone structures up to
13 metres in diameter, having portals made from heavy stone
lintels resting on monolithic jambs, were built as collective tombs
to house successive generations of the dead. The Early Minoans
stood at the same general level of culture as the Early Helladic
people of the Greek mainland, who were likewise largely recruited
from Asia Minor. On the other hand, like the Early Cycladic
islanders, they were better placed to enrich themselves by mari-
time trade: indeed, their situation at the southern margin of the
                                 134
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS      AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

Aegean world was even more favourable, since it encouraged
contact with Egypt and the eastern coasts of the Mediterranean.
   It was a combination of wealth gained by trade and of inspira-
tion derived by contact with the civilized peoples to the south and
east that made possible the decisive advance that led to the develop-
ment in Crete of the first distinctively European civilization. The
Middle Minoan period (c. 2000-1580 B.c.) was marked by many
of the features associated with the rise of the earlier oriental
civilizations: a finer sub-division of labour made possible advances
in technology reflected in the manufacture of bronze and the
adoption of the potter’s wheel; population increased in density
and concentrated in the larger units represented by towns with
two-story buildings; authority was centralized in the hands of
rulers who combined religious and political authority and whose
palaces were also centres of economic importance; and centralized
control was assisted by improved communications in the shape
of wheeled transport and roads as well as by the development of
writing, primarily for purposes of accountancy. The first approach
to literacy took the form of hieroglyphs engraved on seals, but
by Middle Minoan III times a true linear script—linear A—was
being inscribed on unbaked clay tablets.
  The zenith of Minoan civilization was reached during Late
Minoan I-II times (c. 1580-1400 B.c.) between the rebuilding of
the palace of Cnossos after its second wrecking by earthquake and
its final destruction, presumably at the hands of the mainland
power centred at Mycenae, that took over the hegemony of the
Aegean world during Late Minoan III times. Although they owed
much to Asiatic and Egyptian influences, the Minoans were
unique in far more than the style of their decorative art, for they
created the first European civilization and the first one anywhere
to depend for its well-being on maritime contacts. Their art, as
expressed most freely on the palace frescoes and on some of their
finest pottery, betrays a pleasure in the representation of natural
forms, maritime as well as terrestrial, for which no parallel exists
                                 135
    THE   FOUNDATIONS         OF   EUROPEAN   CIVILIZATION:

in the ancient oriental world; and by comparison with the bearers
of earlier civilizations the Minoans were freer from either priestly
or militaristic oppression.

Early Helladic
   The Early Helladic people of the Greek mainland, like their
contemporaries in Asia Minor or in Macedonia, Bulgaria and
southern Roumania, occupied permanent villages or townships
and these were set as a rule on the mounds of their Neolithic
predecessors. Yet innovations in pottery and architecture and the
rise of metallurgy itself speak, if not of ethnic movement, at least
of trade or other contacts with various parts of Asia Minor, some
of which may have passed through intermediate islands. The rite of
collective burial in rock-cut tombs or built ossuaries on the other
hand reminds us that Greece was a Mediterranean land. Another re-
minder is the facility with which the Early Helladic people entered
upon maritime trade that extended directly or indirectly to Egypt.

Aegean trade
  The vigorous civilizations that arose in the East Mediterranean
early in the third millennium were the first in the ancient world
to rest primarily on the basis of maritime trade. The Neolithic
colonization of the larger Aegean islands and of Crete presupposes
traffic over the sea, and the flowering on these islands of cultures
based on metallurgy and on the utilization of raw materials from
a distance indicates a close and well-maintained network of sea-
borne commerce. An excellent example is given by the Cycladic
islands, many of which, left to themselves, would have been too
barren or too small to sustain more than a handful of poor
peasants on a subsistence basis. The islanders owed the possibility
of developing the kind of urban life displayed by the ruins of
Phylakopi on Melos to their activity as traders: indications of this
are indeed provided by the distribution of raw materials narrowly
localized in nature, like the copper of Parosand Siphnos, the emery
                                   136
 ‘NEOLITHIC’      PEASANTS     AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

of Naxos and the obsidian of Melos, or by evidence for the export
of manufactured objects like marble idols and vases to Greece,
Thermi, Troy, Crete and Egypt. Equally, there can be no doubt
that trade relations extended as far afield as the West Mediter-
ranean. Thus idols of local marble from Sardinia reflect Cycladic
influence; one might also cite beaked pottery, flagons of Melian
type, not to mention a tanged dagger of Cypriote form from the
Rhéne delta. Again, though it is known that Crete entered on a
phase of intensified trade activity in the East Mediterranean during
Middle Minoan II times, there are signs, for instance in the pottery
or the bossed bone plaques, representing female forms, from the
Tarxien culture of Malta and from Castellucio in Sicily, and in the
copper daggers of the Remedello culture of North Italy, that
impulses may have begun to reach the Middle Mediterranean
before the end of the Early Minoan period. The Aegean peoples
had long been practised mariners: their boats, probably up to 20
to 30 metres long, were provided with oars and projecting keels
to reduce the impact on landing; and, though incapable of
tacking or sailing close to the wind, they could presumably have
run fairly rapidly before it. It seems likely therefore that the
coasts of Tuscany, the south of France or Iberia could each have
been reached quite quickly from the East Mediterranean.
   The main drive behind early exploration in the Mediterranean
may well have been, as was the case with the Vikings, the com-
parative poverty of the homeland, but prospecting for metals may
also have been a particular attraction so far as the far west is
concerned. Yet, while there is no evidence that the mariners were
impelled by missionary zeal, they certainly carried their religious
convictions with them, and these were sufficiently strong to
impress themselves in due course on many of the native peoples with
whom they came into contact. Many of the elements of Aegean
religion, notably the mother goddess, the sacred bull, the horns of
consecration and the double-axe, stemmed directly from western
Asia, but the practice of collective burial, whether in natural caves
                                 137
    THE   FOUNDATIONS        OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

or in artificial tombs hollowed out of the rock or constructed in
dry-stone masonry, seems to have been a peculiarly Mediterranean
development. Collective use of natural caves for places of burial,
in itself'a practice of very remote antiquity, was undertaken in Crete
in Early Minoan I times; by Early Minoan II the islanders were
building circular dry-walled tombs above ground; and in the South
Cyclades collective tombs were being provided with corbelled or
cupola roofs. Again, on the southern part of the Greek mainland
Early Helladic folk were burying their dead in family vaults that
might be cut from the rock or built in dry-walling.

Diffusion of chamber tombs
   It is hardly possible to doubt that it was from the Aegean area
that the rite of collective burial, associated with belief in a mother
goddess, spread widely over the Middle and West Mediterranean
or that this was associated with the voyages of exploration and
prospecting at which we have already hinted. The earliest
collective tombs in Malta, Sicily, the Balearic islands, the south of
France and southern Iberia were as a rule cut in the rock, as
though they were artificial caves, but in the latter case they might
be rendered in dry-walled structures at ground-level to form
corbelled graves approached by passages. These rock-cut and dry-
walled collective tombs emanating from the East Mediterranean
were reproduced in Sicily, Sardinia and the Balearic islands by
diverse structures of cyclopean masonry, and in Malta, the south
of France and Iberia by megalithic chambers walled and roofed
by upright and transversely laid stones. When the idea of collective
burial spread widely over western and north-western Europe it
was embodied mainly in tombs of megalithic construction, though
the chalk-cut grottoes of the Marne and the corbelled vaults of
certain Breton, Irish and Orcadian chambers remind us in out-
lying regions of ultimate Mediterranean sources, as do the repre-
sentations of goddesses on the grottoes and gallery-graves of the
Paris basin or the more schematic ones on passage-graves in
                                  138
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS     AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

Brittany, Anglesey or Ireland. The diffusion of the idea of
building megalithic chamber tombs, like that of Neolithic economy
itself, was accomplished partly by primary intrusions of adven-
turers from without and partly through adoption by aboriginal
populations with a more or less devolved culture.
   The route followed by the pioneers is marked by megalithic
chamber tombs approached by passages and covered by round
mounds (Map 4): from Atlantic Iberia they sailed across the Bay
of Biscay to the southern shore of Brittany, up the western sea-
ways to Ireland, Anglesey, the Hebrides, northern Scotland and
the Orkneys, and ultimately either down from the north or by
way of the English Channel to the West Baltic area. Although
noticeably concentrated in the western part of their distribution
on areas rich in copper, it was only in southern Iberia that the
passage-graves yielded metal objects: elsewhere it was only in the
forms of lithic artifacts, like the greenstone axes of Breton tombs,
that their chalcolithic background finds any reflection in their
contents. The vast majority of megalithic chamber tombs were
secondary to the pioneer spread: they were erected by Neolithic
peasants and pastoralists, who themselves were often compara-
tively recent converts from a Mesolithic hunter-fisher way of life.
Although they adopted the rite of collective burial, they departed
more or less widely from the architectural prototypes. Over
large parts of western Europe they built tombs that were clearly
degenerate passage-graves, often no more than small chambers
with or without some kind of portal.
   An alternative to the passage-grave that was widely adopted
was the gallery-grave, a long chamber, generally under a long
mound, which, though it might be sub-divided, had no separate
entrance passages. Among the many variants of this type one
might mention the gallery-graves of the Severn—Cotswold area
of Britain having pairs of opposite side-chambers or transepts,
prototypes of which probably came from the Biscayan area of
France, and the segmented ones with concave forecourts, which
                                139
        THE        FOUNDATIONS                       OF   EUROPEAN              CIVILIZATION

with their elaborations are found in Ulster and south-west
Scotland, both associated with variants of the Western Neolithic
pottery. Another important group is that of the Paris basin,
comprising long subterranean chambers lined and roofed with




                                                                                                Xl
                  ©      Early bronze industries:         ©)    Myeenacan-Minoan civilization
                                                                                   t TT T T1               1
         .    .               .
 1, Aunjetitz 2, North Italian     3, Tomaszow              > Direct trade links
                                                          ~<«—                                 sbichnag! AaBarge ti
                                                                                                                  amin
 4, Hungarian 5, South-west German 6, El Argar                                     WZ          Passage graves
| 7, Breton       8, Wessex               9, Boyne        <---> Distant trade


                         4. Europe in the mid-second millennium B.c.

 megalithic slabs, often with porthole entrances. Representations
 of what may be funerary goddesses were occasionally carved on
 slabs at the entrance to the tomb and this was more frequently the
 case in the tombs of the upper Marne Valley that were cut
 entirely from the chalk rock. The people of the Seine—Oise-
                                                          140
 “NEOLITHIC”     PEASANTS      AND    ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

Marnearea, though they continued to depend toa significant degree
on hunting and made crude pottery, nevertheless used daggers of
honey-coloured chert from the quarries at Grand-Pressigny in
Touraine that were evidently designed as substitutes for copper.
   Small tombs of megalithic construction (dysse) were already
being built in Denmark during the final phase of the local Early
Neolithic, but these were only variants of cist graves intended for
single burials. The idea of collective burial reached the West
Baltic area from outside in two main waves. Passage-graves came
in at the beginning of the northern Middle Neolithic, evidently by
one or other of the western sea-routes; and gallery-graves or long
cists appeared in the final stage of the northern Stone Age, the
period of the flint daggers that ran parallel in time with the Early
Bronze Age both in central Europe and in the Hiberno-British
province. Although a few of the northern passage-graves stand
fairly close to the prototype in plan, none show signs of corbelling
or traces of rock-engravings, and the great majority diverge more
or less markedly: some have oval plans, but often the chamber was
long and rectangular leading with the passage to a T-plan. The
grave-goods were in the main indigenous; the pottery comprised a
succession of styles identified from settlements and originating in
different parts of the North German plain; the thick-butted flint
axe was evolved locally from the thin-butted one with squared
sides, itself inspired by copper prototypes; and the commonest
ornaments were beads and pendants of West Baltic amber.

‘Secondary Neolithic’ groups
   The diffusion of collective burial and of megalithic tomb-
construction in the west and the rise of copper-working in central
Europe and North Italy, at a time equivalent to Danubian ITI in
central and Early Neolithic C in northern Europe, are only
symbols of the influence exerted from the Aegean towards the
close of its Early ‘Bronze’ Age on the still predominantly Neolithic
peasantries of barbarian Europe. By contrast, in the more marginal
                                I4I
    THE   FOUNDATIONS      OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

territories of the temperate zone the process of acculturation, by
which surviving Mesolithic groups were led to adopt elements of
Neolithic culture, was still actively proceeding. Some such
process must have been involved in the genesis of secondary
Neolithic groups like the Tripolje, Funnel-neck Beaker and
Western, in territories immediately adjacent to zones of primary
Neolithic spread. Examples of what might be termed tertiary
Neolithic groups include the Alpine Horgen and the Seine-Oise-
Marne of the Paris basin, both of which continued to lay emphasis
on hunting and the use of stag antler and made pottery of debased
character. In the same category may be placed the Clacton-Rinyo,
Ebbsfleet and Peterborough groups of eastern Britain, though
from an insular standpoint these have been dubbed ‘secondary’.
Although in the case of the last two there is no evidence that
originally they practised farming, none of these groups seem to
have found difficulty in commingling with Western pastoralists and
cereal-growers: moreover it is worth noting that it was these most
recently acculturated groups which contributed the tradition of
ritual structures comprising ditches of horseshoe plan and settings
of ritual pits that formed the initial stage in the evolution of
 Stonehenge, in many respects the most outstanding monument of
barbarian society in Europe.

Battle-axe and beaker peoples
   The close of the Stone Age was marked over large parts of
temperate Europe by the rapid movement of ethnic groups, which
through their impact on the static peasantries and through their
blazing of new routes helped to prepare the way for the spread of
metallurgy. East of the Rhine pastoral groups, armed with stone
battle-axes, spread widely, burying their dead everywhere in
single-graves. They issued from the lands between the Vistula,
the Baltic and the Dnieper, from which the Funnel-neck Beaker
folk had emerged in a previous period, but the custom of barrow
burial, which not all of them adopted, came in all probability from
                                142
  ‘NEOLITHIC’      PEASANTS    AND     ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

the steppe region further east. There were spreads in several
directions and each of the main regional groups that emerged was
distinguished by differences of style both in battle-axes and pottery.
To the north they spread across the Baltic to Sweden and Finland
and through the East Baltic lands to the Gulf of Riga; and in the
forests of the Oka—Volga watershed east of Moscow there grew
up the distinctive Fatyanovo group. To the south others moved
into central Europe and some few penetrated as far as Greece at
the close of Early Helladic times. Another main drive was to the
west: some turned north into Jutland, where they contrasted
notably with the megalith-builders, who practised mixed farming
on the richer soils of the drift; and others proliferated in Saxo-
Thuringia and spread into the Rhineland on a broad front from
the Alps to the Low Countries. In the Rhenish area they came
into contact with powerfully built, broad-headed bowmen,
having distinctive archer’s wristguards, barbed and tanged
arrowheads of flint, copper daggers, V-perforated buttons and
bell-shaped beaker pottery, the latter decorated in horizontal
zones by means of toothed stamps. These Bell-Beaker folk seem
to have spread immediately from Iberia, following the megalithic
sea-routes, but also finding their way into central Europe and in
small numbers into Denmark, as well as into the Rhine Valley and
thence, as well probably as from the south, to the British Isles.
In thus linking Bohemia, a major source of tin, with both the
Mediterranean and Denmark, the Beaker prospectors pioneered
routes essential to the development of metallurgical industries in
central and ultimately in northern Europe; and there is evidence
that another group, this time coming ultimately from the Rhine-
land, first opened up the copper deposits of Ireland and so
initiated the Hiberno-British industry.

Arctic hunter-fishers
  The development of bronze metallurgy in Europe will be
reserved for the next chapter. Meanwhile it needs to be emphasized

                                 143
    THE   FOUNDATIONS      OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

that the spread of Neolithic farming economy in Europe was
limited by ecological factors and that, beyond the northern
margin of the deciduous forest, hunting, fishing, fowling and
gathering provided the only or at least the principal means of
subsistence.   The circumpolar zone, with its great tracts of
coniferous and birch forest and areas of open tundra and extending
from the Atlantic coast of Norway to the Urals and far beyond,
supported a type of Arctic culture which, though overlapping in
South Scandinavia and the Baltic coasts with cultures based
primarily on farming, rested fundamentally on a ‘Mesolithic’ type
of economy. The emphasis laid on different aspects of the food-
quest naturally varied: on the Atlantic and Arctic coasts of
Norway deep-sea fishing with hook and line was particularly im-
portant; whereas the hunting of elk played a leading role in the
interior of Sweden, Finland and northern Russia; and seal-hunting
was a main activity on the coasts of the southern territories, in
which alone mixed farming was combined with catching activities.
Certain cultural elements of Neolithic origin were appropriated by
the Circumpolar people, notably the making of pottery, which
they built up by coils to conoid forms and decorated by sinking
pits in the thickness of the walls, as well as by impressing combs
or toothed stamps, commonly arranged in zig-zags over the whole
surface of the vessel. Although they turned out projectile heads,
knives and, in north-west Russia, some notable profiles of animals,
from flint or alternative materials by means of bifacial pressure-
flaking, the sub-Neolithic Arctic people were notable above all
for the extent to which they utilized slate. Both the forms, and
the techniques of sawing and polishing used to shape them,
suggest familiarity with the working of bone. The antlers and
skeletal material from game animals provided material indeed for
harpoon-heads perforated near the base for securing to a line,
barbed spearheads, arrowheads, handles slotted for flint insets and
fish-hooks; nearly all of these were of Mesolithic ancestry, though
the hooks were now commonly barbed and sometimes made in
                                144
V_   Terracotta Negroid head from Nok, Nigeria




                                           (facing p. 144)
VI   Plastic vase of kneeling boy, Agor
                                       a, Athens
 ‘NEOLITHIC’     PEASANTS     AND    ARCTIC   HUNTER-FISHERS

two pieces bound together at the base. Polished adzes, frequently
hollow-ground and evidently inspired by tools made from split
tubular bones, were another widespread feature and presumably
indicate the importance of wood-working.
   The Arctic people were aided in their quest for food by various
means of transport. On the sea and inland waters they almost
certainly used skin boats which, to judge from the north Nor-
wegian rock-engravings, were of umiak type and propelled by
paddles: vessels covered by seal-skin which would have been
tolerably resistant to floating ice. For traversing the snow, which
in Scandinavia lay for nearly half the year over most of the zone,
heavy dog-drawn sledges, built up on struts set in grooves and
braced to runners up to 12 feet long, were used as well as two
kinds of ski, one for compact snow, having straps passing through
a raised foot-rest, and the other for slushy snow with foot-
thongs threaded through side flanges. Boats and devices for
moving rapidly over land during the long winter made it possible
to carry on trade over surprisingly long distances; thus axes and
adzes of Danish flint were traded up the west Baltic coast and
across Sweden to the north-west coast and adjacent islands of
Norway; others roughed out of a kind of slate at Olonets in
Karelia found their way over much of Finland and the East Baltic
states; and amber pendants and figurines from East Prussia found
their way across Scandinavia to the west coast of Norway. The
existence of this trade helps to emphasize the broad homogeneity
of culture over very extensive regions, a homogeneity only partly
explained by an underlying ecological and economic unity.
  In Finland, Norway and Sweden settlement tended to con-
centrate on the coast so that advantage could be taken of the
resources of the sea and the shore as well as of the interior. In
Russia on the other hand and in the interior of Scandinavia the
shores of lakes and rivers were main foci of settlement. The
hunter-fisher way of life commonly involves migration and this
applies particularly to the circumpolar regions where seasonal
   6                           145                           ce
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN       CIVILIZATION

differences are so pronounced. Thus, where they were available,
as on the west and north-west coasts of Norway and on the island
of Karlsé off Gotland, caves might be used during the summer for
particular catches of seals or fish. As a rule, no doubt, tents or
other light structures were used at this time of the year. On the
other hand, during the winter, dwellers on the exposed coasts of
north-west and northern Norway built rectangular semi-sub-
terranean houses having thick walls of earth and rubble faced with
dry-stone work, the roofs supported on two rows of vertical
posts. Although it is difficult to be sure how many houses were
occupied at once, it seems that under favourable conditions the
Arctic hunter-fishers were able to live in sizeable groups. This is
confirmed by the existence of cemeteries like those of Olen on
Lake Onega in Russian Karelia and Vasterbjers on Gotland. The
first of these, though partly destroyed, yielded more than 150
graves. The dead were normally buried in an extended position
wearing skin garments fringed with perforated animal teeth and
accompanied by personal ornaments, weapons and tools.
   The wealth of grave-goods suggests that the Arctic people
practised their economy, the only one feasible at the time over
most of their territory, at least as successfully as their contem-
poraries practising farming further south. In addition to repetitive
patterns applied to pottery, which they shared with the peasant
communities of Neolithic Europe, they created an impressive
body of art—rock-engravings,           plastic models in fired clay,
carvings in amber, bone, slate, greenstone and wood, profiles
chipped from flint and outlines impressed by toothed stamps on
pottery—devoted primarily to representations of the animals on
which they depended, above all elk, bear, reindeer, seals, small
toothed whales, fish and water birds, but also including human-
beings and boats. In the case of the rock-engravings several
distinct local styles may be recognized, but the general style of
the carvings is remarkably uniform as far east as the bog of
Gorbunovo in the Mid-Urals.
                                 146
                          CHAPTER 7

   THE FOUNDATIONS OF EUROPEAN
     CIVILIZATION: FROM MYCENAE
       TO THE AGE OF EXPANSION

Mycenaean origins
   About the same time as the Battle-axe people were swarming in
central and eastern Europe, the Middle Helladic phase of Greek
prehistory was ushered in by warriors who apparently spoke the
Greek language and so belonged linguistically to the Indo-
European family. Their wheel-made, grey ‘Minyan’ pottery,
which included among its forms high-handled cups based on
silver prototypes, belongs to a ware found widely over Asia
Minor and as far afield as north-east Iran and Turkmenia, a fact
consistent with a homeland on the steppes of South Russia for
speakers of the pristine and undivided Indo-European language.
Whether the warrior incursion reached Greece by way of Asia
Minor or, as others think, from Macedonia, the event gave a
decisive flavour to the Late Helladic or Mycenaean civilization
that flowered in Greece during the sixteenth century B.c. Though
clearly subject to strong Minoan influences, Mycenaean civiliza-
tion is no longer believed to have been introduced fully formed by
conquerors from Crete. The mainlanders adopted many elements
of the island civilization, but the Mycenaeans and their culture
were deeply rooted in mainland Greece. This is illustrated by the
fact that the site of Mycenae was occupied already from Early
Helladic times and that the royal shaft graves, which yielded many
of the finest objects from the beginning of the Mycenaean civiliza-
tion, formed part of a cemetery of Middle Helladic origin. Again,
though sharing the centralized palace organization of the Minoans,
                                147                         6-2
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN    CIVILIZATION:

the Mycenaeans incorporated the megaron or great rectangular
hall with porch and inner chamber, a plan absent from Crete, but
which existed in Troy II and in Late Neolithic Thessaly. Even
more to the point, the records maintained by Mycenaean scribes
in connection with the palace economy introduced from Crete are
now known to have been written in the Greek language, though
the script (linear B) was palpably derived from one (linear A)
used by the Minoans as early as the seventeenth century B.c.
for a language yet to be identified; by common consent this
was not Greek and the suggestion has been made that the change
in script was in fact due to the need to adjust to a different
tongue.
   The mainland was a larger and naturally richer unit, which only
needed the stimulus of the ‘Minyan’ incursion to realize its
potentialities. No doubt it was this economic pull that drew
Cretan artificers as well as Minoan manufacturers to Greece and
led in due course to the introduction of the palace economy. The
most vivid picture of the wealth attained in Mycenaean Greece
already by the middle of the sixteenth century B.c. is to be gained
from the goods placed with the dead in the shaft graves. Vessels
of gold and silver, mirrors with carved ivory handles, lavishly
decorated personal ornaments and weapons and the use of exotic
substances give evidence not merely of wealth, but of wealth
concentrated in the hands of chieftains whose warlike attributes
and status are symbolized by light war-chariots, drawn by horses
and running on spoked wheels, vehicles of a type that had first
spread with the Hyksos to Palestine and Egypt and with the
Hittites to Anatolia. When it came to blows with the Cretans, it
was the mainlanders who won and the burning of the Cnossian
palace c. 1400 B.c. marked the beginning of Mycenaean dominance
in the East Mediterranean. It was during the following centuries
that Mycenaean trade reached its peak and it was to this period
that the cyclopean walls and the palaces of Mycenae and Tiryns
belong, as well as many of the tholos tombs, whose great circular
                                 148
       FROM    MYCENAE      TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

underground chambers approached by sloping passages are roofed
with domes that might be up to 45 feet high.

Bronze metallurgy in central Europe

   Until the intensified working of the East Alpine copper mines
had begun to cheapen metal and so to influence technology on a
broad front during the last century or two of the second mil-
lennium, the spread of tin-bronze metallurgy had only a limited
effect on the peasant and pastoral societies of prehistoric Europe.
The broad pattern of Neolithic cultures, as this was modified by
the spread of the Beaker and Battle-axe peoples, persisted; flint,
stone, bone and wood continued to be the most important
materials; and few important appliances came into use at this
time, unless we except the wooden ox-drawn ard or scratch-
plough and the farm waggon with solid one- or three-piece
wheels, of a type that was probably transmitted from South
Russia through the territory of the Funnel-neck Beaker people of
the north European plain. While metal was still expensive, its use
was mainly confined, apart from the all-important axe, to weapons
and persona! ornaments. The metal-smiths themselves were either
itinerant, peddling their own wares, as in the west, or, as in central
Europe, working at a few centres for middlemen who apparently
organized the sale of their products. The conjunction of copper
and tin needed for the rise of a bronze industry admittedly implied
trade that might extend over long distances, but neither this nor
the basic activity of mining was in itself new, since it had been
developed, even among hunter-fisher peoples, for the stone axe
and adze blades needed for felling and shaping wood. On the
other hand the metal trade opened up greater possibilities for the
concentration of wealth and there seems little doubt also that it
marked a further intensification of the prospecting activities of
more advanced peoples centred on the East Mediterranean, the
early stages of which have already been traced. This is confirmed by
the fact that the early smiths of central Europe practised techniques
                                 149
    THE   FOUNDATIONS        OF   EUROPEAN      CIVILIZATION:

invented earlier in the Near East. Among these was the use of valve
moulds consisting of two pieces pegged together, which allowed
the casting of objects having'raised features like mid-ribs and flanges
on either face, and of the cire-perdue process whereby wax models
were encased in clay and after firing replaced by molten metal,
a method which made it possible to produce a wide range of
complex forms with greater ease and economy. Many of the leading
metal types manufactured during the Early Bronze Age of central
Europe (Danubian IV, c. 1800-1450 B.c.) among the Perjamos,
Tészeg A, Aunjetitz and Straubing groups of the Maros, Upper
Theiss and Middle Danube, Bohemia and Bavaria respectively, such
as for example racket-shaped and knot-headed pins of bronze,
gold wire earrings and copper torcs or neck-rings with coiled ends
that served as metal ingots, were likewise of Near Eastern origin.

Mycenaean trade with barbarian societies
   Although bronze metallurgy was thus established in limited
parts of central Europe before the rise of Mycenaean civilization,
it was the Mycenaean market (Map 4) that more than any other
factor was responsible first for its spread to other centres and then
for its intensification. Although copper was worked in Crete and
certain Cycladic islands on a small scale and in Cyprus on a
larger one, the requirements of the Minoans and later of the
Mycenaeans grew with every advance in their technology. The
adoption of standard bronze in Middle Minoan times accentuated
the need for prospecting and trade, because the East Mediter-
ranean area was notably deficient in tin. It was the need for metals
that in the first instance attracted Mycenaean attention to central
Europe and it was doubtless there that their emissaries came into
contact with the Jutish amber that was already during the final
phase of the Northern Neolithic being traded south. Their
interest in the fossil resin with its magical ‘electric’ properties
seems to have been aroused at first sight because Danish amber,
distinguishable from that found in the Mediterranean, was already
                                  150
       FROM    MYCENAE     TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

being buried in the shaft-graves of Mycenae; as it turned out it
was their sustained appetite for this substance, as well as their
hunger for metals, that determined in large measure the course of
trade in Bronze Age Europe down to the breakdown of Myce-
naean power in the twelfth century. The original route by which
amber travelled south from the west Jutland coast was up the
Elbe to the junction with the Saale, thence by way of both rivers
across the territory of the Aunjetitz culture to the Brenner pass
and so by way of the Po Valley to the head of the Adriatic and
down by sea to Greece. When in the second phase of the central
European Bronze Age a distinctive bronze industry, associated
with tumulus burial, arose among descendants of Corded-ware
folk occupying the highlands of south-west Germany, a western
loop was added, making first for the Middle Rhineland, passing
up the Neckar, thence across to the Danube and so downstream
to join the old one. The amber route formed a veritable hub
around which the Early Bronze Age industry of much of Europe
revolved. East of the Saale and extending as far as the Warthe
another distinct centre marked by rich tumulus burials grew up,
which like that in south-west Germany, was carried by descendants
of the Late Neolithic Corded-ware people. Another distinctive
industry developed in North Italy adjacent to the southern end
of the overland route, and at its northern end the Danes, still
in the final stage of their Stone Age, were importing bronze
manufactures both from central and also from western Europe.
   The only manufactured objects of East Mediterranean origin
found in barbarian Europe and sufficiently numerous to define
commercial routes are beads of faience, an artificial substance
consisting of a core of fused quartz grains and a covering of glass
glaze. Almost certainly the trade in these beads to the west and
north-west was in the hands of Mycenaeans or their emissaries.
The large numbers present in the Aunjetitz territory and in that
of the adjacent Tomoszéw culture of the Upper Vistula and a
single find from north Jutland confirm the importance of the
                                151
    THE   FOUNDATIONS        OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

central European trade, but equally the distribution of the beads
points to an alternative route by way of the Mediterranean and
the western sea-ways. Faience beads from the cremation cemetery
of Hal Tarxien, Malta, and from sites with Late Helladic NIA
pottery on Sicily and the Lipari islands mark the passage of
traders towards the western Mediterranean. On the other hand
the scarcity of finds on the coast of eastern Spain and their relative
abundance in the south of France from Languedoc to Provence
makes it plain that the main routes to the west no longer encircled
Iberia. The El Argar culture that followed and carried forward the
Almerian in the east of Spain was relatively provincial in character,
and its metal-smiths had to make do with an insufficient supply of
tin. Trade now flowed north of the Pyrenees, down the Garonne
to Morbihan, itself a source of tin, and on across the open sea to
Great Britain and Ireland, attracted no doubt by the tin of Cornwall
and possibly of Wexford, by the copper of Waterford, Cork and
Kerry and by the copper and gold of Wicklow.
   Although two main routes can be distinguished, these were
themselves interconnected; for instance the chieftains’ tumulus
burials in Brittany probably indicate a movement from the Saale-
Warthe province, and the Hiberno-British region was linked by
two-way movements both with this and with the West Baltic
area. Indeed, it was the position of Wessex at the cross-roads of
the two routes that made it possible for the ruling class to gain
riches from Irish gold, Cornish (and possibly Irish) tin and Baltic
amber. Clues to the ultimate destination of at least some of the
tin are given not merely by the presence of segmented faience
beads in a fair proportion of the Wessex tumulus burials, but also
from the many indications that Wessex goldsmiths had learned
from the more sophisticated practitioners of Mycenaean Greece.

Wessex and Stonehenge

   In the wealth of their tumulus burials the Wessex chieftains
have many analogues on the Continent, but in the lintelled circle
                                  Maye.
       FROM    MYCENAE      TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

and horseshoe setting of trilithons erected from sarsen blocks at
Stonehenge they can show a monument unique in barbarian
Europe and one which they have autographed by means of
engravings pecked on certain of the uprights. Much attention
has rightly been paid to the representation of a metal dagger of a
kind found in the shaft-graves at Mycenae, but it is at least as
significant that more    than sixty representations     occur   of an
ordinary Wessex type of cast flanged axe. Further, while it is
true that the sarsen settings stand apart in sophistication both as to
form and finish, it should be remembered that they relate to a
comparatively late stage in the history of the monument. Stone-
henge began, as we have noted, as a circle of ritual pits surrounded
by a penannular bank and ditch, and was originally constructed
during the Secondary Neolithic phase. The first stone erections
on the site were made from bluestones quarried on the Prescelly
Mountains, and dragged and floated all the way to Salisbury Plain
by the Beaker people. In view of the role of these people in
opening up the copper resources of Ireland and initiating a native
Hiberno-British metallurgical industry, it is worth noting that
according to an old tradition incorporated in the chronicle of
Geoffrey of Monmouth (c. A.D. 1136) the bluestones were derived
from Ireland. It is also a fact that under the right conditions
it is possible to descry Wicklow from the crest of the Prescelly
mountains.

Recession in the East Mediterranean
    Enough has been said to make it evident that the Mycenaeans
or their agents played a decisive part, both in fostering the de-
velopment of native bronze industries in central and north-western
Europe and in creating conditions that favoured the enrichment of
chieftains whose wealth was conspicuously displayed by indi-
vidual tumulus burial. It is possible also, though in the existing
state of knowledge this is only a hypothesis, that Mycenaean skill
and technical knowledge and the pull of the Mycenaean market
                                 153
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN    CIVILIZATION:

were between them responsible for intensifying the winning of
copper in central Europe, which made possible the far-reaching
industrial changes of the Late Bronze Age in temperate Europe.
It has been suggested that it was expansion from central Europe
that precipitated the fall of Mycenaean civilization and helped to
set in motion movements of peoples which troubled the whole of
the East Mediterranean world during the first half of the twelfth
century B.c. Of the existence of disturbances at this time there
can be no doubt. We know from the records of Ramses III
 (1198-1166 B.c.) that the Hittite confederacy, previously
threatened during the closing decades of the thirteenth, was
broken up by an eastward thrust of population during the first
 part of the twelfth century, at a time when Philistines were
 settling on the coast of Palestine and Egypt herself was threatened
 by islanders from the north. Again, according to later sources,
 Troy VIIA was destroyed some time around the end of the
 thirteenth or the beginning of the twelfth century (between 1209
 and 1183 B.c.); and Thucydides tells us that the Dorians entered
 the Peloponnese some eighty years later. Archaeology confirms
 that many of the leading Mycenaean cities were destroyed by
people whose immediate source was Mount Pindus, but who prob-
ably originated in Macedonia. Yet many of the detailed analogies
between central European, Greek and Anatolian material used to
support the idea of movements from the Middle Danube area
might equally suggest movement in an opposite or even from a
third direction and no definite answer can be expected until the
chronology has been more exactly worked out.

 Urnfield cultures in central Europe

   A notable feature of this time in central Europe was the
adoption by the descendants of the Aunjetitz people of the
practice of burying their dead in urnfields, a practice that presum-
ably spread from Hungary and which, significantly, occurred at
Troy VI as early as the fourteenth century B.c. Likewise the
                                 154
        FROM    MYCENAE      TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

warts and fluting on the cinerary urns themselves have Hungarian
affinities and fluted pottery had a very long history in Anatolia, as
well as being used by the destroyers of Troy VIIA and of Late
Mycenaean villages on the Vardar. The Urnfield cultures of central
Europe are symbols of the independent potentialities of European
peasants at a time when civilization in the East Mediterranean was
undergoing a temporary eclipse. They are immensely significant
as laying the basis on which, under Greek, Etruscan and Scythic
influence, the prehistoric Iron Age civilization of Europe de-
pended. The earliest Urnfield group was that established in
Hungary and exemplified by the C-level of the mound at Tészeg.
Another grew up in the old Aunjetitz territory of the Lausitz
between the Elbe and the Oder and north of the Sudeten
mountains and later spread east to the Vistula and south to
Lower Austria. A third, of special importance to the genesis of
the Hallstatt Iron Age civilization of temperate Europe, was
located in the North Alpine area, where two distinct cultures
flourished, namely the Knoviz of Bavaria and south-west Bo-
hemia and the Hétting of Austria.

Copper-mining in the Tyrol
   It was the Hétting people who were mainly responsible, under
the initial stimulus of the Mycenaean market, for opening up the
copper-mines of the Tyrol. The best explored mines are those of the
Miihlbach—Bischofshofen area near Salzburg, which tapped deep
veins of copper pyrites. The miners had bronze-headed picks,
but their main weapons were fire and water. Veins would first be
attacked where they outcropped, but as soon as the miners had
worked themselves into the hillside they were able to bring the
fire to bear on the ceiling as well as on the rock immediately
ahead. Very soon it would be necessary to build a wooden
staging to carry the rock-waste and support the fires, and under
this a passage would be left for the air currents needed to keep the
fires burning and the atmosphere clear. By the time the workings
                                  T}}
    THE   FOUNDATIONS      OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

had reached a practicable limit they might be as much as 160 metres
in length and 30 metres in height at the entrance. Such a mine at
the peak would probably have called for a labour force of some
180 men, a third of whom would have been employed on felling
the wood needed for fuel and staging purposes. The total quantity
of crude copper produced by the Miihlbach—Bischofshofen mines
during the Late Bronze Age has been estimated at around
20,000 metric tons.
   Mining operations on such a scale greatly increased the supply
of copper and it must be remembered that the collapse of the
Mycenaean market soon left the whole of this to the peasant
societies of prehistoric Europe. Some of the metal was un-
doubtedly exported, to be incorporated for example in the
products of the Nordic bronze-smiths in their splendid hey-day;
but the bulk was used by the Urnfield people themselves, either
directly or for fabricating wares for export. Among the tech-
niques first practiced by Urnfield people in temperate Europe was
the art of hammering vessels, an art long previously practised in
in the East Mediterranean world. Socketed axes, the idea of which
may have originated in central Eurasia, were among the numerous
forms that required core-casting. The cheapness of metal made it
practicable to turn out an increased range of tools and these
included such things as chisels, gouges and saws, which in turn
made possible notable advances in wood-working. The scale and
number of the urnfields, the highly organized character of the
extractive industries and the advanced standards of bronze-
smithing suggest a denser population and a more productive basis
of subsistence than that which sufficed for the earlier peasant
communities of much of Europe. Although there is evidence
that the ox-drawn ard or light scratch-plough may have started to
be taken into use during an earlier stage of the Bronze Age, it
would seem that the Urnfield people consolidated a system of
settled mixed farming that was to prevail over extensive parts of
Europe down to the Roman period.
                                156
       FROM    MYCENAE     TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION


Expansion of the Urnfield cultures
   It is hardly surprising therefore that after a period of consoli-
dation in the North Alpine area, during which they elaborated
their way of life and accumulated wealth from copper- and salt-
mines, the Urnfield people should have entered on a phase of
further expansion at the expense of their less developed neigh-
bours, an expansion which took the form of a series of thrusts
over a period of centuries and continued into the time during which
iron had come into use for tools and weapons. The expansive
power of the Urnfielders, based in the first instance on an enlarging
population, was enhanced by the mobility made possible by a
fuller use of horse-drawn vehicles and given a sharp cutting edge
by the slashing swords first introduced to central Europe from
Asia Minor during the disturbed period that ushered in the break-
up of the Hittite empire and the decline of Mycenaean power. The
expansion of the Urnfield people, by displacing the populations
that existed in the territories into which they first penetrated,
brought about movements of population far more widespread
than those involved directly in their own migrations. Moreover,
through their control of vital commodities like copper and salt
and as a result of their pre-eminence as metal-smiths, they
exercised an important influence through the medium of trade,
and it is often difficult from the imperfect evidence of archaeology
to determine the precise historical significance of particular Urn-
field influences.
    The Urnfield expansion is significant both on account of the
movements of population and of trade that it set in motion and
because it laid the economic foundations of the last major phase in
European prehistory, a phase in which iron tools were destined
to play a role of increasing importance. South of the Alps Urnfield
influence penetrated to the Po Valley and Latium, and round
about 1000 B.c. a distinctive culture marked by cremation ceme-
teries and known as Villanovan began to develop between the Po
                                157
    THE    FOUNDATIONS      OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

and the Tiber on the basis of the old Apennine civilization. The
Villanovans placed the ashes of their dead either in biconical urns,
decorated in the Apennine style and covered either by a small cup
or by a crested bronze helment, or in urns shaped like store-
houses with entrances high up in the walls and of a type probably
derived from the Middle Elbe. They grew prosperous by intensi-
fying the exploitation of Tuscan metal resources initiated long
previously, probably under Minoan influence; developed a rich
bronze industry, of which many of the leading forms, including
swords with antennae-like projections at the base of the hilt,
razors, helmets, girdles, safety-pins or fibulae and cult objects,
were of Danubian derivation; and in due course adopted iron-
working. North of the Alps on the other hand Celtic-speaking
people seem actually to have penetrated as ethnic groups as far
west as Catalonia and ultimately as far north as southern Britain,
incidentally setting in motion a number of groups with traditions
formed in the Middle Bronze Age. The earliest incursion seems to
have passed through the Belfort gap into south Alsace and north
Franche-Comté. Late movements during the first quarter of the
first millennium B.c. reached as far south as the Sadne, pressed
forward in a westerly direction towards the Atlantic coast, and
during the latter half of the eighth century B.c. crossed the south
of France to complete the movement into Catalonia. Meanwhile a
distinctive bronze industry grew up in the Atlantic zone of Iberia,
based on    Cantabrian   copper and Galician tin, the original
stimulus for which was probably given by refugees from the
Loire region displaced by the westward thrust of Urnfielders. By the
seventh century B.c. the region had apparently entered into active
trade relations with Brittany and the British Isles, a commerce that
greatly enriched the later bronze industries of the islanders.
   Southern England was strongly influenced from across the
Channel by the economic growth and ethnic expansion of the
Urnfield people. Doubtless it was through trade that such conti-
nental types as socketed axes and slashing swords first came into
                                 158
        FROM    MYCENAE     TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

 the country, and it must be significant that it was during the
 opening centuries of the first millennium that the distribution of
 the products of metallurgical industry was reorganized on conti-.
 nental lines and the travelling tinker replaced by the more elabo-
 rate organization implied by large hoards of finished wares or of
 scrap. Ethnic movement, on the other hand, seems to be implied
 by the adoption of globular urns recalling prototypes in northern
_France, and above all by the introduction of the new system of
 agriculture based on the cultivation of short, broad fields by
 means of ards or light scratch-ploughs, a system destined to
 provide the principal base of the agricultural economy of much of
 lowland England throughout the prehistoric Iron Age and the
 Romano-English period.

 Protogeometric Greece
   As we have seen, the catastrophes which temporarily eclipsed
 Aegaean leadership redounded to the economic advantage of
 central Europe, and set in motion changes which transformed the
 way of life prevailing over extensive tracts of the then barbarian
 world. Even in Greece itself the disaster failed to impair the basis
 on which civilized life was recreated during later centuries. The
 destruction of Mycenae and of other urban centres is a fact
 attested by archaeology, whoever       the attackers, traditionally
referred to as Dorians, may have been in particular cases. Urban
sophistication gave place to rustic simplicity; economic life re-
verted very largely to the activities immediately concerned with
subsistence; trade languished; and crafts like masonry-building,
gem-cutting and writing fell into desuetude. Yet even at a
material level the decline was not unrelieved; Protogeometric
pottery may have been ruder in some respects than Mycenaean,
but it was by no means without merit; and the importation of iron
ornaments and weapons marked the onset of a new era in Euro-
pean technology. Moreover, the break was by no means equally
marked in all the Greek lands. If Mycenaean civilization was
                                 159
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN      CIVILIZATION:

destroyed in the Peloponnese, substantial continuity was main-
tained in Attica, Boeotia and Ionia, and it can hardly be a co-
incidence that it was in these latter regions that, to quote Miss
Lorimer, ‘all Greek poetry, both archaic and classical, all the
great forms which the literature of Europe was destined to imitate
and elaborate through the centuries, have their ultimate origin’.
No doubt it was this continuity also that helps to explain why it is
that Greek mythology, with the gods dwelling on Olympus in
subjection to Zeus, is Mycenaean in conception and the Greek
temple a descendant of the Middle Helladic megaron. Again, it is
a striking fact that the oriental influences that brought Classical
civilization to birth were transmitted through territories like
Rhodes and Cyprus, where Mycenaean civilization had been
subject to the least disturbance.

Genesis and diffusion of iron-working
   As so frequently happens, the decline of one phase of culture
marked the genesis of its successor. Thus the fall of the Hittite
empire at the beginning of the twelfth century was the immediate
cause for the spread of iron technology. Although much more
widely spread in nature than copper and still more than tin,
telluric iron did not come into general use until much later than
bronze, even though insignificant quantities were occasionally
produced accidentally in early times in the course of such acti-
vities as firing pottery in closed kilns. Traditionally the earliest
skilled iron-workers practised their craft in the lands bordering
the southern shore of the Black Sea, and it is significant that the
first historical references occur in the archives of the Hittite kings
at Boghaz-Keui. There are grounds for thinking that the Hittites,
conscious of the advantages conferred by iron weapons in war,
guarded the secret of their production and restricted exports to
daggers, personal ornaments and the like, designed as presents for
rulers of foreign states. What is certain is that it was not until the
downfall of the Hittites that iron-working spread for example to
                                 160
       FROM    MYCENAE      TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

Palestine, where it soon came to be applied to general economic
activities such as farming in the shape of hoe-blades, plough-
shares and sickles. It must have been from Anatolia or Syria,
probably by way of Cyprus, that the Greeks of the Protogeo-
metric period obtained their sword- and dagger-blades and in due
course the knowledge needed for establishing their own iron-
working industry.

The alphabet

   It was in the same historical context and from the same quarter
that the Greeks derived the alphabet. The fall of the Hittites, the
decline of Egypt, following the death of Ramses III (1166 B.c.),
and the collapse of Mycenaean power combined to play into the
hands of the Phoenicians, a Semitic trading people of the coasts
of Lebanon and Syria, who even managed to enjoy political
independence from the twelfth to the ninth centuries. During an
early phase of this period and most probably by c. 1100 B.c. the
Phoenicians had evolved, probably to assist them in the conduct
of their commerce, the first alphabetic script, the actual symbols of
which were adapted from Egyptian hieroglyphs. Considering
that the alphabet had to be adapted to the needs of a non-Semitic
language, the agreement between the symbols on the earliest
Greek inscriptions and those of the Phoenician alphabet is so
close as to leave no doubt of their source, in addition to which the
names and order of letters and the direction of writing from right
to left in many inscriptions are all features of early Greek practice
and only readily explained on the hypothesis that the alphabet was
originally devised for inscribing a Semitic tongue. The prob-
ability is that the Phoenician script was first adopted around the
mid-ninth century B.c. by Greek traders based on the Asiatic
coast of the Aegean and operating through the Phoenician
trading station on Cyprus. Although devised and spread in the
cause of commerce, the alphabet was doubtless a main factor in
reducing the Homeric poems, hitherto passed on by word of
                                 161
    THE   FOUNDATIONS      OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

mouth, to their final form, probably towards the end of the eighth
century, just as it was destined in its variously modified versions
to transmit down to our own day the literature of western man.

Greek colonies
    Ever since Neolithic times the coasts and islands of the Aegean
had been the subject of exploration by mariners eager for trade or
new areas for colonization; at the height of their power the
Mycenaeans had posts as far west as South Italy, Sicily and the
Lipari Islands and trade connections over broad tracts of Europe
from Iberia and southern Britain in the west to the Ukraine and
even Transcaucasia in the east. It is a sign of their renascent
energy that the Greeks of the Geometric period not merely
caught up with, but in due course eclipsed their predecessors.
This is particularly true of the Euxine, into which Mycenaean
trade had penetrated only feebly and settlement not at all. Al-
ready during the eighth century Ionian Greeks had begun to
explore the northern shore of Asia Minor and in due course
trading stations were established at Trebizond and Sinope, the
first for loading iron, copper and gold from Transcaucasia and
the latter perhaps for transhipment into larger craft. Doubtless it
was the adventures of these pioneers which nourished the myth
of the Argonauts in search of the Golden Fleece that we find
incorporated in the Odyssey. During the following century
exploration was extended to the western and northern shores and
here no doubt the leading attractions were the fish that abounded
in the great rivers of South Russia, the Bosporus and the Sea of
Azov and which were traded dried or preserved in jars; the salt
that could so conveniently be prepared in the great estuaries; and
the honey and wax, known to have abounded in medieval Russia
and of which the importance was already implied by Herodotus.
In addition to its importance as a source of food and metals, the
Euxine also offered scope for settlement, and numerous colonies
sprang up at favourable points on the coasts. Among the most
                                162
       FROM    MYCENAE       TO   THE    AGE   OF   EXPANSION

prosperous were those which paid tribute to and lived in profitable
harmony with the Scyths, such as Olbia at the mouth of the Bug
and close to that of the Dnieper, Pantikapaion on the west shore
of the Bosporus and Tanais at the head of the Sea of Azov.
   In the Mediterranean the Greeks met formidable rivals in the
Phoenicians and Etruscans. To begin with they had to content
themselves with establishing colonies in South Italy, from Calabria
to as far north as Naples on the west coast, and in Sicily. They were
effectually prevented from venturing further over the open sea
by the Phoenicians, who had founded Carthage and other
colonies on the Tunisian coast and established depots on the
coasts of Sicily and Sardinia as early as the eighth century B.c.
Assyrian pressure on the trading cities of the Lebanese and Syrian
coasts first made it possible for the Greeks to spread to Egypt and
Cyrene and ultimately to the western Mediterranean, where they
founded Massilia (Marseilles) around 600 B.c. and Emporion
(Ampurias) on the modern Catalan coast, approximately 550 B.c.
From Massilia Greek traders reached out to remoter parts of
Europe for tin and other materials. By the middle of the sixth
century they had ventured through the Straits of Gibraltar to
Tartessos, the modern Cadiz, probably to collect Asturian tin.
But once again Greek enterprise was affected by events far away
at the east end of the Mediterranean. The destruction of the
Ionian cities by the Persians weakened the Greeks and made the
Carthaginians powerful enough to close the Straits of Gibraltar.
One effect of this was to deflect the Greek quest for tin to the
deposits of Morbihan and Cornwall. These were reached by way of
the Carcassonne gap, the Garonne river and the Biscayan sea-
route with a port of call at Corbillo by the mouth of the Loire.

Athenian repulse of Persia
   The overwhelming of the Ionian cities also constituted a mortal
threat to the Helladic homeland where the arts of Classical
civilization were already beginning to develop (Pl. VI). Before
                                   163
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

long Athenian support for Ionian rebels incurred the active
enmity of Darius, who set his armies in motion to stamp out the
distant source of disaffection. Conversely, it was the defeat of the
Persian army at Marathon in 490 B.c. and the destruction of the
fleet ten years later at Salamis that, in dispelling the Persian
menace, ushered in the greatest age of Classical Greece. That this
proved to be brief was due to a fatal flaw in political life: the
existence of so many sovereign city states in a land as small as
Greece was bound to lead to destructive rivalry and conflict. In
the event the state which emerged as victor from the Pelopon-
nesian war (431-404 B.C.) was the most disciplined, but also the
most philistine. With the predominance of Sparta the most
creative, though not necessarily the most influential, phase of
Classical art and thought was over. Before long the emergence of
a strong Macedonian kingdom under Philip II (359-336 B.c.) put
an end to the Greek city state as a political entity of importance.
Yet in other respects Philip’s achievements were immensely
significant, since they made possible the conquests of Alexander
the Great and so ultimately brought within the sphere of Hellenic
influence the ancient civilizations of western Asia and Egypt and
prepared the way for the expansion of the Roman Empire in the east.

The Etruscans

   Both on the Italian mainland and in the North Tyrrhenian sea
the Greek colonists encountered the Etruscans: a people of non-
Indo-European tongue, whose literature has yet to be deciphered
and whose origins have long excited interest. The idea that the
Etruscans arrived in Italy with a ready-made culture from the
Lydian homeland in western Asia Minor attributed to them by
Herodotus has few supporters today. The culture which appeared
in full view around 700 B.c. between the Arno and the Tiber was
in essence no more than an enrichment of that of the Villanovans,
explicable in terms of economic growth and the impact of exotic
influences; Phoenician, Cypriote and Greek. The Etruscans drew
                                 164
       FROM    MYCENAE     TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

their wealth from the deposits of copper, iron and tin in the
mountains and from their own skill as metal-workers. From their
early homeland they gained control over most of western Italy
north of the Greek zone, though, except in the north, they no-
where crossed the Apennines or disturbed the Italic bearers of the
old Apennine culture: Elba was seized early on account of its iron
deposits and Corsica fell into their possession as a result of a sea-
victory in league with the Carthaginians over the Greeks around
540 B.c. In the course of the sixth century Etruscan civilization
spread widely over the old Villanovan territories in the Po Valley
and southward as far as the Campanian plain, where the northern
Greek colonies on the Gulf of Naples were enveloped.
  Whereas the Villanovans were essentially villagers, the
Etruscans preferred, like the Greeks, to live in stone-built towns
with public buildings: it was after all Etruscans who first enclosed
the Seven Hills of Rome with a wall and converted a cluster of
Villanovan villages into a city with forum and temple. The most
impressive signs of their wealth are furnished by their tombs,
great stone chambers domed or vaulted and heaped over with
earthen mounds: the scenes painted on the inner walls, no less
than the sculptured urns, the bronze figures, mirrors and vessels,
the ivories, the imported Greek vases and the exquisite gold
smithery testify to a society that was not only affluent, but
sophisticated and highly stratified. Politically the Etruscans were
organized in self-governing cities, each with its dependent terri-
tory, a system which, as with the Greeks, was favourable to a high
level of culture, but which was unable long to survive the pressure
of larger and more coherent units. The overrunning of their terri-
tories in the Po basin by Celtic-speaking warriors between 450 and
350 .B.c. began the process of disintegration which the Romans
did so much to accelerate. By the middle of the third century B.c.,
indeed, Etruria had submitted to Rome, even if culturally the
absorption was not complete until just before the beginning of
the Christian era. Although the Roman republic ostensibly owed
                                165
    THE   FOUNDATIONS        OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

its birth to the expulsion of the Tarquinian dynasty and its growth
was largely at the expense of the Etruscan state, Roman civiliza-
tion was deeply indebted to the Etruscans: apart from their capital
city and its forum, the Romans owed them many of their leading
characteristics, such as their prowess with drains, their system of
land survey by centuriation, their preoccupation with divination
by the Aaruspices and, in the fasces, their very emblem of authority.

The Scyths
   By the middle of the sixth century B.c. the Phoenicians,
Carthaginians, Greeks and Etruscans had thus between them
settled the coasts, islands and peninsulas of the Mediterranean Sea
and had already begun to penetrate by means of trade and
exploration the extensive territories to the north that still remained
prehistoric. Before tracing the impact of these influences on the
heirs of the Urnfield and earlier prehistoric inhabitants of western
and middle Europe, it will be convenient to consider the nomad
peoples of the Eurasian steppes, who contributed important
influences of their own to the cultural life of the Celtic and
Teutonic peoples. Everywhere the natural grasslands of the steppe
were defined on the north by the forest zone. At their western
extremity the steppes came down to the shores of the Euxine, and
east of the Volga they graded on the south into deserts. In this
way the steppes formed a natural corridor linking the northern
margins of China with the Altai, the southern Urals, Caucasia and
the southern Ukraine, along which nomad horse-riders could
move rapidly. Moreover, the fact that the nomads depended for
their bare existence on the natural pastures of the steppe meant
that pressure at any one point was liable to involve progressive
displacements of population over vast territories.
    To gain a living from the steppe called for a highly specialized
knowledge of animal husbandry and a notable degree of cultural
adaptation, notably in riding, clothing and habitations, so it is
hardly surprising that well-defined nomad groups did not make
                                  166
       FROM    MYCENAE      TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

their appearance until well into the first millennium s.c. One of the
first indications dates from the end of the ninth century, when fore-
runners of the Huns began to harass peasant cultivators in the
frontier lands of North China, and it may well have been the
driving of these raiders to the west by the Chou emperor Suan
that set in motion the widespread displacement of nomad groups
which brought the Scyths to South Russia, probably around
7oo B.c. Although mainly concentrated in the South Ukraine and
the Kuban, the Scyths penetrated in some numbers into Hungary,
where they formed immediate neighbours of the central European
Celts, with whom they appear to have intermixed in Hungary and
Transylvania. The Scyths were pre-eminently nomads: by the
fifth century, it is true, some groups in contact with settled peoples
had adopted agriculture and even occupied townships on the
Dnieper and in the Crimea; but the overwhelming proportion
were at home on the open steppe. There they subsisted to a large
extent on mare’s milk and cheese, helped out by game and fish.
Ever on the move from one pasture to another, the men rode on
ponies, on whose harness they lavished the best materials and the
most skilled craftsmanship, and the women and children reclined
in waggons under the shelter of felt roofs. It is likely that when
stationary they lived in felt tents, which, to judge from the frozen
tombs of the Altai, where such things survived in a wonderful
state of preservation, had wool-pile rugs and brightly worked
wall-hangings. Leather, wool, felt and fur provided materials
for clothing, which in the case of men included soft boots,
trousers for riding, jackets pulled in tight round the waist to
allow maximum freedom in the use of the bow while in the
saddle, and conical hats. They wore plenty of jewellery, and bronze
mirrors of Greek manufacture or copied from Greek models were
common possessions.
   A notable feature of Scythic culture was the decorative art
manifested in metal belt-plaques, harness-fittings, scabbards,
dagger-hilts, drinking-vessels and jewellery and also in wood-
                                 167
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

carving, leather- and felt-work and even tattoo marks. Although
much of the metal-work was executed by alien craftsmen and
though the art derived elements from south-west Asia and
Ionia, Scythic art was essentially barbaric in style and feeling.
It was animated above all by a lively feeling for animals—stags,
goats, lions and birds of prey prominent among them—such as
one might expect to animate men who spent much of their life
in the open and for whom hunting was a main interest. Yet there
is a strong tendency towards stylization: the artist sometimes com-
bined several aspects of a single animal into one representation, or
he might use parts of one creature, such as the head and beak of
a bird of prey, to enrich a representation of another quite different
one; nor did he hesitate on occasion to contort and manipulate the
beasts to conform to some decorative pattern. Among the tricks
which the Scyths could have derived either from China or from
south-west Asia, and which they probably transmitted in turn to
Celtic art, was the rendering of projecting muscles on shoulders,
haunches and other joints by means of curls.
   As might be expected of a people to whom war, the chase and
the management of animals were all-important, Scythic society
was strongly masculine and authoritarian. This is strongly
brought out in the burials, which seem to have provided a main
focus of religious sentiment and which incidentally have yielded
by far the greater part of our information about the Scyths. The
dead were buried under barrows in chambers roofed over with
timber and provided with grave-goods. In the case of the leaders
the tombs were sometimes of vast size and the grave-goods of
outstanding wealth. The barrows of the royal Scyths in the
Alexandropol region of South Russia, for example, might range
up to from 30 to 70 feet in height and from 400 to 1200 feet in
circumference and the chamber might exceed 4o feet in depth
below the old ground surface. The archaeological evidence
strongly bears out the account left by Herodotus, who records
that the body of the dead leader, having been embalmed, was
                                 168
       FROM    MYCENAE     TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

laid on a waggon and for a period of forty days was drawn in
procession round his territory. The great man would be accom-
panied to the grave, not merely by material possessions, such as
clothing, jewellery, weapons, food, drink, drinking-vessels and
containers, but also by his favourite horses, his wife and his chief
servants, recalling the practices of the Han emperors of China or
from much earlier times those of the Sumerian rulers, witnessed
by the contents of the royal graves at Ur.

Hallstatt Iron Age
   The spread of iron-working north of the Alps gave rise to a
new group of cultures which takes its name from the cemetery of
Hallstatt near Salzburg. Although most of the bearers of Hallstatt
culture must have been direct descendants of the Urnfield people,
the ruling class probably stemmed in part from the old Tumulus
culture, and in part from immigrants from the east. The most
notable find relating to the earlier phase of the Iron Age Hallstatt
culture, defined by the characteristic long swords of bronze or
iron with scabbards having metal terminals, or chapes, of winged
type, are the burials of the chieftains. Instead of being cremated
and deposited in flat urnfields, they were now inhumed under
timber chambers covered by substantial burial mounds. Some of
the richest burials in the cortical area of Austria, Bavaria and
Bohemia have yielded remains of four-wheeled waggons that
remind one vividly of the funeral carts described by Herodotus
in connection with the burial of Scythic leaders. Although they
had adopted iron-working for some purposes, the Hallstatt
peoples made great use of bronze: for instance, they used a
variety of vessels, helmets, shields and greaves of sheet bronze in
the North Italian style, as well as a variety of smaller objects and
ornaments; and on occasion they even made their characteristic
swords in this metal. Whether these were really designed for
fighting from horseback, as many have held, is far from certain.
There is no doubt that the Hallstatt warriors rode horses, but
                                169
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

there is no proof that they used them for true cavalry fighting;
it could well be that they treated them, as the La Téne and other
early charioteers did their vehicles, as means of transporting
warriors to the most advantageous point for ground combat. In
any case their ability to ride, which they doubtless owed to
impulses from the east, enabled them to spread fairly rapidly over
the old Urnfield territories in the west, down the Rhine to the
Low Countries, into the Alpine area and across France to northern
and central Iberia. In an opposite direction elements of Hallstatt
culture appeared in several distinct Urnfield groups, among them
the Lausitz culture, regarded by Polish prehistorians as the basis
of the Slav people; the East Alpine, occupying much of the
Middle Danube basin; and the Bosnian, extending over much of
Yugoslavia south of the Sava and the Danube. The wealth of
personal armament and above all the widespread prevalence of
military defences in the form both of hill-forts and marsh-
fortresses like Biskupin in Poland leave one in no doubt that the
period was one of warlike activity, but how far the diffusion of
Hallstatt types was due to mere fashion, how far to raids by warriors
and how far to anything like folk-movements are problems
which need to be considered on their merits in particular cases.
  During the final phase of Hallstatt culture, defined by short
swords and beginning around soo B.c., the centre of gravity seems
to have moved west, and it was then that Greek influence,
stemming from the colony at Massilia and passing up the Rhéne
and across to the Upper Rhine and Danube, began to play directly,
at least on the upper classes of Celtic society. The most numerous
imports from the Greek world were concerned             with wine-
drinking, which seems to have been taken up by Celtic chieftains
almost as a symbol of status: amphorae, still retaining traces of the
pitch commonly added to wine in the Mediterranean down to the
present day, pottery wine-cups, bronze mixing-bowls and flagons
of Rhodian type combine to give a convincing picture of a trade
symbolizing an influence that was to do far more than transform
                                 170
       FROM    MYCENAE      TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

the drinking habits of the Celtic aristocracy. Another striking
instance of Greek influence at this time is given by the brick bastions
of the Heuneburg hill-fort near the headwaters of the Danube.

La Téne

   During the last quarter of the fifth century a new art style,
taking its name from the famous votive find of La Téne at the
eastern end of Lake Neuchatel in western Switzerland, came into
being in the territory between the Upper Danube and the Marne.
Many elements of La Téne art are most easily explained by the
breakdown of Classical Greek motifs like the tendril and the
palmette (an ornament with narrow divisions somewhat resem-
bling a palm-leaf), in the hands of craftsmen schooled in the geo-
metric Hallstatt style. Some of the earliest vehicles of Greek art
to reach the area in question were bronze wine-flagons with
beaked spouts, manufactured in the Etruscan workshops of the
Po Valley, but carrying Greek patterns on the handle-attach-
ments, which crossed the Alpine passes in the course of trade;
it was not until the conquest of the Po Valley by Celtic-speaking
people and the inauguration of Cisalpine Gaul around the middle
of the fourth century that contacts with Italo-Greek art proceeded
on a broader front. The fantastic treatment of animals or parts of
them was on the other hand almost certainly derived from the
Scyths, who as we have seen were immediate neighbours of the
Hallstatt peoples in east central Europe. Celtic society was
oraganized on an aristocratic basis and the finest products of La
Téne art flashed in bronze or gold on the helmets, shields, spears,
scabbards, harness-mounts, lynch-pins and terret-rings (driving
rein rings) of warriors, their horses and their chariots as well as
on the head, limbs and clothing of their women; but some of the
basic motifs were reflected in the work of humble potters and
wood-carvers. From its original focal area La Téne art spread east
into the Danube Valley, where was probably made the silver vessel
found in the bog of Gundestrup (Pl. VII) in Denmark, south
                                 r71
    THE   FOUNDATIONS        OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

into Cisalpine Gaul and west and north over France, the Low
Countries and the British Isles. Over the whole of this territory
it continued to flourish until replaced by Roman provincial
culture within the advancing frontiers of the Empire; and on the far
north-west perimeter of Europe, in Ireland and the highland zone
of Britain, it continued to survive until much later historical times.
   During the prehistoric La Téne period the Celtic peoples of
Gaul and Britain borrowed much from their more civilized con-
temporaries in the south. Thus, the revival of chariots was almost
certainly due to contacts with the Etruscans. Again, during middle
La Téne times the rotary lathe, used mainly for working wood
and shale, reached south-west Germany from North Italy, where
it had been introduced by the Etruscans, and from there spread
widely over temperate Europe. The rotary quern, invented in the
Graeco-Roman world for large-scale milling by means of donkeys
and slaves, was introduced to barbarian Europe in the portable
form used by legionary troops. The native coinage developed in
Gaul stemmed from two main sources: the gold coinage was
modelled on Macedonian staters; and the silver one on coins of
Massilia and the western Greek colonies. The appearance of
native coinage in Gaul, and in due course in southern Britain,
marked an important advance in political consciousness and
organization and it is significant that the late La Téne period also
witnessed the development in Gaul and South Germany of the
considerable fortified townships or oppida described and in some
cases stormed by Caesar.

Expansion of the Roman Empire

   Meanwhile the tiny and rather rustic Roman republic, born in
509 B.c. of the eviction of the Tarquins, was making ready to
extend the boundaries of the civilized world. By the time the
Gauls irrupted into Italy around 400 B.c. the Romans had began
to dominate their Latin neighbours, but it was not until the
victory of Sentinum in 295 B.c. that they finally emerged as the
                                  172
        FROM    MYCENAE     TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

dominant power in middle Italy. In the second stage of their
expansion they consolidated their hold on Italy as a whole: they
began by bringing under control the Greek colonies of Magna
Graecia, went on to evict the Carthaginians from Sicily in the
course of the First Punic War (264-241 B.c.) and within the next
twenty years had subdued the Po Valley. The third stage, during
which they gained control of the Mediterranean, was initiated by
the Second Punic War (218-201 B.c.), which not only brought
them Spain, but also, as a result of the battle of Zama, Carthage
itself and with it full control of the straits of Sicily; further than
that, through the Carthaginian alliance with Macedon, Rome
became involved in campaigns in the East Mediterranean which
led indirectly to the conquest of Pergamum and so to Roman
intervention in the affairs of Asia. The annexation of Syria and
Crete in 62 B.c., and of Egypt in 30 B.c., virtually completed the
encirclement of the Mediterranean, which became in effect a
Roman lake. Meanwhile the fourth and final phase of expansion,
during which the Romans incorporated within the Empire most of
the remaining territories of the Celtic La Téne peoples, had
already been initiated with the conquest of the rest of Gaul by
Caesar between 59 and 51 B.c. The subjugation of Britain, much of
the southern part of which had since Caesar’s incursion been
subject to strong influences from Roman Gaul, was begun by
Claudius between a.p. 43 and 47 and completed even beyond the
Firth of Forth by Agricola (A.D. 78-84), appointed for the task
by Vespasian.    By the death of Trajan in a.p. 117 the Empire
had reached the Rhine—Danube line, which it was destined to hold
until the collapse of imperial authority in the west; and beyond this
it had extended to the Low Countries, the enclave between the
Middle Rhine and the Upper Danube, and the province of Dacia.

The Germanic Iron Age and the migration period
   Meanwhile, beyond the most extended limits of the Empire the
forces that were ultimately to disrupt it were gathering strength.
                                 173
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

The heirs of the Nordic Bronze Age had acquired a knowledge of
iron-working from the south by around 4ooB.c.: during the
ensuing four centuries they drew their main inspiration from the
Celtic La Téne peoples with whom they came into contact on
their southern borders; but during the opening centuries of the
Christian era they came predominantly under Roman influence.
By means of trade, to quote just one instance, bronze accessories of
wine-drinking, manufactured in Italy, Gaul or the Rhineland, were
taken into use by prosperous farmers as far north as the Trondelag;
but even more important than trade in many respects was the
return of individuals from service in the Empire. Thus the free
Germans were growing in wealth and knowledge at a time when
the inhabitants of the Roman provinces were being thwarted by
bureaucratic interference and fiscal exactions; moreover the pro-
vincials’ power of war-like resistance was progressively lowered
by the very peace secured within the frontiers by an army in which
the barbarian element was ever on the increase. Beyond the
frontiers the small possibility of internal growth allowed by sub-
sistence farming and the barrier to northward colonization set by
the adverse climate of Sub-atlantic times led inevitably to southern
thrusts of population. The first of these indentified in history was
the drive of the Teutones and Cimbri from northern Jutland, that
began in 120 B.c. and was only checked by the destruction of the
Teutones on the field of battle near Aix-en-Provence in 102 B.C.
More widespread movements occurred during the second century
A.D., when for example the Goths crossed the Baltic from their
homeland in South Sweden and drove north of the Carpathians
down to the region of Olbia on the north-east shore of the Black
Sea. Such movements as these increased the flow of new ideas back
to the old homelands. It was from the Goths in their new terri-
tories that many exports from the Roman world, and art conven-
tions from the steppes, reached the north. Another feature to
spread north was the runic script, first adapted from the Latin
in all probability by the Marcomanni of Bohemia, a script that was
                                 174
        FROM   MYCENAE       TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

to reach Britain with the Anglo-Saxon invaders and to survive
in Scandinavia in full flower down to the Christian Middle Ages.
   Although it has been argued that westward thrusts of Huns
from the steppes, by engaging the eastern Germans delayed their
assault on Italy, in the long run it was the complex system of folk-
movements which they set in motion that brought down the
Empire in the west. The death of Theodosius I in a.p. 395 and the
division of the Empire, the Latin west falling to Honorius and the
Greek east to Arcadius, was the signal for wholesale invasions. The
full brunt of these was borne by the western half of the empire.
Although the formal end, symbolized by the deposition of Romulus
Augustulus, was delayed until 476, the invasion of Italy and the
sack of Rome by Alaric and his Visigoths in 410 was really decisive
in that, bereft of an effective head, the provincial limbs proved un-
able to withstand the multiple and often lightning thrusts of the
barbarians (PI. VIII). No account of these can be offered here, but
it is important to recognize a primary distinction between those of
the eastern and western Germans. Whereas relatively small bands
of the former, Visigoths, Ostrogoths, Burgundians, Lombards and
Vandals, penetrated great distances and left little ethnic trace
behind—the last-mentioned for example passed through Gaul and
Spain and across North Africa to fall upon Rome from the Car-
thaginian shore—the latter, spreading only over neighbouring
territories, laid the foundations of Anglo-Saxon Britain and
Frankish Gaul.

The spread of Christianity
    The prehistoric peoples beyond the old imperial frontiers were
first brought within the sphere of civilization by Christian mis-
sionaries.   Although   subject at times to severe      persecution,
Christianity spread widely throughout the Empire during the
Antonine period (138-92) and between 313 and 325 it achieved a
settled status through its recognition by Constantine and the
clarification of its doctrines at the council of Nicaea. When the
                                  175
    THE   FOUNDATIONS       OF   EUROPEAN     CIVILIZATION:

western Empire collapsed, much of its ecclesiastical organization
survived even though in the areas most overrun by barbarians
there was some relapse into paganism. Thus the continuity of
civilized life in south-east Britain was so disrupted by the Anglo-
Saxon invaders that Christianity had to be reintroduced from Rome
when more settled conditions set in by the end of the sixth century.
In the long run the Anglo-Saxons brought about an enlargement of
the Christian world by displacing Christians from the most
populous parts of the Roman province and driving them to the
remoter parts of Britain and even across the sea to Ireland. Asa
result thriving centres of Celtic Christianity grew up in northern
Britain and in the far west, separated from the remainder of
Christendom by a welter of Germanic barbarians, and it was only
during a lengthy period after St Augustine’s mission (597), in the
aftermath of which the Synod of Whitby (663-4) wasan outstanding
episode, that the two were reunited. Even so the Celtic church con-
tinued asin a sensea separate force, making for examplea distinctive
contribution to the conversion of Bavaria and West Germany.
   The bringing in of northern and eastern Germany had to wait on
political progress. The defeat of the Huns at Troyes (451) and the
conversion of the Frankish ruler Clovis to Christianity encouraged
the emergence of a well-founded state under the Merovingian
dynasty (486-751).    Great advances were made under Charle-
magne, who extended the Frankish frontiers to the Elbe and the
Pyrenees and was crowned in the year 800 as emperor of the
Romans at the hands of Pope Leo III. Yet the ninth century was to
witness the temporary return of conditions reminiscent of those
prevailing some four hundred years earlier, with Vikings taking
the place of Germans and Magyars that of Huns: the former issued
from Scandinavia to ravage the coasts of the Baltic, the North Sea,
the Western Isles, the Irish Sea, the English Channel, the Bay of
Biscay and even the West Mediterranean; and the latter, of re-
motely east Ural origin, were pushed by the advancing Petcheneg
hordes from their immediate homeland in the Ukraine across the
                                 176
VII   Representation of the Celtic god Cernunnus on a panel of the
                bowl from Gundestrup, Denmark




                                                          (facing p. 176)
VII   Bronze mould showing Teutonic perso
                                          nages of the Migration
                   Period, Torslunda, Sweden
        FROM   MYCENAE      TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

Carpathians into the Middle Danube basin, where their forays
terrorized more settled peoples.
    It was not until the middle of the tenth century, after half a
millennium of unrest, that the German kings Henry the Fowler and
 Otto were able to establish more or less settled conditions in
central Europe, the latter beating the Hungarians decisively at
Lech and reviving the Holy Roman Empire at his crowning in 962.
The extension of Christianity and indeed of literate civilization
itself to the remaining parts of Europe was the work of missionary
endeavour from Rome and Byzantium, the twin capitals of the
 Roman Empire. Henry and Otto had carried the frontier up to the
 Oder and the closing years of the first millennium were marked by
a series of dramatic advances, among them St Adalbert’s mission to
 Prussia (997), the adhesion of Hungary (1000), the conversion of
 Olaf Tryggvason, king. of Norway (995-1000) and a former
Viking, and the establishment of Christianity in Sweden, whence
in the twelfth century missionaries crossed to Finland. Meanwhile
Byzantine missions had already before the end of the ninth century
gone among the Bulgars, Croats and Serbs. In 988 Vladimir the
prince of Kiev introduced Christianity to his dominions, which
extended north to Novgorod over territory crossed by the old
trade routes linking the Swedish Vikings with Byzantium. Pres-
sure of nomads from the eastern steppes led to Novgorod taking
the lead from Kiev during the later twelfth century, but during the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries Moscow rose to prominence, and
when at length the ancient capital of the East Roman Empire fell
to the Turks it was to the metropolitan of Moscow that the head-
ship of Orthodox Christianity passed and it was the principality of
Moscow that formed the core of the future Russian Empire. It was
the expansion of Muscovite power and Orthodox Christianity that
brought the remaining areas of prehistoric Europe within range of
literate tradition. By the death of Ivan III in 1505 the frontiers had
reached the Arctic territories and the Urals and the prehistory of
Europe was to all intents and purposes concluded.
    ;                            177                            cP
    THE   FOUNDATIONS        OF   EUROPEAN      CIVILIZATION:

   A counterpart to the northward expansion of Christianity, which
followed the achievement of more stable conditions towards the
end of the first millennium, is to be seen in the staying and reversal
of Islamic expansion in the south. Within twelve years of Moham-
med’s death in 632 his followers had overrun much of the By-
zantine Empire, including Cyrenaica, Palestine, Syria and Iraq,
and in addition Persia and Armenia; and by 700 they had added
to their conquests the rest of North Africa, Afghanistan, West
Turkestan and north-west India. At the peak of their power in the
mid-tenth century the Moslems had come near to engulfing the
entire Mediterranean, having occupied most of Spain, as well as
Provence, Sicily and South Italy, and threatened Asia Minor and
Byzantium itself. From this point of view the stability that made
possible the Crusades came to Christian Europe only just in time:
in the event not only was all Spain regained by the middle of the
thirteenth century, but the fall of Byzantium was delayed suffi-
ciently long for it to be in some respects an advantage to western
Christendom.

The age of exploration
   By the middle of the thirteenth century Christendom was no
longer on the defensive in the west and was indeed ready to reach
out into other continents. Already by 1260 Venetian and soon
after Genoese merchants had begun to establish trade relations
with China from bases in the Crimea using the same route as that
followed a thousand years previously for conveying silk to the
Roman world; and during the earlier half of the fourteenth century
envoys were reaching China by sea from the Persian Gulf. The
conditions on which this eastern trade was based ceased to exist
when the Mongol was replaced by the Chinese Ming dynasty
(1368/70) and xenophobic influences regained the upper hand. The
Europeans had to turn elsewhere for the spices and other eastern
produce to which they had become accustomed. A new age of
geographical discovery and as it turned out a new era in the history
                                  178
       FROM    MYCENAE     TO   THE   AGE   OF   EXPANSION

of mankind was inaugurated, in which the lead passed from the
Mediterranean to the nations of the Atlantic sea-board. The
Portuguese began by edging round the west coast of Africa and
by 1498 had succeeded in reaching India by way of the Cape of
Good Hope (see p. 117). Meanwhile, six years before Vasco da
Gama’s culminating exploit, Christopher Columbus, a Genoese
holding the commission of Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain, made
landfall on one of the Bahama islands and before returning planted
a small colony of Spaniards on Haiti. Christendom had thus in the
course of two or three centuries initiated a process that within the
ensuing three or four was destined to bring the whole world
within the purview of literate civilization.
