                          CHAPTER       8


          INDIA       AND      THE      FAR      EAST

                             INDIA
India, like the greater part of Africa, lay outside the realm of the
Advanced Palaeolithic peoples whose successors initiated early in
the Neothermal period the processes that led in due course to the
emergence of civilized life in the Old World. Ata time when tells,
marking permanent settlements by peoples subsisting on the pro-
ducts of cereal farming and stock-raising, had for centuries been
incorporating the ruins of successive houses and temples over a
great tract from Palestine, Cilicia and Syria to northern Meso-
potamia and the Iranian plateau, the greater part of the Indian sub-
continent remained the refuge of low-grade hunter-fishers, whose
microlithic flint-work stemmed from Lower Palaeolithic sources
(see p. 49).

Early farmers in Baluchistan and Sind
   The earliest traces of communities based on farming in India are
confined to Baluchistan and to a contiguous area of Sind on the
right bank of the lower reaches of the river Indus (Map 5). At the
present day Baluchistan is so arid that most of the inhabitants are
perforce nomadic, but the numerous tells indicating permanent
settlement, together with the stone-built dams (gabarbands),
suggest that rainfall must have been higher during the third mil-
lennium than it is to-day. Although a few of the mounds have
yielded assemblages lacking in pottery or with only hand-made
wares, as in the first and second phases respectively of the site of
Kile Gul Muhammed, near Quetta, the great majority relate to
communities using copper tools and turning pottery on the wheel.
                                180
                                         INDIA




                         Periano G
 Kile Gul
   Muhammed&               4
             Togau&
                       Rana GhundaS aS



       KuliA




       A     Highland villages
 F_=jHarappan civilization
  O          Chalcolithic cultures
       A     Grey ware

       B_    Gangetic copper hoards

       C_ Chalcolithic
 4°"! Stone axe cultures
  ee

 BT     hd




 5- The Indian sub-continent in late prehistoric times (c. 2300-500 B.C.).

   Several distinct varieties of wheel-turned pottery have been
detected in different parts of the territory, differing in the colour
of the ware and the character of the designs painted on its surface,
local differences analogous to those observed over the same terri-
tory in the designs of rugs made at the present day. Wares of reddish
hue are found in the Zhob valley in the north and again in central
Baluchistan, where the Togau pottery exhibits designs based on
                                          181
                  INDIA    AND   THE   FAR   EAST

naturalistic animals and humans and on friezes of stylized ibex
heads. Buff-coloured wares, on the other hand, occur in the area
round Quetta, painted predominantly in geometric designs; in
south Baluchistan, where the Nal and Kulli wares each combine
geometric with naturalistic and stylized animal designs; and in the
outlying area of Sind, where Amri ware was painted almost ex-
clusively with geometric designs. The chronology of these wares
relative both to oneanother and to the urban civilization of Harappa
and Mohenjo-daro is still uncertain. Yet already it seems clear that
some of the Zhob and Quetta wares began to be manufactured
before that of Amri, a fact of some importance when it is re-
membered that this ware underlay remains of the Indus Valley
civilization at several sites in Sind. On the other hand many
of the hill-villages of the Nal, Kulli and Quetta groups were
without doubt broadly contemporary with the great riverine
civilization.
   Too little is yet known about antecedent stages in the human
settlement of the Indus Valley for the origins of the Harappa
civilization to be anything but obscure. Yet already it is known that
painted wares of ultimately Iranian origin—Amri ware in Sind,
and Rana Ghundai (Zhob Valley) ware at Harappa—underlay a
number of the settlements, and it can hardly be doubted that a
formative part was played by colonists from the hills, endowed
with a technology that included metallurgy and the manufacture
of pottery on the wheel. What is more problematical, and too often
overlooked, is the contribution made by the aboriginal population,
most probably represented by the proto-Australoid stock which,
together with Mediterranean and Alpine elements, made up the
population buried in cemeteries of the Indus Valley people.
Direct contacts with the older civilization of Sumer, for which
concrete evidence exists mainly in the form of small objects of
value, such as engraved seal-stones and etched beads, may well
have provided stimuli, but one has only to compare the Indus
Valley and Sumerian civilizations to see that they are distinct and
                                 182
                               INDIA

largely independent entities. Both responded to the challenge and
opportunity of great river plains on each flank of a vast highland
region peopled with settled metal-using farmers who delighted to
decorate their wheel-turned wares in paint.

Indus Valley civilization
   Thanks to the trade contacts just mentioned, it is possible to say
that, by around 2500 B.c., the Indus Valley civilization had assumed
the form it was destined to maintain with comparatively little
change over the best part of a millennium. Geographically it
covered a larger area than either the Egyptian or Sumerian civi-
lizations: the great metropolitan centres, Harappa on the river
Ravi and Mohenjo-daro lower down on the main river, were
themselves over 350 miles apart as the crow flies; but smaller
townships and trading: centres covered a much more extensive
area from the foot of the Simla hills to the neighbourhood of
Karachi, nearly 700 miles apart, and again over a distance of some
950 miles extending from Sutkagen-dor near the coast of the
Arabian Sea to Lothal and Rangpur in Gujarat.
   Culturally speaking the Indus Valley people (Pl. IX) stood at a
level comparable with that of the Early Dynastic peoples of Egypt
and Sumer. They inhabited cities with monumental architecture
and exercised political authority over extensive territories. Eco-
nomically they could show a relatively advanced degree of sub-
division of labour: urban populations were maintained on food
grown in surrounding rural areas; many distinct crafts were
practised, including metallurgy, potting on the wheel, faience-
manufacture and gem-cutting; and trade connections were main-
tained by means of ships with lands as far afield as Sumer. On the
intellectual level they had achieved partial literacy, even if their
script, essentially pictographic in character and mainly engraved on
seals, though also stamped or scratched on pottery and inscribed
on small copper tablets, is confined to texts of hardly more than
twenty characters that have yet to be deciphered.
                                 183
                   INDIA   AND    THE   FAR   EAST

   On the other hand the general configuration of the Indus civi-
lization was quite distinct. The leading characteristics betrayed by
the excavated remains include a high degree of civic discipline and
organization, uniformity over an extensive area and stability over
long periods of time. The rectangular grid of the street plan,
differing so notably from the cramped irregularity prevalent in
ancient Mesopotamia, the elaborate system of sewers and rubbish
shoots, the carefully maintained wells, the great communal
granaries and the standardized systems of weights and measures all
reflect an ordered and settled society. What was the basis of this
discipline maintained over so long a period of time? There is no
indication that military authority was at all prominent: weapons
were relatively inconspicuous and defences were apparently con-
fined to the citadels, a reflection no doubt of the comparative iso-
lation of the Indus people from neighbours at a comparable level
of technology. Nor has any obvious sign of royal authority been
found, whether in the form of palaces, outstanding tombs or
regalia. A likely alternative is that the sanctions behind this
ordered way of life were religious and that the Indus Valley civi-
lization, like that of modern Tibet, was essentially theocratic. The
existence of a definite institutionalized form of authority seems to
be indicated by the great citadels at each of the capital cities, which
stand to a present height of some 4o feet and measure between
200-300 by 450~500 yards in length and breadth. The buildings on
the citadel at Harappa were too much robbed to interpret, but those
at Mohenjo-daro, though incompletely explored, are of out-
standing interest: in addition to a massive granary and loading
platform, the citadel was crowned by a great bath or tank sur-
rounded by a veranda and cell-like rooms suitable for changing,
the whole suggestive of ceremonial cleansings, such as are featured
by modern Hinduism; and close by was an extensive range of
buildings that may have housed a high priest or even a college of
priests or monks. As to the religious life of the people, there is
evidence, in the form of numerous terra-cotta figurines, of a
                                  184
                               INDIA

domestic cult of the mother goddess, a widespread feature of the
ancient world. Of special interest are features which, like the
bathing tank already mentioned, suggest a pre-Aryan beginning
for modern Hindu practices: these include stones suggestive of
phallus- or /inga-worship and a variety of deities engraved on seals,
including ones combining animal and human characteristics: in
particular a figure with a horned head-dress and arms loaded with
bracelets, squatting on a low seat, an evident prototype of Siva in
his aspect of Lord of the Beasts.
   It may well be asked why so well-organized and stable a civiliza-
tion should have collapsed apparently so suddenly. The possibility
should not be overlooked of an ecological upset sufficient to dis-
turb irretrievably a finely balanced economy. There are many signs
that in the Indus Valley, as on the highlands, rainfall was sub-
stantially higher when the civilization was taking shape during the
third millennium than it has since been, and it is likely that the
adverse effects of any decline in rainfall would have been magnified
by deforestation brought about by the need for timber for the
brick-kilns and other industrial purposes and by the effect of
grazing by livestock. Any serious weakening of the rural economy
would soon have brought down the urban superstructure in
ruin. Yet there is no satisfactory evidence that the civilization was
dying from the roots. The oft-cited evidence for civic dis-
organization during the final phase of Mohenjo-daro, the hovels
and kilns encroaching on the streets, may well in fact relate to more
barbarous peoples camping in the city after its fall and it is worthy
of note that many of the best works of art came from the upper
levels. While it is possible that resistance was weakened by some
underlying ecological cause, it seems certain that the Indus Valley
civilization, essentially civilian in character, was toppled over by
assault on the part of barbarous but militarily effective invaders;
vivid evidence of massacre is provided by the skeletons of men,
women and children, some bearing clear marks of sword-cuts on
their skulls, lying unburied in the streets of Mohenjo-daro.
                                 185
                  INDIA   AND   THE   FAR   EAST



The Aryans
   There are many indications that the opening centuries of the
second millennium were a period of widespread folk movement
over much of temperate Europe and western Asia, and it may well
be that it was through this movement that climatic change exerted
its most powerful influence. Even a slight reduction of rainfall
among peoples living close to the margin of subsistence in the
confined valleys of Baluchistan and the contiguous highland zone
may well have been enough to trigger off a series of movements of
people, and it is doubtless in such a context that we must view the
burning of Baluchi villages and possibly, even at some remove, the
fall of the Indus Valley civilization. The suggestion has often been
made that the agents of at least some of this destruction may have
been Aryans or refugees displaced by their incursions. As we
know them from the Rigveda—a collection of upwards of a
thousand hymns, spells, prayers and epic-chants, first committed
to writing only a comparatively few hundred years ago, but com-
posed by the Aryan priests during the latter half of the second
millennium B.c.—the Aryans were barbarians who lived in houses
of timber and thatch; worked bronze, but were not yet acquainted
with iron; and gained a livelihood by stock-raising and cereal
farming. Their leaders were hard-drinking cattle-raiders whose
horse-drawn chariots, used for war and sport, closely resembled
those of the Hittites, Mitannians and Mycenaeans, and their
priests, who composed the Vedic hymns, ministered to a pantheon
of gods headed by Indra, an apotheosis of the war-leader.
Attempts to identify the intruders described in the literature
with specific archaeological material are bound in the absence
of coins or inscriptions to rest on conjecture, and this is likely
to be particularly hazardous for the initial period when the
warriors travelled light and brought peoples of higher culture
into subjection.
   Until recently very little indeed was known archaeologically of
                                186
                               INDIA

the long period during which the Aryans first consolidated their
hold on the Upper Indus basin, established a main base in the
Bramavata, expanded into the Gangetic basin and laid the founda-
tions for the dynasties of the historical period. Latterly research
has been concentrated on this gap, in many respects the most
formative phase of Indian prehistory, and this has led to the
recognition at a number of sites between the Sutlej and the Upper
Ganges and Jumna rivers of a culture defined by a grey ware made
from well-levigated clay, having a smooth surface and decorated
in matt black paint with dotted and linear patterns. The fact that
this painted grey ware overlies Harappa ware, occurs at many
traditional sites and occupies approximately the area of the Brama-
vata, has suggested that it relates in some way to the Aryans,
though it is important to note that there is as yet no firm indication
of its absolute age. Of the fact of the Aryan conquests and of the
general lines of their advance traditional sources leave no doubt,
but it seems certain that these were much less disruptive of con-
tinuity than the composers of the epics would have us believe. One
reason for this view lies in the pre-Aryan elements in Hindu
religion, elements which we encountered in the Indus Valley
civilization and which include phallicism, ritual cleansing by
bathing, reverence for animals and the attributes of Siva. The
ancient emphasis on kinship between animals and men, for example,
which may well go back to a pre-Harappan stage in India, contri-
buted to ideas concerning re-incarnation in the guise of animals,
which in turn led to abstention from their flesh, concepts in marked
contrast with beliefs about personal immortality and the future life
entertained by the Aryans and with the emphasis on meat-eating
in the Vedic tradition. No doubt the conquerors consorted far
more with the despised peoples of the Indus Valley than their
panegyrists allowed, even if it should prove that this admixture was
more pronounced in marginal territories.
                  INDIA   AND   THE   FAR   EAST


Chalcolithic of the Ganges and the northern Deccan
   While there is no evidence that the Harappans were able to
withdraw in compact units and colonize territories to the south or
east, there is a distinct possibility that refugees may have contri-
buted to the culture of such regions and in this way have helped
perpetuate some of the old traditions. In this connection mention
should be made of hoards of copper objects from the Gangetic
basin found in two main groups, one in the Upper Ganges and
Jumna valleys, the other centering on the Ranchi plateau of Bihar
and extending south into Orissa, and each corresponding to early
centres of copper production. Although clearly stemming from
the Harappan school of metallurgy, the Gangetic types show con-
siderable differences: flat axes, for instance, having more con-
stricted butts and expanded cutting-edges, as well as entirely new
forms like harpoon-heads barbed on either edge which were
doubtless suggested by ones made by the hunter-fisher peoples of
the Ganges from more perishable substances. Unfortunately little
is known of the age of these hoards, except that they appear to be
associated with ochre-coloured pottery like that found stratified
below painted grey ware at Hastinapur.
   Again, communities occupying the region between the Upper
Chambal and Godavari basins in Malwan and the western part of
the northern Deccan seem to have shared in a devolved form
certain attributes of the Harappan culture, though living at a
humbler standard much more equivalent to that of the hill-villages
of Baluchistan. Recent radio-carbon determinations from the
Maheswar settlement in the Narbada Valley suggests that this
Chalcolithic culture may have begun in this region around
1500 B.c.; and it appears to have been brought to an end by the
spread of iron technology around 400 to 500 B.c. The people lived
close to the soil in houses of wood, wattle and daub. Their flint
industry resembled that of the Harappans in that it was based on
the production of blades from carefully prepared cores and in-
                                188
                              INDIA

cluded some simple forms of microlith; they made use of copper,
though more sparingly; their pottery, red in colour and painted in
black with geometric patterns and floral, animal and human repre-
sentations, was turned on the wheel; and their personal ornaments
significantly included beads of faience, as well as of agate and
carnelian.

Stone-axe cultures of the Kistna-Cauvery area
   Further south one encounters cultures at successively lower
levels of complexity. From the Kistna to the Kaveri basins there
flourished the South Indian Stone-axe culture first found clearly
stratified at Brahmagiri. The stone axes, which generally had
pointed butts and lozenge sections and were manufactured at
factory-sites located close to the sources of raw material, were
presumably used first and foremost by comparatively primitive
agriculturists, unable to afford metal axes, for clearing forest and
working timber. Copper was very rare, and the pottery was hand-
made rather than turned on the wheel. On the other hand the blade
technique of the Stone-axe people, the prepared cores and simple
forms of microlith, all match closely the flint inventory of the
marginal Chalcolithic and Harappan culture areas. To judge from
the rock-engravings clustering round the stone-axe sites in certain
localities and presumably related to the same culture, hunting was
carried on as well as the keeping of long-horned cattle, terracotta
figurines of which have also been found at Piklihal. The Stone-axe
cultures occupied the marginal zone of farming that encroached on
the hunter-fisher economy practised by the mesolithic aborigines of
the sub-continent, and in turn persisted down to the spread of iron-
technology during the closing centuries of the first millennium B.c.

Hunter-fishers of the extreme south and Ceylon
   Lastly, in the extremity of the sub-continent, and notably in
Ceylon, the hunter-fishers maintained their old way of life into the
historic period, continuing to arm their arrows with microliths
                                189
                   INDIA   AND    THE   FAR   EAST

chipped from quartz and other materials. Although polished axes
failed to penetrate this zone, some of the ‘ Mesolithic’ people in this
area acquired the art of potting, for instance those who left the
midden of Bellan Bandi Paldssa in Ceylon, dated by C4 analysis to
around the beginning of the Christian era.

Spread of iron-working
   The use of iron, by whatever means it was introduced, spread
rapidly over the sub-continent during the latter half of the first
millennium B.c. and incorporated within one technology agricul-
tural communities relying hitherto on copper or stone. At the
same time new classes of pottery made their appearance: Northern
Black Polished ware from the Gangetic plain to the Godavari and
Black-and-Red ware over much of the rest of the Deccan. More-
over, megalithic tombs came into use over large tracts of southern
India: the chambers, designed to receive the long bones and skulls
of up to half'a dozen bodies, from which the fleshy parts had decayed,
were partly sunk in the ground, frequently had a port-hole en-
trance through one slab and were protected by dry-stone walling
that might be supplemented by a circle of undressed boulders.
With these changes the prehistory of all but the most backward
parts of India was ended, even if the beginnings of recorded history
are still very obscure.

The Mauryan Empire

   It is possible to infer the existence during the later Vedic period
of numerous warring kingdoms in the northern part of the country,
and it was no doubt this that made it comparatively easy for the
invader. The conquest of the northern Punjab by Darius in 516 B.c.
and its incorporation as a satrapy within the Persian Empire seems
to have had no wider repercussions in India. The impact of
Alexander the Great, who entered the country by the Kabul
river in 327 B.c. and pressed down the length of the Indus basin,
proved to be much greater: by playing off one petty king against
                                  190
                                INDIA

another he succeeded not only in conquering a remote province,
but in arousing strong centralizing forces. Alexander’s death at
Babylon in 323 B.c. was the signal for something like a national
rising and led to the establishment by Chandragupta Maurya of a
dynasty that marks the true beginning of an Indian history. As we
know from the report of the Greek Megasthenes at the Mauryan
court, even in Chandragupta’s lifetime northern India was ad-
ministered by an elaborately organized bureaucracy. By adding
the Gangetic plain to that of the Indus, Chandragupta laid a firm
basis from which his grandson Agoka was able to extend the
Mauryan Empire to the limits of the wide territories over which a
farming economy prevailed, as far south as the northern limits of
Mysore. One of the main forces that impelled ASoka was his con-
version to the teaching of Buddha (c. 560-480 B.c.) and, indeed, it
is propaganda for his faith cut into rock-surfaces in Brahmi script
(incidentally the earliest inscriptions to survive in India since the
eclipse of the Indus Valley civilization) that most clearly defines the
extent of his realms. Yet as an organized religion Buddhism failed
to endure in India. It needed the invasion and conquest of the
north by Arabs, Afghans, Pathans and others of Moslem faith
between the tenth and twelfth centuries a.p. to detach any sub-
stantial part of the sub-continent from the ways of Hinduism,
based as these were on the Aryan conquest, but stemming in part
from Harappan and possibly even more ancient sources.

                              CHINA
Chinese civilization originated and took the form destined to
endure in essentials down to modern times in the basin of the
Hwango-ho, and it was not until the period of the Han dynasty
(202 B.c.-A.D. 9) that its centre of gravity shifted south to the
Yangtze river. Among the factors favouring the north were its
situation and its soil: geographically it formed part of the vast
temperate zone of East Asia, extending southward from the Amur
basin, and at the same time was accessible, albeit remotely, by
                                  I9I
                  INDIA    AND   THE   FAR   EAST

routes skirting north of the Tibetan plateau, to influences from early
centres of Old World civilization; and geologically the loess, that
blanketed high ground in Shansi, Shensi and Kansu and spread
over much of the North China plain in the form of alluvium
brought down by the Yellow River, endowed it with a soil at once
fertile and easily worked. Yet, though the northern part of the
country enjoyed certain advantages over the south during the
initial formative stages, the whole of China was relatively remote
from the focal area of Old World civilization, and the appearance
of settled life based on farming was correspondingly retarded.

Hunter-fishers
   The extent to which China was occupied by hunter-fisher
peoples during early Neothermal times is still uncertain, and it has
even been suggested that there was a break at this time in the
human settlement of what was destined to be the cradle of Chinese
civilization. The probability remains that the Late Pleistocene
hunters of the Ordos desert and Choukoutien represent a popula-
tion that survived into the Neothermal period and that future
research will reveal their presence. North of the Great Wall in the
Gobi and the highlands of Manchuria, marginal areas in which
hunter-fishers in fact maintained their mode of life throughout the
prehistoric and early historic periods of the Hwang-ho basin, there
are flint industries with microlithic blades like those used as insets
for slotted bone tools in the Advanced Palaeolithic, Mesolithic and
Sub-neolithic industries of Siberia. Further south, traces of crude
pebble industries, that stem ultimately from a tradition going back
to Middle Pleistocene time, have been found on the surface in the
old forested areas of Szechwan on the Upper Yangtze and in lime-
stone caves at Kwei-lin and Wu-ming in Kwangsi, associated with
pebbles with hour-glass perforation and tools of antler and bone.
Although there is thus evidence for the occupation of different
parts of China by hunter-fishers during the Neothermal period,
there is nothing to suggest the existence of conditions likely to
                                 192
                                 CHINA

have given rise to the independent invention of farming in the
Hwang-ho basin, and the mere fact that the earliest evidence for
this comes from the part of China most accessible to influences from
the west goes to emphasize that the Neolithic way of life was
intrusive.

Neolithic peasants of North China
   The material equipment of the Neolithic peoples of North
China, notably the hand-made pottery with textured surface and
the extensive use of polished stone for wood-working equipment,
knives and projectile-heads, falls broadly speaking into the same
category as that associated with Sub-neolithic groups over a large
part of the circumpolar zone. On the other hand one can hardly
look to the north as a source of domestication, and it seems that to
account for this and for such cultural innovations as painting
pottery and in due course bronze metallurgy it is necessary to turn
to the west. The most likely route linking the Hwang-ho basin
with early centres of farming in west-central Asia is that later
followed by the silk route, skirting south of the Gobi and traversing
Sinkiang by way of the Tarim basin and Kashgar.
   The probability is that while the earliest farmers of North China
were laying the foundations of settled life the loess still carried forest
vegetation, and that, like the Danubians of central Europe, they
practised ‘slash and burn’ agriculture while maintaining livestock
largely on forest products. Their main crop was millet and their
most important domestic animals the pig and the dog. It is evident
that the peasants lived in substantial village communities—the
settlement of Pan Po near Sian in Shensi seems to have covered
about 24 acres—but the nature of their economy involved move-
ment at fairly frequent intervals; and though they seem, like their
analogues on the European loess, to have resettled the same site
several times over, they never stayed long enough to accumulate
tells like those of the Near East. This, and the fact that the loess soil
has been intensively dug over and cultivated, has made it difficult
                                   193
                  INDIA    AND   THE   FAR   EAST

to recover detailed information about the nature of the settlements
and above all about their history. Although, as we shall see, dif-
ferent groups can be distinguished by their pottery, the Neolithic
peasants shared in other respects the same basic culture. Their
houses, which might be round, or rectangular with rounded
corners, and were sometimes sunk into the subsoil, were built of
wattle and daub, the roof being carried on timber posts. The floors
and inner faces of the walls of the Pan Po houses were plastered.
Partition walls joining the front roof uprights to either side of the
entrance formed a kind of internal porch, the roof of which was no
doubt raised to allow easy access, and a clay oven set in the middle
of the house between the roof posts helped to keep the interior
warm in winter as well as providing for cooking. Crops were
stored in beehive pits sunk into the loess, the walls being undercut
to reduce the size of the aperture. Burial was by inhumation;
children were often placed in pots among the houses; but adults
were buried in cemeteries away from the settlement, sometimes in
 plank-lined graves and as a rule accompanied by rich grave goods
 that might include a dozen pots as well as other things. The skeletal
 remains suggest that Neolithic peasants were already of essentially
 the same racial type as that predominant in North China at the
 present day.
    Important light is thrown both on their mode of life and their
 afhliations by the minor artifacts. The widely distributed stone
 axes, pecked out of hard rock and polished at the edges, point to
 forest clearance, as do the bevelled adze-blades to the working of
 timber. That hunting continued to play an important role is
 suggested by the wealth of leaf-shaped and tanged arrow-heads,
 commonly made from polished stone or bone and more rarely of
 shell or bifacially flaked stone. Among the more frequent artifacts
 were the stone knife-blades of lunate or oblong form, polished on
either face and along the edge and perforated to secure the handle,
tools which find ready analogies in north-east Asia and even in the
Eskimo territories of North America. Another trait widely spread
                                 194
                               CHINA

over northern Eurasia and North America is the bone handle
slotted to receive flint flakes, examples of which have been met
with, though rarely, in Kansu. Of more significance is the general
emphasis on polishing rather than flaking stone artifacts and the
use of bone for a wide range of tools and projectile heads.

Grey, Yang-shao and Lung-shan wares
    Into this same context fits the hand-made grey pottery with
 textured surface that is predominant in North China, occurring
 both separately and alongside each of the other leading wares and
 surviving to provide the bulk of the pottery used under the Shang
 dynasty. The roughening of the surface was done by impressing
 basketwork, cords and toothed combs, as was the case over vast
 tracts of Russia from Karelia to Lake Baikal and the Lena River
 and from the Pontic steppes to Turkestan; but during the Shang
 period a similar effect was produced by a wooden beater or paddle
 with a grooved surface or wrapped with cord or textile, a technique
 which seems to have spread from South China.
    The shapes of the grey ware pots in North China conformed to
those of the red and black wares next to be described (Map 6). The
red ware, often named after the site of Yang-shao in western Honan,
extends over the loess territories of northern Honan, southern
Shansi, a zone across Shensi and much of the southern half of
Kansu, where it reached across the frontier almost to the Kuku
Nor; indeed, traces of red ware, some of it painted, have been
found in Sinkiang, for instance at Miao-erh-ku some §o miles east-
south-east of Hami and at several sites in the Turfan oasis. Froma
technical point of view this pottery falls into the context of painted
wares found in many parts of western Asia and contiguous areas
and it is tempting to view it as a product of some degree of western
influence; however, it must be admitted that nothing certain has
yet been established about where it was first made in China or
about the direction in which it spread. The fine red ware, which
despite some earlier reports seems to have been substantially hand-
                                 195
                    INDIA        AND   THE   FAR   EAST

made, was characteristically flat-based and included bowls, flat
dishes and various kinds of jar, that might be provided with
perforated lug handles. The decoration of the funerary pottery was
on the whole richer than that of domestic wares, as little as 8 per
cent of which might be painted. The decoration was mostly
abstract, composed of simple patterns like bands and triangles, but




          wminnan   Great Wall               ==     Lung-shan ware
          (1001)-«~Yang-shao ware                   Limits of the Yin state


           6. China: the prehistoric core of the earliest state

in Kansu spirals were employed as well as zoomorphic and even
on occasion anthropomorphic designs.
   The black ware, named after Lung-shan in the province of
Shantung, was distributed widely over the flood-plain of the lower
Hwang-ho. Geographically the black and red wares were largely
complementary and the fact that the red ware underlay the black at
certain sites in Honan does not of course prove any broad succes-
sion in time. Until the chronology and true epicentres of the two
wares have been worked out, no valid estimate of their historical
                                       196
                               CHINA

relationship can be made, but it is pertinent to note that the makers
of the painted pottery of the Tripolje culture of the Ukraine, on the
other side of the Russian steppes, seem to have turned over about
the same time to the production of black polished ware without any
apparent cultural break. Technically the fine black Lung-shan ware
was more advanced than the others because it was made on the
potter’s wheel and its thin polished walls and fine finish lend it an
air of sophistication wanting from other prehistoric wares in China.
On the other hand the bulk of the pottery, and particularly of
cooking vessels, was made of grey or dark brown ware already
described and it was this, rather than the black ware, that dominated
the overlying early historic levels. Among the pottery used for
cooking, special interest attaches to various forms of tripod that
form evident prototypes for the bronze ones of the following
period, namely the z’ing with solid feet, the Z with hollow ones, the
Asien, comprising a with an upper pot for steaming having a
perforated base, and the kuei with hollow feet and spout. Another
feature pointing ahead to the early historic period was the practice
of scapulomancy: although as yet there were no indications of
actual inscriptions in the form of petitions, there is no doubt that
bones, notably ox scapulae, were scorched in order to provide
clues in the form of cracks, a clear forerunner of the oracle bones
that provided the earliest Chinese inscriptions.

Shang, Chou and Han dynasties
    The contrast between the peasant communities just described
and those of the Shang dynasty, the earliest attested by archaeology,
is so pronounced that it almost certainly points to a major gap in
our knowledge, which the recent excavations at Chéng-chou have
only partly filled. The first insight into society as it existed under
the Shang dynasty was provided by the exploration of a number of
sites in the neighbourhood of An-yang, northern Honan, to which
the capital was moved by King P’an-Kéng, probably about
1300 B.c.; but recent excavations at Chéng-chou carry the story
                                 17
                 INDIA   AND   THE    FAR   EAST

back to the earlier phase, thought to have begun around 1520 B.c.
At An-yang we are confronted with a veritable city laid out in
zones, with palace and artisan quarters and rectangular wooden
houses set on terraces of beaten earth and with gabled roofs sup-
ported on rows of pillars resting on stone or even bronze bases.
From this city the kings of the Yin or later Shang dynasty ruled a
stable and to some degree literate state, in which the art of the
bronze worker had reached a high pitch of perfection and in which
the leaders rode to war and the chase in chariots mounted on
spoked wheels and drawn by pairs of yoked horses, vehicles re-
calling those of Mitannian and Mycenaean princes far away to the
west.                  .
   Although the more elaborate pieces and notably the ritual
vessels from the earliest Shang levels were already specifically
Chinese in style, it seems highly unlikely that bronze metallurgy
was invented independently in the valley of the Hwang-ho and the
probability is that this, like the basic elements of farming and
possibly the painting of pottery, spread to the area from much
earlier centres in western Asia. Many of the leading bronze forms,
also, including knives with incurving edge, certain types of dagger
and socketed axe and leaf-shaped spearheads with a small loop near
the base of the socket, are widely distributed over the steppe and
forest zones from Baikal to the heart of European Russia. Detailed
analogies between finds from places as far apart as Seima on the
Upper Oka, Turbino and Gorbunovo on either side of the Mid-
Urals, Minusinsk and Karasuk on the Upper Yenisei and Anyang
itself suggest that lively trade contacts were maintained at some
time during the period from the fifteenth to the eleventh centuries
B.C. Over a zone covering some 100 degrees of latitude: indeed,
links can be detected as far west as Borodino near the Black Sea
coast of Bessarabia, which itself seems to have been in touch with
the central Caucasus and the Mycenaean world, and further north
with the Arctic hunter-fishers of Finland and Middle Sweden. The
rapidity of movement over such wide territories even in pre-
                                198
                                 CHINA

historic times makes it difficult to assess the historical meaning of
such analogies. Certain features, like the modelling of animal heads
as terminals for dagger hilts, knife- and ladle-handles and the heads
of axes and maces seem to have been a common inspiration of the
peoples of northern Eurasia, whether carried out in bronze, stone
or wood. On the other hand certain elaborations of the beast style
at this early period were the product of the richer cultural environ-
ment of the Shangs. Again, it seems likely that some at least of the
leading types mentioned above were first produced in Shang work-
shops and from there diffused among the metal-workers of the
poorer societies of hunters, nomads and part-time farmers of the
northern steppes and forests.
   The splendid bronze vessels made by the Shang smiths provide
one source of inscriptions, but a much more prolific one is afforded
by the pieces of bone or tortoise-shell, on which questions were
inscribed to ancestors or gods in the hope of obtaining answers
by applying heat and watching the course of the ensuing cracks.
From An-yang alone upwards of 100,000 such inscribed pieces
have been examined and this has shown that the diviners made use
of some 3500 characters, of which around a third can be read in the
light of existing Chinese characters. The fact that inscribed oracle
bones have been found in the earlier levels at Chéng-chou em-
phasizes that the Shang civilization was already Chinese in character
as far back as it can be traced, and it will be recalled that the practice
of scapulomancy, though not of writing, can be traced back to the
‘Neolithic’? Lung-shan culture.
   As was to happen so often in the future, the reigning dynasty
was overthrown by another less highly civilized without destroying
the continuity of Chinese culture. In this case it was the Chous,
issuing from the borderlands of Shensi, who overthrew the Shangs
and destroyed their capital around 1030 B.c. Even at this early
stage Chinese civilization was sufficiently robust to absorb rela-
tively barbarous intruders and it was under the Chou dynasty that
Chinese manners and customs largely took the form they were to
                                   ee)
                  INDIA   AND    THE   FAR   EAST

retain down to modern times. Politically the period was one of
expansion, and during it the Chinese state extended its boundaries
north to Manchuria, east to the neck of the Shantung peninsula
and south to the Hwai valley. In the course of this expansion many
outlying parts of northern China, where, during Shang times, the
old ‘Neolithic’ peasant cultures had continued very largely in their
ancient ways, were brought for the first time within the sphere of
civilization. To the south of the Shang territories, in an area on
which the Chous began to encroach, there is evidence from the
lower Yangtze basin of communities living at a Neolithic level of
culture comparable with, though poorer than, those of the
Hwang-ho. The Yangtze valley people made their cooking pots
mainly by hand, occasionally employing the paddle to shape the
vessel and apply cord-impressed decoration; but most of them
used the wheel for their finer wares and some made highly bur-
nished black ware in a devolved Lung-shan tradition. Likewise
they finished their stone tools and weapons mainly by polishing in
the northern fashion. Remoter areas in the upper Yangtze valley
and in South China (see p. 204) remained prehistoric down to the
last centuries before Christ.
    The last five hundred years of nominal Chou rule, though they
witnessed the rise of Chinese philosophy, and notably of Confucius
and his pupil Mencius, and saw the introduction of iron-working,
were notable in the political sphere for the disintegration of the
central power, the growth of feudalism and the prevalence of war-
fare between minor states. This state of affairs was first brought to
an end, though temporarily, by the Ch’ins, a clan from the steppe
border who gained and for a brief time held the imperial power. It
was under this dynasty that the Great Wall was built on the north
and that the Empire was extended as far south as the Canton delta
and even the northern part of Annam. Although some advances
were lost during the years of anarchy that followed the death of the
first Ch’in king in 210 B.c., these were more than regained during
the Han dynasty (202 B.c.—A.D. 220) under whom the centre of
                                200
                                CHINA

gravity of the Empire shifted south from the Hwang-ho to the
Yangtze basin. At the height of this dynasty the Chinese Empire
covered almost the whole of the mainland of East Asia from Man-
churia to northern Annam with an extension from Inner Mongolia
to the Pamirs at the western frontier of Sinkiang. It was at this
time that the development of the silk trade linked China to the
Roman world: two distinct routes were followed, an overland one
subject to interruption by the Parthians and a maritime by way of
the Indian Ocean, the Coimbatore gap across the extreme south of
India, and the Malacca straits.

           SOUTH-EAST           ASIA, INDONESIA
                 AND      THE    PHILIPPINES
Origins of rice cultivation
   One of the main reasons why the mainland of south-east Asia
merits study is that it forms a kind of funnel through which peoples
have spread over Indonesia, Melanesia and farther afield. Another
is its intermediate position between the two main foci of culture in
India and China respectively. Claims that it was in itself the cradle
of an early civilization based on the cultivation of rice are not sub-
stantiated by the archaeological evidence; indeed, although
regional sub-groups can be detected, which no doubt correspond to
the beginning of settled life in the several areas, the indications are
that the fundamental arts of pottery-making and the manufacture
of finely polished stone tools spread down from China. As regards
the origins of rice cultivation, which has made possible the dense
populations of parts of India, south-east Asia and China, very little
is yet known, except that on botanical grounds this must have
occurred within the tropical zone of south-east Asia. According to
the Greek Theophrastus, active during the latter half of the fourth
and the early third centuries B.c., rice had been cultivated in the
Ganges basin since time immemorial, but the earliest traces so far
revealed by archaeology in India are the carbonized spikelets of
                                 201
                  INDIA   AND   THE   FAR   EAST

cultivated rice from the painted grey ware site of Hastinapura,
dating most probably from early in the first millennium B.c. As it
happens, the oldest trace so far discovered comes from the opposite
end of the zone of ancient rice-cultivation, in the form of impres-
sions of husks on a sherd from Yang-shao Tsun, the classic site of
the Honan painted pottery and dating in all probability from the
middle or earliest half of the second millennium B.c.; the presence
of cultivated rice as far north as the valley of the Hwang-ho means
that it must already have been cultivated by the Neolithic peasants
of the Lower Yangtze which in due course became the centre of
gravity of the Chinese Empire.

Hoabinhian culture
   So far from south-east Asia being an early focus of settled life,
the indications are that Neolithic culture arrived there somewhat
belatedly. Cultures of Mesolithic character were correspondingly
well developed. On the mainland and in part of Sumatra plant
food evidently played a leading part in the subsistence of the
Bacsonian or Hoabinhian culture, so called from sites in Tonkin,
Indo-China, where it was first explored; and it was presumably the
bearers of this culture who discovered and then began to improve
the properties of wild rice. Doubtless the heavy axe-like tools
flaked from stone pebbles in a manner reminiscent of the Palaeo-
lithic pebble tool tradition, though in some cases ground smooth at
one end, were used in clearing wild vegetation, and the grinding-
stones and pounders found in some abundance testify to the pre-
paration of plant food. The Hoabinhian culture has since been
recognized to the north in the Chinese provinces of Kwangsi and
of Szechwan, also remotely situated on the upper course of the
Yangtze, and to the south in Malaya and Sumatra; moreover to
judge from preliminary accounts of the excavations in the Niah
Cave, it spread as far east as Borneo. The Hoabinhians were fond
of sheltering under overhanging rocks or in the mouths of caves,
and the bones of animals which they hunted to supplement their
                                202
  SOUTH-EAST      ASIA,   INDONESIA     AND    THE   PHILIPPINES

plant food have therefore survived, including the mud turtle and
various kinds of oxen, deer and swine; the cave and shelter deposits
have also yielded shells of fresh-water molluscs, pointing to another
gathering activity, for which the shell-middens on the north-east
coast of Sumatra offer more impressive evidence. The human
skeletal material recovered from the caves suggests that the bearers
of the Hoabinhian culture were of the same basic stock as that
represented to-day by the Melanesians and Papuans.

Microlithic industries
   Contrasting with this heavy equipment are the industries, based
on the utilization of small flakes and blades and relating to hunters
depending primarily on the bow, found on a number of the main
islands of Indonesia. Among these are obsidian industries from
caves in the Djambi district of inner Sumatra, from sites bordering
a former lake at Bandoeng in western Java and from the Manilla
district of Luzon in the Philippines, each of which feature micro-
liths with steep retouch. An industry of broadly similar character,
but using triangular hollow-based arrowheads as well, has been
recovered from caves in the south-west Celebes with remains of
animals, which apart from the dog were exclusively of wild species.
It may well be, as some authorities believe, that these industries
came to be identified with hunting peoples of Negrito stock, but
there seems little doubt that culturally they represent a drift south
from the general area extending from Manchuria to Japan.

Lozenge and quadrangular polished adzes
   Two main spreads of Neolithic culture have sometimes been
distinguished in south-east Asia and Indonesia according to
whether axes and adzes were made with lozenge or quadrangular
sections. Geographically the two are to some extent comple-
mentary in distribution, though in places overlapping, the lozenge-
sectioned or lentoid type making little impact on Malaya or West
Indonesia, though abounding in the Philippines, Borneo, the
                                203
                    INDIA   AND    THE   FAR   EAST

Celebes, New Guinea and Melanesia. Yet it must be remembered
that the lentoid celt is after all the basic form over a large part of the
world and is hardly in itself a trait of much diagnostic value.
   The quadrangular adze on the other hand is much more clearly
defined. Although present alongside ones of lentoid and ovoid
section in the Hwang-ho basin, the type was particularly charac-
teristic of Formosa and the coastal region of South China, where it
was often highly finished. The indications are that it spread south
in two main waves, one penetrating Indo-China, north-east India,
Malaya and western Indonesia, overlying Hoabinhian levels
where these were present, the other by way of the Philippines to
North Borneo and the Celebes. Such a diffusion clearly implies
sea-transport, and indeed boat-making was probably one of the
main crafts for which the quadrangular adze was employed. The
quadrangular adze people depended for their livelihood mainly on
swine-keeping and the growing of rice and yams. They made
pottery by hand, often with the help of a pad and beater, the latter
frequently being wrapped with cord to give a characteristic cord-
textured finish to the outer surface of the vessel. Over a territory
which is as extensive as the continent of Europe it is not surprising
that local variations should have occurred in the form of the adzes.
In Malaya, where, if the radio-carbon date for Lengong in Perak is
accepted, they were present already by the middle of the second
millennium B.c., the quadrangular adzes were generally of simple
type, the frequently bevelled cutting-edge being slightly wider
than the butt; on the other hand a local beaked form, bevelled
obliquely from two directions, was also present. Particularly fine
quadrangular adzes were made in Java from such materials as
jasper and agate, and here again a special form emerged in the
pick-adze, having a keel on one face. In other areas the shouldered
or tanged adze, constricted at the butt in various ways to facilitate
hafting, played a leading role, a type which in Fukien and Kwan-
tung and on Formosa flourished mainly during the Chou period
and would seem to indicate a diffusion during the earlier half of the
                                   204
 SOUTH-EAST       ASIA,   INDONESIA     AND   THE   PHILIPPINES

first millennium B.c. Adzes of this type were common in northern
Indo-China and it was presumably thence, ifultimately from South
China, that they spread over Burma and north-east India, where
they are confined to regions with the strongest Mongoloid racial
element, mainly in Assam, Bengal, Orissa and the eastern margins
of the Central Provinces.

Dongson bronzes
   Neither south-east Asia, Indonesia nor the Philippines ex-
perienced a phase of technology fully comparable with the Bronze
Age in the more advanced parts of the Old World. Yet, while
stone tools continued in general use into the Christian era, a
certain number of bronze artifacts, named after the rich settlement
and cemetery of Dong So’n in northern Annam, found their way
over these territories during the latter half of the first millennium
B.c. and in the richer graves of Annam these were sometimes ac-
companied by objects made of iron. The leading types of Dongson
bronze, which as a rule was a lead alloy, included daggers, socketed
axes, hoes and spear-heads, and kettledrums of a kind used by the
Karens of Burma and western Siam down to modern times for
calling up spirits, rain-making, casting spells on enemies and
similar purposes. Scenes of horsemen wearing costume of Late
Chou character point to the north as a likely source: it has been
suggested that the Dongson style and industry was introduced
from the north by barbarians from the steppe, forming part of the
movement that overwhelmed the Western Chou dynasty; and
even that certain decorative elements may be linked remotely with
those employed by peoples far away in the Caucasus and the
Thraco-Cimmerian zone of the Pontic steppes. However this
may be, the Dongson bronzes affected only a small segment of the
population, which remained as a whole in a basically Neolithic
stage until the general use of iron was spread by Hindu merchants
trading as far afield as Sumatra, Java, Bali and parts of Borneo
during the early part of the Christian era.
                                205
                   INDIA   AND   THE   FAR   EAST



Melanesia
   The Melanesian islanders, beyond the range both of the Dong-
son bronzes and of the Hindu traders who introduced iron tools to
Indonesia, remained in the Stone Age down to the European
period, so that as recently as the second world war communities
could be found in the interior of New Guinea in a ‘Neolithic’ state
of culture. Rice was not eaten in Melanesia until modern times,
and the natives lived mainly by cultivating such things as bananas,
breadfruit, coconuts, tara and yams by the slash and burn method,
helped out by raising pigs, dogs and chickens and by sea-food. For
felling and working timber for boats and houses the Melanesians
used adzes and axes of polished stone. They made all their pottery
by hand, using two different techniques: coil-building, which
probably came down from the north, and shaping by anvil and
paddle, the immediate source of which was Malaya. Melanesian
prehistory must remain obscure until sequences have been
established in the various islands and the age of suitable samples
correctly determined by radio-carbon dating, but already it seems
to be established that a culture resembling the earlier Neolithic of
the Philippines had reached New Caledonia at the latest by the
middle of the first millennium B.c.

                              JAPAN
Earliest occupation
   Although Japanese civilization was a late development and de-
pended largely on infusions from the continental mainland, notably
from Korea, its very insularity favoured the growth of distinctive
features and a tenacity of cultural tradition which has enabled it to
survive in some measure the impact of modern industrial society.
Very little can yet be said of the earliest traces of human activity on
the islands. There is no indication that Honsu was occupied earlier
than Neothermal times: no reliable associations have been proved
between stone implements and Pleistocene fauna; nor does the
                                 206
                               JAPAN
surface of the Kanto loams from which the implements come show
signs of any marked erosion or other changes indicating a high
antiquity. Finds made in the Gumma prefecture include pebble
tools flaked on one surface which recall industries from Java and
Sumatra and like them stem ultimately from the Palaeolithic tradi-
tion of East Asia. On the other hand the northern island, Hokkaido,
could have been reached during the Ice Age by dry land from the
mainland by way of Sakhalin and it may be that the earliest level
recognized there and defined by a blade industry with some burins
represents an extension of the Advanced Palaeolithic of Siberia.

Jomon hunter-fishers
   The first phase of Japanese prehistory about which much is
known is represented by the J6mon culture named after the cord-
markings commonly imprinted on the outer surface of the pottery,
a Ware common to Korea and Manchuria and which provided the
common background to the ceramic history of North China.
Although generally described as ‘Neolithic’, there is no evidence
that the Jomon people practised farming, at least until the closing
phases of their culture. Economically they belong to the same Sub-
neolithic category as many other predominantly hunter-fisher
peoples of the circumpolar zone. For the greater part of their
history their only domestic animal was the dog, and it was only
latterly that they began to cultivate millet, buckwheat and beans.
As a rule Jémon man preferred to live within reach of the sea to
take advantage of a wide range of sea-foods: clusters of middens
around Tokyo Bay and many other localities have yielded vast
quantities of discarded shells of mussels, oysters and other shell-
fish and in addition plenty of fish-bones. Most of the fish taken for
food were of kinds like mullet and perch that could be taken from
inlets at high tide, but remains of shark, sting-ray and tunny show
that boats, dug-out varieties of which have survived, must also
have been used for angling. Jomon fishing-gear includes fish-
hooks with plain or externally barbed tip and harpoon or detach-
                                207
                  INDIA   AND   THE   FAR   EAST

able spear-heads, perforated for attachment to a line. In addition
inland game, including deer and wild pig, was hunted by arrows
tipped with hollow-based triangular flint heads flaked on either
face, and wild plants were prepared for food by grinding stones and
mortars. The Jémon people lived in settlements of trapeziform or
circular houses, having floors lowered below ground-level and
central fire-places, around which were set timber uprights for
carrying the thatched roof. Like other Sub-neolithic peoples the
Jémon hunter-fishers made pottery by hand, and this they decor-
ated with simple geometric patterns imprinted with cords or shells
or executed with grooves: in form the earliest pots were conoid,
but flat bases soon appeared and as time went on handles and
spouts were successively added; and from the beginning human
figurines were also made from fired clay. Their flint-work, as seen
in the arrowheads and numerous scrapers, was of a relatively high
standard, but the stone axes were generally crude—to begin with,
hardly more than natural pebbles lightly ground at one end.

Yayoi farmers
   An altogether moreadvanced economy, one that laid an adequate
foundation for the relatively wealthy society of the Protohistoric
period, was introduced to northern Kyushu from Korea along with
other elements of the Yayoi culture some time during the third
century B.C., probably as an indirect result of the expansion of the
power of the Han dynasty of China. Although initially the Yayoi
culture spread rapidly into western Honshu, reaching the Yamato
Plain by around 200 B.c., its momentum slowed down, and it was
not until A.D. 100 that it penetrated Tohoku. The interrelations be-
tween the Yayoi and older J6mon cultures were quite complex and
it would seem that in some parts of the country there was some real
continuity between them. The most important single innovation
was probably the introduction of rice-cultivation, which by middle
Yayoi times had created in the western part of the country a pre-
dominantly agrarian society. Tangible evidence of thenew economy
                                208
[X   Stone carving of bearded man from Mohenjo-daro, Pakistan
                                                        (facing p. 208)
x   Model of Mayz ay 7O = = Ww = 5 s he dad, Paler
                               JAPAN
includes traces of paddy fields and irrigation channels; carbonized
grains and also impressions of rice; and granaries raised on timber
piles and approached by ladders. Stone continued to be used for
axes, adzes and arrowheads, but bronze weapons and mirrors were
first imported from the mainland and thenin duecoursecastin Japan
itself, or alternatively copied in stone; and many tools began to be
made of iron. Asa further symbol of the sub-division of labour, it
may be added that at this time the potter’s wheel came into use.

Protohistoric   Japan
   Around A.D. 400 Japan entered on the Protohistoric phase that
only ended with the introduction of Buddhism towards the end of
the sixth century A.D. and the committal to writing between a.p.
712 and 720 of traditional claims surrounding the imperial dynasty.
The main information about this intermediate period is derived
from very numerous tombs, often of monumental construction
and occasionally occupying areas, including surrounding moats, of
as many as eighty acres. These testify to increasing wealth and
technical skill, a growing density of population and a feudal
organization of society with numerous clans owing allegiance to
the imperial clan. Clay models buried with the dead indicate
not merely the differentiation of town and country houses, but the
emergence of palaces and shrines. Already during this period,
coinciding more or less with that of the barbarian migrations into
the European territories of the Roman Empire, the main social
institutions of recent Japanese history were in being. As if to
emphasize the continuity, wooden Shinto shrines have continued
to be rebuilt on the same site and after the same pattern as examples
first erected during the Protohistoric period. Again, though it
seems likely that Shintoism itself was first institutionalized in com-
petition with Buddhism, its basic belief in the need to offer thank-
offerings and sacrifices to a multitude of natural spirits, inhabiting
such places as groves, mountain tops, sources of water or stones of
unusual size, must surely stretch far back into the prehistoric past.
    8                            209                            cP
                   INDIA    AND   THE    FAR   EAST


                     NORDH-EAS EE ASIA

Hunter-fishers
   The vast funnel-shaped territory of Siberia east of the Yenisei
and north of the Amur owes its interest largely to its position in
relation to the New World. Doubtless it was through this region
that the first immigrants must have passed on their way to America,
presumably at a time when the land-connection was still intact, and
doubtless, also, when means of communication had been developed
during Neothermal times, it provided a main avenue for cultural
movements, not necessarily always in one direction, between the
Old World and the New. On the other hand the climate of Siberia
must throughout prehistoric times have imposed narrow limits on
the possibility of local cultural development: even in modern times
agriculture has been confined to the uppermost Yenisei and to the
Angara Valley and hunting, gathering and fishing have provided the
main and for most of the region the sole source of food-supply.
Yet, if the possibility of sharing fully in the kind of life permitted to
peasant farmers, still less of progressing towards urban civilization,
was denied to the prehistoric inhabitants of Siberia, this did not
prevent them developing effective cultures based on various forms
of catching activity or of acquiring elements of technique, such as
potting, originally developed among communities based to a
greater or less degree on food-production.
    The best sequence of Sub-neolithic cultures in Siberia is that
established in the Angara Valley and Lake Baikal regions. Pottery
first appeared in the Isakovo stage and comprised conoid jars with
straight sides ornamented by net-impressions. Among the hunting-
gear were bone spearheads armed by flint micro-blades inset in
slots, a type found with a number of burials in the region lacking
pottery and assigned on not very conclusive evidence to a distinct
Khini phase of settlement. The device is also interesting because of
its occurrence over northern Eurasia as far west as the Atlantic coast
of Norway and as far south as Mongolia and Kansu; and because it
                                   210
                         NORTH-EAST        ASIA

turns up in North America in the context of the Denbigh culture of
Alaska and the younger Dorset culture of the Hudson’s Bay area.
Other and more specifically Sub-neolithic elements to appear in
the Isakovo culture include partially polished adzes, polished stone
knives and bifacially flaked arrowheads. In the later Serovo and
Kitoi stages a greater emphasis seems to have been placed on
fishing, for which lures, barbed spears and fish-hooks were used.
In the Glaskovo stage, contemporary with the Bronze Age in
south-west Siberia and probably with the Shang dynasty, the
pottery shows signs of contact with North China.
   Abundant traces of Sub-neolithic people at the level of those of
 the Baikal area are known from the Lena Valley and even from as
 far east as the Kolyma. Over all this territory the hunter-fishers
 continued to combine the use of burins and bone tools inset with
 micro-blades with coarse, hand-made pottery, a sherd of which
 from a late site in the Lena Valley was found, significantly, to have
 had fish-scales mixed with the clay as tempering. Further east there
 are indications of well-developed maritime cultures. The Old
 Bering Sea culture probably grew up during the centuries immedi-
 ately B.c. on either side of the strait and it occupied the coast of the
 Chukchi peninsula as far west as the Bear Islands on the north.
 Middens at the mouth of the Amur river suggest that coastal
settlement may have begun there as far back as the middle of the
second millennium B.c. and in this context it is worth recalling that
the Jomon people who occupied the main island of Japan possibly
as far back as the fifth millennium B.c. were primarily coastal
midden-dwellers. Whether or not the modern Ainu are remnants
of the Jomon people as was once thought, it is certain that they
retreated before the Yayoi cultivators until by the end of the first
millennium B.c. they were concentrated on Hokkaido; it was prob-
ably about this time and doubtless under the same pressure that
they spread northward into Kamchatka and the Kurile Islands. The
native peoples of north-east Siberia remained prehistoric down to
the Russian colonization of the first half of the seventeenth century.
                                  211                             8-2
                          CHAPTER 9

                  THE      NEW WORLD

The first immigrants
   By comparison with most of the Old World the Americas were
settled quite recently: no traces of human occupation have ever
been found truly stratified in deposits of Early or Middle Pleisto-
cene age, and it is significant that all hominid remains from the New
World are of recent Homo sapiens type. Although recent dis-
coveries have shown that the first immigration took place rather
earlier than had previously been regarded as probable, there is still
no valid evidence that it preceded a comparatively advanced stage
of the Late Pleistocene. Whenever they came the first Americans
must have been hunter-fishers, since they had to traverse nearly
four thousand miles beyond the range of farming across territories
ill-provided with wild vegetable food.
    One may reasonably assume the earliest immigrants to have
taken the same route as a number of the larger mammals, including
the bison and the mammoth—two of those most keenly sought
after by prehistoric man—namely the route across the Bering Sea.
Precisely when and where and under what conditions the first
crossing from Asia was made is still uncertain: a drop in sea-level
of only 150 feet, such as could easily be envisaged for an advanced
stage of the Late Pleistocene, would be sufficient to ensure a land-
bridge between the continents, and the probability is that it was
during an interstadial of the last Ice Age that the immigration took
place. What we do know for certain is that Palaeoindian hunters
were active on the High Plains of North America by a period
assessed by radio-carbon analysis at the tenth millennium B.c.:
immediately prior, that is, to the final glacial episode of major
                                212
                        THE   NEW      WORLD

importance. How much, if at all, earlier they may have arrived is
still obscure. From what is known of the physiographic develop-
ment of the territories through which the migration must have
passed it seems clear that the movement can hardly have taken
place at the height ofa major glacial onset: at sucha time north-east
Siberia was blocked by a great ice-sheet, and though north-west
Alaska was mainly free of ice, access to the High Plains would have
been barred by the conjunction of the Laurentide ice-sheet,
spreading from the Hudson’s Bay region to the Rocky mountains.
The probability is that the migration took place before the eustatic
rise of sea-level was sufficient to breach the land-bridge between
Asia and North America, but after the ice-sheets had retreated
sufficiently to leave a free passage at either end. Such conditions
may have obtained during the stage represented by the forest-bed
at Two Creeks in Wisconsin, which according to radio-carbon
dating dates from the tenth millennium B.c. and so is equivalent in
age to the Allergd oscillation of north-west Europe, and possibly
also during earlier warm phases towards the end of the Wisconsin
glaciation.

Hunters on the High Plains: Folsom, Sandia, Clovis and other groups
   It was the discovery by a party of palaeontologists in 1926 of two
pieces of worked flint in apparent association with bones of extinct
bison at Folsom in New Mexico that first opened up wider per-
spectives in New World prehistory (Map 7). Within the next two
years systematic digging had established beyond reasonable doubt
that bison of an extinct species (Bison taylori) had been hunted by
projectiles tipped by flint heads of a very particular type. These
‘Folsom points’ had been carefully flaked on both faces to a rather
obtuse point, and longitudinal flakes had been struck on either face
of the concave base, presumably to facilitate mounting on a shaft.
Similar points from near Lipscomb, Texas, were found alongside
scrapers and utilized flakes with the remains of numerous bison,
including nine skulls and the articulated remains of fourteen
                                 213
                                           THE          NEW        WORLD

animals, suggesting the sites of an actual butchery. Exploration of
an actual settlement site at Lindermeier in north-east Colorado
confirmed that the makers of these fluted points were hunting on




                                           @Angostura
                                           @Scousblut
                                                    @Meserve

                                                                   @Graham Cave
                                                                                               b&
                                                                                                    Hardaway
                                                   @ Lipscombe                 G *                      @
                                               Plainview              A   B®
                                           Clovis                              @Quad
                                     %@        @ Lubbock
                                 Burnet Cave




   (1D) Areas ofhigher culture                                                         >   ~                   ‘   |      i WE




       ey Land  over 6000ft.                      CE             .        Co                        \                   SASK
          (not shown on inset map)         .                         ~         ~ ~~ SS                             AY   ee8Gaver ;
                                                                                 CC
                                                                                  SSE                   EEE                          i
                                                                                                                                     ULE




                                          7. New World prehistory

the High Plains at a time when the fauna differed profoundly from
that found in the same territory in recent times. Yet there was still
no indication of precisely when the various fossil forms became
extinct. Nor did the archaeological material itself give any indi-
cation of high antiquity: it differed markedly from the Advanced
                                                             214
                        THE   NEW     WORLD

Palaeolithic industries of the Old World, notably in the complete
absence of true burins, and on the other hand showed some affinities
with industries of Sub-neolithic character in northern Eurasia; and,
moreover, the characteristic Folsom fluted point has not been
found in the Old World, a fact which caused it to be dismissed by
some as a marginal and probably retarded development. In
parenthesis, it may be added that this last objection has lost much
of its force in the light of what is now known about the character
of the Late Pleistocene industries of Siberia which stand closest to
those of the New World: the Siberian industries in fact have a
strong ‘Mousterian’ element, one which by analogy with the
Szeletian of central Europe might almost have been expected to
give rise to bifacially flaked points.
   Whatever doubts may have been entertained about its age, the
Folsom find was immensely stimulating and soon fresh discoveries
were made. New types of chipped projectile-head were found with
remains of extinct animals, and on two occasions these were over-
laid by deposits containing Folsom material. The significance of
these and other finds was only emphasized when the results of
radio-carbon analysis of samples from a Folsom site at Lubbock,
Texas, were published in 1949, establishing its age as somewhere
in the eighth millennium B.c. The Palaeoindians were not only
established on the High Plains near the beginning of the Ana-
thermal or earliest phase of the Neothermal period, but were seen
to have appeared even earlier.
   Since the original Folsom discoveries two types of projectile-
head have been found at still older levels. One may begin by
mentioning the one first identified at the Sandia Cave, New Mexico,
in association with extinct forms of horse, bison, camel, mastodon
and mammoth. The Sandia point is typically asymmetrical in out-
line, having a shouldered tang; and stray specimens have been
found over a fairly wide area. Precisely how far back in time the
Sandia point extends is not yet known: the radio-carbon date of
20,000 + for the pre-Folsom level at Sandia itself is discounted;
                                215
                       THE   NEW   WORLD

but two specimens, distinguished by short flakes struck longitu-
dinally from the base of the tang, were recovered at Lucy, in the
same state, from a deposit immediately preceding the last major
glacial phase and dating therefore from around 8500 to 10,000 B.c.
The second variety was first identified at Clovis, also in New
Mexico, where it was separated by two disconformities and an
intervening bed of brown sand from an overlying Folsom level.
Clovis points are characteristically heavy, run to three inches or
more in length, as a rule are more tapered than Folsom points and
are fluted for only about half their length. At the same site they
were found with traces of mammoth, and a number of similar
associations have been noted in this part of North America; no less
than eight Clovis points were found with a single mammoth
skeleton at Naco in Arizona; a single one accompanied an articu-
lated skeleton at Dent, Colorado; and at Lehner, Arizona, an
industry of Clovis type occurred with mammoth, bison, tapir and
possibly horse. As in the case of the Sandia points, dating remains
inconclusive. The geological evidence at Naco, where the archaeo-
logical level rested on pebbly sand deposited by a stream, and was
directly covered by laminated water-laid beds, only to be suc-
ceeded by deposits indicating progressively more arid conditions,
suggests that the Clovis hunters lived during a pluvial period. On
the other hand the radio-carbon dates from Lehner and from the
lower level at Burnet Cave point to a survival well into the Ana-
thermal period. The fact that Clovis points have been found
stratified below Folsom ones on more than one occasion is not
inconsistent with their persistence into later periods: indeed, it
may well prove that the distinction between Folsom and Clovis
points is functional rather than cultural; and in this connection the
persistent association of Clovis points with mammoths and Folsom
ones with bison is at least suggestive.
   There is good evidence that on the High Plains the specialized
hunting economy lasted from Late Glacial down to well into the
Neothermal period. Many distinct forms of projectile head, mostly
                                216
                       THE   NEW     WORLD

associated with bison-hunting, have been recognized. Thus points
of the Portales group—comparatively small, with parallel sides and
obtuse points—have been found stratified above ones of Folsom
type, and radio-carbon dates indicate a span from Anathermal to
well into Altithermal times. Again, lanceolate points with slightly
concave base and parallel oblique flake-scars (Brown’s Valley and
Angostura points) seem to have lasted down to the sixth millen-
nium B.c. Lastly, the tanged or stemmed forms with parallel trans-
verse flaking of the Cody group—thin-sectioned ones named after
the bison-hunters’ station of Scottsbluff, Nebraska, and thicker
ones after Eden Valley, Wyoming—appear to date from the fifth
millennium B.c. Incidentally, the type station of this group, the
Horner site near Cody, Wyoming, yielded flint scrapers, a special
type of asymmetrical tanged knife and remains of upwards of
180 bison, of which the tops of the skulls had in many cases been
removed.

Expansion of the Palaeoindians east and south
   That the High Plains should have been a main focus of early
settlement is fully consistent with the hypothesis that the Palaeo-
indian hunters pressed south through a gap between the Laurentide
and Cordilleran ice-sheets and along the eastern margin of the
Rocky Mountains. It must be remembered that the High Plains,
now an arid region, enjoyed Pluvial conditions during the Late
Glacial period, and the evidence suggests that it was around lakes
and ponds that the hunters of bison and mammoth habitually
camped. On the other hand it is hardly surprising that they should
have spread widely into the virgin hunting grounds that sur-
rounded them. The precise significance of stray finds in north-
west Canada and Alaska will only be known when more systematic
excavations have been made, but in the case of fluted points, ad-
mittedly an American invention, it can only be supposed that
examples from Alberta and Saskatchewan represent a movement
from the south facilitated by the eastward contraction of the
                               217
                        THE   NEW      WORLD

Larentide ice-sheet. Much more important was the expansion to
the east. Fluted points, often having a more pronounced con-
cavity at the base than the classic Folsom type, are known from
Alabama, east Tennessee, North Carolina and Virginia and up to
Massachusetts and north Vermont. As the Palaeoindians pushed
into more brokenand forested ground they seem to have broadened
the basis of their subsistence to include the gathering of shell-fish
and plants, and in this way to have entered upon a new phase of
culture, the Archaic of eastern North America. Equally, when they
turned west, the Palaeoindians entered an environment ill-adapted
to a way of life based on specialized hunting. The arid conditions of
the Great Basin region necessitated heavy reliance on plant food
and the capture of even the smallest animals, the basis of a distinc-
tive Desert culture. More will be said later about both the Archaic
and Desert cultures. Meanwhile it remains to consider the south-
ward expansion of the Paleoindians.
   This is marked in Mexico and in parts of South America by
projectile heads of laurel-leaf form, the so-called Lerma Points,
associated with mammoth skeletons. These include two skeletons
of Mammuthus (archidiskodon) imperator showing clear signs of
having been butchered—the base of one of the skulls had been
smashed open, probably to facilitate the extraction of the brain,
and many bones had been cut or grooved by stone tools—found
at a distance of half'a mile in the bed of an old lake at Santa Isabel
Iztapan, near Tepexpan in the Valley of Mexico, accompanied in
one instance by a Lerma point with slightly serrated edge and a
lanceolate point with a squared base and in the other by a point with
a weakly defined tang, a convex scraper and a spokeshave. The
deposit in which the deposits lay formed part of the Upper Becerra
formation assigned by geologists to the tenth millennium B.c., and
radio-carbon analyses have given dates ranging from 9050 + 300 to
14,000 + B.c. Another Lerma point from Tamaulipas in north-
east Mexico has been radiocarbon-dated to the eighth millennium
B.c. Further south the Palaeoindian trail is marked by laurel-leaf
                                 218
                        THE   NEW      WORLD

points at El Jobo in Venezuela and at Intihausi and Ayampitin in
central Argentine, where bifacially flaked projectile heads have
been dated by radio-carbon analysis of associated organic traces to
the end of the seventh millennium B.c. Indeed it would seem from
the finds at Fell’s Cave and from numerous middens that by this
time, if not before, the Palaeoindians had reached the north shore
of the Strait of Magellan—impressive testimony, as was the spread
to the Atlantic shore of North America, to man’s inborn drive to
explore his environment.
   The culture developed by the Palaeoindians on the High Plains
during the closing phases of the Wisconsin glaciation was based
on the hunting of big-game, notably bison and mammoth. Indeed
most of the finds relate to the places where the game was actually
killed and dismembered, though Lindenmeier and a few other sites
have provided us withabroader range of settlement material. The
abundance of flint scrapers argues for the use of skin clothing, but
burins are conspicuously absent, and it is worthy of note that by
comparison with many Upper Palaeolithic cultures relatively little
use was made of bone and antler. The impression remains of a
highly specialized hunting culture in which projectiles, in this case
darts tipped with flint heads and propelled by spear-throwers
(atlatls), played a leading part. Although there is no evidence that
the Palaeoindians practised art, as did the Advanced Palaeolithic
hunters of parts of the Old World, it is certainly true that they
fabricated their projectile heads to a standard well beyond what was
functionally necessary, and perhaps we can see in the perfection
and multiplicity of form of the various bifacially flaked points some
counterpart to the engraving and painting through which the
hunters of the Dordogne relaxed their tension.

Desert culture
   West of the High Plains in the Great Basin area, from the
Rockies to the Pacific the Palaeoindians encountered a desert en-
vironment, which called for adiligent quest for all available sources
                                 219
                        THE   NEW      WORLD

of food, rather than for the specialized hunting of particular kinds
of big game. Where opportunity offered, indeed, the Desert
culture people killed their bison, antelope or mountain sheep, but
often they had to be content with lesser game, carnivores like desert
fox, bobcat, coyote or skunk or rodents such as desert wood-rat,
bushy tail rat, gopher or kangaroo rat. In catching these and any
other animals they could get, they used nets, snares and traps as
well as darts tipped with chipped heads (lanceolate or stemmed and
notched, sometimes with indented base) and propelled by wooden
atlatls or throwers. Further, considerable reliance was placed on
plant food, particularly seeds and rhizomes, the former of which
seem to have been parched, abraded on grinding-stones and eaten
as a kind of mush or gruel. The necessity to exploit every source of
wild food in an inhospitable land meant that the Desert people
must have lived in small groups and moved over considerable
territories in the course of a year. Fortunately they were in the
habit of sheltering at some periods in caves and under rock-shelters
and the exploration of some of these—notably Danger Cave,
Utah; Roaring Springs and Fort Rock Caves, Oregon; Leonard
Shelter near Lovelock and Gypsum Cave, Nevada; and Ventana
Cave, Arizona—has given us a remarkably complete picture of
their equipment. The relatively small size of the shelters and the
intermittent character of their occupation confirm the impression
that they lived in small, nomadic groups. Their equipment was
easily carried; they used baskets—at first twined, later supple-
mented by coiled—and a variety of nets, cordage and matting;
their digging-sticks, fire-drills, darts and atlatls were easily
carried; and even their milling-stones were portable. A depressing
feature of their way of life is that the food-quest can have left them
but little leisure and it is hardly surprising to find no evidence for
decorative art—no sign of contrasting colours in their basket-work,
no fringes to their leather garments and but few signs of personal
ornaments. By the same token, though the Desert culture
appeared with most of its basic traits already by around 7000 B.c.,
                                 220
                        THE   NEW     WORLD

there were few signs of progress over much of the territory; the
adjustment to an unfavourable environment once made, there was
small inducement to change. Yet, even though in some parts of
California a similar way of life has lasted down to the present day,
the Desert culture was by no means wholly a backwater; it was
apparently Indians of this foraging-stage economy who in the
southern zone of their territories—in New Mexico and in the
Valley of Mexico—initiated the domestication of maize, on which
the higher cultures of Mesoamerica and the Andean region alike
were reared.

The origins of Mesoamerican and Andean civilizations
   When the material productions of Aztec, Maya and Inca were
first brought to light by archaeology, the tendency of European
scholars was to seek their inspiration in the Old World: leaving
aside those who were mesmerized by the supposed journeys of the
Egyptian Children of the Sun, sober scholars looked with more
discrimination across the Pacific to south-east Asia and even to
 China for sources of these civilizations, for which they could see
no convincing native origins. Against this, American scholars
have by and large maintained that the higher cultures of the New
World represented no more than intensifications of the indigenous
American Indian cultures with which they shared a basically
common style; that though more elaborate they were nevertheless
subject to many of the same basic limitations vis a vis the Old
World as were the lowlier ones—for example in the lack of the
plough and the wheel; and that they were grounded on the culti-
vation of distinctively New World crops, suchas maize, squash and
potato, rather than on the cereal grains on which the Old World
civilizations depended. This does not exclude the possibility of
trans-Pacific contacts in comparatively early times—many
authorities for instance have found it difficult to believe that such
a specialized process as tie-dying, by which patterns were produced
on textiles by folding the material and tying it so as to prevent
                                221
                        THE   NEW   WORLD

certain parts coming into contact with the dye, can have been
practised independently in Pre-Incan Peru and Indonesia—but it
does reduce the importance of these contacts in the process of
building the higher cultures of the New World. The findings of
modern archaeology have already strongly confirmed that by and
large the higher civilizations of the Americas were indigenous
growths, for not only do we now know that parts of each continent
had been occupied from some thousands of years before the first
appearance of these civilizations, but we can now view them as the
climax of a long period of progressive development in time.

Cultivation of maize.
   The cultivation of maize is basic to the higher civilizations of
the New World. The early history of maize is difficult to study
because it has never yet been found in a living state, since the wild
prototype was apparently swamped genetically by cultivated
varieties. The discovery of fossil pollen from deposits under
Mexico city dating from a period long prior to the arrival of man
in the New World confirms that maize was certainly an indigenous
plant. There is evidence from the valley of the Tehuacan that wild
maize was gathered during the period 5200/3400 B.c.; and between
3400/2300 B.C. it was cultivated by people who also grew gourds,
squashes, beans, and other food plants, though still depending for
much of their nourishment on wild resources. Settled village life
and pottery-making did not begin until the middle of the second
millennium B.c. and it was only in the next one that we find evi-
dence for irrigation and ceremonial sites, definitely marking the
Formative Stage of Mesoamerican civilisation.

Chicama, Chavin and Classic cultures of Peru
   South of the Isthmus of Panama a stage of culture broadly com-
parable with that of the Desert cultures of North America has
been revealed rather more fully during the exploration of middens
at Huaco Prieta in the Chicama Valley of the northern coastal
                                 222
                        THE   NEW      WORLD

district of Peru. Here, between the mid-third millennium and
about 1200 B.c., there lived people who depended in large measure
on sea-food: gathering shell-fish, catching fish in seine nets
weighted by stone sinkers and supported by gourd floats, and
hunting porpoises. They supplemented their diet by gathering wild
roots, tubers and fruits and by cultivating beans, gourds, squash
and presumably cotton, but noticeably they were not growing
maize. They occupied subterranean one-roomed dwellings roofed
by whale-bones or timber beams. They used cotton and bast-fibre
to make bags, nets and fabrics, and they twined mats and baskets,
for some of which activities there is evidence from much earlier
cave-deposits as far north as New Mexico, Nevada and Utah; and
like their northern fellows they got along without pottery.
    The Formative Stage in Peru, particularly well documented in
the Virti Valley settlements of the Chavin culture, was, as in the
Valley of Mexico, marked by the appearance in embryo of many
of the basic features of the civilization that was ultimately to
develop in the region. The Chavin people, who lived in rect-
angular gabled houses, cultivated maize as well as manioc, squash
and, for industrial purposes, cotton, and kept dogs and, almost
certainly, llamas. Ceremonial pottery elaborately moulded into
animal and human forms, and stone-faced terraced pyramids, em-
bellished with reliefs featuring felines, serpents and humans, point
to the growing elaboration of religious practice. Furthermore the
beginning of irrigation during the closing phase of the culture
argues for an increase in the density of population and in the degree
of social integration. The fact that the Chavin Culture appeared in
Peru several hundred years later than a comparable one in Mexico,
taken in conjunction with the presence in both areas of such
specialized traits as stirrup-spouted jars, the preoccupation with
felines in decorative designs, the terraced pyramid and the practice
of cranial deformation, suggests that the Peruvians of the Forma-
tive Stage owed much to impulses from the north during the broad
period 1200-Goo B.c. Indeed, the antiquity of maize in the north
                                 223
                        THE   NEW     WORLD

and its absence from the Preformative in Peru would alone suggest
that Mexico was the main originative focus at this stage.
   In both regions cultural development reached a climax during a
so-called Classic or Florescent Stage, following the long period of
incubation: at this time we recognize fully-formed and distinct
civilizations each equipped with a technology sufficient for its
needs and each having its own individual style. Once the civili-
zations of Mesoamerica and the Andes had achieved their Classic
form, technical progress, though it did not cease, was much slower,
and change took the form in the main of political vicissitudes within
an established cultural framework up to the time when Spanish
intervention and conquest brought to an end the independent
histories of the higher civilizations of the New World. Modern
research, notably the application of radiocarbon analysis, suggests
that the Classic stage began substantially earlier than some recent
authorities have been willing to admit, though confirming in the
case of the Maya Old Empire with curious exactitude some earlier
estimates based on study of the ancient calendars carved on stelae.

Early civilization in Mexico Valley
   Mesoamerican civilization found classic expression both on the
high plateau of Mexico, where at Teotihuacdn in the Valley of
Mexico there flourished a city of some 50,000 people equipped with
ceremonial pyramids and monumental buildings as early as the
sixth century a.p. and, by contrast, in the tropical rain-forests of
Northern Guatemala and Honduras, where under the Old Empire
the Maya civilization passed through its most creative period
between the third and the seventh centuries A.D.
   The Post-Classic phase in Mexico was marked less by significant
advances in technology than by the successive rise to dominance of
different peoples. It is noteworthy that stone continued to provide
the main material for tools and weapons, and indeed it was only in
the south-west coastal area, most accessible to influences from
Ecuador, that metallurgy played a role of any importance and then
                                224
                        THE   NEW     WORLD

only from late Post-Classic times. Among the first conspicuous
groups of which we have knowledge were the Toltecs of Tula and
the Chichimecs who overthrew them in the twelfth century,
peoples who subscribed to a comparatively mild religion sym-
bolized by the plumed serpent Quetzalcoatl carved on the columns
of many of the public buildings. The Aztecs, from whom the
Spaniards were to wrest the sovereignty of Mexico, first began to
move into the Valley of Mexico from the north during the twelfth
century, and it was not until around 1325 that they founded their
capital city and ceremonial centre of Tenochtitlan on two islands in
Lake Texcoco. By contrast with their predecessors and with the
Maya the Aztecs were a fierce and cruel people: their social struc-
ture was hierarchical, comprising serfs, freemen, officials, nobles,
priests and over all a semi-divine king; they worshipped a god
Huitzilopochtli who demanded human sacrifice on a grand scale
for his propitiation; and they exercised a ruthless domination over
weaker neighbours, Huaxtecs, Mixtecs, Zapotecs and the like. In
the long run it was some of their less amiable qualities that led to
their downfall. Excessive veneration of their ruler Montezuma II
made them incredulous of his seizure by Hernando Cortés and it
was hatred of their Aztec overlords that prevented the peoples of
Mexico from rallying against the Spanish invader. Thus it became
possible for Hernando and his followers to topple over a populous
empire in the full pride of power and growth within a period of two
or three years (1519-21).

The Mayas

   The classic Maya civilization, memorialized at such sites as
Uaxactun, Tikal, Copan and Palenque (Pl. X) by stone buildings
and inscribed stone stelae, and boasting a priestly caste learned in
astronomy and mathematics, likewise made do with a technology
based on the use of stone tools; copper tools did not appear until
late Classic times and then only as foreign imports. The most
prominent structures were temples, set on terraced pyramids
                                225
                        THE   NEW      WORLD

with flights of steps for access, and dwellings for priests and rulers
set round courts. Although outwardly imposing, these buildings
were in fact archaic in character; their mode of construction with
rubble core and ashlar facing and the lack of any such device as the
true arch meant that within their massive walls the chambers were
narrow and dark. The Maya religion, though having features in
common with the Mexican, was milder in its requirements. Like-
wise the Maya state seems to have beena relatively pacific confedera-
tion of cities, dominated to a large degree by a priestly caste. One
of the main preoccupations of the priests was the measurement and
recording of time by observing the heavenly bodies and con-
structing an intricate calendrical system. To do this they employed
a vigesimal system of numeration. Furthermore, they made use of
hieroglyphs for recording outstanding events which they were
careful to date by reference to their calendar, though as far as we
know writing was restricted to this particular function in Maya
society. For some reason not yet definitely established, but which
may well have been connected with the limited possibilities of the
soil in a tropical rain-forest habitat, the Old Empire seems to have
died out in its original territories. By around a.D. 700 the focus of
settlement had shifted to the limestone plateau of Yucatan, where
the city of Chichén Itza had been among the first to be founded.
Around the tenth century the New Empire became involved in war-
fare and in the long run, after recourse to Mexican mercenaries, fell
under Toltec influence. The Post-Classic Maya culture, having lost
its autonomy, entered upon a period of sharp decline during the
thirteenth century, and by the end of the fifteenth had virtually
ceased to exist as a viable entity. In this particular instance the
demise of a New World civilization can hardly be set at the door of
the Spanish conquerors.

Peruvian civilization

   The Classic stage of the Andean civilization, represented on the
coast of Peru by the Mochica culture in the north and the Nazca in
                                 226
                         THE   NEW     WORLD

the south and on the southern highlands by such sites as Tiahua-
naco and Pucara, is tentatively dated to the period from the be-
ginning of the Christian era to around a.D. 650. It was marked by the
full development of technical processes, a flourishing period of art
and the establishment of highly organized and aggressive states in
each of several regions. The basis of subsistence was enlarged by
the cultivation of the potato, sweet potato and pineapple. Metal-
lurgy was now practised ona substantial scale and copper was used
for such things as the blades of digging-sticks, mace-heads and
lance-points as well as for ornaments. The fine, polished poly-
chrome pottery included in its repertoire of design representations
of pumas, condors and humans. Textiles of both cotton and wool
were outstanding and represented practically the entire range of
aboriginal American techniques of weaving. Many different pro-
ducts, including tapestry, brocades and gauzes, were produced toa
very high standard of fineness. This fine quality was due in part to
the standard of selection and spinning of the fibres and in part to a
traditional dexterity in weaving for which belt looms were em-
ployed, but in which the hands played a main part. The effect was
heightened by the use of vegetable dyes—indigo, red and yellow to
orange brown. Some indication of the rivalry between regional
units characteristic of the age is given by the marked differentiation
of local art styles and by the emphasis laid in vase painting on
warriors and by such scenes as the execution of prisoners of war.
   The immediate Post-Classic age was characterized by the
expansion of highland and specifically of Tiahuanaco influence to
the coastal regions. After this episode, which is thought to have
lasted for some three centuries, there followed a period during
which the population of the coastal tract tended to concentrate in
large cities organized in three states, of which Chimu in the north,
stretching from Timbeg to the region of Lima in the south, was the
largest and most powerful. The capital city of Chimu, Chan-Chan,
was approximately eleven square milesin areaand comprised tenor
more large rectangular enclosures averaging 1300x650 feet and
                                 227
                       THE   NEW       WORLD

having powerful walls up to 40 feet high. The concentration of
population implied by such cities was made possible by combining
irrigation schemes in two or more neighbouring valleys and it was
probably at this time that roads were constructed up and down the
coast. In the highlands of Peru broken topography and multiple
sources of water militated against large concentrations of popu-
lation, yet it was from small beginnings in the Cuzco Valley that
there issued the imperial race of the Incas.
  Like the Aztecs, the Incas of Peru (Pl. XI) established and en-
larged their empire with great rapidity, only to be cut down in full
career by the Spaniards. A decisive factor in their rise was a suc-
cession of exceptionally able rulers. Between his accession in
c. 1438 and 1460 Pachacuti had conquered the highlands of Peru.
From this base, aided by his son Topa Inca (1471-93), he incor-
porated first much of Ecuador and the empire of Chimut and later
the south coastal region of Peru, the highlands of Bolivia, northern
Argentine and Chile north of the Maule river. Over this consider-
able empire, rounded off under Huayna Capac (1493-1527) by the
acquisition of the rest of Ecuador, presided a divine ruler, assisted
by a hereditary nobility related to him by blood, by a priestly
hierarchy and by an army of appointed officials, who between
them controlled every aspect of the lives of the hapless people.
The Incan state, indeed, with its minute regulation of economic
and social life, forecast some of the worst features of modern
collectivist societies: a completely regulated economy was
associated with a relentless system of taxation exacted in the form
of labour for agricultural works, mining, road-making and the
army; marriages were arranged by appointed officials; and
conquered populations were forcibly transferred to distant pro-
vinces. The empire was knit together on a material plane by an
extensive system of narrow but well-built roads embracing the
sometimes precipitous highlands as well as the easier coastal
regions, a system equipped at intervals with rest- and store-houses
and traversed by llamas and human runners; and ona      spiritual one
                                 228
                        THE   NEW     WORLD

by means of a religious system administered by a priestly hier-
archy. Worship of a lord of creation and of the heavenly bodies
was carried on in stone temples decked with gold. Further, the
religion of the day called for sacrifices, on normal occasions of
such things as llamas and maize beer, but at moments of crisis,
such as the illness or death of the ruler, of the lives of women and
children. Yet the empire, though by far the most extensive and
the best organized in the New World, was much too weak to
withstand the impact of a small but resolute body of Spanish
adventurers. By comparison with that of sixteenth-century
Europe, the technology of the Incan civilization was miserably
defective: ahead of the rest of the New World in the ability to
make bronze tools and weapons, its lack of iron and gunpowder
was yet decisive; again, the Incas, though possessing a decimal
system of numeration, lacked any form of writing; and there were
inherent weaknesses in its constitution which made the state
exceptionally vulnerable on the death of a ruler—power was
excessively centralized in the person of the Emperor, but, the
Emperor having many wives, the succession, though passing to a
son, was not fixed on any particular one. As ill luck would have
it the Spaniards under the leadership of Pizarro reached the
country during precisely such a crisis of succession: Atahuallpa
had no sooner staged a successful revolt against his half-brother,
the new emperor Huascar, than he was seized by the Spanish
conqueror (1532). The Incan Empire fell at the height of its vigour
and glory, only local resistance surviving to remind the conquerors
of their victory.

Basket-maker and Pueblo cultures of the North American south-west
   Beyond the comparatively restricted zone of indigenous higher
civilization in the Americas there were vast tracts over which the
intruding white man encountered a varied but everywhere less
advanced level of culture; indeed, there were only two regions
north of Mesoamerica in which maize agriculture was practised
                                229
                       THE   NEW      WORLD

during Pre-Columban times, namely the South-West and the
East. The most clearly defined and vital focus of culture in the
South-West was centred on the present-day junction of the four
states of Utah, Colorado, Arizona and New Mexico. Here, in the
centuries around the beginning of the Christian era, there de-
veloped from a Desert culture basis a type of settled economy
that has managed to retain its essential pattern down to the
present day. Within this area ethnologists distinguish three main
cultures, exploiting rather different environments, laying a dif-
ferent emphasis on various aspects of the quest for food and dis-
playing individual styles: at the juncture of the four states the
Anasazi people, who for descriptive purposes we shall take as
typical, occupied a predominantly plateau region (4000-7000 feet) ;
by contrast, the Hohokam people to the south-west were desert-
dwellers, whose economy depended to an important degree on
irrigated maize-cultivation; and to the south-east the Mogollon-
Mimbres people, occupying a more mountainous territory with
forest and scrub, laid a greater emphasis on plant-gathering.
   The Anasazi people emerged, probably in the second century
A.D., from a generalized Desert culture background. They de-
pended for food on maize, which they cultivated by digging-sticks
and ground on saddle-querns, and on pumpkins, as well as on
gathering wild seeds and hunting mainly small game, in which
they used spears armed with stemmed and notched flint heads and
propelled by atlatls. They grew tobacco which they smoked in
tubular pipes. They had no domestic animals other than dogs.
Although practising agriculture, the earliest Anasazi people relied
for containers on bags made from vegetable fibres and on twined
and coiled baskets, for which reason they are often referred to as
Basket-Makers (second century a.D.—50o0 A.D.). They buried their
dead in caves, wrapped in skin blankets and cloaks and provided
with plaited sandals and with objects used in daily life. They lived
in small hamlets, commonly of two or three houses, which were
rounded in plan, had floors sunk below ground-level, and were
                                230
                        THE   NEW      WORLD

provided with storage-pits for food. During the thousand years
that ensued before the first intrusion of the Spaniards, the basic
pattern of the Anasazi culture persisted, though subject to a
number of important modifications. The so-called Modified
Culture Stage (500-700 A.D.) was marked by the introduction of
bean cultivation and turkey-keeping, by the substitution of the
bow and arrow for the spear and atlatl, by the adoption of potting,
at first moulded in baskets, later modelled by hand, by the aggre-
gation of dwellings to form villages and by the construction of
Kivas, the men’s club-houses or ceremonial centres that played a
leading part in later phases of the culture. The main trend in the
Pueblo stages of the Anasazi culture (Pueblo I, 700-900; II,
900-1050;   III, 1050-1300) was a progressive enlargement in the
size of settlements, culminating in great cliff-house settlements and
hill-top towns, compact masses of up to a thousand rooms of well-
built masonry from one to four stories high. During the reign
of Pueblo IV (1300-1700), while the Indians were still limited by
a Stone Age technology, the Spaniards appeared for the first time
in New Mexico (1540) and by the end of the period European
influence had spread over the whole region. Yet, although no
longer free to move their settlements, the Pueblo V Indians of
the present day still retain a considerable control over their affairs
and the painted pottery they sell to motorists carries on recogniz-
ably an ancient tradition.

Archaic culture of eastern North America
   The second area in which maize agriculture was practised
during prehistoric times to the north of Mesoamerica, was the
Mississippi Valley and the territories to the east, where it seems to
have appeared during the first millennium B.c. Initially the region
bounded by the St Lawrence and the Atlantic seaboard had been
penetrated by Palaeoindian hunters, but, as we have seen, the
broken country and the spread of forests during Neothermal times
combined to promote a widening of the food quest to include
                                 231
                       THE   NEW      WORLD

fishing, the gathering of shell-fish and wild plants, and also
hunting. On such a basis there arose the Archaic culture of
eastern North America, parallel in many respects with the Desert
culture of the West, but recalling rather, because of the simi-
larity in environment, the Mesolithic of northern Europe.
Specific features which support this European analogy include
among others: the domestication of the dog, the absence of
pottery, the utilization of antler and bone as materials for such
things as harpoon-heads, the heads of fish-spears and fish-hooks,
and in the later stages the polishing of stone for such purposes as
axes, spear-thrower weights, bowls and plummets. A feature of
the Archaic stage which is surprising at first sight is the working
of copper on a considerable scale for tools and weapons rather
than ornaments; but the industry was of course based on the
exploitation of outcrops of native metal in the southern region of
Lake Superior and of detached fragments carried by glacial action
over wide areas of Wisconsin, Minnesota and neighbouring states.
It implied no knowledge of metallurgy, any more than did a similar
utilization of native copper in more recent times by the Indians of
the Copper River district of Alaska or by the Eskimo and Indians
of the Coppermine River of northern Canada: as we are told by
Samuel Hearne, who travelled in the latter area between 1769 and
1772, ‘with the help of a fire and two stones, the Indians could
beat a piece of copper into any shape they wished’. From such
native copper the Indians of the Archaic period beat out awls,
tanged knives, projectile heads with wrapped-over sockets and
broad spud blades similarly wrapped over at either side to grip
the wooden handle. The products of this industry, though con-
centrated more densely in the area of production, were distri-
buted by trade to the Laurentian area, New England and New York
and as far south as the shell-heaps of the middle South. There is
indeed plenty of other evidence for widespread trade in objects
made of exotic materials among the Archaic people: for example,
bowls of Appalachian steatite were traded as far as Florida and
                                232
                       THE   NEW     WORLD

the lower Mississippi and objects made of shell were extensively
traded from the south-east. The dead were cremated or buried
flexed or seated and in either event might be scattered over with
red ochre. Antler head-dresses of copper recall ones made from
natural antler in the early Mesolithic of northern Europe.

Woodland culture
   Over a large part of the eastern area the Archaic was trans-
formed into the Woodland stage, mainly during the broad period
j00 B.C.—A.D. 500, under impulses from two main directions.
From the north came pottery-making and mound-building, the
two most prominent traits in the purely archaeological record,
but the practice of maize-cultivation, which doubtless helped to
sustain the elaboration of mortuary and ceremonial practices with
their attendant monuments so characteristic of the Woodland
stage, must have come from the south-west—most probably from
Mexico. Other innovations introduced from outside included
tobacco-smoking in tubular pipes and weaving. Two distinct
intensifications have been noted: the Adena, centred on south
Ohio, south-east Indiana, north Kentucky, north-west West
Virginia and south-east Pennsylvania; and the Hopewell, which
seems to have appeared somewhat later and to have been centred
on the south Ohio, Illinois and Mississippi area, with extensions
down to Louisiana and Florida and across from Oklahoma to
New York. In both cultures the burial mounds and associated
monuments testify to a pronounced degree of social stratification.
Thus, whereas the ordinary Adena individual was cremated with-
out much ado, people of higher status were given an elaborate
form of burial that took quite a long time to reach completion.
First the dead man was placed in a log tomb erected on the floor
of his house, together with suitable grave goods and the corpses
of other people, probably retainers slaughtered for the purpose.
After a while their bones were disinterred, painted and placed
once again in the tomb which was now heaped over by a small
                               233
                        THE   NEW       WORLD

mound. Finally a gigantic mound up to 70 feet high was erected
to cover both the grave and the burnt-out remains of the house.

Middle Mississippi culture
   A final step in the development of the eastern tradition occurred
somewhere around 1000 A.D. with the emergence of the Middle
Mississippi culture. Centred on a track from north-central
Georgia through north Alabama and Mississippi to west Tennes-
see, Kentucky, south Illinois and south-east Missouri, it radiated
influence over a much wider area. Even so, it had not everywhere
brought Woodland cultures to an end at the time of European
contact: when De Soto traversed the south-east in the middle of
the seventeenth century he encountered Indians with a Middle
Mississippi culture, but the English colonists of Virginia and the
Carolinas found the Algonquin and Siouan peoples still pre-
serving their Woodland heritage. The Middle Mississippi culture
was not marked by technical innovations of any note, but rather
by an intensification of the ceremonial aspect of social life. The
larger village centres were built round plazas or squares and were
marked by rectangular temple mounds, frequently built in tiers
as though several times reconstructed to a greater height. One
of the largest—at East St Louis in Illinois—covered an area of no
less than 16 acres, was 1080 feet long, 710 feet broad and around
100 feet tall. Although the temples themselves were only en-
larged versions of the ordinary domestic buildings, made of
timber, lath and plaster and provided with a gabled roof, the
whole arrangement recalls that found on a more elaborate scale in
Mesoamerica. Several new art motives executed in clay, carved
stone, shell and sheet copper—winged snakes, dancing bird-men
with speech-scrolls and human skulls—point in the same direc-
tion, even if it is only fair to state that no precise source has been
detected. Probably we should think in terms of inspiration,
perhaps through a very few individuals, rather than of any move-
ment of ethnic significance; indeed, as we have emphasized in this
                                 23.4
                       THE   NEW      WORLD

section, there was a very real continuity in the cultural history of
the eastern United States from Archaic and even Palaeoindian
times up to the moment of European penetration.

Hunting, fishing and gathering communities
   Over the rest of North America, as well as over the inhospitable
regions of the extreme South, communities subsisting exclusively
on hunting, fishing and gathering prevailed down to modern
times and in some instances still survive. Subject to this limita-
tion, there was scope for considerable variation according to
ecological conditions and to the nature of the response made by
different societies. Thus among the Indians of central and southern
California a pattern of subsistence formed at latest in the Ana-
thermal period in the sphere of the Desert culture persisted
throughout the prehistoric period well into the nineteenth
century. A leading part was played by wild seeds, among which
the acorn was of predominating importance, and these were pre-
pared by grinding-stones, supplemented in due course by pestles
reminiscent of those used so much earlier by the Natufians of
Mount Carmel. That hunting still had a certain role is shown by
the occurrence at each stage of chipped flint spearheads, at first
leaf-shaped or squared at one end, and later stemmed, and by the
introduction towards the end of the prehistoric period of the bow.
On the coast fishing and the gathering of shell-fish were often
leading sources of food. The prehistoric Californians depended
throughout on flint and stone and on such materials as antler and
bone from which they made fish-hooks and barbed spearheads.
Pottery was strictly local in occurrence and well-twined and coiled
baskets served for containing food and liquid, as well as cooking.

Coastal culture of the North-West
  The aboriginal culture of the north-west coastal region was
first brought into effective contact with European civilization at
the time of Captain Cook’s visit in 1778 and has survived, though
                                235
                       THE   NEW      WORLD

with modifications, down to the present day. To judge from the
small amount of material excavated, no change of note seems to
have occurred in the equipment of the coastal Indians of British
Columbia during the last five or six hundred years. Subsistence
was based on exploitation of the resources of rivers and the sea:
sea-fish and sea-mammals, like whales, seals, sea-lions and sea-
otters, were significant sources of food, but it was the plentiful
harvest of salmon, easily caught on their seasonal runs upstream,
that made possible the elaboration of culture exemplified for
instance by the historical Nootka and Kwatuitl. Although they
undertook some seasonal movements in the quest for food, the
assured supply of salmon made it possible to occupy permanent
villages and live in comparatively large communities. Their
villages might comprise upwards of thirty houses. These were
built on massive timber frames with shells of wooden planking
and might be as large as 520 feet long and 60 feet broad, providing
accommodation for more than 100 people. The material culture
included some elements, like twined basketry containers, derived
ultimately from the ancient Desert culture, but many items of
specialized coastal equipment show significant agreements with
analogous ones from the Aleut and Eskimo areas. On the other
hand the social system was highly complex: society was organized
on a hierarchical principle with noble or chiefly families, com-
moners and slaves; and surplus wealth was dissipated in cere-
monial feasting and competitive display.

Denbigh and Dorset cultures of the Arctic

   The Arctic territories of North America seem to have been
settled mainly by successive migrations from west to east, move-
ments that stemmed ultimately from Siberia, and which represent
no doubt only the latest of a series, the earliest of which brought
the first men into the New World. No certain trace of the earliest
migrations has yet been recognized in Alaska, and the oldest
assemblage of material yet recovered there, that from the Denbigh
                                236
                        THE   NEW     WORLD

River, relates not to the great southern migrations but to the
peopling of the Arctic Zone; indeed, Denbigh material has since
been traced across the Hudson’s Bay region to the Sargaq area
of West Greenland. The precise age of the Denbigh finds in
western Alaska is still uncertain, but there seems no good reason
for doubting the radio-carbon dates of up to c. 4000 B.c. already
obtained. The Denbigh people were skilled at knapping materials
like flint and turned out miniature burins, delicately flaked
projectile-heads and side-blades for mounting in handles, and
regular micro-blades, which at Trail Creek, Seward Peninsula,
were found set in slotted bone projectile heads. The burins are in
every respect similar to those made by the Advanced Palaeolithic
and Mesolithic peoples in Eurasia, but also by the Sub-neolithic
people of the Lena Valley of north-east Siberia; and the slotted
bone projectile points extend right across northern Eurasia to
western Norway. The lithic tradition of the Denbigh culture
seems to have contributed to the formation of the first well-defined
culture based on the Hudson’s Bay region, that named after Cape
Dorset on the south-west of Baffin Island. Although possessing
marked characteristics of its own, notably the delicacy with which
bone and ivory were worked and the art, comprising incised geo-
metric designs and carved animal and human figurines, the
emphasis on chipped stone and the presence of burins and micro-
blades both point to Denbigh influence; on the other hand ground
slate tools were also used and the culture shows some afiinities
with the early Eskimo cultures developing farther to the west.

Old Bering Sea, Thule and recent Eskimo cultures
   The earliest specifically Eskimo group yet recognized is the
Old Bering Sea culture of Alaska, St Lawrence Island and north-
east Siberia, which on the evidence of radio-carbon analysis
seems to go back to the last centuries before Christ. The people
were adapted to a coastal way of life and lived in semi-subter-
ranean houses, rectangular in plan and approached by narrow
                                237
                       THE   NEW   WORLD

passages, a type of dwelling that goes back to Upper Palaeolithic
times in Siberia. Their basic implements were made of chipped
stone and ground slate and they used pottery cooking vessels and
lamps. In course of time regional groups seem to have developed
on this basis, for instance the Punuk culture of St Lawrence
Island and the Birnik culture of Point Barrow and the Arctic coast
of Alaska. The last of these is of basic importance as the immediate
source of the widespread Thule culture centred on Hudson’s Bay,
but once covering a large part of northern Canada, including
Labrador, and extending to Greenland. The Thule people, who
spread east from northern Alaska, evidently came into contact
both with the Dorset culture, occupying the heart of their new
territories, and with the Norse settlers who had reached south-west
Greenland already during the tenth century. Their basic economy
and the type of houses in which they lived resembled those of
their forebears in Alaska and Siberia, but their technology now
depended on the iron borrowed from the Norse, rather than upon
stone. In some parts of Canada the Thule culture has persisted
in modified form down to the present day, but elsewhere it has
been replaced by that of the existing Eskimos: there is evidence
for a certain backwash of culture from the central regions to
northern Alaska, and on the west coast of Greenland a distinctive
Inugsuk culture grew up on the Thule basis. Since the Eskimo
were the first people in the New World to encounter Europeans,
and since they must always have been thinly spread—today
barely 40,000 of them occupy more than 6000 miles of coast—
their survival might at first sight seem surprising until we
remember that their way of life marks one of the most effective
adaptations to an environment of exceptional severity.

Yahgan, Ona and Alacu peoples of Tierra del Fuego
  At the other end of the New World in Tierra del Fuego the
Yahgan and their neighbours the Ona and Alacaluf maintained
down to modern times the most southerly settlements of mankind.
                                238
                       THE   NEW      WORLD

Isolation and an adverse environment combined to preserve a way
of life that seems hardly to have differed from that revealed in the
middens on the Beagle Channel which began to form at least
eight or nine thousand years ago. These lowly denizens of a
miserable land, as they were viewed by Charles Darwin, lived on
a diet of shell-fish, supplemented by fish, birds, seals, whales,
otters and wild vegetable food. Their dwellings were caves,
windbreaks or primitive huts and they wore little beyond a skin
mantle thrown over the shoulders in cold weather. Like many
early Americans they were ignorant of pottery and used coiled
baskets as containers. Their chipped stone projectile-heads, both
stemmed and hollow-based, recall Palaeoindian ones in many dif-
ferent parts of America, and their harpoon and barbed spear-
heads of bone recall in a general way those of many North
American groups, Archaic, North-western and Circumpolar.
Unlike the Eskimo, who were comparatively recent intruders, the
Tierra del Fuegians were survivors, in a modified and possibly
even degenerate form, of the early Palaeoindians who found their
way right down both the American continents. The contrast they
offer to the sophisticated citizens of Mexico and Peru at the time
of the Spanish conquests is a testimony to the achievements of
the aboriginal Americans in Mesoamerica and on the Andean
highlands.




                                239
                        CHAPTER Io

    AUSTRALASIA              AND      THE      PACIFIC

             AUSTRALIA       AND     TASMANIA

Wallace Divide
   Australasia, refuge of an archaic flora, recalling that of the
Secondary era of geological time, and of a fauna of monotremes
and marsupials, the most primitive and next most primitive of the
three groups into which the mammals are divided, was the last
continent to be settled by man. The barrier that sheltered these
living fossils and at the same time prevented the spread of the
earliest types of hominid was the trough in the ocean bed between
Borneo and Celebes, known among biologists as the Wallace
Divide (see Map 1). Since this would have been at least thirty
miles wide, even when sea-levels were at their lowest during the
maximum of glacial phases, the first men to reach Australia from
south-east Asia can only have crossed by means of boats or floats
and this may be why neither Pithecanthropus nor the Neander-
thaloid species from Late Pleistocene terrace deposits of the Solo
river in Java, Homo soloensis, was able to do so.
Tasmanians

   The least advanced of the inhabitants of Australasia at the time
of its discovery by white men were the Tasmanians, who failed
to withstand the impact for even three generations and were
exterminated before any complete record of their culture was
made. It would of course be quite wrong to interpret their
culture as though it was a mere fossil preserving primitive
Palaeolithic characteristics, but it remains true that they were
subject to the same limitations as the men of the Old Stone Age.
                               240
Mileviiaiioae   itt




                      XI   Inca figurines of gold (male) and silver (female)

                                                                               (facing p. 240)
&




    XII   Abor ifo)o ina | hunter, Austral la
                 AUSTRALIA     AND    TASMANIA

They were restricted for their food-supply to what they could
gather or hunt, and their equipment was very limited; they lacked
bows, and at the time of their discovery depended very largely
on woodenclubs and on spears of which the tips had been hardened
by fire. As a result they lived in small bands widely distributed
over the country and rarely settled in any one place for more than
a brief time. Although Tasmania was not lacking in resources and
extended over some 26,000 square miles, the aboriginal population
at the time of the white occupation is not thought to have
amounted to more than from two to four thousand. Individual
hunting bands rarely exceeded fifty souls and much of the year
was passed in smaller groups. Wind-breaks of tree-branches and
bark provided rudimentary shelter. There was little scope for the
sub-division of labour beyond that between the sexes, and
technology was correspondingly simple. Like the men of the
Old Stone Age the Tasmanians were ignorant of pottery and
depended on chipped stones for their basic implements. This does
not mean that their stone industries can usefully be compared with
ones of Pleistocene antiquity from Europe, as has sometimes been
done, since there can hardly have been any close historical con-
nection between them. Moreover, as yet we know neither the
sequence of Tasmanian industries nor their absolute age, beyond
the fact that the youngest of them were still flourishing in the
nineteenth century. What can be said is that they are limited to
flake tools and unifacial pieces with edge-trimming and that the
younger Australian types dating from the third millennium B.c.
and later are conspicuously absent. No doubt the archaic aspect
of Tasmanian culture resulted above all from the absence of
stimulus that followed from its isolated position.
   Racially the Tasmanians combined a tendency co the round-
headedness and woolly hair of the Negrito peoples of New
Guinea, the Celebes, the Philippines, Malaya and the Andaman
Islands, with basic Australoid characteristics.   Some anthropo-
logists were once inclined to believe that the Tasmanians reached
   9                            241                          CP
              AUSTRALASIA      AND   THE   PACIFIC

their territory direct by overseas migration from Melanesia, but
it is now thought that they came from Australia at a time when
Tasmania was still joined to the mainland. One reason for this
is that Negrito elements have been recognized on the mainland,
notably in the rain forest of the Atherton Tableland in north-east
Queensland, but also in marginal areas like Bathurst and Melville
Islands in the north and in the extreme south-east and south-west
corners of the continent, which may best be explained as relicts
of the earliest migration to Australasia.

Australoid migrations
  The Australoids, with wavy hair plentifully distributed on their
brown bodies, long heads with low foreheads and prominent
brow-ridges, noses with low and broad roots, prognathous jaws,
large palates and teeth and small chins, preserve a stage in the
evolution of Homo sapiens probably anterior to the emergence of
Negroids, Mongoloids, Whites and American Indians. It seems
likely that they came from South Asia and it is significant that
pockets of Australoids are found, though mixed with other
strains, in Ceylon and possibly in South India. The route fol-
lowed by the migration from south-east Asia passed through
Indonesia and is marked by the fossil skulls from Wadjak in
Java and by still living people on some of the Lesser Sunda
Islands. Further it would appear that some of the Australoids,
instead of pushing south, continued north of New Guinea to
Melanesia, where they are still to be recognized in the Bismarck
Archipelago and in New Caledonia. The high degree of homo-
geneity observed in all but a few enclaves of the aboriginal popu-
lation—all the more notable in view of the extent of the territory
and its varying ecology—and the fact that the known fossil
skeletal remains, and most notably the cranium from a river
terrace at Keilor a few miles north-west of Melbourne, are Austra-
loid in type confirms the view that prior to the European colo-
nization Australia was mainly peopled by a single stock.
                               242
                  AUSTRALIA     AND   TASMANIA

  Like the Tasmanians, the Australian aborigines (Pl. XII) were
limited by the possibilities of food-gathering and hunting, though
possessing highly complex social institutions. The population at
the time of the discovery is estimated to have amounted to some
250,000 tO 300,000, giving an average density about the same as
that estimated for Tasmania. On the other hand people were very
unevenly distributed over the 2,948,366 square miles of conti-
nental territory; much of the western and central parts was
either desert or too arid to support more than very sparse settle-
ment. Recent aboriginal habitation has been concentrated in the
far north, along the extensive coastal territories, in the forested
area of the south-east and in the valley of the Darling and Murray
Rivers, but it has to be remembered that the main climatic and
vegetational zones, and by consequence the distribution of popu-
lation, must have shifted considerably within the probable span
of human settlements: for instance at the height of the Pleistocene
Ice Age the arid zone must have been much further north and the
rain-belt in the south correspondingly more extensive, whereas at
the climax of Neothermal times the arid belt would have been
further south than to-day and tropical rain-forest must have
spread over Arnhem Land and south of the Cape York Peninsula.
Prehistoric settlement
   Although an immense amount of collecting has been done, the
scientific pursuit of prehistory is still in its infancy over large
areas of the vast Australian territories. Careful stratigraphical
excavations have however been made in rock-shelters over wide
tracts of the eastern half of the continent; and, also, successive
layers and their contained industries have several times been
dated by means of radio-carbon analysis. Although the results
of many investigations are still not yet available and despite the
fact that only a beginning has been made in scientific excavation,
some conclusions are already beginning to emerge. It is already
clear that early man reached Australia well back in the Late
Glacial period, when the Sahul Shelf was dry land and New
                                243                          9-2
              AUSTRALASIA        AND   THE   PACIFIC

Guinea was still connected with the Australian continent: existing
radio-carbon dates go back at least some 16,000 years.
  The earliest stone industries obtained from modern excavations,
notably that from Kenniff’s Cave between Charlesville and Rock-
hampton in southern Queensland, dated by radio-carbon to
between 3 and 14,000 B.c., and the similar one from the lower
level of the Ingaladdi shelter some 120 miles south-west of
Katherine in the northern part of the Northern Territories, were
of a comparatively simple type. The earliest knappers, who seem
to have maintained a remarkably uniform tradition over a period
of ten thousand years or more, made their artifacts mainly from
struck flakes and apparently concentrated on the production of
convex and concave scrapers, together with nosed tools and
heavy plane-like artifacts, an assemblage that can plausibly be
interpreted as designed in the main for shaping simple forms of
wooden tool or weapon.       It is of interest, in view of what has
been said of the physical origins of the Tasmanians themselves,
that closely similar assemblages have long been known from
Tasmania.
   Modern excavation has shown that there was great diversity
and regional variation in the later stone industries. Thus, careful
investigation of the stratified shelters at Devon Downs and
Fromm’s Landing on the Lower Murray River has revealed an
apparent overlap by the third millennium B.c. between two in-
dustries that differ both in their character and in their geographical
distribution. What may have been the earlier of the two in the
Murray Valley is that termed Pirrian after the native name (pirri)
for a type of symmetrical stone point the upper surface of which has
been trimmed by delicate surface flakes struck from either edge to
a median keel. The pirri point, which ranged from 1} to 74. cm.
in length and probably served to tip a spear, is apparently con-
fined in the south-east to South Australia north of the Murray
river and to the Darling Valley, being significantly absent from
the well-explored territories east of the Great Divide and south
                                 244
                 AUSTRALIA      AND   TASMANIA

of the Murray River. To judge from stray finds and occasional
excavations, there was an important focus of pirri points in
Arnhem Land and it is suggestive that similar points appear in
the middle Toalian industry of southern Celebes as well as in an
analogous assemblage from west Java. Until we know more of the
chronology of lithic industries in northern Australia and Indo-
nesia, on the other hand, the context of any movements from
Indonesia to Australia must remain in doubt.
   There is evidence for the appearance, probably a little later, of
a microlithic industry in the Murray Valley, which, though
resembling the Pirrian in its lightness and refinement, yet
differed from it both typologically and as regards its distribution
in the continent as a whole. The microliths, which must pre-
sumably have been used as insets for some kind of composite tool
or weapon, were made from narrow flakes or bladelets and given
definite form, most commonly crescentic or irregularly trapez-
oidal, by means of steep, almost vertical retouch. Although
comparable industries occur in Indonesia and further afield in
Ceylon and India, microlithic industries have yet to be found in
the northern parts of the continent through which any intrusive
movements must have come. In the south-east part of Australia
the distribution of the microlithic industries is to some degree
complementary to those with pirri points, being particularly dense
east of the Great Divide and south of the Lower Murray River.
On the other hand they also occur in the Darling and Lake Eyre
Basins, in central Australia and even in the far west. The fact
that they are apparently absent from Tasmania agrees well with
the fact that they do not seem to have appeared in the Murray
Valley until the third millennium B.c. at a time when the Bass
Strait had already long been formed through the eustatic rise of
sea-level. The absence of microliths or small battered-back
implements from ethnographic material argues that the tradition
had already died out in the prehistoric past, but recent excavations
have shown that it was still flourishing in the Sydney area at least
                                245
              AUSTRALASIA       AND    THE   PACIFIC

as late as c. 200 B.c.; and the inhabitants of rock-shelters in the
neighbourhood of Grafton in northern New South Wales were
evidently continuing the same tradition through much if not
the whole of the first millennium a.p. As well as making such
geometric forms as crescents, triangles and trapezes, some groups
of microlith makers applied the steep backing retouch to truncate
bladelets obliquely or blunt them down the whole of one convex
edge, producing forms known to Australian collectors as ‘ Woak-
wine’ and ‘Bondi’ points respectively. They also made ancillary
forms commonly found in backed-blade industries in other parts
of the world, notably small thumb-nail scrapers, utilised pieces
(lames écaillés) and occasional lateral burins, the facet character-
istically oblique to the primary flake surface. They also worked
bone, but as with other prehistoric groups in Australia bone was
less important than stone, which may explain the scarcity of
burins, one of the few recognisable types being the small pointed
muduk that may have served as a gorge for catching fish or birds.
   The animal bones from the Murray River shelters show that
the makers of pirri points and microliths alike hunted the same
kinds of game, notably kangaroo, rat kangaroo, wallaby, wombat,
bandicoot and possum; took goanna and lizards; caught fish and
birds and gathered crayfish, birds’ eggs and molluscs. No doubt
plant food was an important source of nourishment at all times;
and, especially it would appear in the later stages, the collection of
sea-food played a major role in coastal areas.
    Since neither the food-quest nor the temporary artificial
shelters used involved the felling of trees on any substantial scale,
it is hardly surprising that the elaborately polished axes or adzes
typical of so many ‘neolithic? communities should have been
absent from the normal tool-kit of the Australian aborigines. On
the other hand they made several kinds of implement, designed
to shape wood into a variety of essential gear, such as digging-
sticks and spear-throwers. These included pebble tools shaped by
removing flakes from one face to form a chopping or scraping
                                 246
                 AUSTRALIA      AND   TASMANIA

edge, closely resembling ones first recognized in shell-middens in
Sumatra (hence Sumatraliths) and known to have been used in
Malaya immediately prior to the appearance of neolithic culture,
probably in the middle of the second millennium B.c. It has indeed
been claimed, mainly on the ground of surface specimens found
on Kangaroo Island near Adelaide, that such pebble tools were
made by the earliest inhabitants of South Australia; but the fact is
that securely dated specimens from Australian rock-shelters do not
antedate the beginning of the second millennium B.c. Edge-ground
axes, made from chipped stone and lightly polished, were often
imported from quarries some distance off and seem first to have
come into circulation about the same time.
   The edge-ground axe was normally set in gum and mounted on
a short handle. The gum obtained from spinifex grass, while
easy to mould, sets so hard that down to modern times the
aborigines have done much of their wood-working by means of
adzes made up of scraper-like set-flakes (tw/a) set in substantial
lumps mounted either at the end of a spear-thrower or on a stout,
slightly curved piece of wood. To judge from the Murray Valley
sequence, tula flakes appeared already near the beginning of the
third millennium B.c. alongside pirri points.
    Over much of the southern part of the continent the standard
of stone-working apparently declined during the last phase of the
prehistoric period. In the Northern Territories on the other hand
a remarkable school of stone flaking developed, focused on the
Kimberley Hills, the main product of which, the leaf-shaped
spear-point with shallow flaking on either face, continued to be
made during the European period from telephone insulator or
bottle-glass. When the bifacial Kimberley point first appeared is
still uncertain, but it may prove significant that it occurred along-
side unifacial points resembling pirri in the Ingaladdi (upper
level), Sleisbeck and Oenpelli rock-shelters.



                                247
               AUSTRALASIA       AND    THE   PACIFIC


 Recent Australian aboriginal culture
   It is only for the brief period during which they have come
under the scrutiny of competent observers that we have any full
information about the non-material aspects of aboriginal life.
From the writings of Spencer and Gillen and their successors, it is
evident that, though economically and technically still at a level
comparable with that of the Mesolithic peoples occupying much
of north-western Europe between 5000 and 10,000 years ago, the
Australian aborigines had developed one of the most complex
kinship systems in the world as well as an elaborate ceremonial for
initiating adolescents into adult society. Their religion was equally
intricate, centring on myths concerned with the doings of more or
less remote ancestors and on totemism, a multitude of beliefs
based on a supposed intimate relationship between individuals,
                                                            but
more especially between classes of men, such as members of the
same clan or sex, and specific animals, plants or natural forces like
the sun or rain. Among the overt expressions of such beliefs were
tabus on the killing or eating of the totem, ceremonies aimed at
its increase and representations in art. These latter, which might
be crudely naturalistic or symbolic in style, were commonly
engraved or painted on rocks, stone cult objects, wooden shields,
boomerangs and spear-throwers or pillars and trees marking
burial or other ceremonial places. Of such art very little beyond
rock-engravings and, less frequently, paintings might be expected
to survive for very long.
   As to how far back in prehistory the Australian aboriginal art
goes, it has been pointed out that many of the rock-engravings in
widely separated parts of the continent, for instance in the Flinders
Range of South Australia, at Port Hedland on the north coast of
West Australia and on the courses of the Flinders and Burnett
rivers of Queensland, are unknown to the existing aborigines.
This need not of itself imply a high antiquity, but it has further
been pointed out that the pecked areas of some engravings are
                                248
                  AUSTRALIA      AND   TASMANIA

covered by surface films which must have taken some time to
form and that others are on rocks that have fallen as a result of
weathering since the execution of the art; again, engravings some-
times depict animals no longer found in the same locality. The
early engravings were frequently merely outlined, but sometimes
the area of the representation was pecked all over. In addition to
abstract patterns, the engravings include representations of
human beings, their foot-prints and their hunting equipment and
above all animals and their tracks, notably emu, kangaroo, lizards,
turtles and fish. Although it seems evident that some of the rock-
art is ancient, it is not yet possible to attach specific works of art,
still less specific styles, to individual prehistoric cultures. The
fact that rock-engravings have been found in Tasmania makes it
likely that some of them belong to one of the earliest spreads into
Australia, and a number of rock-shelters in eastern New South
Wales with red ochre drawings, paintings and stencils of human
hands, weapons and culture-heroes have yielded lithic industries
with Bondi points. We may feel reasonably sure that the rock art
goes far back in Australian prehistory, a reminder of the many
other elements in the spiritual life of the early aborigines that we
have lost.
    The Australian continent was first drawn within the purview
of history as a by-product of Dutch enterprise in the East Indies
during the early seventeenth century. By the middle of the century
the north, west and south coasts of Australia and that of Tasmania
had been explored, but it was not until 1770, when Captain Cook
sailed north from New Zealand, that the east coast was sighted.
Real progress in bringing Australian prehistory to an end was not
however initiated till the founding of a penal colony at Sydney in
1788 and the appointment of the first governor of New South
Wales in 1810. During the second quarter of the nineteenth
century rapid progress was made in exploring the interior. Al-
though it has been possible to undertake important field studies
in remote parts of the country down to very recent times, abori-
                                 249
              AUSTRALASIA      AND   THE   PACIFIC

ginal culture only continues to survive, like many forms of wild
life in much of the world to-day, because it is consciously pro-
tected.
                       THE     PACIFIC
It is hardly to be wondered at that the Pacific islands, spread out
over vast tracts of ocean, should have been occupied later than
the larger island groups of Indonesia, the Philippines and
Melanesia, that stood so much closer to south-east Asia, or even
than the Australian mainland and Tasmania. They were not only
more remote, but their very discovery and colonization implied a
high standard of boat-building, social cohesion and navigation.
Indeed the peopling of Micronesia east of the Marianas, which like
the Philippines seem to have been occupied as early as the second
millennium B.c., and of Polynesia was not accomplished until
towards the end of the first millennium a.p. Despite claims to the
contrary there is no real doubt that the migrations stemmed pre-
dominantly from East Asia. The discovery of Ecuadoran pottery —
dating from around A.D. 500 on the Galapagos islands some joo
miles from the American coast shows, it is true, that occasional
voyages were made ina contrary direction and by means of these
the diffusion of any New World elements, such as the sweet
potato, should be explained. The broad fact remains that the
livestock and almost all of the cultivated plants of the Poly-
nesians, as of the Melanesians, stem from Asiatic sources. The
same applies to their material equipment. Certain elements were
left behind—pottery for instance failed to spread into Polynesia,
or even into Micronesia beyond the Marianas, and the islanders
made do with bark cloth in place of textiles—and despite the late
date of their migrations the Polynesians used no metal until the
European period. On the other hand their fishing gear and the
quadrangular polished stone adzes with butts shaped for hafting,
both vital elements in their culture and often reaching a high
standard of workmanship, stem ultimately from Eurasiatic
                               250
                          THE   PACIFIC

sources. The discovery and settlement of the Pacific islands was
accomplished in double canoes hewn out of great trunks by stone
adzes, vessels capable of sailing rapidly before the wind, but which
had to be paddled against it. Moreover apart from their families
and supplies of food and drink for the voyage, the navigators had
to take with them livestock and plant tubers to stock their new
homelands, for the Polynesians no less than the Melanesians
depended largely on raising species which they themselves intro-
duced. On the other hand their environment provided important
additional resources: generally these were in the form of sea-food,
but in the case of the earliest settlers of New Zealand they included
the moa, a giant ostrich-like, flightless bird. The courage and skill
of the Polynesian navigators can be gauged from the fact that
without compasses or other scientific aids they sought out small,
often widely separated islands distributed over a third of the
globe’s circumference. The Pacific was first crossed by Europeans
in 1521, when Magellan sailed round South America and traversed
 the whole ocean before hitting the Marianas, but it was not until
 Captain Cook’s explorations between 1768 and 1779 that the
brief prehistory of Oceania was brought within immediate sight
 of its end.




                                 251
                      RETROSPECT

The story of mankind reflected in prehistory may be viewed most
simply as one of biological progress, of life lived more abundantly
and, however one defines this, more fully. It was, as we have
seen, as hunters that the Pithecanthropians—and conceivably
certain Australopithecines before them—emerged from their
basically vegetarian Primate relatives as the ancestors of Man.
For by far the greater part of their prehistory, a period to be
measured in hundreds of thousands of years, the progress of the
hominids was restricted by their abilities as hunters; and the
Advanced Palaeolithic cultures that flourished in restricted zones
of western Asia, northern Africa and Europe between some
thirty-five and ten thousand years ago, were characterized
above all by specialized hunting-gear, by the fuller utilization of
animal skeletal material and by a graphic art in which fertility
and the chase provided the main themes. Conversely, when man
first began to advance, around ten thousand years ago, towards the
threshold of civilization, he did so by extending his dominance
over wild animals and plants up to the point at which he was
able to control their breeding and genetic composition so as
to elicit new domesticated varieties in accordance with his own
needs.
    Another sign of growing biological effectiveness was enlarge-
ment of the area of settlement. It was not until Late Pleistocene
times that man extended beyond the territories of his fossil fore-
bears. Throughout the Early and Middle Pleistocene he was
confined to those parts of the Old World free from winter frost
and which could be reached on foot. These included the greater
part of continental Africa; southern Asia from Syria to Indonesia,
which during periods of low ocean levels must have formed a
south-eastern extension of the continent; and on the other hand
                               252
                           RETROSPECT

south-western Europe, extending as far north as lowland England
and the Elbe. There is no certain evidence that the colonization of
any part of the Soviet Union was undertaken until well into the
Late Pleistocene, when the Mousterian culture intruded into
territories marginal to the north-east of the Black Sea and further
east into restricted parts of central Asia, notably western Turk-
menia and south-eastern Uzbekistan. The remainder of the
southern parts of European Russia as far north as the river Oka,
together with extensive tracts of Siberia from the Upper Ob to the
Lena Valley, were first occupied by bearers of Advanced Palaeo-
lithic culture equipped with skin clothing and accustomed to erect
artificial dwellings in the open. Again, it was presumably at an
advanced stage of Late Pleistocene times that groups of hardy
hunters pressed through the funnel of north-east Siberia into
Alaska and down the foothills of the eastern Rockies to initiate
the first or Palaeoindian phase of New World prehistory. Large
areas of the globe were first settled during Neothermal times, due
partly to new territories becoming available as a result of the
melting of Pleistocene ice-sheets, notably in northern Europe, but
in large measure to the development of improved means of com-
munication; thus boats, however primitive, were needed before
the Wallace line could be crossed and the colonization of Australia
begun; again, the settling of most of Micronesia and of Polynesia
required navigation of a relatively advanced order; and in our own
times long-distance aircraft have served to open up some of the
few remaining lands hitherto inaccessible.
   As man grew more successful he not only spread farther afield,
but multiplied in numbers, and in due course was able to lead a
more settled existence in groups sufficiently nucleated to make
possible the development of civilization. So long as he was
limited to hunting and gathering the animals and plants naturally
available in the wild state, he was, with few exceptions, constrained
to exist in small groups and move over more or less extensive
territories to gain his food in the course of each year. One of the
                                 253
                           RETROSPECT

few sources of animal protein obtainable with comparatively slight
effort and expenditure of time were certain kinds of fish: as we
know from the Indians of the American North-west and as we
suspect may have been the case in the Dordogne during the Late
Glacial period, it was possible to settle comparatively densely and
to enjoy relative security on the banks of rivers having a strong
seasonal run of salmon; or, again, those who at a relatively
advanced stage of Neothermal times were first willing to venture
on the sea and fish from boats, were able to live in permanent
coastal settlements. On the other hand most land-bound peoples
were more restricted and it was only when advanced hunters were
confronted by altogether exceptional circumstances, like those
prevailing during the initial dry phase of Neothermal times round
the spring of Jericho, that it was feasible to live in settled groups
of any size while depending on a hunting and gathering mode of
life; and, as we have seen, at Jericho itself the big expansion in
population came with the establishment between men and animals
of a special form of relationship amounting to primitive domesti-
cation. It was the adoption of farming that alone provided the
assured basis of subsistence needed before men generally speaking
could live permanently in large groups; and it was life in cities
which first made possible the sub-division of labour and the social
integration needed to ensure rapid and far-reaching advances in
the subjugation of natural forces, advances on which the origins,
expansion and intensification of civilization itself depended.
   In the nature of things it is traces of the intensification and
spread of human settlement and of the advances in technology
whichaccompanied them that survive most palpably inthe archaeo-
logical record, but it would be a great mistake to suppose that
these are more than aspects of man’s success in the struggle for
dominance.    No less important are the social, intellectual and
spiritual advances which leave fewer material clues behind them.
Dependence on social cohesion for such purposes as winning a
livelihood, erecting shelters against the elements, ensuring con-
                                254
                           RETROSPECT

tinuity and soc on are common to the whole animal world and are
frequently carried much further in insect than in human society.
The special characteristic of human society, or rather, to express it
another way, the reason which causes one to describe a society as
human rather than animal, resides in the degree to which its
patterns of behaviour are artificial, institutional and traditional,
rather than instinctive; and it is because human society is artificial
that it is subject to an evolution far more rapid and striking than
that of animal societies. Social evolution proceeds by means of
culture, the possession of which beyond a certain level itself
provides the only valid criterion for distinguishing man and his
immediate hominid forebears from the other Primates. The possi-
bility of developing culture, by which one means the patterns of
behaviour and thought inherited by virtue of belonging to
society rather than through genetical inheritance, depended on
the possession of an adequate brain; but conversely, as we have
pointed out (p. 26), there are reasons for supposing that the
ability to acquire culture was adaptive, in the sense that the strains
most capable of doing so were those whose genotypes were propa-
gated most abundantly in the course of natural selection. At
least it is true that the period that witnessed the first essays in
cultural development was marked by unprecedented advances in
the growth of the brain. Equally, though, the physical evolution
of Homo sapiens in his modern form was already complete with
the first appearance of Advanced Palaeolithic culture, with which
indeed it seems to have been intimately connected. Quite clearly
the immense and accelerating advances in social evolution of the
last 50,000 years must, though conferring biological advantages in
the sense of permitting greater fullness and security of life, have
been independent of organic evolution; indeed it could be argued
that in certain respects cultural evolution may have been achieved
at some cost to man’s purely physical endowment.
   The ability to learn, on which culture depends, is widespread in
the natural world. In man this ability is not only more developed,
                                 255
                          RETROSPECT

but, thanks to speech, social institutions and, beyond the stage
of complexity termed civilization, to writing, advances made
by individuals can be absorbed into the traditional lore trans-
mitted from one generation to another. The cultural endowment
of humanity thus persistently grows. This occurs even though the
centre of cultural advance may shift and certain areas undergo
more or less pronounced cultural regression. Moreover, the
advance is not merely cumulative but tends to gain in momentum,
so that the advances of the last five thousand years exceed those
of the previous fifty thousand and are in turn eclipsed in many
respects by those of the last fifty. All this goes to emphasize the
immense importance of transmission or of what in modern
society we would speak of as the educational process.
    Much of the mounting weight of knowledge transmitted to
successive generations can be viewed as no more than the accom-
paniment of economic and technological advance, part of the
cultural apparatus by which men made themselves more effective
as biological organisms. There remain spheres of knowledge or
awareness which, though not immediately concerned with making
life more abundant for mankind in general, have been of supreme
importance to individual men and as a matter of fact, through their
influence on social life have ultimately served to enhance bio-
logical effectiveness. I refer to self-knowledge, awareness of
limitations in relation to others and apprehension of unseen
powers, qualities that differentiate human personality from those
of organisms wholly regulated by instinctive appetites and drives.
A crucial moment in the growth of personal awareness was
reached with the symbolic recognition of death as the fate of the
individual, and for this there is no evidence before the onset of
the last major glaciation, when Neanderthaloid people began to
give careful burial to the dead and deposited objects with them
for use after death. The first sign of aesthetic awareness, evidenced
by personal adornment and graphic art, two of the leading features
of Advanced    Palaeolithic culture, was delayed until the ap-
                                256
                           RETROSPECT

pearance of Homo sapiens in his fully developed form. Advanced
Palaeolithic art, particularly that applied to the walls and ceilings
of caves, is further revealing for the clear indications it gives of a
belief in magic, a belief that by going through prescribed motions
it is possible automatically to activate supernatural forces for the
accomplishing of human desires. It is in the Advanced Palaeo-
lithic art that we first encounter representations of human beings,
representations which though primarily intended as symbols of
fertility were nevertheless endowed with genuine human feelings
(frontispiece). The first portrayals of definite individuals are those
modelled in clay on human skulls from the earlier Proto-Neolithic
level at Jericho (Pl. II). This is particularly appropriate because it
was precisely at this critical juncture in human history that men
were beginning to enter an era marked by a progressive widening
of the range of social choice, a factor which together with the
adoption of settled life made for an increasing variation of cultural
style and expression.
   The growth of urban civilizations involved a progressive
elaboration of social organization, an ever greater subdivision of
economic and social functions and an increasingly complex nexus
of rights and obligations or, to put it another way, a growing
burden of ethical demands. Although individuals were nominally
free to reject these, they were under strong pressure to conform;
indeed, a certain standard of conformity was necessary if societies
were to cohere and survive in the face of internal stresses and
external competition, and it must be supposed that those societies
were favoured in the struggle for survival which most effectively
harnessed the energies of outstanding individuals to the overriding
social purpose of maintaining cultural continuity. Customary
constraints operated in part through family upbringing and the
complex net-work of social institutions and in part through his-
torical lore enshrined for most of human history in oral traditions;
but behind all these was the force of supernatural sanctions
embodied in religion.
    10                           257                            cP
                           RETROSPECT

   Speculations about the origins and earliest history of religion
based solely on what ethnologists have been able to discover
about the peoples of simpler culture living in our own time are
no longer held of much account, since the primitive stages must
have been passed through thousands of years ago under quite
different historical circumstances. On the other hand the archaeo-
logical traces relate solely to overt manifestations. As a working
hypothesis it may be assumed that awareness of superhuman
powers and of the need to establish some relation with them formed
part and parcel of the emergence of something that we can recog-
nize as human personality: the more consciously aware prehistoric
man became of his predicament, the more anxious he would have
been to resolve it. The most pressing anxiety, or at least the one
which elicited the first overt response, seems as we have already
emphasized to have been the full realization of death as a personal
fate. The careful disposal of the dead by Neanderthal man initiated
funeral rituals which down to our own day have served to re-
assure the living: the material settings of these rituals varied
according to the economic level reached, from shallow graves
scooped out of earlier cave deposits to the Pyramids of Egypt,
the royal graves of Ur or Mycenae, or the timber-lined shaft-graves
of the Altai; but their purpose        remained   fundamentally    the
same. Others of the main anxieties, those relating to subsistence
and reproduction, found their first expression in the figurines of
pregnant women and the representations of game animals ac-
companied by weapons and other signs on the walls and ceilings
of caves, attributable to various groups of Advanced Palaeolithic
hunters in Europe. The cult of the generative forces embodied in
various symbols of the male and female principles was a persisting
element in prehistoric culture that in due course became embodied
in the religious traditions of the great literate civilizations of man-
kind. In the same way subsistence continued to form the object
of religious preoccupation. Among agricultural peoples the
vegetative principle and forces powerfully affecting this, such as
                                 258
                           RETROSPECT

the sun, grew increasingly important and, together with fertility
and death, contributed most powerfully to the organized religions
that first grew up in the earliest civilizations of western Asia.
    Archaeology of itself can hardly answer the question, so often
raised, whether the concept of an overall, supreme power or god
appeared relatively late as the final outcome of a long evolution
or whether, as Wilhelm Schmidt and his followers have main-
tained, the notion of a transcendent deity was apprehended by
primitive man. Even if it were possible to study the oral traditions
of the pre-literate societies of remote antiquity, it is doubtful how
explicit an answer would be forthcoming, since it was of the
essence of primitive religion to be nebulous; clarification had to
wait on abstract formulation of speculative thought of the kind
first achieved by the philosophical schools of advanced literate
societies. The realities of religion among primitive peoples must
surely have resided in the ritual by which they assuaged their more
pressing anxieties and in the acts of worship by which they sought
to establish relations with supernatural forces; and these, whether
recognized as stemming from a deity or not, certainly manifested
themselves in a multiplicity of outward appearances. Of the
existence of ritual practices as far back as the middle of the Late
Pleistocene archaeology offers abounding evidence, more parti-
cularly of those concerning burial of the dead. Traces of the earliest
worship are more elusive, partly because at a certain level reli-
gions can hardly be separated from magical practices and partly
because of the difficulty of distinguishing for example between
sacred and profane structures or between votive offerings and
hoards buried for security. The first certain evidence for domestic
shrines and public temples comes from the earliest fixed settlements
of western Asia. In this region it can be said that the earliest cities
grew up with temples at their cores and that the earliest citizens
conceived themselves to be subjects of gods and members of
temple communities. Indeed it seems to have been for the purpose
of maintaining temple records that writing was first devised, as if
                                  259                          10-2
                          RETROSPECT

to emphasize that the earliest civilizations were as much the pro-
ducts of religion as of technology;    each in its own way served to
enhance the biological effectiveness of society, the former by
relieving tensions that would otherwise impede its smooth
working, the latter by improving the degree of control over
physical environments.
   To the individuals who comprise human societies the effect of
social evolution has been to enrich the quality of their lives. The
cultural endowment of mankind has become more variegated,
both in respect of the range of potential functions within indi-
vidual societies and on account of wider divergencies between the
form and style of different communities; and this occurred at a
time when men were becoming more keenly aware, both aesthetic-
ally and intellectually, of the nature and possibilities of their sur-
roundings. One of the most significant lines of progress in
human evolution has been a growth in the appreciation of the past
and the future. The whole possibility of economic advance has
been bound up with the notion of deferring immediate satisfaction
in the expectation of future benefits, as when seed corn was pre-
served even in times of famine to ensure the next crop; hard labour
sunk in extensive workings in the hope of reaching ores; or when
distant voyages were undertaken in the hope of trade or discovery.
Indeed one can say that speculation or prediction, whether in the
economic or purely intellectual fields, are among the most signifi-
cant attributes of man, serving to differentiate him increasingly
from the brutes. Again, the transmission of culture has been made
possible by storing up experience of the past; much of this com-
munal memory has in course of time been so to speak built into
the structure of society, for example into the means of production,
but a body of explicit tradition must also have been transmitted
largely by word of mouth. Most peoples at a simple level of
culture transmit mythological stories purporting to account for
outstanding features of their social organization, technology and
even physical surroundings. Stories of this kind served at once
                                 260
                           RETROSPECT

to invest the existing usages of the community with ancestral
sanctions and to enhance the feelings of solidarity of those
subscribing to them. In literate communities these functions
are to a large degree performed by histories: indeed the major
political and cultural units of the modern world owe their very
existence to awareness of their common pasts. This is why pre-
history, the only kind of history capable of being shared by men of
all levels of cultural attainment, whether heirs of ancient literate
traditions or only recently preliterate, is so peculiarly relevant to
a world which from the standpoint of science and technology is
already one.




                                261
