                           CHAPTER      2


   LOWER PALAEOLITHIC CULTURES
        AND THEIR SURVIVALS ,

Criteria of culture
  Although most palaeontologists agree that the assumption of
an upright posture was sufficiently important to justify separating
the hominids from the great apes, few would maintain that it is
possible to distinguish on purely zoological grounds between
those hominids that remained prehuman and those that had
attained the status of man. To qualify as human, a hominid has,
so to say, to justify himself by works: the criteria are no longer
biological so much as cultural. Yet it remains true that a close
interrelationship must exist between cultural achievement and
biological endowment. The adoption of an erect posture, which
may well have been a response to the thinning of forest and the
consequent need to cross open country between one area of wood-
land and another, in itself facilitated the acquisition of culture;
the freeing of the hands from locomotion made them available
for tool-using and ultimately for tool-making; and these activities
stimulated the development of the brain. At the same time they
facilitated it by modifying the architecture of the skull: the
diminishing role of the teeth for eating and manipulating had the
eflect of reducing their size, the weight of the jaw and the strength
of the brow-ridges and muscular attachments. On the other hand
the two-footed stance had its dangers, and ultimately only those
hominids survived who made an intelligent use of tools and
weapons. Indeed the ability to acquire culture was evidently of
adaptive value in the sense that the strains most capable of doing
so were those whose genotypes were propagated most abundantly
                                 26
               LOWER     PALAEOLITHIC        CULTURES

in the course of natural selection. This may well explain why the
increase in the size of the brain that permitted ever greater
advances in culture developed so rapidly in the course of Pleisto-
cene times. Even the biological evolution of the most advanced
hominids was thus in large measure an outcome of developments
in culture.
   In many ways the most striking of these, and certainly the one
most likely to find reflection in the archaeological record, is the
ability to make tools. Here the distinction between tool-using and
tool-making is one that needs stressing: it may be true that one
has grown out of the other, but it is important to emphasize that
it is as a fabricator that man stands out from his fellow primates.
By the use of a tool is meant the active manipulation by an
organism for the furtherance of its aims of some object taken
 from the external environment: thus, to quote Dr W. H. Thorpe’s
 example, a Californian sea-otter bringing boulders up from the
 sea-bottom to crack molluscs is using a tool, whereas a gull
 dropping a mollusc on a rock to break it is not doing so. Tool-
 using in the true sense can be traced far back among quite lowly
 forms of life, but it does not of itself imply intelligence or insight.
 Even the great apes, though showing some dexterity in the
manipulation of sticks and strings and in the stacking of boxes,
reveal grave limitations in their behaviour. For instance, they
show little understanding of statics, and in their handling of boxes
rely almost entirely on blind improvisation rather than insight.
Again—and this is even more significant—their activities are
directed exclusively to securing visible objectives, so that even
when some preparation is involved, such as sharpening the end of
one stick to fit into a socket, the element of foresight and planning
is really very slight. By contrast, tool-making and the building
of structures, even among the most primitive human societies, are
based on a precise knowledge of raw materials and, within the
limits of the technology prevailing, of how most effectively to
handle them. Moreover, it is characteristic of human beings that
                                  27
             LOWER    PALAEOLITHIC       CULTURES

they have a much greater appreciation of the factor of time than
the other primates: in their oral (and in due course literary)
traditions they draw on memories of the past, which serve them
as a kind of cultural capital; and by taking account of the future
they gain the impetus needed to undertake operations which may
in themselves be long-drawn out, and to meet contingencies not
always precisely foreseeable.

Speech
   Speech was almost certainly another cultural attribute of the
earliest men. Students of the great apes are agreed that one of
their greatest drawbacks is the lack of speech, which alone is
sufficient to prevent them acquiring the elements of culture. It is
true that chimpanzees have a wider ‘register of emotional expres-
sion’ than most humans and that they are able to communicate to
one another not only their emotional states but also definite
desires and urges; yet, as Kohler has emphasized, ‘their gamut of
phonetics is entirely “subjective”, and can only express emotions,
never designate or describe objects’. In this connection it is
interesting that in their famous enterprise of bringing up the
chimpanzee Viki from the age of three days to three years, Dr and
Mrs Hayes found it possible to train her to certain commands, but
failed after eighteen months of intensive tuition to get her ‘to
identify her nose, eyes, hands and feet’.     Until hominids had
developed words as symbols, the possibility of transmitting, and
so accumulating, culture hardly existed. Again, as Thorpe has
remarked, man’s prelinguistic counting ability is only of about
the same order as that of birds or squirrels: serious mathematics,
with all the immense advances in control of the environment that
it portends, first became possible with the development of symbols.
Speech, involving the use of symbols, must have been one of the
first indications of humanity. Its only drawback as a criterion for
the prehistorian is that there is no hope of being able to verify
its existence directly for the remotest ages of man. Despite
                                28
                     AND     THEIR        SURVIVALS

suggestions to the contrary, the best palaeontological opinion is
against the notion that articulate speech can be inferred either
from the conformation of the mandible or from study of casts
taken of the inner surfaces of skulls. Probably the best clue is the
appearance of tools of standardized and recognizable form, since
it is hard to see how these can have been popularized and trans-
mitted without the use of verbal symbols.

The first fabricated tools
   Without doubt the most palpable signs of the earliest culture are
the tools made by prehistoric man. The oldest ones recognized by
the pioneers of prehistory were hand-axes, flaked down from
nodules or thick flakes on either face so as to form a well-defined
working-edge. The occurrence of such tools side by side with
remains of extinct animals in ancient river gravels and other
diluvial deposits provided the earliest good evidence for the
antiquity of man. Further evidence was obtained from rock-
shelters and caves, the exploration of which had already begun
more than a generation before Darwin published The Origin of
Species, but which was resumed more intensively in 1858. By
1865 enough had been learnt for Sir John Lubbock to contrast the
immensely long Old Stone or Palaeolithic Age, during which men
lived by gathering and by hunting animals that included many
species now extinct, with the New Stone or Neolithic Age, most
fully revealed by the finds from the pile-settlements (not long
since exposed by the shores of the Swiss lakes), which mirrored
the lives of peasants living a more settled life based on farming
and practising a variety of new crafts that included potting and
sometimes weaving.
   The transition from using whatever lay to hand to the fashioning
of purposive tools must have been gradual and therefore difficult
to detect in the archaeological record. We are indeed fortunate
that early man made extensive use of relatively imperishable
substances such as flint or stone, in addition to the organic
                                     a.
              LOWER     PALAEOLITHIC       CULTURES

materials that have vanished almost entirely from the earlier
chapters of the story. Even so there are grave difficulties in
recognizing man’s first essays in the working of flint and stone,
since not only might a very slight amount of trimming suffice to
adapt a fragment detached by frost or some other natural agency,
but nature herself is capable of simulating artificial flaking of quite
a high order. Assuming that there must have been a more
primitive stage in the working of flint and stone than that re-
presented by the Palaeolithic hand-axes from diluvial deposits,
certain prehistorians of the opening decades of this century
addressed themselves to what they took to be industries from the
dawn of the Stone Age. Many of the so-called eoliths (Eos, Greek
goddess of dawn) were in themselves reasonably convincing (even
if the product of intensive selection), but the very zeal of the eolith
hunters proved their undoing: it was not merely the numbers in
which they found them that aroused scepticism, but even more
the increasing age of the deposits in which they occurred. Speci-
mens from the Pliocene seemed permissible, but when they were
found in deposits of successively earlier phases of the Tertiary
era, from Miocene, Oligocene and even early Eocene deposits, it
became evident—since after all man-sized apes first appeared in
the fossil record from the Miocene—that something was amiss.
Prehistorians also became aware that similar forms occurred in
much younger deposits containing well-made palaeolithic tools
and this helped to stimulate research into the natural agencies that
might have been responsible. In due course assemblages of
chipped flints and stones were found under conditions which
showed them to have been the indubitable products of nature.
From a study of these it is now possible to attribute to specific
natural agencies many of the earlier ‘industries’: for instance the
so-called ‘Cromerian’ flints were products of quite recent storm
wave action on the foreshore; the Kentish ‘eoliths’ were made by
the friction of one flint against another in the course of soil-creep;
the ‘eoliths’ from Eocene deposits at Clermont in the French
                                  30
                      AND       THEIR        SURVIVALS

department of Oise were produced by pressure and movement
caused by solution of the calcareous formation underlying the
flint-bearing   strata,   and    many         ‘Kafuan’   ‘implements’   from
Uganda were apparently the work of waterfalls and rapids in
steep gorges.
  The oldest certain indications of industrial activity date from
the transition from Early to Middle Pleistocene times and present
indications suggest that they were made by people of advanced
Pithecanthropian type. The possibility exists that certain Australo-
pithecines were tool-makers. Three Australopithecine teeth were
recovered from a breccia of Sterkfontein which yielded flakes and
cores of comparatively advanced workmanship, and Australo-
pithecine skeletal remains have recently been found on more
than one floor in bed I at Olduvai, Tanganyika, associated with
animal remains and flaked stone tools. Whether the tools were in
fact made by the Australopithecines or by their hypothetical hunter
( Telanthropus?) can hardly be determined from the evidence yet
available; the absence of tools from the Australopithecine sites in
the dolomite areas of South Africa has been explained by the
suggestion that these were the dens of carnivores rather than
living-sites, but such an argument is somewhat double-edged,
since if the Australopithecines had really been tool-makers it
seems hard to credit that they can have been such ready victims,
especially when we consider the achievements of Peking man with
similar or even inferior tools. A point to be emphasized is that the
brains of the Australopithecines never exceed in capacity that of
modern gorillas (max. 685 c.c.), whereas there is no proof that
even Pithecanthropus javanesis of Java, with an average skull
capacity of 900 c.c., made tools. Tools have never yet been found
either in the Djetis beds, which yielded part of the skull of a young
individual, or in lower levels of the subsequent Trinil beds from
which the main body of hominid fossils came: the earliest lithic
industry yet recognized in the Sangiran area is that from the
upper levels of the Trinil beds, though it should be emphasized
                                        31
              LOWER    PALAEOLITHIC        CULTURES

that lithic tools of very primitive character could easily escape
detection, especially on open sites without recognizable fire-
places.

The culture of Peking man
   If the status of the Java Pithecanthropians with regard to tool-
making must remain an open question, there is no doubt that the
earliest industries of the Far East and of North Africa alike were
associated with hominid remains of the same general category.
There are signs that Sinanthropus, to use the original but now
generally discredited term for Pithecanthropus pekinensis, was
geologically slightly later and anatomically rather more advanced
than the Java forms; in particular the Peking people, witha cranial
capacity averaging 1000 c.c., had noticeably larger brains. There
can be no question but that they possessed a culture, even though
a rudimentary one. The earliest deposits (locus 13) at Chou-
koutien, dating from the earlier part of the Middle Pleistocene,
yielded a typical chopping tool made by alternate flaking from
a chert pebble, giving a sinuous working-edge. The main fissure
(locus 1), dating from rather later in the Middle Pleistocene and
the source of remains of upwards of forty representatives of
Peking man, has produced a wealth of stone artifacts made from
intractable materials like green-stone, coarse chert and quartz. It
must be admitted that many of these were so crudely fashioned
that they would hardly have been recognized as humanif recovered
from an ordinary geological deposit. Nevertheless the industry,
much of the material of which was brought to the site and which
was intimately associated with traces of fire and other human
activity, has certain well-defined characteristics: there are no tools
comparable to the hand axes of Africa and parts of Europe and
south-west Asia; pebbles and flakes were employed as materials
for tools and the flakes had sometimes been formed by crushing
nodules between two boulders, resulting in signs of percussion at
either end; secondary retouch was scarce and irregular; and the
                                  32
                    AND   THEIR       SURVIVALS

leading tools were intended for chopping and scraping, the former
generally made from pebbles, from which a few flakes had been
struck to form irregular working edges, and the latter by trimming
lumps or flakes to form smooth edges. With this rudimentary
stone equipment, supplemented by such tools as he was able to
shape by its aid) Peking man succeeded in living largely on the
flesh of his competitors in the animal world. In this he contrasted
significantly with the great apes, who if not so averse to meat as is
sometimes suggested had in practice to make do almost entirely on
a vegetarian diet.
   To judge from the animal remains associated with him, Peking
man depended largely on venison, since two-thirds of them
belong to two species of deer, namely Euryceros pachyosteus and
Pseudaxis grayi. Yet he by no means restricted himself to this
meat and his victims seem to have included elephants, two kinds
of rhinoceros, bison, water-buffaloes, horses, camels, wild boars,
roebucks, antelopes and sheep, not to mention such carnivores as
sabre-toothed tigers, leopards, cave bears and a huge hyaena.
How he managed to secure this varied selection of game we can
only speculate. No specialized projectile-heads have survived in
the archaeological record, but to judge from evidence from else-
where he would have had available wooden spears with the tip
hardened in fire and it seems likely in view of the character of
some of his victims that he would have used primitive pit-traps.
The meagreness of his material equipment only emphasizes the
important part that team-work, based on articulate speech and on
a conscious network of social relations, must have played even
at this early stage of development, when groups were so small and
so sparsely scattered. Equally we should recognize the immense
courage of these primitive men, who in the face of powerful and
largely unknown forces made their way—and our way—in the
final resort by their prowess as hunters, by confronting and
vanquishing animals larger, faster and stronger than themselves.
    One of their most important aids was fire and it was in layers
                                 33
              LOWER    PALAEOLITHIC       CULTURES

discoloured by burning and mixed with ash and charcoal that
most of their discarded refuse was found. Fire would have been
of value for keeping wild beasts at bay, for warming the cave,
for hardening wooden weapons and of course for roasting meat.
In addition to meat, wild animals provided skins and, in their
bones, teeth and antlers, potential raw materials for making tools
and weapons. There seems no doubt that Peking man utilized
certain of these, though not to the extent that has sometimes been
claimed. Deer antlers were certainly detached from their frontlets,
the beams were sometimes cut into sections and the tines removed,
no doubt for use. Again flakes, from the long bones of various
animals have the appearance of having been used and even
trimmed by flaking. On the other hand there is no sign that Peking
man fabricated well-made artifacts from these materials.
   Both the way in which the bones of Peking man himself
occurred and their condition throw light on other aspects of his
behaviour. There can have been no question of burial, since the
remains were distributed in the cultural deposit in just the same
way as animal bones. This, indeed, taken together with his
primitive appearance, was enough to suggest to at least one
eminent authority that Peking man was himself the victim of
some more advanced human type. The fact remains that, despite
the most careful search of thousands of cubic metres of deposit
and the recovery of an impressive body of material relating to
Peking man, no single trace of his supposed overlord has ever
been found. If it be accepted that Peking man was himself the
hunter—and this view is now unquestioned by leading authorities
—then the condition of his bones argues strongly that he was a
cannibal as well as an avid consumer of animal flesh: his long
bones are normally split exactly as were those of wild animals to
facilitate the extraction of marrow, and the aperture at the base of
the skull has habitually been enlarged in just the same way as
among the Melanesians of recent times who favoured human brain
as a delicacy.
                                34
                    AND   THEIR        SURVIVALS


The evolution and spread of hand-axe industries
   The stone industry from the Middle Pleistocene deposits at
 Choukoutien is not merely archaic in appearance, but in fact
represents what historically speaking is the most primitive level
of human culture certainly recognized. This does not mean that
even the material from locus 13 at Choukoutien is the oldest in
time. The question precisely where hominids first crossed the
threshold of humanity has yet to be decided. Certainly this must
have happened somewhere within the comparatively restricted
territories to which Lower Palaeolithic cultures were confined.
 One reason for preferring east central Africa is that it seems to
have been there that cultural evolution proceeded most rapidly
during Middle Pleistocene times: above all it was there that the
industrial advance, symbolized by the evolution from crude
chopping-tools of hand axes flaked on both faces to form a
progressively more regular working-edge, was achieved. By
contrast, in regions outside those over which the hand-axe in-
dustries spread in the course of Middle Pleistocene times, the old
chopping-tool and flake tradition persisted, in some localities even
through Late Pleistocene and into Neothermal times. Industries
of this general type have already been recovered from Pleistocene
deposits between Ichang and Chungking in the Valley of the
Yangtze in South China, in the Mei Fingnoi valley near Bhan-Kao
in Thailand, from the Kota Tampan district in the Perak Valley
of northern Malaya, from Yenangyaung and other sites in the
Middle Irrawady in Burma and from the tributaries of the Indus
in the Punjab, notably from the Soan Valley.
  It was most probably in east central Africa that the great hand-
axe tradition first arose. Assemblages of stone tools from suc-
cessive levels in the Middle Pleistocene sediments exposed in the
Olduvai gorge in Tanganyika (Map 1) display the gradual
emergence from roughly made chopping-tools of hand-axes
similar in form to those originally recognized at such European
                                  35
              LOWER    PALAEOLITHIC       CULTURES

sites as Chelles, Abbeville and St Acheul in the north of France.
The basal level (bed I) at Olduvai on the other hand yielded an
assortment of tools in the old tradition flaked from water-worn
pebbles or from irregular nodules of quartz, lava, chert or
quartzite. These included choppers, ranging in size from ping-
pong to croquet balls and formed by striking flakes from two
directions; simpler tools made by striking flakes from one direction
only; and flakes, many of which were struck in the production of
chopping-tools. At Olduvai hand-axes proper first appeared in
the lowest levels of bed II and in their first stage they were
primitive in form, comparable to those from the French Abbe-
villian, flaked only at the pointed end, either by being struck by
stone hammers or by themselves being beaten against stone anvils,
and having a markedly irregular working-edge; moreover they
were accompanied by about the same number of primitive chop-
ping-tools, the form from which they were evidently themselves
derived. Thereafter in successive levels of beds II-IV ten more
stages could be recognized, leading up to forms of more evolved
Acheulean type requiring less and less raw material. Not all of
these need be described here and it may be sufficient to say that
hand-axes with a working-edge all the way round appeared for
the first time in stage 4; that by stage 5 the technique had begun
to come into use whereby thin flat flakes making possible a more
even working-edge were struck off by a baton of wood or bone
instead of by a stone hammer or against an anvil; and that from
stage 6, if not before, cleavers, that is, tools with a straight
working-edge as opposed to the more or less pointed business-end
of the hand-axe or the irregular edge of the primitive chopping-
tool, appeared alongside hand-axes.
   Similar types of tool spread widely over much of Africa and
contiguous parts of Europe and Asia during Middle Pleistocene
times. In due course they covered the whole of Africa apart from
the region of the Kalahari desert and a broad zone extending from
the south-west Sudan across French North Africa, today occupied
                                 36
                     AND   THEIR        SURVIVALS

by savannah and by the southern fringe of the Sahara. From
Kenya and Uganda they extended south through the Rhodesias
and Mozambique to the Cape, where the site at Stellenbosch lends
its name to the earlier stages of the local hand-axe industry, and
west over the Zambezi—Congo watershed, where an outstanding
factory site has been explored on the Kamoa stream, to Angola
and the Congo basin proper. Northwards the current seems to
have passed up the Great Rift, by-passing the Horn of Africa until
the close of the Middle Pleistocene, into the Nile Valley, where it is
represented by a rich site on the Khor Abu Anga, a left-bank
tributary joining the main river immediately below the confluence
of the Blue and the White Nile. From the Nile Valley it spread in
two main directions. North-westwards the hand-axe people
occupied, not merely the Gebel el Akhbar and the Maghreb, but
the whole broad territory from the Nile to the Atlantic, including
most of the Sahara, which in pluvial times supported a rich fauna
resembling that of central Africa today. It was without doubt
from north-west Africa that hand-axe users spread into south-west
Europe as far as the Rhine and south-east England, and by way of
the French Riviera into the Italian peninsula. Equally, Egypt was
a bridgehead for Asia and hand-axe industries are found in Jordan,
Palestine, Syria and Mesopotamia. No doubtit was a prolongation
of this movement, presumably across what is now the head of
the Persian Gulf and round the northern coast of the Arabian
Sea, that brought hand-axe industries to India, where they
occupied much of the peninsula south of the Narmada river. It
will be noted that the Middle Pleistocene hand-axe users nowhere
penetrated the mountain zone linking Anatolia, Iran, Afghanistan
and the Himalaya; indeed, they never completely filled up the
territories to the south, and though they penetrated north-west
India they failed to displace the older flake and chopping-tool
tradition represented by the stone industries of the Soan Valley.
   This, and even more the northward limit on their spread into
Europe, suggests that the real barrier to the spread of the hand-axe
                                   37
             LOWER     PALAEOLITHIC      CULTURES

cultures was not the mountains as such but rather the ecological
setting. There seems little doubt that these cultures were adapted
specifically to a forest environment: there they originated and
there their distribution was mainly if not entirely confined. It is
doubtless in the light of this that one should interpret the
appearance on the northern margins of the province, in south-east
Britain, Belgium, North France and parts of Germany, of a
counterpart to the Soan of Pakistan, namely the industries named
after Clacton-on-Sea, England. In these industries, dating from
the Mindel-Riss interglacial, flakes were removed by the same
anvil technique employed by the early Abbevillian hand-axe
makers. Frequently the flakes, which showed a characteristically
prominent bulb and a high angle between the striking-platform
and the main flake surface, were struck from the parent nodule in
two directions, leaving chopper-like cores, resembling the chop-
ping-tools of the Soan, Choukoutien and similar industries of the
East. The idea, advanced by some earlier prehistorians, that the
Clactonians relied exclusively on flakes in stark contrast with the
Abbevillian hand-axe makers can hardly be reconciled with their
chopping-tools or with the fact that Clactonian-like flakes were
commonly produced in the course of making hand-axes by means
of the anvil technique. What can legitimately be said is that the
Clactonians laid greater stress on flake-tools than the hand-axe
peoples. The most likely explanation of this is ecological, namely
that they occupied territories, as did the Soans, on the northern
fringe of the main forest zone.
   The progressively more economical use of the raw material
implied in the refinement of the hand-axe was carried a stage
further with the development at the time of the Riss glaciation of
industries which take their name from the site of Levallois near
Paris. In these there can be no question that the prime object
was the production of flake tools. The Levallois flint-workers,
who like the Acheulian hand-axe makers used the baton or rod
technique, began by preparing the nucleus or core which they
                                38
                    AND   THEIR    SURVIVALS

trimmed into the shape of a tortoise, leaving the under face
comparatively flat and making the upper one convex by striking
flakes radially from different points on the circumference: only
when this work had been completed did they strike off the main
flake, which bore on its upper surface and on its faceted butt
traces of the preparatory shaping of the parent core. Such
Levallois flakes were tools in their own right fully capable of
being used for many of the same purposes as the finer hand-axes
with which they were often found.

Lakeside camping places
   When we remember that they were first and foremost big-game
hunters, it is hardly surprising that the Middle Pleistocene hunters
should have settled in river valleys like the Thames or the Somme,
the Nile, Vaal or Zambezi, the Soan or the Narmada, and the Mei
Fingnoi or the Irrawaddy and by the shore of lakes, such as
those of Olduvai and Olorgesailie in east central Africa, Karar in
Algeria, Torralba in Spain or Hoxne in England. We saw from
Choukoutien what an immense variety of animals they took, and
very similar evidence is forthcoming from the settlements of hand-
axe makers. The Olorgesailie people killed and ate giant baboon,
giant pig, and a large kind of horse and hippopotamus; at Karar
the animal remains included elephant, rhinoceros, hippopotamus,
buffalo, zebra, giraffe, warthog and gazelle; and at Torralba
straight-tusked elephant, rhinoceros, wild ox, stag and horse.
Although, as in the case of the Choukoutien hunters, their
methods of hunting must remain largely a matter of surmise, we
have good evidence that primitive wooden spears of which the
tip had been hardened in the fire were used; a fragment of one
made from yew-wood was found at Clacton and a complete,
though broken, specimen of the same material and nearly eight
feet long was recovered from between the ribs of a straight-
tusked elephant at Lehringen, near Verden in Lower Saxony,
Germany: the first from an interglacial deposit of Mindel—Riss,
                                  39
              LOWER     PALAEOLITHIC      CULTURES

the second from one of Riss-Wiirm age. It is interesting to note
that the pygmies of the Cameroons have been accustomed to stalk
elephant with a wooden spear not much more than six feet long,
which they thrust into the animal’s body with both hands; as the
animal tries to escape the spear works in more deeply and the trail
of blood allows the hunters to keep on his track. When a kill of
a large beast is made among such people it is customary for folk
to collect from far and near to feast off the meat. During the
Stone Age, when implements were easily made and expendable, it
is likely that these would often be worn out and discarded at the
site of a kill and it seems easiest to explain in this way finds like
that at site HK in bed IV at Olduvai, which yielded no less than
459 hand-axes and cleavers blunted by use and lying amid the
disarticulated skeleton of a hippopotamus.
   What kind of men were responsible for the hand-axe industries
of the Middle Pleistocene is a difficult question to answer. The
most likely reply at the moment is that while retaining certain
features of Pithecanthropian ancestry, such as large face and teeth,
heavy jaws and massive brow-ridges, they were beginning to
show in the general conformation of the skull a trend towards
Homo sapiens. This is a view consistent with the occurrence of
hand-axes in North Africa in association with jaws of Pithecan-
thropian character and with the admittedly ambiguous Swans-
combe find (see pp. 21f.). At the present time there is no well-
founded evidence to support the idea that a more advanced
‘Presapiens’ type had emerged at this stage of prehistory.

Decline of hand-axe industries
  The close of the Middle Pleistocene was marked by the onset
of desiccation in territories which by reason of their forested
environment had been most favourable to the hand-axe industries.
The onset of drier conditions transformed much of the Sahara
from a rich hunting-ground to a vast desert and destroyed the
large measure of homogeneity that had hitherto prevailed over
                                 40
                    AND   THEIR      SURVIVALS

the whole African continent and contiguous parts of Europe and
Asia, reduced North Africa, deprived of its extensive hinterland,
to an outlier of western Asia and converted the territories of the
Congo and South Africa into provincial backwaters.
   South of the Sahara the expiring hand-axe tradition left twin
heirs during Late Pleistocene times, provincial cultures occupying
mutually exclusive territories, namely the Sangoan, which main-
tained itself amid the forest country of the great river systems of
the Congo and Angola, in the Zambezi Valley and in the region
of the Great Lakes, and the Fauresmith, found near fresh springs
on high ground in the Orange Free State, Bechuanaland and
Kenya. Both agree in combining hand-axes and faceted flakes
struck from prepared cores, but the Fauresmith hand-axes were
generally smaller and the industry also included well-made
cleavers; the Sangoan on the other hand had begun already in its
middle stage to develop lanceolate hand-axes and lanceheads of
quite specific character. Such changes as did occur were of
essentially local significance. This was even more the case over the
extensive territories in the east of the Old World, into which the
hand-axe cultures never penetrated and where the old chopping-
tool and flake traditions persisted, as they appear to have done in
successive stages of the Soan culture of northern India, without
contributing anything essential to the course of world prehistory.

Mousterian and Levalloiso-Mousterian cultures
   It fell to the northern parts of the Lower Palaeolithic world to
witness the genesis and rise of the Advanced Palaeolithic cultures
on which the future development of mankind was largely to
depend. The precise origins of these cultures, as of the fully
developed Homo sapiens with which they were associated, remain
among the prime objectives of prehistoric research. Recent
discoveries in south-west Asia suggest that the lithic traditions of
the Advanced Palaeolithic may go back to a period contemporary
with the last Interglacial period in Europe. What is certain is that
                                41
              LOWER    PALAEOLITHIC        CULTURES

the industries prevailing at the outset of the last Glaciation were
still essentially Lower Palaeolithic in character and were associated
with men of Neanderthal and Neanderthaloid type. Over parts
of western Europe, including in particular the territory between
the Loire and the Pyrenees, the lithic industries were of the kind
named after the rock-shelter of Le Moustier in the Dordogne: the
tool-kit was still very restricted, comprising scrapers and points
made from flakes trimmed on one or both edges by secondary
flaking of a kind that left abrupt steps on the surface but also
including small hand-axes of triangular or heart-shaped form.
Further south, extending from the French riviera and Italy to
central Europe and the regions bordering the north-east of the
Black Sea, namely the Crimea, the Don—Donetz region and the
coast of the west Caucasus, hand-axes were rarer or absent; but the
industry was enriched by hand awls, points with a shallow flaking
on the under surface and narrow strip flakes with steep secondary
flaking down the working edge. Further south again, in Palestine,
Syria, Iraq and south-west Iran, as well as in northern Africa, the
industries of this time had a pronouncedly Levalloisian character.
    Owing to their habit of occupying caves, we have reasonably
full information about the animals on which the Neanderthal and
Neanderthaloid peoples mainly depended for food, about the use
they made of bone and related materials and the way in which
they disposed of their dead. As hunters these people show no
signs of having been in any way more advanced that their
immediate predecessors. Where, as in certain of the Mount Carmel
caves in Palestine, Levalloiso-Mousterian levels overlie ones dating
from early stages of the Palaeolithic, there is no indication that an
extended range of animals was hunted. Equally, there is no sign
of any marked improvement in the methods of hunting; reliance
evidently continued to be placed on proved methods like wooden
spears, stone balls (probably used as bolas stones) and presumably
on primitive pit traps; and there is a notable absence of specialized
projectile-heads. Again, exceedingly limited use was made of bone
                                 42
                    AND    THEIR        SURVIVALS

and related materials, which, as we know from later practice by
stone-age hunters, were capable of providing a variety of spear-,
harpoon- and arrowheads, as well as fish-hooks and pointed fish-
gorges, a variety of tools and many kinds of personal ornament:
pieces of dense bone, including phalanges, or toe-bones, were used
as anvils for working flint, but there is no evidence that bone or
antler was worked to make well-defined implements or weapons
of any description. Another and possibly more significant limita-
tion is the absence of any indication of a developed aesthetic sense:
Lower Palaeolithic man was capable of producing a limited range of
tools with an astonishing economy of effort, and the perfection of
form and degree of standardization that they achieved, often over
great areas and despite wide variations in the qualities of the raw
materials used, bear witness to firmness of intention and a definite
sense of style; but as far as we know he practised no art—no sign
of carving or engraving for example has been found among all the
wealth of bone and antler from Mousterian and kindred sites; nor
is there evidence of even so much as a single bored tooth to
suggest that he fabricated ornaments to adorn his person.
   In two significant ways however Neanderthal man made im-
portant advances. For one thing he extended the range of settle-
ment well to the north of the frost-free zone to which earlier men
had confined themselves and this at a time of glacial intensity.
Precisely how far he reached has still to be settled in detail, but
there are indications that he colonized parts of Siberia for the
first time, though probably not as early as Wiirm I times, and even
reached as far as China. The presence of well-made flint scrapers
as an important element in his standard equipment suggests that
he found it necessary in his northerly habitat to wear animal skins,
at least out of doors. It was probably the cold conditions of
Wiirm I times, also, that caused the Mousterian and Levalloiso-
Mousterian people to occupy caves where these were available.
    The other marked advance shown by Neanderthal man was in
his treatment of the dead. Certain discoveries from the closing
                                   43
              LOWER    PALAEOLITHIC       CULTURES

phase of the last Interglacial seem indeed to indicate the con-
tinuance of cannibalism, notably the Neanderthal skull from
Monte Circeo, Italy, with the base broken open for the extraction
of the brain, and the mass find at Krapina in Yugoslavia, where
remains of upwards of a dozen individuals, male and female,
young and old, were discovered mixed up in the cultural deposit
with wild animal bones and treated in the same way, having been
broken up for the extraction of marrow, partly burnt in the fire and
soon. On the other hand the Mousterian deposit at La Chapelle-
aux-Saints was found to overlie a grave, cut into the rock floor
and containing the crouched skeleton of a Neanderthal man;
similar burials have been found at La Ferrassie, likewise in the
Dordogne, and also at Kiik-Koba in the Crimea. Even more
significant evidence was uncovered at the Mugharet es-Skhil,
Mount Carmel, in the form of a veritable cemetery of ten graves
with remains ranging from a girl of three and a boy of four toa
man over fifty years of age. As at La Chapelle-aux-Saints the
graves were only just big enough to accommodate bodies with the
arms and legs flexed. No red ochre or personal ornaments were
found, but the jaw-bones of a large wild boar were seen to be
clasped in the arms of the old man. A more recent discovery of
exceptional interest is that of a Neanderthaloid child in the cave of
Teshik-Tash, Uzbekistan, the head surrounded by six pairs of
horns of the Siberian mountain goat, which had evidently been
stood upright in a circle while still attached to the frontal bones.
Quite clearly men of the Neanderthaloid type had developed
concepts well beyond what one might have expected from their
lowly material culture.
   There was a considerable range of variation in physical type
among the makers of Mousterian and kindred industries. As we
have seen (p. 22), the fragmentary skulls from Fontéchevade
suggest that a comparatively modern form, lacking massive brow-
ridges, had already emerged before the onset of the Wiirm
glaciation, and to this period the extreme Neanderthal form,
                                 44
                     AND   THEIR        SURVIVALS

represented by the Chapelle-aux-Saints and other finds, belongs.
This latter type is restricted to limited parts of Europe and is
generally regarded as aberrant, the product of isolation on the
margin of the Palaeolithic world and one which died out without
contributing to the modern races of man. Of much wider distri-
bution are finds of a Neanderthaloid type that combines such
features as large teeth, heavy jaws and massive brow-ridges with
varying degrees of advanced characteristics. It is worthy of note
that these less specialized types occur widely distributed over the
extensive territories of Eurasia, within which Homo sapiens in his
modern form—and the Upper Palaeolithic blade and burin
cultures of which he was the bearer—must have emerged. It
seems highly probable that the Neanderthaloids associated with
Levalloiso-Mousterian industries over a wide territory from
Gibraltar to Italy, South Germany, Yugoslavia, the Crimea,
Cyrenaica, Palestine, Iraq and Uzbekistan stood close to the main
line of hominid evolution that culminated in modern Homo sapiens.

Survivals in Africa and South Asia
   The Advanced Palaeolithic cultures (Chapter 3) which first
appeared in a developed form between 30,000 and 40,000 years
ago both in Europe and western Asia, were confined to the more
northerly parts of the Old World. Over extensive territories to
the south, among them the oldest centres of human prehistory,
Lower Palaeolithic cultural traditions persisted, albeit with
modifications, down to comparatively recent times. From the
point of view of world history, most of Africa, India and south-
east Asia were henceforward by-passed by the main currents of
creative change throughout the remainder of prehistoric times.
This does not of course mean that they did not undergo a certain
evolution of importance to their own populations; but it is worthy
of note that such evolution, for example in the direction of micro-
lithic tools of flint or stone, often followed patterns set by Advanced
Palaeolithic peoples or their Mesolithic successors who in Africa
                                   45
              LOWER    PALAEOLITHIC       CULTURES

were restricted to parts of the Mediterranean zone with a dubious
extension to Kenya. The industries with flint burins or graving-
tools and blades blunted by steep flaking on one or more edges,
often known as backed-blades, that appeared in Cyrenaica during
the Late Pleistocene are presumed to have intruded from western
Asia. Those of Algeria and Tunisia, including the Capsian (after
Gafsa in Tunisia) once considered as a possible source of the
Advanced Palaeolithic of Europe, have been shown by radio-
carbon dating to be predominantly of Neothermal age. Equally,
the industry from Kenya that has been compared with the
Advanced Palaeolithic Aurignacian culture of Europe is almost
certainly much too young.
   One of the most conservative parts of Africa at this time was
the Nile Valley, where traditions stemming from the Lower
Palaeolithic Levalloisian persisted well into Neothermal times and
give rise to industries of Epi-Levalloisian character. One such
was the industry first noted at Sebil in Egypt and characterized by
small crescents and trapeziform pieces shaped by a steep edge-
flaking and evidently designed as insets for composite tools of the
kind that first came into use among Advanced Palaeolithic people.
   In other parts of Africa Levalloisian and Levalloiso—Mousterian
traditions gave rise to industries marked above all by various types
of projectile heads with bifacial retouch. Thus the Aterian (after
the Tunisian site of Bir-el-Ater near Tebessa), based on the
production of faceted flakes from tortoise cores, but featuring also
barbed and tanged arrowheads, leaf-shaped points and tanged
flakes with bifacially flaked tangs, extended in a belt across North
Africa from west of the Nile to the Atlantic. The Still Bay culture
(after a locality in Cape Province, South Africa), was characterized
above all by leaf-shaped points made from faceted flakes by
bifacial flaking and had an even wider geographical range
stretching from the Sudan, Abyssinia and Somaliland, through
Uganda, Kenya and Tanganyika to the Rhodesias and the Union
of South Africa. The resemblance between the Aterian and Still
                                 46
                     AND    THEIR     SURVIVALS

Bay cultures, separated though they were by the Nilotic province,
has often been noted. One explanation would be that they
represent expansions north and east from central equatorial A frica,
where the Upper Sangoan (sometimes known as Djokocian)
combines specialized forest tools like tranchet axes, of which the
working edges are formed in the main by the intersection of two
flake-surfaces, with lance heads made from faceted flakes by
working on both faces; and in this connection there is an interesting
resemblance between the tanged arrowheads of the Final Sangoan
(or Lupemban) and those of the Aterian. An alternative possi-
bility is that similar forms were developed in widely separated
areas from a common        cultural inheritance, possibly under the
impulse of the notion, emanating from Advanced Palaeolithic
 sources, of hafted projectiles.
    During Neothermal times the Still Bay tradition, like the Epi-
 Levalloisian, developed towards microlithic forms intended for
insertion into composite tools and weapons. During the arid
period (c. 8000-5 500 B.c.) that followed the last Pluvial, the area
of human settlement in East and South Africa seems somewhat to
have contracted. Yet the Magosian culture that takes its name
from Magosi in Uganda maintained a high degree of homogeneity
over an extensive territory down to the Cape. Over this region
we find industries with diminutive points of Still Bay type,
associated with small blades removed from prepared cores by
punches, and backed blades and lunates shaped rather like a thin
section of a tangerine with the straight edge sharp and the curved
one blunted by steep flaking. There seems little doubt that the
Magosian, along with more or less parallel cultures like the
Hargesian of Somaliland, was in its turn a source of the even more
widespread microlithic industry, characterized by small double-
ended scrapers and lunate insets for arrows and known after the
South African locality of Wilton. This first appeared during the
succeeding Makalian wet phase and at the extremities of its distri-
bution lasted down to modern times. Other industries included
                                 47
              LOWER    PALAEOLITHIC        CULTURES

in what South Africa prehistorians term their Late Stone Age are
the variant of the Wilton named after the Nachikufu caves in
north-east Rhodesia, found in the savannah woodland country
north of the Zambezi and marked in its earliest stage by narrow
pointed microliths; and the Smithfield of the Vaal and Upper
Orange rivers, an industry with special forms of scraper, but
lacking microliths, the general aspect of which is doubtless related
to the nature of the raw material, a variety of indurated shale. In
the course of their long history—there is a radio-carbon date of
4350+ 250 B.c. for a low level in the Nachikufan cave—these
industries underwent many changes and were enriched by contact
with more advanced cultures (see pp. 113 ff.). In East Africa the art
of potting was early acquired from neighbouring groups, but in
the Union this was a more recent trait. Among other features that
appeared only in the younger stages in South Africa may be
mentioned stones bored from both faces to give an hour-glass
perforation and polished stone axes and beads made from ostrich
and mollusc shell. Both in the Horn of Africa and in the Union
cultures of essentially Mesolithic type lasted down to the spread of
iron-working, which first reached Rhodesia on its way south
during the first millennium B.c.; indeed, microlithic industries in
the Wilton tradition were still being made when European in-
fluence began to penetrate South Africa.        It seems probable,
though by no means proved, that the makers of the later Wilton
industries were Bushmen. Although at present confined to the
Kalahari desert, where certain groups have recently been the
subject of intensive ethnographical research, these hunters formerly
ranged over the whole of the eastern part of South Africa into
which they came at an unknown period from the north. The
Bushman’s way of life is basically the same as that which arch-
aeology leads one to infer for the Wilton people, and moreover,
they make beads of eggshell, weight their digging-sticks with
bored stones and use the bow and arrow for hunting; a main
difference is that they now tip their arrows with bone or iron, but
                                 48
                    AND   THEIR    SURVIVALS

in times gone by arrows were armed with lunates set in resin with
the sharp edges exposed.
    The presence of more or less naturalistic rock-paintings over
broad tracts from Tanganyika and Nyasaland, south through the
Rhodesias to the eastern zones of the Transvaal and Orange Free
State and on to the Cape and south-west Africa, has attracted
widespread interest because of their supposed affinities to ones of
Advanced Palaeolithic age in eastern Spain. A more sober view
of the African paintings is now taken, for many of them were
almost certainly executed during the last two or three hundred
years by Bushmen; moreover, the East Spanish are now generally
considered to be of Neothermal age. Yet there is little doubt that
some of the African paintings are of prehistoric age and that they
were executed by makers of Wilton industries. Again, it is
generally accepted that the rock-engravings found in the interior
of the Union were made by the Smithfield people within whose
territory they are confined. The practice of this rock-art, like the
wearing of personal ornaments and the use of bows with arrows
inset with blunted-back microliths, shows that even peoples
remote from the great centres of Advanced Palaeolithic develop-
ment were to some degree, even if belatedly, quickened by
impulses radiating from them.
    Very little is yet certainly known about what was going
forward in southern and south-east Asia during Late Pleistocene
and early Neothermal times. One of the few general conclusions
is that the trend of development in India seems to have been broadly
analogous to that in much of Africa. Late Soan industries made by
developed Levalloisian techniques can be traced down to Late
Pleistocene times and the presumption is that it was these that
gave rise to the microlithic industries with lunates found in large
numbers in the Gujarat and more widely scattered over the Indian
peninsula down to its southern extremity and in Ceylon.



                                  49                          (iP
                          CHAPTER 3

    ADVANCED PALAEOLITHIC AND
       MESOLITHI@G- CULTURES

     ADVANCED           PALAROLITHIC            PEOPEES
New and more spacious prospects were opened up during the
latter half of the Late Pleistocene era by men whose intellectual
capacity and physique differed in no significant way from our own.
It was somewhere between Atlantic Europe and Inner Asia that
man seems first to have given signs of freeing himself from the
narrow conceptual limits within which Lower Palaeolithic peoples
had been confined. It was here in this heartland of Old World
culture that around thirty-five thousand years ago he first achieved
Advanced Palaeolithic status as a specialized hunter, using a
variety of weapons, adorning his person and practising an art that
testifies to an imaginative awareness and a creativity beyond any-
thing of which he had previously given signs and in which we can
detect a first promise of his later achievements.
    The technology of Advanced Palaeolithic peoples was founded
on lithic industries based on the production, by some kind of
punch, of blades or flakes relatively narrow in proportion to their
length and having more or less regular, parallel flake-scars. From
such blades were made a variety of types adapted to different
functions: knife blades and projectile points and barbs were made
by a steep retouch which gave a rest to the finger or facilitated
mounting in a handle or shaft; scrapers for dressing skins and
probably for shaping other materials were formed by trimming
blades to a convex edge; and burins, vitally important for working
antler and bone as well as for engraving, were made by striking
off flakes more or less counter to the main axis of the blade. The
                                 5°
             ADVANCED        PALAEOLITHIC      PEOPLES

much greater use of antler and bone, facilitated by the flint burin,
was another leading feature of Advanced Palaeolithic industry.
Here again many different forms were produced, such as various
patterns of lance- and harpoon-head, spear-throwers, perforated
batons, leather-working tools, awls, and delicately eyed needles.
Allin all, the Advanced Palaeolithic industries give the impression
of being far more diversified and highly specialized than those
practised by Lower Palaeolithic peoples, whether of an earlier age
or persisting down to Neothermal times over the extensive tracts
of Africa and the Far East that remained outside the sphere of
Advanced Palaeolithic culture.
   Although modern research in eastern and central Europe and
in western Asia has produced evidence vitally important for
establishing the spread of the various Advanced Palaeolithic
cultures, the sequence established in the caves and rock-shelters
of south-western France and set out in Table E remains in some
respects a key one.


     TABLE     E. Simplified sequence of Advanced Palaeolithic
                   cultures in south-western France
   Radio-carbon dates B.c.                 Cultures
       15,000—8,000             Magdalenian
       18,000—-15,000           Solutrean
       2.2,000—18,000           Gravettian (Upper Perigordian)
       28,5 00—22,000           Aurignacian
       3.2,000—28,500           Chatelperronian (Lower Perigordian)



   The first of these, the Chatelperronian, is of little general
significance, being confined to south-west France: a substantial
proportion of the flint tools from Chatelperronian levels is of
Mousterian type and a likely explanation of the culture is that it
represents a local development from the Mousterian in the same
general direction as that taken by the more important Advanced
Palaeolithic cultures that follow it in the French sequence.
                                  51                             3-2
ADVANCED       PALAEOLITHIC       AND    MESOLITHIC       CULTURES

Aurignacians and Gravettians
   Among the earliest widely spread blade and burin industries two
main varieties may be distinguished, each named after French
localities, namely the Aurignacian, characterized by projectile
heads of bone, flint scrapers with steep secondary flaking running
up to a keel and flint burins of beaked form, and the Gravettian,
characterized by flint knives and projectile tips and barbs with
steep retouch. Industries of Aurignacian type are known to have
extended from Northern Iraq and Afghanistan to Transcaucasia,
the Crimea, Syria and Palestine and westward from Roumania to
Hungary, Lower Austria, South Germany, France and Canta-
brian Spain. The Gravettian zone is very different, extending
from South Russia, where sites occur most abundantly on the banks
of the Don and Dnieper and their tributaries, to central Europe and
thence, by way of Italy and South Germany, to France and Spain.
  Very little is yet certainly known about origins, but a Pre-
Aurignacian flint industry of basic blade and burin type has more
than once been recognized in Palestine and Syria, where it underlies
Levalloiso—Mousterian deposits and is even associated with the
“Jabrudian’, and industry of Late Acheulian affinities.          Such
would argue for an ultimately Asiatic rather than a European
origin for the blade and burin industries. The Aurignacian and
Gravettian may probably be thought of as divergent specializations
from a Pre-Aurignacian base that may itself have occupied a
fairly extensive territory in western Asia. To judge from existing
radio-carbon dates it would seem that the Aurignacian was
already established over a broad zone of western Asia as far east
as Afghanistan by around 35,000 years B.c. On the other hand the
Gravettian, which in central and parts of western Europe is found
stratified above Aurignacian industries, seems already to have
appeared in Austria around 28,000 B.c.
   Whereas the Aurignacians lived mainly in caves and shelters,
the Gravettians who extended their range into the loess-lands of
South Russia often in such areas made artificial shelters, the earliest
                                  52
            ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC       PEOPLES

for which certain evidence is yet available. Basically these appear
to have comprised skin tents, supported on a few sticks, weighted
round the margin by heavy bones or tusks and covering irregu-
larly-shaped floors that were often slightly hollowed out of the
subsoil. The oval or more or less round houses identified at
Gagarino in South Russia or Dolni-Véstonice in Czechoslovakia,
which ranged from around four to seven metres in width, pre-
sumably housed single families, but the larger dwelling-areas, like
those at Kostienki IV ranging up to twenty-eight or thirty-four
metres in length, must surely have been intended to shelter larger
groups. Yet the distinction is more apparent than real, since
where extensive excavations have been made, as at Pavlov in
Moravia, small dwellings have been found to occur in clusters and
on the other hand the larger ones have been shown to have been
divided into family units. The oblong dwelling-area at Puskari
on the Desna with its three fire-places has for example been
interpreted as due to the confluence of three conical skin tents.
Again, the ones at the lower level at Kostienki IV, which it may be
noted were never more than from five to six and a half metres
across, are best regarded as rows of family units, such as are more
plainly visible in the upper level of the same site with its rows of
adjacent more or less circular huts, each having its own hearth.
What seems clear enough is that as a rule the Gravettians of the
South Russian and Czechoslovak loess-lands lived and moved
about in bands made up of a number of primary households.
Whether these were matriarchal clans, as claimed by Russian
prehistorians, partly on account of the female figurines found at
several of their settlements, can hardly be determined on the basis
of existing evidence; but the fact that they operated as a group,
rather than as mere biological families, is easily explained when
one remembers the ineffectiveness of their armament and the fact
that in these territories at any rate the Gravettians depended to a
large degree on the mammoth, a beast that must have required
teamwork both in hunting and dismembering.
                                 33
ADVANCED        PALAEOLITHIC         AND    MESOLITHIC        CULTURES



The earliest art
   One of the most characteristic and widespread traits of the
Gravettian was the manufacture of female figurines in which the
sexual characteristics are emphasized at the expense, for example,
of the head and features. These figurines, which are found from
France and Italy to the South Russian plain (Map 2), were most




2. Europe in the Last Ice Age: the spread of naturalistic ‘ Venus’ figurines
  (large dots indicate three or more; ice sheets are shown by stippling)

commonly made of mammoth ivory or of various kinds of stone,
but at three Czechoslovak sites examples were also made from
fired clay. The heads as a rule are represented by mere nobs:
hair is rarely and features still more rarely indicated (Frontispiece).
The figure is shown with full breasts and buttocks and is com-
monly pregnant; apart from a girdle at the back of one of those
from Kostienki and a fringe at the rear of that from Lespugue,
the figurines are unclothed. The arms are generally puny and may
                                     34
            ADVANCED       PALAEOLITHIC      PEOPLES

be folded across the breast and the legs taper from well-filled
thighs, the feet, where these have not been broken off, being
suggested rather than shown in detail. In two cases at least the
figurines were coloured with red paint. The selective emphasis
with which these figurines have been shaped suggests that they
were connected in some way with a cult or at least with a body
of ideas centering round fertility, and the fact that all those with
a definite provenance came from settlements, whether from caves
or artificial dwellings, argues for their domestic rather than
public or ceremonial significance. In addition to the Venus
figurines, as they have sometimes been called, the Gravettians
carved and modelled figures of various animals in a more or less
naturalistic style. Thus at Kostienki I, one of the most famous
of the South Russian stations figures of mammoth were cut
rather crudely from the same chalk material as two of the Venus
figures, together with the heads of many kinds of animal includ-
ing lion, bear, and wolf, some with partly human features. The
Gravettians of Czechoslovakia were similarly fond of carving
animals, and in addition modelled a considerable variety—
mammoth, rhinoceros, cave bear, reindeer, bison, horse, lion or
tiger, wolf and lynx—from clay which they hardened on the fire
like pottery.
   Engraving, on the other hand, was much rarer in eastern and
central Europe than in the west. Objectives of personal adorn-
ment and various tools of bone and ivory were ornamented by
incised fringes and simple criss-cross and linear chevron patterns
and the South Russian mammoth-hunters sometimes built up
conventional designs by means of small pits. Occasionally, as in
the stylized engraving of female figures from Predmost, more
ambitious engravings were attempted, but few engravings of more
naturalistic type have been found and none of these is very
convincing. Yet in the west the Gravettians and even the Aurig-
nacians engraved lively outlines of wild animals on stone slabs and
pieces of bone and, what is even more significant, on the walls of
                                 >)
ADVANCED       PALAEOLITHIC       AND   MESOLITHIC      CULTURES

caves and rock shelters. Although the distribution of the two by
no means coincides, it seems likely that the rise of vigorous
schools of naturalistic engraving on small objects was connected
in some way with the practice of cave art. This latter was restricted
even within the territories of the blade and burin culture in which
caves were naturally available: it was not practised for instance by
those who inhabited the caves of western Asia and of central
Europe and was in fact concentrated in the south-western parts of
France and in Cantabria, with outliers in Old Castille and
Andalusia and in South Italy and Sicily.
   The basic drive behind the cave art, as seen for instance at
Lascaux, was a sense of the hunter’s dependence on the continued
abundance of game and on his ability to secure victims. This is
shown clearly enough by the preoccupation of the artists with
game animals and to a minor degree with the beasts of prey
that might threaten them, rather than with human beings; by
their concern with individual beasts rather than with groups and
scenes, apart only from the theme of male and female; and by the
representation of weapons, wounds and medicine men. Yet such
anxieties and tensions are, and no doubt were, resolved among many
hunting communities by mime, dancing and the beginnings of
dramatic representations—indeed, there are signs that the cave
art itself grew from them, even if they are hardly in themselves
sufficient to account for its practice. It must have been the caves
themselves, with their dark recesses, that heightened mystery and
suggestibility and led the hunters of certain territories well-
provided with caves to develop the art of engraving and painting
their walls, ceilings and on occasion their floors. In this connection
it is interesting to note that the artists sometimes worked with the
aid of lamps deep in the limestone rock; for instance at Niaux
in the Ariége the first traces of cave art that greet the intruder
are some 510 metres (over 550 yards) from the mouth and those
deepest from the mouth as muchas 1114 metres, or well over two-
thirds of a mile. Again, there is ample evidence that the pre-
                                  56
             ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC       PEOPLES

historic artists were stimulated by the natural irregularities of
caves, such as bosses in the rock, stalagmitic columns, or drip-
marks on the floor, which they were fond of improving or in-
corporating in the shapes of wild animals; or again by the muddy
slime on the floors or the walls of caves, that led by way of
ape-like doodling not only to meanders drawn by the fingers
and, thus, ultimately to naturalistic outlines but also to plastic
modelling.
    During the first or Gravettian (later Perigordian) cycle of cave
art, both engraving and painting were carried out. Engraving was
done by flint graving tools or in the case of clay surfaces by the
finger-tip; and painting by means of various ochres, oxide of
manganese and carbon, ground on stone palettes and either applied
in powdered form by being blown from the mouth or through a
tube or mixed with animal grease and applied by means of brushes
or soft stumps. The engravings of this first cycle comprised
meandering lines made by fingers on clay and naturalistic engrav-
ings of animals, drawn in outline often with great vigour, though
with stiff legs and commonly having the horns depicted full-
face. Allied to these engravings were a number of low reliefs
like the five figures from Laussel, one male and four female,
one of the females carrying a bison’s horn in the right hand.
Paintings included red and yellow meanders drawn by several
fingers; human hands, either positive red ones or negative ones
silhouetted in various colours; crudely painted red animals and
club-shaped signs; line drawings in red, yellow and black; wide
blotted lines; flat washes; and the beginning of painting in two
colours.
   When the Gravettian hunters died they were given ceremonial
burial dressed in their finery and scattered over with red ochre.
From such finds and from discoveries made on dwelling sites it
is evident that the Upper Palaeolithic hunters of western and
central Europe were accustomed, unlike their Mousterian pre-
decessors, to wear head-dresses and girdles of perforated snail-
                                 v7
 ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC       AND   MESOLITHIC      CULTURES

shells, bracelets, necklaces and anklets of ivory, perforated animal
teeth and shells. Some of their bracelets in particular were
elaborately decorated with geometric engravings.

Szeletian and Solutrean
   The contrast between the makers of blade and burin industries,
more particularly the Gravettians, and the Mousterians and Leval-
loiso-Mousterians was thus considerable, not only in the more
versatile nature of their handwork and in the greater adaptability
of their dwellings, but still more in their aesthetic awareness and
above all in their capacity for cultural progress. Yet the fact that
evolution occurred and that fruitful contact was sometimes made
between the two ought to warn us against over-emphasizing
the immediate differences between them and remind us that the
essential contrast was one of potentialities. Thus, the Szeletian
culture, named after the Hungarian locality of Szeleta, combined
split-based bone points of Aurignacian type with bifacially flaked
points of Mousterian ancestry, recalling those of the Aterian and
Still Bay industries of Africa.    Again, flint work from levels
immediately overlying Gravettian deposits in South Russia shows
a recrudescence of the bifacial technique that prevailed in the
underlying ones and carried forward Mousterian traditions like
those manifested at the Caucasian site of Ilskaya. Equally, in
France, industries with bifacially-flaked points, named after the
site of Solutre, Sadne-et-Loire, directly succeeded the Gravettian.
At first, under the impact of impulses that probably came from
central Europe, plano-convex points were made with shallow
pressure flaking encroaching on part of one face; these were
followed by laurel-leaf points of characteristic shape; and, finally,
by shouldered or tanged points which sometimes combine flat
flaking with the steep edge retouch of the Gravettian. The best
indication that, alongside impulses from a more archaic industrial
source, substantial continuity was maintained with the blade and
burin tradition is afforded by the naturalistic art which persisted
                                  58
             ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC      PEOPLES

both in France and Spain, to flower again in the closing phases of
Upper Palaeolithic times.

Magdalenian and other specialized groups
   In the south and east, in Spain, Italy, central Europe and South
Russia, the heirs of the Gravettians maintained their traditions
with only comparatively minor changes right down into Neo-
thermal times. In north-western Europe and in south-west Asia
on the other hand new, regionally differentiated cultures appeared.
Of these the best endowed was the Magdalenian, which seems to
have developed locally from Gravettian sources and to have
flourished mainly in a limited territory extending from western
and south-western Germany across France to Cantabria, with an
extension for a time into eastern Spain. The Magdalenian is note-
worthy for a marked development in the use of bone and above
all of antler for the fabrication of a broad range of weapons,
implements and objects of personal adornment, including barbed
harpoon heads and eyed needles of a fineness unsurpassed by any
other prehistoric people; and secondly for carrying cave art and
the enrichment of smaller objects to a new peak of development.
In the field of cave art the Solutreo-Magdalenian phase was
marked by renewed attempts to suggest fullness. Figures might
be thrown into apparent relief by cutting deeply into the sur-
rounding limestone: good examples are the friezes of horses,
oxen, ibex and the rest from the Solutrean and Early Magdalenian
sites of the Dordogne and the even more splendid one at Angles-
sur-Anglin to the north in Vienne which included representations
of the waists and thighs of three women. An alternative method
was to suggest relief by means of fine hatching such as can still be
seen at Altamira or Marsoulas. Similarly in painting, after passing
once again through the sequence of simple line to blotted and
flat-wash work, the artists attained to polychrome representations
outlined in black, as seen in some of the best work at Altamira and
Font de Gaume, before relapsing at the close of the Pleistocene
                                 59
 ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC       AND   MESOLITHIC      CULTURES

into small red drawings. Quite as remarkable in its way was the
work of Magdalenian artists in bone and antler. This is parti-
cularly well displayed in the reindeer-antler spear-throwers charac-
teristic of the middle phases of the culture: two kinds were made,
weighted ones with figures carved in relief at the lower or hooked
end and unweighted ones that might be carved all the way down
the shaft, but in each case the artist showed admirable skill in the
way in which he enriched an object of great functional importance
by his renderings of horses, ibex, bison and other animals in full
or partial relief. Altogether the art of this last phase of the Upper
Palaeolithic in western Europe reflects the apogee of an advanced
hunting culture operating in conditions that must have been
highly congenial and productive of leisure.
   In Palestine and Syria the Aurignacian was followed by a local
derivative known as the Atlitian and this in turn was succeeded
at the close of Upper Palaeolithic times by one of generalized and
debased Gravettian affinities (the Kebaran or Nebekian) charac-
terized by narrow micro-blades with blunted back, a few micro-
liths of lunate and triangular shape of the type used to back and
tip projectiles, and small burins and scrapers. A rather similar
industry, though somewhat closer to the Gravettian, has been
located in caves in the Zagros Mountains at Zarzi and elsewhere.
Further north, on the South Russian plain, the Gravettian
industries with traces of bifacial retouch were succeeded by ones
of somewhat degenerate type with smaller implements in less
variety like those from Gontzi and Timonovka. Meanwhile
hunters especially adapted to hunting reindeer were beginning to
colonize the North European plain as far west as northern Holland
and southern England and more or less up to latitude 55° N.; for
the most part they were compelled to live in the open and there
are signs that, in North Germany at least, they occupied skin tents,
though in Britain they took the opportunity of occupying caves
where these were available. Although the antler harpoon-heads
made by the Hamburgians recall in general terms those of a
                                 60
             ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC        PEOPLES

certain stage of the Magdalenian, the antler-work as a whole is
unique in character and the flint-work reminds one of the flint
industries of South Russia and central Europe rather than of
western Europe, and there seems little doubt that the northern
plain was colonized from the south or south-east. During the
final cold spell of the Late Glacial period reindeer hunters had
penetrated Denmark and the number of distinctive cultural groups
(Ahrensburgian, Swiderian, Bromme, Tjonger) had continued to
multiply.

Colonization of Siberia
   Finally, it was during Late Glacial times that Siberia seems to
have been first occupied by man. Although the total extent of the
territory is so vast, the area open to human settlement was in fact
limited in the north by the existence of a great zone of lake and
marsh south of the northern glaciated zone, between the Urals and
the Yenisei and on the south by the mountain zone of Inner Asia,
much of the outer rim of which was glaciated. Traces of Upper
Palaeolithic settlement have so far been found in the Upper Ob and
Yenisei, the Angara and Selenga basins near Lake Baikal and the
Upper Lena River up to latitude 61° N. To judge from the fauna,
two phases of Late Glacial settlement appear to be represented—
an earlier one by Mal’ta and Buret’ in the Angara Valley and a
later one by Afontova Gora near Krasnoyarsk in the upper
Yenisei—and these were followed by one of Neothermal age well
seen at Verkholenskaia Gora. The flint industries from Mal’ta and
Afontova Gora are both basically Mousterian in tradition with
typical tortoise cores, points and side-scrapers. On the other hand
the presence of blades, burins and, at the latter site, of microlithic
points with battered backs points clearly to a contribution from
the Upper Palaeolithic blade and burin tradition, a contribution
which is emphasized by the wealth of antler, bone and ivory
artifacts (including eyed needles, slotted bone handles, perforated
batons, and objects of personal adornment such as plaques and
                                  61
 ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC       AND   MESOLITHIC       CULTURES

pendants decorated with pits as well as tubular and disc beads);
and still more by the presence of female figurines. The easiest way
to account for this apparent mixture is to suppose that Gravettians
moving east from the South Russian Plain came in contact with
descendants of the Mousterians spreading northward from Uzbeki-
stan. The wealth of ornaments found with the ceremonial burial
of a child at Mal’ta suggests that the early settlers of the Baikal
region had come to satisfactory terms with their environment,
which to judge from the fauna shared certain characteristics of
steppe and tundra. One way in which they managed to survive
the cold winters was to build semi-subterranean houses with
entrance passages, a type which in its basic character still survives
in the circumpolar zone. Another, testified by the fine-eyed
needles and by a figurine from Buret’ on the Angara river, carved
from a mammoth tusk and apparently clothed in furs, was the use
of sewed skin clothing, for which there is also good evidence at
the other end of the Upper Palaeolithic world in the Magdalenian
of western Europe.
    One of the main interests of these early Siberian industries is
that they provide an obvious source for those earliest intruders
into North America who laid a basis for the prehistory of the
New World as a whole. In this connection especial significance
attaches to the presence already at Mal’ta of bifacially flaked points
of a kind that emerged from similar antecedents in many parts of
the Old World. Up to the present it is true that no sites of Late
Glacial age have been encountered north of latitude 61°, but
research in this remote part of the Soviet Union is still in its early
days and it should not be overlooked that much of the low-lying
plain to the north of the inhospitable mountainous interior of
easternmost Siberia, a plain that once linked Alaska with the
Lower Lena Valley, has been submerged by the rise of sea-levels
during the Neothermal period.


                                 62
ADVANCED       PALAEOLITHIC        AND    MESOLITHIC       CULTURES


             MESOLITHIC            COMMUNITIES
The onset of Neothermal conditions about ten thousand years ago
exerted a profound influence on the course of prehistory. This
applied particularly to the Advanced Upper Palaeolithic peoples
occupying regions subject to Late Glacial or Pluvial climate.
There the changes in ecological conditions were so great and so
relatively sudden as to upset the balance of the human societies
involved and so gave rise to major readjustments in the sphere of
culture, which serve to define Mesolithic from Advanced Palaeo-
lithic communities. Conversely, in intermediate territories like
Italy and Spain, where no such marked or sudden change occurred
in the natural environment, it is frequently difficult to distinguish
on purely cultural grounds between the two stages, and Advanced
Palaeolithic cultures grade almost imperceptibly into ones of
Epi-Palaeolithic character.

Origins of domestication
   As a generalization one might say that the Mesolithic peoples of
the Old World bridged the transition from the old hunter-fisher
mode of life to one based on the new economy of farming. They
did this in several ways. To begin with, it was Mesolithic people
who, early in Neothermal times and almost certainly somewhere
in western Asia, initiated the domestication of animals and plants.
This process, gradual and difficult to trace in its earliest stages, led
in the course of a few centuries to the rise of economies in which
hunting and fishing had sunk to roles altogether subsidiary to that
of agriculture and stock-raising and which provided a firm basis
for the earliest civilizations of the Old World. Equally it was
Mesolithic people who carried on the old way of life throughout
the very extensive regions over which farming spread, in the
course of millennia, from the earliest centres to the outermost
limits imposed by contemporary climate and vegetation. More-
over, it was these Mesolithic survivors who helped to diversify the
                                   63
 ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC       AND   MESOLITHIC      CULTURES

provincial Neolithic cultures, which arose essentially by a process
of acculturation.
   It is a reasonable hypothesis that the domestication of animals
and plants was carried out under stress of the arid conditions that
followed immediately on the end of the last Pluvial period in
parts of western Asia. The existence of these conditions has been
demonstrated particularly clearly from the Neothermal levels of
rock-shelters on Mount Carmel, Palestine, in which the pre-
ponderance of antelopes and specifically of gazelles over the wood-
land fallow deer was greater than during any previous period
represented in the deposits. The change must not be over-
emphasized, since we know from other sites that woodland and
scrub must have survived in certain localities of Palestine, but
from the point of view of early man it was certainly for the worse.
The desiccation created a situation that could only be met by a
reduction in population or by improvements in the means of
subsistence.

Mesolithic groups in south-west Asia
   The Mesolithic people about whom we know most in western
Asia are the Natufians, so called after the Wady en-Natuf, where
their traces were first recognized. They were centred on a strip of
territory mostly within some forty miles of the East Mediterranean
between Beirut in the north and the Judaean Desert in the south,
with outliers in Syria and far away to the south-west at Heluan,
some twenty miles south of Cairo. Over the greater part of their
territory the Natufians occupied rock-shelters, though recent
discoveries at Eynam and Jericho make it clear that already
during an early stage in their history they had begun to live in the
open. The dead were commonly buried at their place of settlement;
for instance the Mugharet el-Wad produced a cemetery of 87
individuals, including 64 adults, most buried on the platform but
a few in the interior, though it is fair to point out that not all of
these were of one period. The earliest Natufians habitually buried
                                 64
                  MESOLITHIC      COMMUNITIES

more than one person in the same grave, though in such cases one
individual was marked out from the rest by being accompanied by
personal ornaments. The settlement of Eynam included a monu-
mental circular tomb, sunk nearly a metre into the ground and
having walls lined with plaster, which appears to have been used
on more than one occasion. The Eynam tomb also yielded, above
two layers of burials, a complete skull with two neck vertebrae,
suggesting that it had been severed from the trunk while still
clothed with flesh.
   The material equipment of the Lower Natufians reflects an
economy based primarily on hunting, but in which fishing,
indicated by slender bone spearheads barbed on one edge and by
plain fish-hooks, played locally an important part, and in which
cereal grasses were harvested for the first time by reaping-knives
formed by flint blades inset into slotted handles of bone (and
presumably also of wood) and converted into meal by stone
pestles and mortars. The production of blades and burins and the
use of bone and antler on a considerable scale carried on Advanced
Palaeolithic traditions; so did the vigorous art, in which animal
forms were rendered in a more or less naturalistic style; and so did
the wearing of personal ornaments, comprising head-dresses and
thigh-bands made from Dentalium shells, necklaces made up of
perforated ends of gazelle phalanges, bored teeth, and twin-
pendants of carved bone separated by Dentalium spacers. On the
other hand the abundance of microliths, though not unknown in
certain Advanced Palaeolithic cultures, is more characteristic of
Mesolithic ones. The lunate form that predominated in the
Natufian was retouched on the convex back by flaking from two
directions, producing the so-called ridge-back retouch, designed
to make them, like the blades of reaping-knives, fit more snugly
into grooves or slots when mounted in handles or the heads of
projectiles. The use for reaping of narrow blades with ridge-back
retouch, inset in bone handles, of which several more or less
complete examples have been preserved, is indicated by the
                                65
ADVANCED       PALAEOLITHIC       AND   MESOLITHIC      CULTURES

presence of diffuse lustre of the kind that results from friction with
the silica in cereal stalks, but it is important to emphasize that as
yet we have no biological evidence of the precise nature of the
cereals reaped by the Natufians, nor above all of the extent to
which these had been domesticated and improved by breeding.
The fact that even the reaping-knives bore carved animal heads on
their handles and that stone pestles were shaped in the form of
animal hoofs suggests that hunting was still the main source of
food and this is supported by the absence of bones of domestic
animals from deposits certainly of Lower Natufian age; even the
dog, which commonly precedes domestic food-animals, did not
certainly appear before the Middle Natufian. On the other hand
it has been argued that the mere fact that specialized reaping
equipment had been developed points to the harvesting of cereals
improved by breeding to a point at which they retained their
seeds for a period after ripening instead of shedding them almost
at once.
   That the Mesolithic inhabitants of Palestine contributed vitally
to the early development of settled life based on stable farming
will become more apparent when we consider the sequence
brought to light in the early levels at Jericho (p. 81, below). Yet
the probability is that when more is known about the prehistory
of the area extending from the Mediterranean to the Iranian
plateau, over which the earliest settled communities made their
appearance, it will be found that the process of readjustment to less
friendly environmental conditions caused more than this one Meso-
lithic group to seek closer relations with selected species of animals
and plants in a way that led ultimately to their domestication.
Further, one has to remember that, even in remote prehistoric
times, men and therefore knowledge crossed tribal boundaries and
so were capable of influencing groups with quite distinct cultural
traditions, provided that they stood at an appropriate technological
level. The question ‘who invented agriculture?’ is one that is
hardly worth asking, since there is no prospect, certainly in the
                                 66
                    MESOLITHIC    COMMUNITIES

foreseeable future, of its receiving a convincing answer. Mean-
while hints that the earliest farmers in different parts of western
Asia preserved traces of Mesolithic ancestry emphasize the essen-
tially transitional character of the Mesolithic peoples: thus, the
pre-pottery farmers of Jarmo in Iraq used microliths and the
formally Neolithic, if not Chalcolithic (that is using some copper
alongside flint and stone), inhabitants of Sialk in Persia made
reaping-knives by setting flint blades into slotted bone handles
carved at one end with animal heads. How far this implies that
any particular group shared in the original transition from hunting
and gathering to farming and how far that they merely adopted
the new way of life from more advanced neighbours can only be
decided in this key area when a much closer net-work of radio-
carbon dates has been established.

Mesolithic Europe
   In the case of territories such as the greater part of Europe, into
which farming is known to have spread from outside, the Meso-
lithic peoples can be considered as transitional only in the latter
sense. By the same token the span of Neothermal time during
which Mesolithic societies prevailed was determined by the
relative remoteness of different areas from the early centres of
civilization, so that, to quote an extreme example, the Mesolithic
period lasted much longer in say Denmark than it did in
Palestine. Another fundamental difference is that, whereas in
western Asia the Neothermal period began as one of stress, an
era of aridity succeeding the plentiful rainfall of pluvial times, in
northern Europe it was, on the contrary, one in which glacial
conditions were relaxed and replaced by more genial ones. Thus,
whereas in Asia worsening conditions promoted the development
of a new way of life at the expense of the old, in Europe the
emphasis was on adapting the old way of life to the spread of
forest and on extending its geographical range to include regions
formerly covered by ice-sheets or at least subject to periglacial
                                 67
 ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC      AND   MESOLITHIC      CULTURES

conditions.   Between these extremes, over much of the West
Mediterranean zone for example, the change in ecological con-
ditions was much less marked and no outstanding cultural
developments occurred.
   Over a large part of Europe, including Iberia and Italy and
much of France, Britain, central Europe and South Russia, the
archaeological remains of Mesolithic cultures showed a marked
falling away from those prevailing earlier in the same localities,
suggesting a general impoverishment, due perhaps to some quite
minor disturbance of the old equilibrium. A noticeable feature of
the flint industries is an abundance of microliths shaped by a steep
retouch from narrow flakes of small size and used in many cases to
provide tips and barbs for wooden arrows; microliths had indeed
played an important part in certain Advanced Palaeolithic
industries, but the widespread dominance they now assumed was
something new. Apart from this there was a marked reduction in
forms, though scrapers continued to bea feature of most industries
and burins continued, usually in greatly reduced numbers. In
keeping with the decline of the burin went a general reduction in
the importance of antler and bone as materials for implements and
weapons and a scarcity of any form of art. The only exception to
this was provided by the Azilian culture, named after the site of
Mas d’Azil in the Ariége, which included numerous harpoon heads
made from stag antler and barbed on one or both edges, and stone
pebbles painted in red with conventional designs of ultimately
anthropomorphic origin: and this culture, which was centred
on the Dordogne, the northern slopes of the Pyrenees and the
Cantabrian mountains, evidently evolved directly from the Late
Magdalenian of the region. The precise sources of the cultures
represented by minute geometric microliths and found over large
parts of southern, western and central Europe are more difficult to
trace, partly owing to their impoverishment and partly due to the
effects of migration. The Grimaldian culture of Italy, indeed,
seems to have developed without a break into an Epi-Grimaldian
                                68
                  MESOLITHIC         COMMUNITIES

of Neothermal age, but no precise line of descent is evident for
the Sauveterrian of France      or    the comparable   industries   of
Britain or central Europe.

The Maglemosians
  The hunter-fisher peoples who began to develop on the North
European Plain in Pre-Boreal and reached their peak in Late Boreal
times, stand in vivid contrast in that they exhibit something of the
creative drive characteristic of the Advanced Palaeolithic peoples
of southern and central Europe. The Maglemose people, named
from the big bog (magle mose) at the Danish site of Mullerup
where their remains were first recognized, have sometimes been
classified as possessing a Forest culture but it is important to
emphasize that they differed from those just described not so much
in their environment—France and central Europe were forested as
much as Denmark during Neothermal times—as in the use they
made of it. The heart of the Maglemosian territory comprised the
eastern part of Britain, the marshy region now covered by the
North Sea, the North German plain and the lands bordering the
western part of the Ancylus Lake, the form taken by the present
Baltic Sea during Boreal times. From there they spread west as
far as Ulster, east into the forest zone of Russia, and north to
Middle Sweden and Norway as these territories were made
accessible through the isostatic recovery of the earth’s crust from
the diminishing weight of retreating ice-sheets. The Maglemosians
settled the banks of rivers and the margins of the lakes abound-
ing in their territory, so that much of their refuse found its
way into waterlogged deposits. This has led to the survival
of an unusually large number of objects made from organic
materials.
  Like their contemporaries in central and southern Europe, the
Maglemosians depended for their living on hunting and fishing
supplemented on occasion by fowling and plant-gathering. The
presence of quantities of antlers and bones at a number of their
                                69
ADVANCED       PALAEOLITHIC       AND   MESOLITHIC      CULTURES

sites makes it possible to be sure that they killed large numbers of
the elk, aurochs, red and roe deer and wild pig that sheltered in
the virgin forest. Further, the discovery of microliths still
mounted in resin on their pine-wood arrow-shafts proves beyond
dispute that a main function of these was to barb and tip arrows.
In addition to arrows of this type, blunt-ended ones of wood,
intended for birds or small mammals with precious pelts, were
found, together with bows made from single pieces of tapered
wood and provided in the middle with carefully made hand-grips.
As well as bows and arrows the Maglemosians used spears
mounted with antler or bone heads barbed on one edge, either
singly, or in pairs, for hunting and fishing. As might be expected
from the nature of their habitat, they went in for fresh-water
fishing on a considerable scale, using, in addition to fish-spears or
leisters, lines with barbless bone fish-hooks resembling those
from the Natufian culture of Palestine and nets made from twine
twisted from fibres taken from the inner surface of line-bark and
provided with sink-stones and floats of tree-bark. Numerous
finds of wooden paddles, including one of late Pre-Boreal age
from Star Carr, England, show that boats were in use and a well-
made dug-out canoe from Pesse in Holland has been dated to
c. 6250 B.C. by radio-carbon analysis.
    One of the chief ways in which the Maglemosians differed from
other Mesolithic groups lay in the positive attitude they adopted
towards the forests that marked the climax of Post-Glacial vegeta-
tion in the temperate zone. Already before the end of Pre-Boreal
times, during the period when birch forests were predominant,
there is evidence that axes and adzes chipped from nodules of
flint and sharpened and re-sharpened by blows struck transversely
to the blade were used to fell trees and work timber. At first the
blades were small and crudely made, but from the beginning they
must have been mounted on handles in some form of holder or
sleeve to absorb the impact. Larger and more regular ones were
made during Boreal times and from this period we have a number
                                 70
                   MESOLITHIC      COMMUNITIES

of examples fixed in their original sleeves of antler or wood, into
which wooden handles were inserted. By means of such tools the
Maglemosians were able not only to initiate, though on a very
restricted scale, the clearance of forest, which was not to be under-
taken in earnest until the adoption of farming, but also to utilize
wood on a more extensive scale, for example in making the dug-
out canoe already mentioned.
   Another difference lay in their very extensive utilization of
antler and bone. Whereas such peoples as the Epi-Grimaldians and
the Sauveterrians contented themselves with awls, bodkins and
various spatulate tools, the Maglemosians used these materials for
making various forms of mattock-head, sleeves for axe- and adze-
blades, barbed spearheads of various shapes and sizes, fish-hooks,
netting-needles, leather-working tools, and objects of apparently
ceremonial character.
   Lastly, at the height of their development the Maglemosians
practised art on a much more considerable scale. This took the
form mainly of decorating objects of daily use, perforated and
often smoothed antler beams or pendants or amulets. The
techniques employed included line engraving, sometimes so fine
as to escape casual scrutiny, and pits neatly drilled, presumably by
fine flint awls, into the surface of the object decorated. The
commonest motives were geometric patterns such as linear chey-
rons, criss-cross lines and various kinds of barbed line, all of which
might on occasion be tied together to form an overall net-like
design; in addition animal and anthropomorphic designs might
be employed, the latter particularly on pendants or amulets.
Occasionally, also, amber lumps might be carved into the forms
of animals. The explanation for the flowering of this art at the
peak of the Maglemosian culture and at the heart of its area of
distribution may well be no more than that it represents a response
to an environment peculiarly well-endowed for hunting and in
which communities of hunters might be expected to have ex-
perienced some degree of cultural intensification.
                                  71
ADVANCED       PALAEOLITHIC      AND   MESOLITHIC      CULTURES


Coastal settlement
  During their final phase there is evidence that Mesolithic
people in coastal areas were paying considerable attention to sea
mammals, fish and shell-fish as sources of food, though there
is doubt how far this represents a new departure and how far
it is due simply to the submergence of the earlier Mesolithic
coasts over most of Europe. Evidence that the resources of
the sea were being vigorously exploited during the Atlantic
phase of climate is available from the numerous        middens   of
Denmark and South Sweden; from cave and midden sites occupied
by Larnians and Obanians on either side of North Channel in
north-east Ireland and south-west Scotland, from midden sites
on islands off the present coasts of Morbihan and near the estuary
of the Tagus in Portugal, occupied by makers of flint industries
with trapeziform arrowheads; and from middens in cave-mouths
abounding in the North Spanish province of Asturias but
extending as far west as North Portugal.

Neolithic contacts

   A significant aspect of the later stages in the history of some
Mesolithic groups in Europe is the traces they show of influence
from intrusive Neolithic economy. Thus, at a certain stage in the
coastal settlement of Denmark, well exemplified at Ertebolle in
North Jutland, we find a number of cultural traits that must have
been Neolithic in origin, namely pottery, flat and radial flaking of
flint axes, chisel-ended arrowheads made from sections of flint
blades, and, most suggestive of all, agriculture and stock-raising
alongside the older sources of food. Admittedly these have been
explained in two ways, either as pointing to contact between
indigenous hunter-fishers and intrusive farmers in Denmark or as
evidence of the impact on the native Mesolithic culture of in-
fluences from Neolithic peasant cultures somewhere to the south.
What is in any case reasonably sure is that the contacts set in
                                72
                  MESOLITHIC      COMMUNITIES

motion a process of acculturation which serves to explain the
distinctive character of Early Neolithic culture in the north.
Again, in south-west Europe we find that peoples making flint
blades and trapeziform arrowheads and living an otherwise
Mesolithic way of life appear to have herded goats or sheep.
Among such one may include midden-dwellers on the estuary of
the Tagus or on the coast of Morbihan and the Tardenoisian cave-
dwellers of Guyenne, who take their name from Fére-en-Tardenois
in the Ile de France. Here also there are alternative explanations,
but the fact remains that in both northern and southern Europe
the later Mesolithic peoples bridged the gap between societies
based exclusively on a wild economy and those who depended
overwhelmingly on farming.

Expansion in northern Eurasia
   Early Neothermal times also witnessed a certain enlargement
in the area of human settlement, more particularly in northern
territories as these were released from the grip of glacial or peri-
glacial conditions. In the British Isles occupation was restricted
during Late Glacial times to territories south of a line between
Settle and Scarborough; and though much of Ireland provided
lush grazing for giant Irish deer and reindeer, at this time the land
was empty of men.     Settlement seems to have expanded into the
empty lands by two main thrusts: on the one hand makers of
flint industries analogous to the French Sauveterrian, but with
elements from native sources, moved up the Pennines to north-
eastern England and eastern Scotland, sending a westward branch
to the Isle of Man; and on the other off-shoots from the Magle-
mosian centre, established in east Yorkshire as early as Late Pre-
Boreal times, spread westwards across the sea to Ireland where
they concentrated in the flint-rich province of Ulster. The
Larnian—Obanian culture, which grew up on either side of the
North Channel and ultimately spread up the west coast of
Scotland, may well have received impulses of ultimately Azilian
                                 73
ADVANCED      PALAEOLITHIC       AND   MESOLITHIC     CULTURES

character from the Biscayan area to the south and quite certainly
developed a regional character of its own, to which adaptation to
coastal activities may well have contributed.
   At the end of Late Glacial times the greater part of the Scandi-
navian peninsula was still buried under ice, the southern margin
of which, marked by the Fenno-Scandian moraine, passed well
south of Oslo and Stockholm; moreover, south of the ice-sheet
a broad zone subject to isostatic depression was still submerged by
the sea. As the ice-sheet shrank and the land was recovered,
human settlement was able to expand, but it is worthy of note that
the Mesolithic colonization was in fact restricted to territories
outside the Fenno-Scandian moraine, and to the Atlantic coasts.
The discovery of lithic industries at intervals around the Atlantic
coasts of Scandinavia up to Finnmark and on to the Murmansk
shore suggests a coastwise expansion of the coastal cultures
identified in Denmark and West Sweden from early Atlantic times
and in all probability established much earlier. The difficulty of
overland movement up the fjord-indented coast of Norway and
the discontinuity of settlement alike suggest that the northward
spread of the Fosna-Komsa culture was effected by means of
boats, the use of which enormously increased the possibilities of
migration under primitive conditions.
   Further east, in European Russia, a definite expansion in the
area of settlement can also be noted. Thus, the Oka Valley into
which Advanced Palaeolithic man had barely penetrated was
occupied comparatively thickly by Mesolithic hunter-fishers.
Further north there are signs that inroads were beginning to be
made into the southern portion of the belt of pine forest that
stretched from the East Baltic to the Urals. At Kunda and other
sites in Esthonia abundant bone and antler gear for hunting and
fishing, comparable but not identical with that of much the same
age in the West Baltic area, is known from deposits of Boreal
and younger age. Closely similar finds relating to an Eastern
Maglemosian are known from north-west Russia and a further
                                74
                 MESOLITHIC      COMMUNITIES

800 miles or so east in the Schigir culture around Sverdlovsk,
beyond a slight gap in the Ural mountains. Although, however,
the Eastern Maglemosians had penetrated the coniferous forest
over a front of more than a thousand miles, they did not do so very
deeply, and much of the northern part of European Russia
remained unoccupied. Further east in central Siberia no very
marked change seems to have occurred in the external environ-
ment and in consequence no clear line can be drawn in cultural
history until the appearance of pottery. The material from
Verkholenskaia Gora, near Irkutsk, was associated with a modern
fauna and dated from Neothermal times, but in all essentials it
represents a continuance of the Advanced Palaeolithic of the
region.




                                75
