                          PREFACE

The object of this book is to present a brief outline of man’s
prehistoric past. The varying intensity of archaeological research
in different parts of the world, the author’s unequal reading and
the insistent progress of knowledge, which modifies conclusions
almost before they can be set down, all help to distort the picture.
Yet, as a teacher, the author is aware that even an imperfect text
may have its uses, more especially to those prepared to adventure
more widely in the literature of the subject.
   In a volume of this scope and size an author has no choice but
to state conclusions without being able to argue his case in any
detail or even, save on occasion, to specify alternatives or do more
than indicate the very extensive areas of uncertainty which enve-
lope his subject. The present author trusts that where his inter-
pretation differs without explanation from that of some authorities
cited at the end of this volume, the nature and limitations of his
book will be remembered. One of the pleasures of preparing it
has been the stimulus to read more widely, and the author acknow-
ledges the benefits he has received in this way.
   In seeing the book into print the author has received valuable
help and criticism from members of the staff of the University Press.
   Permission to publish photographs has been kindly given by
the following: the University Museum of Archaeology and
Ethnology and the Museum of Classical Archaeology at Cam-
bridge; the Cambridge University Press; Messrs Thames and
Hudson; Dr K. M. Kenyon; the Museum of National Antiquities,
St Germain; the Oriental Institute, Chicago; the Museum, Jos,
Nigeria; the National Museum, Copenhagen; and the State
Historical Museum, Stockholm.
   Finally, the author would like to acknowledge the skill and
understanding with which Mrs Ruth Daniel has drawn the maps.
PETERHOUSE, CAMBRIDGE                         GRAHAME       CLARK
August 1960
                            a,
                            x         be             A       ")

                            aie                     bs                    a




           i    j           iia                 |        a        a       7   ?     :   A



       a
               ot       4Aerie oe                                             ais ane
    pu Aly
                      .
      maeag
                            f                                         7
                                                                  Ter
                                                                                    y       mi
                                                                                    te                  :




                            % My
                            tk         :        =
                            :              ry
                                at     a



                     Fi ni Ay
                kenneironte «run
                       ae ee ia) brbeltalt a
    Clidllng:                      angen pe‘wer wip ailsorelgy aan
    some yiien nrld 42 + Nate te Riecin
                                        ang
    ior o7tl vitnit                   a> ud 54a: Ashi                               avd          de
\          {Viet                            Wh ‘nado                          tt “enya
                    Le ey   ihe: *aeges Ws               ented                    hy QUEM             quel
                    Wet ewagle, (ell qumopce’), aebaki; n
                    wit              lias            avoreaidase (vituegninaeahe
                                                                                                             y
                                                                  D               retin? UaseheSy
                                                                              elites        14 egal f
                                                                                  lea?                masa
                                                                          f       & diuny7 * stabtses
                                                                          itl igh a                   ih opie
                    INTRODUCTION

The idea that human history began when the first hominids pro-
claimed their humanity by making tools according to socially
transmitted patterns is one that has only taken shape during the
hundred years or so since Darwin published The Origin of Species.
It had of course been realized much earlier that something could
be learned about times before the earliest written records by
diligent study of monuments and other material traces, though to
begin with antiquarians were mainly concerned with traces of
classical or medieval civilization. By the end of the eighteenth
century archaeology had already begun to be applied systemati-
cally to a study of the prehistoric, as well as the historic, ages of
man. A close relationship can indeed be observed between the
development of men’s ideas about the biological world and about
their own earliest history, and it may be said that scientific enquiry
killed the idea that history was limited to the span of literate
tradition as surely as it did the dogma of the fixity of species.
   The first systematic attempts to classify archaeological data
were both evolutionary in conception and show very clearly the
impact on the study of human history of ideas that had been
stirring in the realm of biology since the days of Buffon. C. J.
Thompsen’s Three Age System (1836) was based on the succession
of stone, bronze and iron as the leading raw materials for tools and
weapons; and Sven Nilsson’s (1838-43) classification was based
on a supposed progression from a hunter-fisher mode of life to
that of literate civilization by way of herding and cultivation.
These and later attempts to grade prehistoric societies in terms of
evolutionary development owed much to the observation of
modern primitive peoples. In much the same way, it was the
opportunities for studying nature at work gained on Darwin’s
journey with the Beagle and Wallace’s travels in the Malay
                                  I
                         INTRODUCTION

archipelago that led to the theory of evolution by natural selection.
The publication of Darwin’s book, and above all perhaps its
championing by Thomas Huxley in relation to man’s place in
nature, proved a real turning point. Acceptance of the geological
antiquity and zoological relationships of man served to emphasize
the immensity and significance of his prehistory. The need to
bridge the gap between what was known about man from tradi-
tional sources and what was implied by the new hypotheses of
natural science in relation to his origins was now manifest.
   It was to fill this gap that prehistory as we understand it came
into being as a recognized field of study. The use of this term to
designate the history of preliterate societies in contradistinction to
that of literate ones may be thought to be illogical and to run
counter to the basic continuity and unity of history. Yet there is
a strong case for recognizing the distinction between the two
disciplines, so long as it is remembered that there is in fact no
break in the phenomena they seek to study. The kind of informa-
tion about the prehistoric past to be won by archaeology is very
different from that obtainable from written documents, so that
whereas the historian is able to delve down into the motives and
choices of individuals, the prehistorian must as a rule be content
with the fate of communities or classes, and must concern himself
with trends more often than with events. Again, although it is
true that the methods perfected by prehistorians can generally
be applied to elucidating the historic past, the skills and techniques
most frequently used by the historian and by the prehistorian differ
widely, as do their relations with other branches of knowledge.
   If prehistory originated from a philosophical need brought into
existence by the progress of biology, the more general applications
of modern science have recently added urgency both to the
prosecution and the dissemination of prehistory. It is not difficult
to detect among lay public and professional historians alike a sense
of the inadequacy of traditional history at the present juncture of
human affairs. Whatever may be thought about his philosophy or
                                  2
                         INTRODUCTION

scheme of history, it is a merit in Professor Toynbee to have
emphasized the deficiencies in our age of supersonic aircraft and
nuclear fission of the kind of history appropriate to the age of the
horse and buggy or even of the railway. Anomalies frequently
have their comical aspect, but equally they are liable to be
dangerous; and this property is likely to be particularly marked
when something so deeply charged with emotion as men’s view of
the past is involved. What is above all needed is surely a view of
history capable of reconciling the requirements of national
societies with those of a world order. Yet, if Toynbee’s case
against identifying general history with the history of western
civilization is accepted, his insistence on the autonomy of the
major literate civilizations runs the danger of substituting cultural
for national rivalries. It is surely the prehistoric past, largely
overlooked by Toynbee, that provides the only common source
of all civilizations and so of all literate history.
   The aim of this book is to survey in barest outline the history
of mankind from the first dawn of culture down to the time when
successive societies attained literacy. Since, once they had emerged
as such, literate, civilized peoples tended to exert influence over
those still living under prehistoric conditions, it will be necessary
to sketch in the outlines of their subsequent histories at least down
to the time when they were drawn into the range of younger
dominant civilizations. In an outline of this kind it is hardly
practicable to incorporate or even to summarize the kind of
evidence, archaeological and natural-scientific, on which the re-
construction of prehistory depends. Our concern is not with the
bricks and mortar so much as with the building, and attention will
only be directed here and there to the kind of details needed to
convey a vivid impression of texture and substance. It is never-
theless important to remind the reader that the account presented
here rests on fragmentary but concrete evidence, most of it
excavated from the soil and all of it subjected to the kind of
scrutiny practised by experts in the field of criminal detection.
                                  3
                         INTRODUCTION

Since the reader is asked to take so much for granted, he is entitled
to be made aware of some of the main areas of uncertainty and
entreated to remember that the intensity with which prehistoric
research has been carried on varies widely in different parts of the
world. Yet, during the hundred years since the publication of
 The Origin of Species, enough has been learned to make possible
a reasonably valid outline of what happened in prehistory.
    A main difficulty is to ensure a proper balance. It is important
to avoid European or other regional bias, yet it would be pointless
to try and achieve a kind of time-space parity for its own sake;
every period of time and parcel of territory has not contributed on
equal terms to the early story of mankind any more than it has to
contemporary history. Since by and large the tempo of change
has quickened with each advance in culture, it will be necessary to
 treat the much shorter closing phases of prehistory on equivalent
 terms to the lengthier ones that preceded them; yet we must guard
against paying the younger       periods undue attention merely
because of the bulk and diversity of the archaelogical material that
survives from them, and we must seek all the while to weigh the
relative importance of each main episode in the total history of
mankind. Again, it has to be recognized that the focus of human
progress has shifted within wide geographical limits in the course
of time, so that first one region and then another has the chief
claim on our attention.     It is inevitable therefore, and indeed
desirable, that whereas wide territories over long periods of time
will receive hardly more than a passing mention, quite brief
episodes will be given proportionately fuller treatment. The aim
is not to produce a chronicle, a kind of Bayeux tapestry worked
flatly ona roll of fabric, but something more likea history, painted
in depth ona canvas of fixed dimensions. The main difficulty is to
create a unity, to give the illusion of unfolding a complete pano-
rama and yet at the same time to highlight significant groupings
and reveal telling details. Fully to realize this calls for exceptional
powers, and the writer will be content if he helps his readers in
                                   4
                          INTRODUCTION

some measure to view the histories of their own cultures in the
broad perspective of world prehistory.
   An obvious precondition of this is a chronological framework
of world-wide application. So long as one confines oneself to the
prehistory of a single region, one can often piece together an
outline story by analysing changes of fashion, the association in
finds of one period of miscellaneous artifacts and the sequence of
deposits on archaeological sites; moreover, events in different
regions can often be synchronized if trade relations existed
between them. So soon, however, as the field of study is enlarged
beyond the range of prehistoric trade and extended backwards in
time and outwards in space, the need for a more universal system
or chronology becomes apparent. Episodes in the spheres of
climate, geography and animal and plant life during the Plei-
stocene era of geological time provide a rough framework for
prehistoric chronology, but a much finer grid is needed for the
later stages of the story when the tempo of change grew so much
more rapid. The ideal is clearly a system of absolute chronology
in years, world-wide in validity and capable of being applied
readily to archaeological sites. Dates founded on recorded history
are of limited use: they can only be applied to comparatively
recent prehistoric communities within territories bordering on
the ancient centres of civilization; and even so are generally
subject to considerable margins of error, due both to uncertainties
in the earliest historical chronologies themselves and to the diffi-
culty in effecting certain correlations between these and the pre-
historic sequence. Systems based on minute fluctuations of
climate as expressed by variations in the thickness of sediments
deposited in glacial melt water or in the amount of growth made
by trees in certain habitats will often provide a useful yardstick;
yet it is only locally and exceptionally that these can be applied to
measuring the progress of human prehistory. It is easy to see why
the radio-carbon method devised by Dr W. F. Libby in 1949
holds so much promise, for here we have a technique yielding
                                  j
                        INTRODUCTION

dates in terms of years and capable of being applied to archaeo-
logical sites all over the world. The method depends on the fact
that when organisms die their radio-activity runs down at a known
rate, so that by measuring accurately their remaining supply of
C4 it is possible to estimate the time since death. It is very
important to know that the method has plenty of limitations:
apart from the possibility of contamination, which cannot be
avoided even by the greatest care in collecting the sample and may
involve troublesome pre-treatment, there is at present a limitation
in range of around 50,000 years; and, most important of all, there
is an inherent element of statistical uncertainty due to the random
disintegration of atoms, which means not merely that C' dates
have to be expressed with a standard deviation of error, but that,
even so, only a proportion of correct dates can be expected to fall
within the given range, a consideration often ignored by critics of
the method who fail to understand what it claims to do. Yet,
though no reliance can be placed on individual analyses, a general
pattern, based on a growing number of analyses and backed by
intensive research into sources of error, is beginning to emerge
wherever the method has been applied, a pattern which allows us
for the first time to view the achievements of something like
2000 generations of men in historical perspective. Since this book
is intended as an outline for wide use, isolated C™4 dates will in
general be avoided and the chronology adopted will be that
generally accepted by prehistorians, taking account of the radio-
carbon, as of other, geochronological methods, and utilizing
where possible dates extrapolated from the earliest historical
sources.
                          CHARTER


           MAN’S       PLACE         IN NATURE

A major paradox to be faced when we consider our own origins is
that man, who through the power of his mind has come near to
complete mastery over the forces of external nature as they
confront him on this planet, and who is even now engaged in
extending his dominion into outer space, is himself an animal.
In common with all other animals he forms part of the nexus of
living things and individually is subject to the same processes of
growth, maturity and death. Like them, also, he lives within the
framework of a physical environment. If therefore we are to
interpret correctly the material traces of his culture recovered by
archaeology, it is important to begin by considering at least in
broad outline the evolution of his geographical setting during
Pleistocene and later times. Equally, since he owes his power in
the first instance to the physical and mental endowment acquired
from his forebears in the course of evolution, it is essential to
consider, if only in bald outline, the main steps in the recent
history of his emergence as a biological entity.

              PHYSICAL        ENVIRONMENT
The Pleistocene era, which witnessed both the biological and
cultural evolution of the earliest men, was one of profound
environmental change. It was marked above all by a succession
of climatic fluctuations of sufficient magnitude to produce major
shifts of animals and plants as well as changes in the disposition
of land and water sufficient to alter, sometimes drastically, the
possibilities of human migration and settlement. The existence of
these repeated fluctuations in the conditions under which the
                                 7
                   MAN’S      PLACE       IN NATURE
earliest men lived is significant for two reasons: it affords some
insight into the kinds of challenge encountered by our forebears,
both as biological organisms and as builders of culture; and it
provides a broad framework of natural chronology for the main
stages of his early prehistory.

Glacial and pluvial periods
   In the existing temperate zone and in the tropics at high
altitudes the most dramatic feature of the Pleistocene was the
extension and contraction of ice-sheets. Sheets of boulder-clay
of the type laid down by glaciers and trains of boulders marking
their passage, as well as more prominent topographic features,
like the moraines deposited by ice-sheets withdrawing from their
former margins, show that great ice-sheets covered extensive
parts of North America and Europe which now enjoy temperate
conditions. In periglacial zones immediately beyond the margin
of the ice, great sheets of loess, a fine dust blown out of exposed
frost-soils by winds issuing from glaciated territories, blanketed
the landscape, and during temperate episodes between glacial
phases their surfaces weathered, leaving a clear record of climatic
fluctuations. The direct effects of the Pleistocene glaciations on
early man through their denial of areas for settlement and through
the barriers they interposed against human migration, though
locally considerable, were less widespread than those of the
geographical and biological changes associated with them. For
instance the locking up of water in ice-sheets had a profound
influence on sea-levels: calculations show that the excess over
what is contained in the existing ice-caps would have been
sufficient to reduce sea-levels by around 100 metres (c. 325 feet)
and geological evidence points to a lowering of sea-levels during
Pleistocene times of just this order of magnitude. Where thick,
immensely heavy ice-sheets were formed, the earth’s crust might
locally be temporarily depressed, only to recover again when the
ice melted, an effect known as isostasy; in areas subject to heavy
                                      8
                   PHYSICAL     ENVIRONMENT

glaciation, therefore, the onset of a glacial period might entail a
depression of the land in relation to the sea. Nevertheless, apart
from areas under or immediately contiguous to ice-sheets, glacia-
tions were marked by falls and interglacial periods by rises of sea-
level, producing what are known as eustatic changes—enough to
form or intersect land-bridges of cardinal importance to human
migration. Over the extensive tropical and subtropical territories,
which played so important a part both in the early genesis of man
and in his culture, as well as in the development of farming and
urban life, climatic change expressed itself in pronounced and
prolonged periods of heavier rainfall—so-called pluvial periods—
interrupted by interpluvial ones with lower rainfall, marked
respectively by such phenomena as rises and falls of lake-levels
and the activity and inactivity of springs.
   No less profound were the biological consequences of the
changes of climate of which glaciations and pluvials and subsidiary
episodes were merely local expressions. What was in effect hap-
pening with each major cycle was a shifting back and forth of
climatic zones: when ice-sheets expanded into temperate zones,
rain-belts encroached on subtropical ones and the tropics them-
selves contracted; conversely, when ice-sheets retreated, temperate
conditions began to reassert themselves over territories formerly
covered by ice and deserts to reclaim regions temporarily revived
by temperate conditions. Apart from their direct impact, climatic
changes influenced the conditions of human life profoundly
through the plants and animals on which mankind depended for
food as well as for many of the substances required for his material
culture. Widespread transformations in vegetation were an in-
evitable accompaniment of climatic cycles of sufficient magnitude
to bring about large-scale glaciations: tundra, coniferous, de-
ciduous and evergreen forests, desert and tropical rain-forests all
shifted in response to changes of precipitation and temperature.
Equally, since they depended directly on vegetation, the herbi-
vorous animals with which man was principally concerned reacted
                                 y)
                   MAN’S    PLACE        IN NATURE
in similar fashion to the onset and retreat of each climatic cycle,
so that a forest fauna might in any particular locality be re-
placed by one adapted to steppe or tundra conditions and vice
versa.
   The cumulative effect on human societies of these major
fluctuations in the character of the external environment must have
been all the greater in view of the pitifully small cultural capital
available during prehistoric times. When it is remembered that
they were repeated at frequent intervals during the million years
or so of the Pleistocene—no less than fifteen times if the evidence
of ocean cores is to be relied upon—it is hard to resist the idea that
some causative link must have existed between them and the
process of change involved in man’s biological and cultural
evolution. Environmental change was a potent agent of biological
mutation, just as it stimulated migration and emphasized isolation.
On the cultural side anthropological studies suggest that at any
given moment of time an apparent equilibrium exists between
any human society and the habitat (soil and climate) and biome
(vegetation and animal life) of the ecosystem (total natural setting)
in which it subsists and of which in a sense it forms an integral
part: any change in habitat or biome must of necessity call for
readjustments in human society of a kind involving cultural
change, migration, or both, the outcome of which is the establish-
ment of a new and likewise temporary equilibrium. It is in this
continuous process of challenge and response—to use Toynbee’s
vivid phrase—enriched and complicated by interaction between
rival societies and increasingly by contending classes—that we
may surely see some explanation for the mechanics of human
progress, even if it brings us no nearer an ultimate explanation of
prehistory.
   The Pleistocene period that witnessed the unfolding of human
prehistory probably began about a million years ago. It was
marked in the fossil record by the appearance of true elephants,
horses and oxen, but during its Early stage elements of the old
                                    10
                  PHYSICAL     ENVIRONMENT

Tertiary fauna survived in the Villafranchian beds, including such
forms as Dinotherium, Stylohipparion and Sivatherium. As we have
seen the period as a whole was marked by frequent and sometimes
pronounced climatic changes, which assumed different guises in
various parts of the world. Among the most dramatic were the
repeated advances and withdrawals of ice-sheets in the present
temperate zone. On dry land the geological record of these is
incomplete or at least damaged by more recent episodes. Yet,
both on the north European plain and in the Alpine area it has been
possible to map fairly closely the moraines of four major glacia-
tions, which are here named after localities in the Alps where they
were first recognized. The indications are particularly clear for
the Late Pleistocene, which embraced the last or Wiirm glaciation
and its preceding interglacial phase. The Middle Pleistocene,
which owes its special interest to the fact that deposits of this
age have yielded the earliest certain traces of human industry,
was marked by two major glaciations (Mindel_and_ Riss) and a
prolonged Mindel-Riss interglacial. On the other hand the
evidence for the Early Pleistocene is much less well preserved,
even though this phase apparently lasted longer than the two later
ones combined; indeed, geologists have only been able to recover
abundant signs of one glaciation, that of Giinz, though traces of
at least three earlier ones have been detected. Recent studies of
deep-sea cores drilled from the beds of the Caribbean an
Pacific suggest that in all there were fifteen main glaciations, SS
against less than half that number established by ground survey”
in the Alps. This only goes to show how little is known about
the history of the Early Pleistocene period, which must on the
other hand have witnessed vital stages in the emergence of
humanity.
   The most recent glacial deposts are as a rule better preserved
and allow finer divisions to be made, so that in the following
Table A three phases can already be distinguished in the period
of the Wiirm glaciation.
                          MAN’S   PLACE        IN   NATURE


    TABLE A. Major sub-divisions of the Pleistocene period in
              central Europe and East Africa
Geological         Radio-carbon                 Glacial episodes     Pluvial episodes
    time             dates B.c.                 (central Europe)       (East Africa)
                    12,000—8,000          Late Wurm
Upper               29,000-12,000         Middle Wiirm                   Gamblian
 Pleistocene        '70,000—29,000        Early Wiirm
                   100,000—70,000         Riss—Wiirm inter-             Interpluvial
                                           glacial
Middle                                    Riss                           Kanjeran
 Pleistocene                              Mindel-Riss inter-             Interpluvial
                                           glacial
                                          Mindel                         Kamasian
Early                                     Giinz—Mindel inter-           Interpluvial
 Pleistocene                               glacial
 (Villafranchian                          Giinz                          Kageran
 fauna)                                   Sequence of numerous               _
¢. 1,000,000                                   earlier glaciations


   The younger episodes of the Late Wiirm are naturally those
which have so far been most closely dated. The results set out in
Table B are those obtained from a limited part of north-western
Europe, but both the Allerad oscillation and the somewhat abrupt
close of the Late Pleistocene around ten thousand years ago have
left records over extensive zones of the northern temperate zone.


        TABLE      B. Muor sub-divisions of the Late Wiirm in
                        north-western Europe
   Radio-carbon dates B.c.           Climatic stages             Forest history zones
          8,850-8,000                Younger Dryas                       Ill
         10,000-8,850                Allered oscillation                 Il
         10,5 00—10,000              Older Dryas                         Ic
         I1,500-10,500               Bolling oscillation                 Ib
         12,000-11,500               Oldest Dryas                        la


   Outside the glaciated territories, in lands where subtropical and
tropical climates now prevail, fluctuations of climate occurred of
                                          I2
                   PHYSICAL     ENVIRONMENT

comparable magnitude, taking the form of pluvial phases of
markedly greater rainfall, interrupted by arid, interpluvial ones.
In Table A the pluvial periods of Africa and Asia are shown for
convenience marching alongside the glacial ones of Europe and
North America, but it needs to be emphasized that it is quite
unknown whether or how closely they were in fact synchronous.
For this we must await the development and application of
techniques that make it possible to assign absolute dates far
enough back in both areas.
   The value of sequences of this kind for providing a chrono-
logical framework, even for periods for which no absolute dates
are yet available, hardly needs stressing. What is hardly less true
is the importance of climatic changes of the magnitude and
frequency known to have occurred during Pleistocene times to
a proper appreciation of the geographical conditions under which
early man developed both as an organism and as a cultured being.
Thus variations in precipitation and temperature, quite apart from
their direct effects, altered radically the conditions for gaining a
livelihood through their influence on vegetation and animals.
Similarly, the changes of land and sea-levels which resulted from
the growth and retreat of ice-sheets (see pp. 8f.) must have
influenced the pattern of settlement and above all, in an age before
sea-going craft had come into use, have had a profound effect on
the possibilities of migration. Knowledge of the precise coast-line
is of particular importance for the Late Glacial and early Neo-
thermal period, during which widespread migrations occurred.
Deep borings in the Pontine Marshes of Italy and elsewhere have
fortunately made it possible to measure with some accuracy the
displacement of sea-level during the last glaciation and this, in
turn, allows one to form a good impression of the extent of the
land-connections that, for example, linked Britain with the Euro-
pean mainland, Alaska with Siberia, south-east Asia with Indonesia
as far as the Makassar Strait and Australia with New Guinea and
Tasmania.
                                 13
                     MAN'S   PLACE        IN   NATURE


Neothermal climate
   Although in a broad sense the Pleistocene or Quaternary period
lasted down to the present day, it has been found useful to desig-
nate the time since the last major fluctuation by a distinct term.
Workers in the present temperate zone understandably began by
referring to the Recent or Holocene period as Postglacial, but in
the context of world prehistory the more modern term Neothermal
is preferable, since the passing of glacial conditions was only one
of several local effects of a world-wide phenomenon. Radio-
carbon analyses agree with counts of the varved or finely layered
sediments deposited annually in the melt-waters of the contracting
Scandinavian ice-sheet to indicate that the Neothermal period,
which witnessed the gradual emergence of existing physical
environments and an immense acceleration in the process of
social evolution, began some ten thousand years ago. Since the
deposits are both more accessible and better preserved, it is hardly
surprising that we know the history of the Neothermal period in
far greater detail than we do that of any previous geological era.
In the temperate zone in particular it has been possible through
a statistical analysis of the fossil pollen incorporated in successive
layers to zone deposits belonging to this period in terms of their
vegetational history: to begin with, only trees capable of living
under relatively cold conditions were able to colonize the land-
scape freed by the contraction of ice-sheets; only gradually and
progressively did an increase in warmth-demanding trees reflect
the rise of temperature to a maximum noticeably above that now
prevailing in the temperate zones at the time of what in these
territories constituted the Neothermal climatic optimum; and dur-
ing the concluding phases vegetational change reflected above all
a decline from the climatic optimum and the transformation of the
landscape under the influence of farming and industrial activity.
   Rather less has yet been discovered about minor environmental
changes in the existing tropical and more particularly in the
                                     14
                        PHYSICAL          ENVIRONMENT

   present subtropical zones that played so crucial a part in the
   origins of farming and the early development of civilization. The
   most complete sequence is that worked out for East Africa, where
   two minor periods of increased rainfall (Makalian and Nakuran)
   have been distinguished for Neothermal times. Detailed study of
   the fauna from the upper levels of the Mount Carmel caves has
   confirmed the existence in Palestine of an initial dry phase followed
   by a wet one that presumably corresponds with the Makalian, and
   there is some evidence that this latter extended over a broad
   zone of northern Africa.

   TABLE C. Sequence of climatic stages during the last 10,000 years
                    North-west Europe          North America     East Africa
Dates B.c.     Forest zones   Postglacial        Neothermal    Epipleistocene

   i               IX          Sub-atlantic     Medithermal      Nakuran

- 2000           VU            Sub-boreal                        Dry
                        Optimum
                        PA
+ 4000            vit)         Atlantic         Altithermal      Makalian


   6000            “           Boreal
                                                Anathermal       Dry
   8000            IV          Pre-boreal

   Fluctuations of sea-level
      Corresponding to the broad climatic changes of Neothermal
   times were fluctuations of sea-level resembling, though on a much
   reduced scale, those of the Pleistocene. Leaving aside isostatic
   movements, which, however pronounced, were local in their
   effects, the main change was the eustatic rise of sea-level due to
   the melting of ice-sheets. Radio-carbon analyses of samples from
   deposits submerged off the coasts of north-west Europe, North
   America and New Zealand indicate that in areas unaffected by
   crustal movements sea-levels rose at a rate of approximately three
   feet a century between c. 12,000 and 4ooo B.c. Close study of
                                          Tj
                   MAN'S   PLACE      IN NATURE
ancient strand-lines has further shown that at the peak of the
Neothermal climatic optimum sea-levels rose a certain height
above modern sea-level from which they have since receded.

               BIOLOGICAL.            EVOLUTION
The Primates
   The physical similarities between men and anthropoid apes are
so close as to leave no reasonable doubt of their near zoological
affinities: this is so whether one considers the general structure of
the skeleton, the muscular anatomy or the disposition of the
visceral organs, or whether one takes account of the evidence of
metabolic processes or serological reactions; even the human
brain has recently been stated by a leading authority to be ‘in its
morphology. . . little more than a magnified model of the brain of
an anthropoid ape’. Indeed, one might almost go so far as to
classify both apes (Pongidae) and hominids (Hominidae) (the
latter comprising all varieties of living men together with fossils
of all the forms to appear since the anthropoid apes diverged from
the parent stem) as falling within the same family Hominoidea,
a family which is comprised, together with that of the catarrhine
monkeys (Cercopithecidae), in the order Primates. Yet the general
weight of opinion, impressed by the notably larger size of the
brain in relation to body-weight in man and by significant
differences in dentition and in linear proportions of the limbs,
inclines to rate the Pongidae and Hominidae as separate families
alongside the Cercopithecidae.
   From an evolutionary point of view the most significant step in
the emergence of the hominids seems to have been the assumption
of an erect posture. It was this which released the hands from
locomotion, making them available for tool-making and the
securing and preparation of food, and in due time led to the
head being balanced on top of the spinal column rather than
suspended from its upper extremity. No doubt the changes in
dentition, characteristic of the hominids, were to some degree
                                 16
                    BIOLOGICAL        EVOLUTION

linked to the growing importance of the forelimbs and in turn
affected the architecture of the cranium, more particularly of the
brow-ridges. What is reasonably certain is that our remote hominid
ancestors attained a more or less erect posture before their brains
had notably exceeded the range of the great apes.

 The A ustralopithecines
   It would seem that, whereas the great apes were adapted to life
in the forest and so specialized in a brachiating mode of locomo-
tion (that is, one in which they still made considerable use of their
arms) the hominids developed in more open country and early
adopted an erect, bipedal carriage. Three main genera may be
distinguished in the family Hominidae. The first to appear in the
course of evolution were the Australopithecinae; the second
Pithecanthropus; and the third Homo. The original discovery of
Pithecanthropus erectus revealed a creature that combined an erect
habit with a brain not much bigger than that of a large ape. The
more recent revelation of the Australopithecines has confirmed
beyond doubt that in the evolution of the hominids bipedal
locomotion preceded the enlargement of the brain. The majority
of the Australopithecine fossils have been recovered from Early
Pleistocene deposits in South and East Africa and this strongly
suggests that these territories must have been the main centres of
hominid evolution at this time: indeed, the only find so far made
 from south-east Asia, that of Palaeojavanensis (cf. Maganthropus),
 came from Djetis beds of Sangiran in Java now generally assigned
 to an early stage of the Middle Pleistocene (Map 1). The South
 African Australopithecine fossils belong to two main groups, each
 of sub-generic status and dating from successive stages of a late
phase of the Lower Pleistocene. The earlier sub-genus Australo-
pithecus, which dates from the last dry interstadial and the onset
of the final wet phase of the Kageran pluvial, comprises two main
species, A. africanus from Taungs and Makapan and A. trans-
yaalensis (cf. Plesianthropus) from Sterkfontein. The younger
    2                            17                            CE
                   MAN’S      PLACE    IN NATURE

sub-genus Paranthropus, including P. robustus from Kromdrai
and P. crassidens from Swartkrans, dates from the last Kageran
wet phase. Two important finds from East Africa can be classified
within this framework: the so-called Meganthropus africanus from




                                                     SVE          SS

             mem    Wallace Line               Uninhabited zone


      1. The prehistoric world to the end of the Middle Pleistocene


 near Lake Eyasi in Tanganyika falls into 4. transvaalensis; and
 the recently discovered Zinjanthropus boisei from the lowest bed
 in the lacustrine series at Olduvai in the same land fits quite well
 into P. crassidens.
    Morphologically, and particularly in the general structure of
 the skull, notably its height above the orbit, the contour of the
                                      18
                    BIOLOGICAL          EVOLUTION

forehead and upper facial area, and the mastoid process, as well as
in the pattern of the dentition with its evenly curved parabolic
arcade, small teeth, spatulate canines and absence of the diastemic
intervals or gaps either side of the canines, the fossil remains of
the Australopithecines reveal clear hominid affinities, even though
the cubic capacity of the brain ranged only from 450 to 700 c.c.
compared with 685 c.c. for the largest known cranium of a gorilla.
The character of the limb and pelvic bones makes it reasonably
certain that these small-brained, but nevertheless basically hominid
Australopithecines had adopted an upright posture. Their general
evolutionary significance is thus clear: they provide just the
antecedents one might have expected for the Pithecanthropians of
the succeeding Middle Pleistocene era. Yet it would be wise to
recognize that in the existing state of knowledge the precise status
of the Australopithecines in hominid evolution is far from being
agreed by expert opinion. In particular it is sometimes argued
that Australopithecus and Paranthropus mark culminations of side-
branches from the main line of hominid evolution leading to
Pithecanthropus rather than standing on the main stem; and great
significance has been attached to a fossil jaw from the Paran-
thropus deposit at Swartkrans. Yet until more complete fossils of
Telanthropus, as it has been termed, are available there seems no
prospect of deciding whether this form is entitled to a separate
status, still less whether it stood closer to the main line of evolution
than Paranthropus.

The Pithecanthropians
   Since the original discovery of remains of Pithecanthropus
erectus in the Trinil beds of Java, several more finds have been
made on the island and there seems no doubt that hominids of this
genus were living there in Middle Pleistocene times. A much
larger assemblage of upwards of forty individuals has been re-
covered from North China in the Middle Pleistocene filling of
rock-fissures at Choukoutien near Peking (Pl. 1). At first these
                                   19                             2-2
                   MAN’S   PLACE      IN   NATURE

remains were given the status of a distinct genus, Simanthropus,
but later studies have shown that they belong to the genus
Pithecanthropus; indeed it is doubtful whether they ought to be
accorded even the specific designation pekinensis, since the flatten-
ing (platymeria) of the shaft of the thigh-bone, on which the
distinction from P. erectus has been held to rest, could so easily
result from nutritional factors. More recently traces of the same
genus (needlessly termed Azlanthropus mauritanicus), in the form
of two mandibles and part of the cranium of a younger subject,
have come to light in Early Pleistocene deposits exposed in a
sand-pit at Ternifine near Palikao, Algeria; and the old find of a
mandible from Mauer near Heidleberg suggests that the Pithecan-
thropians were also present in Europe during Middle Pleistocene
times. In general character they represent an advance from forms
akin to the Australopithecines and in particular they show a
notable increase in brain capacity: thus the mean of three crania
from Java was 860 c.c. and that of four from Peking was 1075 c.c.,
placing them in this respect more or less intermediate between
Australopithecus (400-700 c.c.) and Homo sapiens (c. 1350 ¢.c.)3
the fact that the Chinese group is well to the fore accords with its
wholly Middle Pleistocene age.
   Although they illustrate at least the beginning of the second
main advance in hominid evolution, the growth of the brain
following the attainment of an upright posture, the Pithecan-
thropians display a number of features which mark them off from
more evolved forms. Thus the skull has a low vault with frontal
flattening, a marked ridge at the junction of the two main side
bones and thick walls; the mastoid process is small; the palate is
enormous and there is marked alveolar prognathism, the lower
part of the face projecting forward noticeably; the mandible is
massive and, in the case of the Java form, the teeth, though
hominid in their general arrangement, show tendencies for the
upper canines to overlap the lower ones and for a diastemic gap to
appear between the incisors and canines; and the weight of the
                                 20
                       BIOLOGICAL           EVOLUTION

mandible is matched by a correspondingly massive development
of the supraorbital and occipital brow-ridges, which, together with
the flattened forehead, would probably strike us most forcibly
were we to encounter one in the flesh. Yet the Chinese variety was
quite certainly manufacturing tools and using fire.

       TABLE D. Simplified classification of the Hominidae
 Geological time     | Genus         Sub-genus                 Species
Late Pleistocene     Homo                             H. sapiens
                                                      Hi. neanderthalensis
                                                      H. soloensis
                                                      H. rhodesiensis
Middle Pleistocene Pithecan-                          P. heidelbergensis (cf.
                    thropus                            H.h.)
                                                      P. africanus (cf. Atlan-
                                                       thropus)
                                                      P. pekinensis (cf. Sinan-
                                                       thropus
                                                      P. javanensis (cf. P.
                                                       erectus)
                                   Telanthropus?
                                   Paranthropus       P. javanensis (cf.
                                                       Palaeojavanensis)
Early Pleistocene    Australo-                        P. robustus
 (Villafranchian)     pithecinae                      P. crassidens
                                   Australopithecus   A. africanus
                                                      A. transvaalensis (cf.
                                                       Plesianthropus)


   It was from this Pithecanthropian stock that the primitive fore-
runners of Homo sapiens must have developed. The rarity and
fragmentary character of well-documented fossils makes it difficult
to know what these were like. The surviving bones of the
Swanscombe         skull obtained from Mindel—Riss gravels in the
Lower Thames basin, together with hand-axes of the type first
recognized at Saint-Acheul, near Amiens in North France, show
no characteristics which enable them to be distinguished clearly
from skulls of Homo sapiens in his modern form. On the other
hand the frontal bone is missing and it is precisely this that, in the
                                       21
                    MAN’S PLACE        IN NATURE
case of the comparable skull from an interstadial deposit of the
Riss glaciation at Steinheim in South Germany, shows primitive
characteristics in the form of the massive brow-ridges that com-
monly went with large teeth and heavy jaws. It seems most likely
that the Middle Pleistocene inhabitants of Europe and probably
of Africa, while retaining certain Pithecanthropian features in
modified form, had a moderately well-developed frontal region,
a relatively high cranial vault and a face of only moderate size.
Neanderthal and Neanderthaloid men
    By early Late Pleistocene times the picture is more complex. Now
for the first time we have evidence for a truly modern type, lacking
massive brow-ridges, in the two fragmentary skulls from the cave
of Fontéchevade in the Dordogne, France. This find is all the more
striking in that it was overlaid by a deposit containing Mousterian
flints (of the kind found at Le Moustier in the Dordogne and
elsewhere) with remains of Neanderthal man, a variety named
after the discovery of a brain-case in the Neanderthal in the
German Rhineland, and since exemplified by a number of others
from Europe dating from the first phase of the last or Wiirm
glaciation. The limb bones of this kind of man are thick-walled,
heavy and unduly short, especially in the forearm and calf, in
relation to his trunk. Again, his skull, although having a cranial
capacity well up to modern average, displays a number of aberrant
features: for instance the cranial vault is flattened, the face is large
and the foramen magnum, the hole at the base of the skull through
which the spinal cord passes to the brain, is set slightly backward;
the supraorbital ridge or torus is prominent and continuous, and
with this is associated a chinless jaw of massive proportions; and,
finally, the molar teeth exhibit the condition of taurodontism
much more often than is usual among modern man. It may be
significant that this extreme form appears to be confined to a
marginal territory of the palaeolithic world; perhaps, as has been
suggested, it represents an aberration in response to extreme
                                  22
                       BIOLOGICAL          EVOLUTION

 climatic conditions, under which the chance of genetic variation
 was likely to have been at a maximum precisely when oppor-
 tunities for migration were reduced.
    In many ways it is unfortunate that the earliest finds which have
 created our image of the ‘classic’ Neanderthal type should have
 been made in this marginal territory. Analogous finds from
 regions that enjoyed more temperate conditions, for example
 those from the Palestinian caves of es-Skhil and et-Tabun,
 Mount Carmel, the Shanidur cave in northern Iraq and the cave
 of Teshik-Tash in Uzbekistan, display Neanderthal characteristics
 to a much less pronounced degree. It has sometimes been argued
 that these Asiatic Neanderthaloids were the product of inter-
 breeding between Neanderthal and Sapiens stocks, but a more
 likely view is that they stand closer to the main stem of human
 evolution and represent, or at least are closely related to, types
 intermediate between Swanscombe             and Steinheim on the one
 hand and modern man on the other. One reason for thinking
 that this is so is that Homo sapiens almost certainly emerged
 somewhere in Eurasia and most probably in western Asia.

 Homo sapiens and modern races of man
    In any event the people identified with the Advanced Upper
Palaeolithic hunting cultures that immediately succeeded the
 Mousterian in this region were essentially modern in type. The
limb bones, relatively light and slender, suggest a fully upright
posture, as does the position of the foramen magnum _which.
faces directly downwards; tlié forehead is rounded and approxi-
mately vertical and |thé’muscular tidges
                                       on thecranium
                                                   are only
lightly marked; thé brow ridges are moderately developed   and
are never continuous; and the§awhas awell-defined chin, is light.
in build and has relatively               smallaL teeth.
                                                   TD
                                                         The overwhelming :
                                                                          con-
neers nar             unanatnsnoenneess nel
sensus of professional opinion is that the existing races of mankind
are without exception variants of this single species, Homo
sapiens.

                                      23
                    MAN’S    PLACE     IN   NATURE

    When and where did the various races of man diverge? The
 first question is particularly difficult to answer, because so many of
 the leading criteria by which racial differences are distinguished,
 such as pigmentation and hair form, are such as can hardly be
 studied from skeletal material. Attempts have been made to read
 racial characteristics into some Upper Palaeolithic remains—for
 instance the type first recognized from the Grimaldi caves near
 Mentone has been variously interpreted as Negroid or primitive
“Mediterranean and that from the rock-shelter of Chancelade in the
 Dordogne has even been held to be Eskimo in type—but the
 dangers of drawing conclusions from such limited evidence are
 obviously very great and it is wisest to admit that we do not yet
 know when the existing races of Homo sapiens came into being.
 What seems most likely is that they arose as a result of gradual
 genetic diversificationnfollowing  onthe widespread migrations and
 colonization ofofnew territories that occurred some time during the
 final major glacial cycle. The degree to which the distribution of
 certain well-defined pigmentation types fits in with that of specific
  environments, after due allowance is made for the effect of migra-
  tion since the period of characterization, is sufficiently close to
  suggest that differences of pigmentation must have been to some
  degree adaptive: thus in the Old World blonde fair-skinned
/ people tend to go with a cool, cloudy habitat; brunettes with the
 strong sunlight and bright skies of climates like that of the
 Mediterranean area; the darkest skinned with the hottest, non-
 forested regions (for example, the savanna of Africa); and those
 with yellowish skin and crinkly hair with the tropical rain-forests
 of Africa and south-east Asia. Again, there are sound reasons for "
 linking width of nasal aperture with climate, since it is a function
 of the nose to mitigate the temperature of the air before it is
 drawn into the lungs: it is therefore not at all surprising to observe
 the narrow nostrils of the Eskimo or even the North European,
 the medium ones of the Mediterranean or the broad ones of the
 Negro. Yet it would be quite wrong to suppose that all geo-
                                  24
                   BIOLOGICAL         EVOLUTION

graphical variations were necessarily adaptive, since the isolation
which must have increased as man extended his geographical
range could well in itself have been sufficient to promote genetic
variations.
   A last point to make is that it was only during the final stages
of the Pleistocene that man spread over the greater part of the
earth. The early types of men were confined to the warmer parts
of the Old World: their remains are found widely over Africa
from Algeria to the Cape; in Europe as far north as lowland
England and central Germany; in western Asia up to the mountains
of northern Iran; in India, south-east Asia and Indonesia; and as
far east as the Makassar Strait, coinciding with the great biological
divide first recognized by Darwin’s collaborator, A. R. Wallace.
It was not until some time after he had emerged in his modern
form that Homo sapiens occupied northern Eurasia and spread on
the one hand into the New World and on the other into Australia
and Tasmania and across Polynesia to New Zealand. The extension
of human settlement over progressively wider territories is one of
the major themes of the prehistory of Late Glacial and Neothermal
times to be treated in later chapters of this book: it was made
possible by the relatively unspecialized character of Homo sapiens
as a biological species, but above all by the possession of culture,
by means of which man has been able to adapt himself to the
widest range of environments.




                                 25
