                           CHAPTER 4

  THE INVENTION OF FARMING AND
     THE RISE OF MESOPOTAMIAN
            CIVILIZATION

Mixed farming as the basis of Old World civilization
   The possibility of advancing towards civilization depended in
the first instance on a new relationship between man and the
animals and plants on which he depended for food. So long as he
had to subsist on the game animals, birds and fish he could catch
and trap, the insects and eggs he could collect and the foliage,
roots, fruits and seeds he could gather, he was limited in the kind
of social life he could develop; as a rule he could only live in small
groups, which gave small scope for specialization and the sub-
division of labour, and in the course of a year he would have to
move over extensive tracts of country, shifting his habitation so
that he could tap the natural resources of successive areas. It is
hardly to be wondered at that among communities whose energies
were almost entirely absorbed by the mere business of keeping
alive, technology remained at a low ebb. It is true that peoples like
the Kwakuitl and Nootka tribes of British Columbia, who were
able to win a basic supply of food by catching and storing the
salmon that came up their rivers at the spawning season, could
maintain permanent settlements, build massive timber houses and
support elaborate social institutions involving the ceremonial
destruction of wealth. Yet the fact remains that no such peoples,
other than the pioneers of farming, were able by their own
efforts to emerge from the Stone Age. It was only through the
control of breeding of animals and plants that early man was able
to ensure himself a reliable and readily expandable source of food
                                 76
       THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN       CIVILIZATION

and thereby establish a secure basis for cultural advance. The
invention of farming was indeed revolutionary in the sense that it
alone made possible the rise of literate civilizations, though one
does well to remember that the new economy was established so
gradually and its effects upon other aspects of culture were at
first so imperceptible as to be hardly discernible in the archaeo-
logical record.
    The historic civilizations of the Near East were centred on
great rivers: the Euphrates and Tigris, the Nile and, somewhat
later, the Indus; but archaeology, supported by radio-carbon
dating, makes it clear that the antecedent stages, which witnessed
the genesis of farming, metallurgy, urban settlement and a complex
social hierarchy, were passed through elsewhere. The birth of
farming and the origins of settled life in the Near East occurred
somewhere in the zone extending from Palestine, Syria and Cilicia,
and thence across the piedmont or foot-hill zone of Turkey and
northern Iraq to Iran, the Caspian shore and Turkestan (Map 3).
Whereas the alluvial lands had an arid climate and needed irriga-
tion to render them fertile, the upland territories have a rainfall
to-day exceeding 16 inches a year and even at the driest phase of
Neothermal time must have been relatively more favourable to
primitive farmers. Moreover, it was precisely in these latter
territories that the prototypes of the relevant crops and livestock
flourished in the wild state. At least it is the case that Triticum
dicoccoides and Hordeum spontaneum, progenitors respectively of
Emmer wheat and barley, the two cereals that dominated agri-
culture in this zone, are both found wild in just these regions to-
day; there is no evidence that either was available in Egypt before
being introduced by man; and the only cereal growing wild in
Europe, Triticum aegilopoides, known from Albania, Yugoslavia
and northern Greece, is unlikely to have played a significant part,
since Einkorn T. monococcum, to which it gave rise, seems never
to have been cultivated as a separate crop and, having as a rule
only one grain on a spikelet, was not much use for breeding
                                td.
3. The heartland of Old World civilization, c. 8000-2
                                                      500 B.¢.



                            78
A City- dwellers            ©   _—-Hunter-fishers and gatherers

@ Established farmers           Land between 200 and 1000 m.

@ Incipient farmers             Land over 1000 m.




                        7
               THE   INVENTION       OF   FARMING

purposes. Again, though wild prototypes of oxen and swine were
rather widely distributed in the temperate zone during Neo-
thermal times, wild sheep were much more narrowly confined,
the Mouflon variety to a zone from Syria and southernTurkey
to Iraq, the Urial to one from the Caspian across Iran to Afghani-
stan and northern Pakistan, and the Argali to the region from
Turkestan to the Uzbek republic. Equally it was the piedmont and
mountain zone that held metal ores and so offered conditions
favourable to technological advance among societies whose
economies long remained on a subsistence basis. It was not
until social development was comparatively advanced that occupa-
tion of the alluvial territories, involving irrigation of the soil
and wholesale importation of basic raw materials, first became
feasible.
   If the original focus of farming is to be located somewhere
within the territory just defined, it is among the advanced hunter-
fishers and food-gathers occupying the area at or near the
beginning of Neothermal times that we have to seek the in-
novators, who in a sense were responsible for the whole future of
civilization in the Old World. Insufficient is yet known about the
Mesolithic peoples of western Asia to allow any firm conclusions
to be drawn about those most likely to have been responsible.
The possibility has to be allowed that in reality several different
groups rose to the same challenge—the desiccation that marked the
onset of Neothermal times in this area. In any case, even if some
one group was in fact ahead of the others, conditions were such
that people were more receptive than usual to new ways of easing
the burden of subsistence, so that the picture would soon be
blurred by diffusion. It would seem therefore that we must await
a more exact definition of the Mesolithic groups occupying the
region, and above all a network of radio-carbon dates sufficiently
close to make it possible to trace the areas where the new form of
economy first emerged.

                                80
I   Reconstructed skull of Peking man (Pithecanthropus pekinensis)




                                                           (facing p. 80)
If   Skull of Proto-Neolithic man from Jerich
                                              o with face
                     modelled in clay
    AND   THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN      CIVILIZATION


The * Proto- Neolithic’ ofJericho and Jarmo
    Meanwhile excavations in the Tell es-Sultan, the site of the
ancient Jericho, in Jordan and at the mound of Jarmo in the
Kurdish foothills of northern Iraq have thrown some welcome
light on an early stage in the history of farming. The base of the
tell at Jericho yielded traces of the Natufian hunter-fishers,
whose remains, previously known from rock-shelters and open
stations, mainly in Palestine (see p. 64), are the most complete
for any Mesolithic group in western Asia. According to radio-
carbon dates they were camping around the spring at Jericho about
7800 B.c. and to judge from the constricted space they occupied
it would seem that they formed only a small group, probably a
few primary families such as might have lived in the mouth of
a large cave. Like their relatives at Mount Carmel they lived
mainly by hunting gazelle, and supplemented their diet by
harvesting grain by means of reaping knives inset with flint
blades. Whether this grain was wild or in any sense domesticated
has been much discussed, but it is worth pointing out that wild,
self-grown cereals grow in the immediate neighbourhood at the
present day and there is no evidence that the Natufians had any
special arrangements for storing their grain or that they had
developed any true querns or milling-stones, though they certainly
used stone rubbers of the type employed in many parts of the
world for preparing wild plant foods. Until specimens of the
grain harvested by the Natufians have been examined by a
competent botanist, one can hardly be sure about its precise
status. What is certain is that the Natufians had hardly gained
enough control over cereals to affect in any noticeable way their
mode of life.
   By contrast the forty-five feet or so of archaeological deposits
overlying the Natufian layer, though they still yielded no real
pottery, gave clear indications of greatly enlarged social groups
and of more permanent settlement, and it seems reasonable to
    4                           SI                          cP
                THE   INVENTION       OF   FARMING

expect that when the plant remains have been reported upon they
will show that definite progress had been made in the domestica-
tion of cereals; already comparison of the horn cores of the
numerous goats from the site with those of wild ones has given
some evidence for domestication. Two distinct stages have been
distinguished in the Proto-Neolithic deposits. The earlier one,
which yielded a flint industry in the Natufian tradition, though
lacking certain types and supplemented by ground stone axes, was
characterized by well-constructed round huts with sunken floors
and beehive walls made from long oval bricks with flat bases and
curved or hog-backed upper surfaces. In the course of this earlier
or ‘hog’s-back’ stage of the Proto-Neolithic, which to judge
from the flints was an outgrowth from the Natufian, the settle-
ment, which by now extended over the whole area of the tell,
was defended by a ditch cut in the solid rock to a depth of
3 metres and a width across the top of 9 metres, backed by a
massive stone wall with great round towers set at intervals and
incorporating inner stairways for manning the defences.
   The fact that such primitive people found it necessary to erect
defences on such a scale suggests the presence of rivals at an
analogous stage of development and it seems likely that these are
represented in the upper Proto-Neolithic layer that began to form
around 6000 B.c. This need not of course imply that the transition
to a more settled form of life based on incipient farming, added to
the hunting of plentiful game, was made by more than one
Mesolithic stock in the region. More likely it reflects the possi-
bility that the attainment of a more settled way of life favoured the
development from the same basic Natufian stock of locally
differentiated communities, and it is noteworthy that the lithic
industry in the upper Jericho level, with its pressure-flaked tanged
arrowheads and heavy, serrated reaping-knife blades compares
closely with that of the Tahounian, previously recognized in the
Judaean cave of El-khiam overlying successive stages of the
younger Natufian. A feature of the upper Proto-Neolithic of
                                 82
    AND    THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN       CIVILIZATION

Jericho is the appearance of a specialized type of quern, wedge-
shaped with a grinding hollow running out at the broader end,
another sign that the use of grain for food was already long-
established. The houses at this level consisted of rectangular
rooms grouped round courtyards in which the cooking was done:
the walls were built of sun-dried bricks on a stone foundation
course and the floors were characteristically made of clay coated
by burnished lime-plaster and covered by rush mats. Indications
of what may have been family shrines were found in the houses,
but the most telling evidence for spiritual development it so be
found in the treatment of the dead. Already in the lower level the
custom of severing the heads from the trunks and burying them in
separate nests seems to have been established, a practice paralleled
in a Mesolithic context in South Germany at Ofnet and Kauferts-
berg near Nordlingen. A notable feature of the rite as practised
by the plaster-floor people at Jericho was the way in which the
skulls were filled with clay, the eyes inlaid with shell and the faces
finely modelled in clay, the expressions of which are so personal
as to suggest veritable portraits (Pl. II). Burial had been accorded
to the dead since early in Late Pleistocene times and among
Advanced Palaeolithic peoples it had become customary to inter
them clothed and with their ornaments in place; but though burial
had become formalized as a means of separating the dead from the
living and though some differentiation in the objects placed with
the dead might be made according to sex, there is no indication
that individuals were memorialized as such in those early times.
The modelled faces from Jericho on the other hand point the way
to the funerary masks and portraits of later and more sophisticated
cultures from Pharaonic Egypt to Stuart England. More vividly
than anything else, unless it be the scale of the settlement and its
defences, they emphasize the significance of the change initiated by
hunter-fishers and carried forward during the seventh millennium
B.c. by men who added to a plentiful supply of gazelle meat the
increment of domesticated cereals and herds of goats, citizens of
                                  83                            4-2
                 THE   INVENTION       OF   FARMING

no mean community who were yet ignorant of pottery, for long
regarded as a symbol of settled life.
   Primitive farming communities also lived in the Kurdish foot-
hills of northern Iraq, where descendants of the Advanced
Palaeolithic Zarzi culture are known to have occupied, as at the
open site of Karim Shahir, territory well supplied by species
capable of being domesticated. Excavations at the mound of
Jarmo on a promontory hill-top have yielded abundant evidence
for a primitive Neolithic community that made no use of pottery
until the last third of its existence. The houses, like those of the
upper Proto-Neolithic of Jarmo, had rectangular rooms with mud
walls built on stone footings and reed mats on the floors. The
lithic industry combined blades and microliths of Mesolithic
aspect with blades of reaping-knives and polished stone axes.
Pestles, mortars and milling-stones bear further witness to the
importance of plant-food, and what have been described as ‘floor-
basins’ of clay baked in place may have been the bases of silos.
The grains of emmer, spelt and two-rowed barley suggest that
these cereals were still at a comparatively early stage of their
emergence from wild prototypes. Among the meat bones wild
animals accounted for only 5 per cent and the villagers evidently
kept herds of sheep or goats, cattle and swine. If we were to
follow the radio-carbon dates obtained from the original samples,
the site would be no earlier than the first half of the fifth millennium
B.c. and would therefore rank in relation to sites like Hassuna as
a poor outlier rather than as an ancestor. Even so the site would
remain of the highest interest, not merely as confirming that a
simple kind of mixed farming might be carried on by people who
had not yet acquired the art of potting, but as illustrating the
process whereby the new way of life spread in a relatively primitive
form at a time when in the main centres it was passing through a
more advanced stage of development, a process which we shall
find exemplified ever more vividly when in a later chapter we
consider a secondary area of diffusion like Europe.
                                  84
     AND   THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN       CIVILIZATION


The ‘ Neolithic’ of Syro-Cilicia
   A new stage in the advance towards civilization in south-west
Asia was reached when settled communities, depending on a
mixed farming economy and still limited by a technology based
substantially on lithic tools, took to potting, probably some time
towards the end of the sixth millennium B.c. Three main foci may
be noted, one centred on Cilicia and western Syria with contacts as
far south as Jericho, another on northern Iraq and eastern Syria
and a third on the Iranian plateau. In each case the villagers lived
in rectangular-roomed houses that formed the nucleus of settle-
ment mounds or tells. The pottery of the Syro-Cilician zone, best
exemplified from the lowermost layers (XXV-XXXIID) of the
Yiimiik Tepe at Mersin, Ugarit (Ras Shamra), and Byblos,
comprises simple pots, often hole-mouthed, of dark burnished
ware decorated by horizontal rows of impressions by a shell-edge
that was sometimes rocked back and forth. Associated with this
was a rich lithic industry, including blades of reaping-knives,
polished axes and tanged lanceheads, often with pressure-flaking
broadly analogous to those of the Tahounian industry of Palestine.
To judge from the impressions of a textile garment under a
crouched burial at Mersin (X XVI), weaving was practised as well
as potting and flint- and stone-working.

The ‘ Neolithic’ of Iraq: Hassuna and Halaf
    Traces of broadly similar culture were found in the basal layer
(Ia) of the great stratified mound of Tell Hassuna near Mosul in
northern Iraq. To judge from the stratification and the absence of
structural features, the earliest phase was marked by hardly more
than camps and the emphasis evidently lay on stock-keeping, even
if, as suggested by the use of straw for tempering the coarse pot-
tery, cereals were also cultivated. The rich lithic industry including
tanged projectile heads with pressure-flaking and the burnished
pottery both point to the Syro-Cilician region as a source of the
                                   85
                 THE   INVENTION      OF   FARMING

earliest culture represented at Hassuna and in this connection it
should be noted that burnished ware occurs in the intervening
Khabur drainage area at Tell Shaghir Bazar and at Tell Halaf; only
the carinated storage vessels made from the coarse straw-tempered
ware suggest local development. A further indication that at this
time the whole area from the East Mediterranean to the Tigris
formed in effect a unitary zone is that during the immediately
ensuing period the same multi-chevron design was found painted
on pottery from Mersin (XX-XXIV) as on that from Hassuna
(Ib, c; Il) or Nineveh (1). Moreover, pottery with incised
herring-bone and chevron designs, associated with this at Nine-
veh I, is known from as far west as Mersin, Byblos and Jericho.
   The first real indication that Assyria was beginning to form a
distinct focus of early culture came with the last phase of this
stage in northern Iraq, when the vigorous and distinctive pottery
named after the original finding-place at Tell Halaf was developed.
Halafian pottery is outstanding on account of the variety of its
forms and above all of its painted decoration and because of the
excellence of its firing; but it was still hand-made, and there is no
reason to think it was necessarily or even probably made by whole-
time potters. In addition to dishes and flasks the forms included
bowls with sharp-shouldered bodies and flaring necks and bowls
and flasks on hollow stands. The decoration comprised geometric
patterns like triangles, chevrons, lozenges, chequers, stars, Maltese
crosses, quatrefoils and rosettes; stipples, including egg and dot;
and stylized representations of men and animals, including
designs based on the bull’s head. It was applied to a buff or
cream slip by glaze paint. At the climax of the industry the
decoration was polychrome; red, orange, yellow and black paints
being used, sometimes high-lighted by white spots. The pottery
was apparently fired to temperatures up to 1200° C. in great domed
kilns with rectangular annexes, like those preserved at Carchemish
with walls and ceilings of clay on stone footings. Some archaeo-
logists, misled by the formal analogy in plan with tholoi (the
                                 86
    AND    THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN       CIVILIZATION

circular underground tombs of Greece approached by sloping
passages), have interpreted these structures as funerary or in some
way religious, but there is no evidence that they were used for
any other purpose than that revealed rather clearly at Carchemish.
The Halafians appear to have depended on lithic tools and quarried
obsidian as far afield as Lake Van. Metal tools have come from
a number of Halafian sites, but these were either, as at Tell
Halaf, from levels contemporary with the early Ubaid stage in
southern Iraq or, as at Samarra, were in all probability intrusive
from much younger deposits. Before the period of Ubaid influence
copper was only used for such things as beads and then most
probably from native metal. The Halafians were skilled at working
hard stone, which they made into button seals, beads, amulets and
small vessels, and they imported shells from the Persian Gulf to the
Khabur area. Suggestions that they used wheeled transport should
be discounted, being based on an incomplete and enigmatic vase
painting. On the other hand there are indications that cult activities
were well developed. Clay figurines of women, sometimes shown
with exaggerated breasts and rump andat Arpachiyaassociated with
doves, suggest fertility cults, as do models in clay, bone and stone
of the common farmyard animals, notably including bulls, and
representations of bulls’ heads on pots and stone amulets. There are
also signs in double-axe amulets and signs painted on pots that a
thunder-god was recognized. At its greatest extent Halafian
pottery extended westwards over the Syro-Cilician region to the
West Mediterranean at Mersin (X VII-XIX) and Ras Shamra (III),
northward to Lake Van and southward as far as the region of
Baghdad and even further on the east of the Tigris; on the other
hand it did not penetrate the alluvial lands of southern Iraq, which,
as we shall see, were first settled by the Ubaid people from the east.

Iran: Bakun, Sialk and Hissar
  The Iranian plateau, together with Baluchistan and Afghanistan,
shared with the piedmont zone of Syria and northern Iraq an

                                  87
                THE   INVENTION       OF   FARMING

endowment that favoured the early emergence of societies based
on mixed farming and capable of fixed settlement, societies that
soon learned to exploit the copper ores of the region and to
practise metallurgy. Although Iran formed part of the primary
zone in which prototypes of cultivated cereals and domesticated
sheep flourished in the wild state, very little is yet known of
peasant communities contemporary even with the early levels at
Hassuna. Crude, hand-made plain pottery found with a rich
lithic industry and numerous bone tools in the basal layer at the
tell of Bakun B near Persepolis suggest that the mountainous area
of south-west Persia was occupied before the development of the
painted wares chiefly characteristic of the region. Further north,
on the eastern slope of the mountains forming the western rim
of the Iranian desert, the lowest level (Ia) of the northern tell at
Sialk near Kashan has yielded well-documented material com-
parable in age with the Hassuna culture. The earliest settlement at
the base of the tell was evidently little more than a camp, but very
soon mud huts began to be built and the mound to grow. The
presence of lustred reaping-knife blades and saddle-querns and
of the bones of domestic cattle and sheep alongside those of some
game animals shows that the Sialk I people practised a form of
mixed farming and in the upper levels of this stage they had
already begun to hammer copper into small objects like pins and
awls. The most interesting feature of the pottery is that it includes
several distinct hand-made wares—plain undecorated, pale with
black paint, red oxidized (at first plain but later decorated with
black paint) and rare sherds of black—an indication that the
Sialk pottery is the product of a considerable history. Even so it is
significant that the Sialk I culture preserves some traits of Meso-
lithic ancestry, notably microliths and slotted bone reaping-knife
handles with animal head terminations, that recall in a general way
those of the Natufian. Another hint of the antiquity of Neolithic
culture in the region is the occurrence of soft pottery at the Belt
Cave on the south-east Caspian shore in a deposit formed
                                 88
     AND   THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN       CIVILIZATION

according to radio-carbon dating during the sixth millennium B.c.
Yet until more systematic work on Pre-Sialk phases has been
done it will hardly be possible to be sure at what stage Iran began
to contribute to the history of cultures based on farming.
   In common with the piedmont zone of northern Iraq and
Syria, Iran was too arid to develop civilizations comparable in
antiquity with those of the great riverine zones and indeed it was
not until the first millennium B.c. that it effectively crossed the
threshold of literacy. On the other hand this great upland
territory formed so to speak a reservoir from which human floods
broke out from time to time to interrupt, but on occasion to
stimulate, the development of civilization in the riverine lands.
Two main provinces of painted pottery have been distinguished
for this region, one characterized by predominantly reddish, the
other by predominantly buff wares. The former and more
northerly group is found on sites like Sialk, Ravy and Hissar on
the western and northern rim of the Iranian desert and at Anau in
the former Turkestan: apart from the pottery, it is distinguished
by a general absence of the clay figurines found in the southern
group and by the practice of burying the dead among the houses
instead of in separate cemeteries. The latter, on the other hand, is
centered on the highlands of south-western and southern Iran,
from Elam to Fars and eastward to Seistan and probably Makran
in south Baluchistan, representative sites including Tepe Giyan,
Susa I and Bakun A and B.                                .

The ‘Chalcolithic’ of Iraq: Ubaid, Eridu, Ur and Tepe Gawra
   It was from the buff-ware province that the first colonizers of
the alluvial lands of southern Irag came to lay the basis of the first
historic civilization of Mesopotamia, that of the Sumerians. The
Ubaid people, who take their name from a low tell not very far
from the ancient site of Ur, arrived with a fully developed mixed
farming economy and almost certainly with a knowledge of
metallurgy acquired during their earlier history in the highlands.
                                 89
                THE   INVENTION       OF   FARMING

They entered a territory lacking in minerals, building stone or
even timber (other than palm stems), a land moreover which
combined an arid climate with an absence of annual inundations
and which therefore required artificial irrigation to provide a
plentiful and assured supply of food. Yet it was a land of oppor-
tunity: given a certain level of technology and above all a degree of
social integration permitting the growth of the political authority
needed for public works, it was capable of producing food
sufficient to support societies of increasing levels of complexity;
and the great rivers both allowed access to distant raw materials
and provided a means of exerting control ultimately over the
whole of Mesopotamia. To anyone capable of occupying them
the alluvial lands of southern Iraq presented a challenge, one that
evoked in response nothing less than the development of a new
form of city life and within less thana thousand years the emergence
of a specific Sumerian civilization, embracing the whole Tigris—
Euphrates basin.
   The Ubaid people settled to begin with in the southern part
of Iraq at a time when the northern parts of the country were
occupied by the Halafians in the closing stage of the fifth millennium
B.c.; but within a very few centuries they had imposed their
culture over the whole of Mesopotamia and influenced much of
Syria. The name site of Al Ubaid was a humble village set on a low
mound or island of river silt close to the course of the Euphrates.
The huts were built of the most abundant raw materials of the
area; some hada flat roof, the walls formed of reed mats suspended
between palm-stems and plastered with mud, and others a rounded
one formed by bending bundles of reed over from one side to
another, creating a structure like a Nissen hut. The peasants lived
by farming: cereal crops were harvested by reaping-knives or
sickles set with flint teeth, like those used on the highlands and in
the Syro-Cilician region, or alternatively by sickles made of baked
clay; and, though no bones have survived, the use of dung as
plaster and the manufacture of animal figurines confirm that
                                 90
     AND   THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN      CIVILIZATION

domestic livestock were kept. There is some evidence also for
hunting and fishing in the marshes and rivers. To judge from a
clay model with upturned ends, it would appear that they were
already using boats made from bundles of reeds like the modern
bellum to navigate the rivers. Potting was still mainly done by
hand during the early stage of the culture, but already the foot-
rings added to certain vessels before firing were being shaped on
a slow-moving wheel or tournette turned by the potter’s hand.
The finer wares, of a light buff colour which turned when over-
fired to a greenish hue, were decorated by painting with a smooth
ferruginous paint having a matt surface, generally blackish but
sometime reddish in colour. The patterns were made up pre-
dominantly of relatively simple geometrical designs, such as zig-
zag lines, triangles, lozenges and cross-hatching, but very oc-
casionally animal motives, like those used more freely in the
highlands, were employed. Although forming a distinctive ware
on its own, the Ubaid pottery clearly relates to the buff-ware
province of Iran and it is significant that figurines of women and
animals were also a marked feature of the Mesopotamian culture.
   The picture of village life given by the exploration of Al Ubaid
has been corrected by later work on a number of town sites.
Excavation of Tell Abu Shahrain (the ancient Eridu) and Ur in
the south and of Tepe Gawra (XII-XIX) in the north has shown
that the Ubaid people also lived in towns and erected their
buildings from sun-dried bricks. Another sign of their relative
advance over predecessors in Mesopotamia was that they practised
metallurgy. In the south few copper objects have been recovered
from Ubaid deposits, but at Tepe Gawra and Arpachiya and
further afield at Tell Halaf a number of cast copper axes and other
tools have been found; even at Al Ubaid the peasants made baked
clay copies of copper tools, notably shaft-hole axes with expanded
blades. The most striking monuments of the Ubaid people, not
only on account of their physical size but even more because of
what they imply in social organization, are their temples. At Abu
                                oI
                THE   INVENTION       OF   FARMING

Shahrain no less than thirteen, the two bottom ones known only
from a few walls, were found in the Ubaid levels underlying
structures dating from the third Dynasty of Ur. The earliest
temple of which a plan could be recovered (level XVI) was a
small, nearly square room with a door near one corner, two short
screens suggesting a division of the inner space, an altar in a niche
in the rear wall and an offering-place showing signs of burning
in the middle; by level VIII, on the other hand, the tripartite plan
with a central cella flanked on either side by rows of small rooms
had been evolved. This latter type occurred again in the two
lowermost Ubaid layers (XVIII—-XIX) at Tepe Gawra and was
to recur throughout the succeeding Warka and Protoliterate
stages of southern Iraq. The construction and above all the
frequent reconstruction of temples, which might be of very
substantial size, go to show that the Ubaid people had already so
to speak created the characteristic form of early civilization in
Mesopotamia, the sacred city whose economic, social and re-
ligious life was centered on the temple and its priests.

Warka
    On the Ubaid foundation Sumerian civilization developed
comparatively rapidly in the south, where its progress can most
conveniently be followed in the sequence of deposits found in
the precinct of the Eanna Temple at Warka (= Sumerian Uruk,
Semitic Erech), Here the Warka stage proper is represented by
the bottom six layers (XIV-IX), the succeeding six (VIII-III)
being assigned to the Protoliterate stage. The Warka stage is
marked by the spread of a new kind of pottery which first co-
existed with evolved forms of Ubaid ware and then replaced it.
Culturally this pottery is interesting because it belongs to a ware
at home in Anatolia and suggests an enrichment of Mesopotamia
by impulses from the north. Economically its main significance is
that it was turned on a free-spinning wheel, generally a sign that
its manufacture had ceased to be a domestic craft and was in the
                                 92
     AND    THE    RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN      CIVILIZATION

hands of whole-time potters. No architectural remains of out-
standing interest were found in the levels of this phase at the
Eanna site, but in another part a succession of temples was
erected at this time to the god Anu. The earliest of these, rep-
resented only by a ramp, may have been earlier than Eanna XIV,
but those whose plans have been recovered were probably
contemporary with Eanna XI—VIII. The culminating structure
of the Warka phase was the White Temple, built on the traditional
threefold plan and having on the central axis of the cella a
rectangular pedestal with a low semicircular step bearing traces of
burning, presumably in connection with offerings or incense.
The White Temple measured 22:3 x 17:5 m. and it was set on a
great platform 70 m. long, 66 m. broad and 13 m. high, built of
rectangular mud bricks. The size of the temples erected during
the Warka phase and above all, perhaps, the frequency with which
they were rebuilt go to emphasize their importance in the social
structure of the day. Another feature to appear at this time,
destined to be of even greater importance in Sumerian society,
was the cylinder seal, which first occurred between two under-
lying building phases most probably of Eanna X-IX age.

Protoliterate     Sumer
   The Protoliterate phase at Warka was marked by a renewed
activity in the construction of temples. On the Anu site a true
ziggurat or stepped platform was erected for the first time in
Eanna VIII; on the Eanna site a tripartite temple was raised on
a limestone footing during period V and above it in period IV
a building with great free-standing columns; and on another part
of the site a temple was built directly on the level soil, the surface
being decorated by vast numbers of small cones of variously
coloured stones pressed into gypsum plaster, that gave the effect
of a vast mosaic covering not only the building itself but also
the wall round the court. The phase further witnessed a number
of innovations, including the use of vessels of copper and silver,
                                  93
                THE   INVENTION       OF   FARMING

monumental sculpture and pictographic writing. The uppermost
Protoliterate level at Warka (Eanna III) yielded an almost life-
size human head of marble and a number of large sculptures of
animal heads. Again, from a hole beside an altar at Tell Asmar
we have a series of human figures (Pl. III) carved from yellow
limestone with the eyes inlaid by shell, figures which are thought to
represent in most instances individual devotees of the god whose
temple they originally helped to furnish. It is significant, in view
of the central role of the temple and its priests in Protoliterate
society, that the earliest traces of writing and numeration belonged
to the temple accounts. Pictographic signs first appeared in
Eanna IV and by Eanna III they had become notably more
conventionalized. The numerical system associated with these
primitive scripts combined features of the decimal and sexagesimal
systems and emphasizes the way in which economic activities
were controlled from the centre by the temple community. That
means of transport over land as well as on rivers had been
developed at this time is shown by the occurrence among the
pictographic signs of representations of wheeled vehicles and of
boats with upturned ends,

The Early Dynastic period
   The Early Dynastic phase of Sumerian civilization, which began
between 3200 and 2800 B.c., was marked from a material point of
view by an overall increase in wealth rather than by any notable
innovations in the sphere of technology. Many of its basic traits
were already present in the Ubaid culture and, as we have seen,
the use of the wheel for potting and for transport, monumental
sculpture, cylinder seals and pictographic writing were all added
during the ensuing Protoliterate phases. Among the most potent
signs of increased wealth should be mentioned the greater
abundance and elaboration of metal tools, weapons, ornaments
and vessels, among which forms were evolved that spread in time
to Syria, Anatolia, the Aegean, the Caucasus, central Europe and
                                 94
    AND   THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN       CIVILIZATION

vast tracts of Russia. By the end of Early Dynastic times the
Sumerian smiths were riveting and soldering, as well as casting,
and were making bronze with a content of from 6 to 10 per cent of
tin. Quantities of gold and silver were used for ornaments and
vessels, as well as a wide range of more or less hard stones.
Representations on painted pottery, models and remains from
tombs give us more detailed information about the wheeled
transport available at this time: chariots and waggons were
evidently mounted on solid wheels, made from three pieces of
wood held together by cross-pieces and bound by tyres held
in place by copper nails, and drawn by Asiatic asses (onagers)
or oxen harnessed by collars and yokes. From this time
also engravings on cylinder seals indicate that animal traction
was being applied to light wooden ploughs for cultivating the
soil.
    The rise in material well-being was accompanied by major
changes in social structure, the most notable of which was the
emergence of kings or officials of comparable status, at first as
temporary war leaders, but in due course as established rulers of
the city states. The immediate cause of this was undoubtedly the
rise of warfare as an institution and this itself was linked with the
increase in wealth already noted: thus, the growing affluence of
the cities only served to increase their attraction to marauding
pastoralists of the highland and the desert; the citizens needed to
secure raw materials in increasing variety and volume from more
or less remote territories inhabited by poorer and more barbarous
peoples; and, even more to the point, rivalry between the cities
grew as the opportunities for enrichment increased and this
occurred at a time when armament was becoming more effective
and the inhabitants found themselves able to support warriors.
Whatever the factors responsible there can be no doubt that war
had by this time become a well-organized institution: on the so-
called ‘Royal Standard’ of Ur we see depicted not only the royal
chariot with prisoners under guard, but three distinct grades of
                                 95
                THE   INVENTION        OF   FARMING

combat troops, namely ass-drawn chariots riding men down, a
phalanx of heavy troops helmeted and cloaked, and light skir-
mishers in contact with the enemy. Eloquent insight into the
status achieved by the Sumerian rulers is given by the Royal Tombs
at Ur, which show that a whole procession of grooms, guards,
courtiers and women, together with the oxen drawing the funeral
car, were slaughtered to accompany the royal personage to the
next world.

Mesopotamia down to Alexander
    The political history of Mesopotamia during the two thousand
years or so that elapsed before it passed under Persian dominion
was in many respects depressing. Ever since its emergence in the
fifth millennium the city state had been the basic political unit of the
Sumerians and at least eleven of these, Eridu, Ur, Erech, Larsa,
Kish and Nippur among them, supported independent dynasties.
The struggle for predominance among these was seldom relieved
by statesmanship or by the appearance of higher forms of political
integration and on the rare occasions when these were achieved
the promise was dissipated by the intrusion of desert or mountain-
dwellers inferior in civilization and bent only on appropriating
the wealth of the richer alluvial lands. Predominance won by
piecemeal defeat of rivals was generally limited to the active life
of the victor. It was not until Sargon founded his city of Akkad in
c. 2340 B.C. that we find ourselves in the presence of a political
innovator of genius, able not merely to conquer, but to secure his
conquests by basing his regime on something more permanent
than force. Sargon may well have owed his ability to weld into
an imperial state the lands sharing in Sumerian civilization and
extending from the Mediterranean to the Persian Gulf to the spread
from the north of Semitic ideas and language with their greater
emphasis on kinship and tribal loyalties. A uniform dynasty and
calendar, indeed, secured his realms to his immediate successors,
but around 2180 B.c. the Sargonid Empire was overthrown by
                                  96
    AND   THE   RISE   OF   MESOPOTAMIAN       CIVILIZATION

hillmen from the east. Despite this set-back, Ur, under its Third
Dynasty, was destined to enjoy its most splendid days, only to be
overwhelmed around 2025 B.c. by Amorites from the west and
Elamites from the east.
   The victories of Hammurabi (c. 1800-1760 B.c. ), by expelling
the Elamites and establishing the First Dynasty of Babylon,
ushered in a new cycle. Like Sargon before him, Hammurabi
appreciated the need to establish an imperial organization:
governors were appointed to rule over city states, a body of laws
was promulgated and a state religion based on the cult of Marduk
was established. This time it was Hittites from the north and
Kassites from the east who overwhelmed the empire, the former
sacking Babylon (c. 1595 B.c.) and the latter establishing a dynasty
that lasted down to 1171 B.c. In the twelfth century B.c. the
Assyrians emerged as a powerful military state and, though the
Babylonians were able to maintain their trade with the Phoenicians
and others bordering the Mediterranean, they lived, more
particularly after the great period of Assyrian expansion during
the ninth century, under the shadow of their ruthless neighbours
to the north. This was only brought to an end by yet another
irruption from the eastern highlands. By an irony of history it was
the destruction of Elamite power by the Assyrians (640 B.c.) that
made possible the rise of the Persians, who under Cyrus II of the
Achaemenid dynasty first overthrew the Medes (c. 550 B.c.) and
then descended on Babylon (c. 539 B.c.). The Assyrian dominions
were overrun and before long the Achaemenid empire was ex-
tended east to the Oxus and the Indus and west to include Egypt.
Soon almost the whole of the western focus of Old World
civilization was engulfed in the Persian empire. Only the Athenian
hoplites who on the plain of Marathon (490 B.c.) turned back the
hosts of Darius, the Greek sailors who destroyed Xerxes’ fleet at
Salamis (480 B.c.) and the Lacedaemonians who defeated his
army at Plataea (479 B.c.) preserved the growing point of
European civilization. Within a hundred and fifty years or so the
                                 7
               THE   INVENTION    OF   FARMING

Greeks under Alexander the Great had conquered the whole of
the ancient world from Asia Minor and Egypt to Iran and the
Punjab (334-323 B.c.). Alexander’s conquest marked far more
than the end of the Persian empire: it symbolized the eclipse
of the ancient civilizations of western Asia and the Nile Valley
and the advent of a European power on the stage of world
history.




                             98
                             CHAPTER §

    ANCIENT EGYPT AND THE LATER
        PREHISTORY OF AFRICA

It is no longer seriously disputed that the arts of farming on
which the Old World civilization were based were first learned in
those parts of western Asia where alone the wild prototypes of the
more important cereals flourished in the wild state. From this it
follows that the spread of farming from this focal territory must
have involved the introduction of domesticated species into new
and unfamiliar environments. The first area to which cereal
farming and stock-raising were diffused was probably Egypt and
it will in any case be convenient to describe this next, because the
Nile Valley gave birth to the earliest distinctive literate civiliza-
tion outside western Asia.

                              Le EG a?Ie
Diffusion offarming
   How and when farming first spread to Egypt and incidentally
to Africa is still uncertain. The most obvious route is the overland
one from Palestine to Lower Egypt, and traces of cultures of
Neolithic aspect have been found there, notably at Merimde-
Benisalame near the head of the Delta and on old shore-lines of
the former Fayum lake (Map 3). On the other hand the fact that
the main focus of the Predynastic cultures, in which the form of
ancient Egyptian civilization had already begun to take shape,
lay in Upper Egypt between Asyiit and Luxor suggests that
influences from Asia may have reached Upper Egypt by way of
the Wady-el-Hammamat and the Red Sea. The direction from
which these impulses first arrived has an obvious bearing on the
                                 oo
                ANCIENT     EGYPT      AND   AFRICA

relations between the ‘Neolithic’ cultures of Lower and the Pre-
dynastic ones of Upper Egypt: if the southern route was used, or
at least used first, the existence of certain parallelisms between the
two groups would argue that the former were poor, retarded
relations of the latter; whereas, if the seminal influences moved
upstream, quite opposite conclusions might be drawn. Present
indications are that, though some of the ‘ Neolithic’ communities of
Lower Egypt in fact persisted during the early Predynastic period
of Upper Egypt, the Fayum peasants have a clear priority,
going back well into the latter part of the fifth millennium B.c.,
whereas the earliest radio-carbon dates for early Predynastic sites go
back no further than the fourth millennium. Whether farming was
established earlier in the lower Nile Valley we may never know,
since in the course of six thousand years or so the river could well
have eroded traces of any earlier settlements that may have existed.

Fayum, Merimde and El Omari
   The earliest Neolithic communities yet known from Africa
belong to the period of heavy rainfall following the arid period
that formed the background to the invention of farming in western
Asia. When the Fayum basin was first settled by farmers the
level of the lake stood 180 feet higher than it does today and forest
trees and swamps existed in what is now an arid environment.
At the height of Altithermal times, indeed, the Fayum was no
isolated oasis, but formed part of a zone of relatively favourable
environment extending over large tracts of the Sahara. Traces of
hunter-fisher peoples have been found there, with remains of
crocodiles, hippopotami and fish, indicating conditions wetter
than those of to-day. The widespread occurrence of barbed bone
harpoon-heads suggests that a broadly similar way of life prevailed
at the height of Altithermal times as far west as the Fayum
depression and the Nile Valley down to the neighbourhood of
Khartoum. Indeed the Fayumis can best be regarded as hunter-
fishers who had adopted a Neolithic way of life originally
                                 100
                              EGYPT

developed in western Asia, and it is worthy of note that they used
bone harpoon-heads and winged arrowheads of flint paralleled
in the French Sudan.
   The Fayumi people kept sheep or goats, cattle and swine, and
cultivated emmer and flax. The equipment used in harvesting,
storing and grinding the grain, like the cereals themselves, were
those developed long previously in western Asia. The silos lined
with coiled basketry, in addition to carbonized cereals, yielded
fine baskets, used in all probability for sowing, and wooden
reaping-knives with flint blades set in slots, like the much older
bone ones of the Natufians. Although fire-holes were noted in
the mounds of midden material, no definite traces of dwellings
were observed, from which it has been inferred that tents or
similar structures were used. Numerous axe and adze-blades made
from polished flint or stone suggest that timber was nevertheless
utilized on a considerable scale and it may prove that more
substantial dwellings were in fact made. Traces of linen show that
weaving was practised. Pots were made by hand in simple shapes,
mainly undecorated flat-based bowls without handles, spouts or
other features. Apart from shells, some of which were brought
from the Red Sea and the Mediterranean, and beads of amazonite
or microcline felspar of uncertain, but certainly exotic origin, the
Fayumis made do with local materials and their economy was of
simple subsistence type.
   Traces of communities practising the same economy and whose
way of life and material equipment closely resembled that of the
Fayumis, are also known from Merimde and from El Omari near
Helwan. The exact age of the Merimdian is still unknown, but a
radio-carbon date for El Omari (c. 3300+ 230 B.c.) suggests that
poor peasant cultures of this type could survive for some time
alongside more advanced communities. An apparent difference is
that the Merimdians buried their dead, as a rule contracted on
their right side and without grave-goods, among their dwellings
rather than away from the settlement. They occupied light shelters
                                IO!
                ANCIENT     EGYPT     AND   AFRICA

of oval or horseshoe plan. They sometimes used large pots as silos
as well as baskets, and supplemented the produce of farming by
hunting and fishing; like the Tasians of Upper Egypt they made
barbless fish-hooks resembling in general those used long earlier
by the Natufians of Palestine.

Badarian of Upper Egypt
    Other communities of relatively simple farmers, depending on
flint and stone for their basic technology, established themselves
in Upper Egypt, notably in the region near Badari, where they
seem to have laid the basis of the Early Predynastic culture.
Traces of the temporary settlement of such early farmers were
found at Hammamiya stratified below Early and Late Predynastic
levels, but the bulk of our information comes from burials. The
Badarian peasants cultivated emmer and barley which they
harvested with reaping-knives set with bifacially flaked sickle-
teeth and stored in clay silos; and they kept cattle and sheep or
goats, though not apparently swine. In addition they hunted,
using arrows tipped with heads of leaf- or hollow-based and
winged form. As craftsmen they also wove, made baskets and
turned out pottery by hand. This latter comprised bowls and open
dishes, commonly black inside and near the rim, the lower part of
the body being red or brown through oxidization; the finer ware
was finished with a burnished rippled surface and patterns were
sometimes made on the inner face of open vessels by means of
burnished lines. Flint, stone and bone were freely used, but
copper appeared only in the form of beads that had been hammered
into shape, presumably from native metal. The dead were interred
in a contracted attitude in oval trench graves clothed in linen with
skin outer garments, as a rule with the head at the west end,
facing south and so lying on their right side. The men were clean-
shaven, but wore their hair long; and the women plaited theirs and
wore ivory combs carved with animal heads. Finds of stone
palettes, occasionally with red pigment or with malachite, suggest
                                102
                              EGYPT

the use of cosmetics. Perforated shells were used for head-dresses,
girdles and necklaces; and anklets, bracelets, rings and ear- or
nose-plugs were also worn. A feature of Badarian practice of
special significance for the future was their careful burial of
domestic animals wrapped in textiles.
   Among the graves with Badarian grave goods were others with
distinctive, though evidently closely related, furniture, which is
commonly attributed to a separate culture named after the site of
Der Tasa. Although no radio-carbon or absolute dates are
available for the Tasian it is generally held on not very impressive
evidence to have preceded the Badarian. The absence of copper
beads, on which some stress had been laid, could well be due to
chance; and in any case the presence or absence of small trinkets
of native copper has no real economic or technological signifi-
cance. The distinctive beaker pots, slender, with round base and
flaring rim, are decorated by incised patterns that suggest basketry
prototypes.

Early Predynastic
  The Early Predynastic or Amratian culture has been found at
Nakada sandwiched between the Badarian, from which it appar-
ently developed, and the overlying Later Predynastic. Radio-
carbon dates suggest that it was flourishing about a third of the
way through the fourth millennium (3627+ 300; 3794+ 300 B.c.).
Whereas the villagers of Merimde and Badari camped on spurs
overlooking the Nile and the Fayumis settled the margins of the
Fayum lake, the Predynastic peoples seem to have been the first
to exploit the possibilities of the naturally irrigated valley. The
size of the Nakada settlement, an aggregation of mud and reed huts
at least 100 yards across in either direction, and the number of the
graves in the cemetery both suggest enlarged social units.
Schematic representations of a variety of animals painted or
scratched on pottery may have been intended as symbols of
totems and it is significant that similar ones recur as emblems of
                                103
                ANCIENT    EGYPT      AND   AFRICA

nomes or territorial divisions during the historic period. It may
well be therefore that the Amratian villages were occupied by
totemic clans. Their technology was still basically lithic, copper
continuing to be used only in its native form and for such small
objects as pins with rolled heads.    On the other hand, flint was
no longer obtained merely in the form of surface nodules; it was
now mined and the roughing out and manufacture of tools was
carried out on the site of the quarries. Bifacially flaked arrow-
heads continued to be made in numbers, including leaf and
triangular as well as hollow-based forms. The finest pieces were
fish-tail lanceheads and long dagger blades, which had been
ground into shape before being subjected to a final process of
superbly controlled pressure flaking. This process, the object of
which was no doubt to impart a surface finish, was also applied
to polished flint axes and adzes. In general Amratian pottery was
coarser than Badarian, probably because the Predynastic people
were beginning to develop elegant stone vessels, cylindrical ones
from alabaster and footed ones from basalt. Black-topped ware
continued to be made, but a new departure was White Cross-
lined ware in which patterns recalling basketry, together with
others depicting animals, men and boats, were applied in dull
white paint to a polished red surface. To judge from the clay
figurines found in the graves, men appear to have gone unclothed
apart from penis sheaths and sandals, though they wore plumes in
their hair, and both sexes went in for a variety of ornaments, most
of them elaborations of ones used by the Badarians, such as ivory
combs carved with animal figures, glazed beads and a variety of
bracelets. Stone palettes show that making up was still popular
and indeed their more elaborate character—they might be shaped
to animal profiles—suggests an even greater accent on cosmetics.
In addition to personal ornaments the dead were accompanied by
food and figurines, which might be carved from ivory, as well as
being modelled more roughly in clay, in graves that were still
simple holes in the ground.
                                104
                              EGYPT


Late Predynastic
   The Late Predynastic culture, represented by Nakada II,
extended further north into the northern part of Middle or the
southern part of Lower Egypt and indeed takes its name from
Gerza near the entrance to the Fayum depression. In the
extreme south, however, it never displaced the Amratian in
Nubia, nor at the opposite extreme did it penetrate northern
Lower Egypt with the Delta which was occupied by a quite
different culture, represented by the settlement of Maadi near
Cairo and by the cemetery of Heliopolis on the margin of the
Delta. The Gerzean culture probably arose in Middle Egypt on an
Amratian basis enriched by the permeation of cultural elements of
Asiatic origin. Thus, whereas Black-topped pottery continued to
be made for a while, White Cross-lined ware gave place to
Decorated ware, painted in Asiatic fashion with dark red paint on
a pale buff ground, to represent the natural markings of the stone
vessels on which the forms were based. Stone vessels themselves
continued to be made and the use of hard porphyry marks a further
advance in an exacting craft.
   A highly significant innovation was the introduction of metal-
lurgy, which had appeared in western Asia a thousand years or so
previously: in addition to the small objects which the Badarians
and their immediate successors had made from native copper, the
Gerzeans were now able to cast flat axes, ribbed daggers and flat
knives. Swallow-tailed blades and curved knives continued to
be thinned by polishing and finished off by controlled pressure-
flaking, which on the latter might take the form of oblique,
parallel fluting of extreme regularity. On the other hand new
features to appear at this time, almost certainly from Asia,
included the widespread use of blades struck from carefully
prepared prismatic cores, and the introduction of chisel-ended or
transverse arrowheads and pear-shaped stone mace-heads. In
place of glazed stone, faience began to be manufactured, a complex
                               105
                ANCIENT     EGYPT     AND   AFRICA

substance consisting of an artificial core of finely powdered quartz
grains cemented by fusion and coated with a glass glaze. Im-
portant raw materials were obtained from a distance: copper came
from the eastern desert or from Sinai, but lead and silver were
imported from Asia, and lapis lazuli from an ultimate source in
northern Afghanistan, presumably by way of Mesopotamia. In
this latter connection it is significant that a local copy of a Meso-
potamian cylinder seal of Protoliterate type was found in one of
the Gerzean graves at Nakada. Boats made of bundles of reeds,
but of substantial size and provided with cabins, served for the
transport of materials like mined flint or stone vessels on the
Nile. These native boats were propelled by oars, but foreign-
looking ones with upturned prow and stern painted on Gerzean
pots were fitted with a sail. For overland portages asses were
used, and it should be noted that wheeled vehicles, though long
known in Mesopotamia, were not introduced in Egypt until the
New Kingdom, which began c. 1570 B.c.
   Gerzean society was firmly based on farming, and hunting
had markedly declined as an economic activity. The villagers lived
in more substantial houses, rectangular in plan and fitted with a
wood-framed doorway in the side. Graves were no longer orient-
ated regularly and it is noteworthy that they began to show a
greater range of wealth in terms of burial offerings, some being
provided with ledges, others with compartments separated off by
wattle partitions, to contain extra offerings; the most one can say
is that during Gerzean times there were signs of a growth in
wealth accompanied by a more integrated social structure.

Unification
  The ancient Egyptians attributed the unification of their country
to a single individual, Menes, whom they supposed to have
welded the twenty-two nomes of Upper and the twenty nomes of
Lower Egypt into a single realm and to have initiated in his own
person the First Dynasty of pharaohs. In reality the process must
                                106
                               EGYPT

almost certainly have been a gradual one, lasting for at least two
or three generations. The unification is unlikely, for one thing, to
have been accomplished without a good deal of fighting, and we
have evidence for this on a number of well-known archaeological
objects. For instance scenes of royal conquest are carved in low
relief on either face of a great stone palette some two feet in length
from the old royal capital of Hierakonpolis in Upper Egypt: one
(Pl. IV) depicts king Nar-mer, the crown of Upper Egypt on his
head, despatching an enemy with a stone-headed mace and sur-
rounded with captives and enemy dead; and the other shows the
same ruler, this time with the crown of Lower Egypt, confronting
four chiefs of nomes and surmounting a heap of decapitated
enemies. It is interesting to note that two animals are depicted on
this latter face with their necks intertwined, a convention also found
on a dagger handle from Gebel et Tarif, but only at home in
Mesopotamia. Another knife handle, this time of ivory from
Gebel el Arak, has been carved to show on one face combats
between men and boats with standards and upturned ends and on
the other a man dompting two lions. This last is especially
interesting because the man is wearing a hat and skirt of Sumerian
type and because the whole scene recalls the Sumerian epic of
Gilgamesh.
   The occurrence of elements of Mesopotamian origin among the
representations on these key objects raises the question how far
the unification of Egypt was brought about by foreign influence or
even by alien intruders. There can be no doubt of the existence
precisely at the period of transition from the Predynastic to the
Protodynastic or Archaic period of Egyptian history of innova-
tions that stemmed from Mesopotamian sources of Protoliterate
(Jamdat Nasr) age. In addition to the cylinder seals and the art
motives already mentioned, one could cite brick architecture,
which after a long history in Mesopotamia appeared suddenly in
Egypt during the First Dynasty in the construction of tombs and
which exhibited a series of detailed agreements, such as the size
                                 107
                 ANCIENT    EGYPT     AND   AFRICA

of bricks, the use of three rows of stretchers alternating with one
of headers and the decorative use of buttresses and recesses.
Another innovation to appear about the same time was writing,
with ideograms, phonetic signs and determinatives, even though
at first mainly as an element in monumental art rather than for the
practical purposes for which it had been devised in Mesopotamia.

Dynastic Egypt
  Yet it has to be emphasized that, important though Asiatic
impulses undoubtedly were at this decisive juncture, the civiliza-
tion that emerged in the Dynastic period was essentially Egyptian,
the culmination of a thousand years or so of prehistory in the Nile
Valley, distinct from and in some respects in marked contrast to
that of Mesopotamia. The continuity of Egyptian civilization
from its prehistoric beginnings down to the Hellenistic Age and
even to the spread of Islam owes much to geography. Whereas the
inhabitants of Sumer had to contend with rich and warlike moun-
tain dwellers both in the east and north, as well as with occasional
incursions from the western desert, the ancient Egyptians were
comparatively insulated in the Nile Valley. They were not so
remote as to be cut off from the stimulus of Asiatic civilization,
deriving from that quarter first the arts of agriculture and then
metallurgy and the techniques of incipient civilization, but they
were far enough off to escape invasion, save at periods of excep-
tional weakness; and even when this did occur their civilization
was too deeply rooted to be much affected by temporary political
domination. Meanwhile the economic wealth conferred by the
Nile floods and the cultural advantages derived from proximity
to Asia ensured that the Egyptians were at all times so superior
that they had nothing to fear from their immediate neighbours in
the Libyan and Eastern Deserts and in tropical Nubia.
   The main political danger was rivalry between Upper and
Lower Egypt arising from the narrowness and great length of the
alluvial zone of the Nile. It was because of this that the conquerors
                                108
                              EGYPT

from the south found it worth while to set up an important centre
at Memphis to match their old capital at Heirakonpolis and that
down to the end of the New Kingdom the Pharaohs wore the two
crowns. The river Nile provided a physical means for uniting the
country, but it was the supremacy of the Pharaoh that guaranteed
that unity. Asa divine ruler he symbolized the whole community
and it was his unchallenged sovereignty that engendered confi-
dence and stability. The whole administration was carried on by
authority delegated from the Pharaoh, whether through governors
of nomes or through officials of the central government, one of
whose main concerns was to channel a sizable proportion of the
social surplus into the hands of the ruler. The importance of
leading officials even during the Archaic phase of the Dynastic
period is witnessed by the scale and richness of their tombs
recently explored at Sakkara. On the other hand the supremacy of
the Pharaoh is well displayed on one of the great ceremonial stone
maces from Heirakonpolis, showing Nar-mer raised up nine steps,
on his throne, confronted by captives and attended by a priest,
a sandal-bearer and fan-bearers. Another shows the ‘Scorpion’
ruler presiding at the opening of a canal, a symbolic act emphasiz-
ing how the people of Egypt depended for their very sustenance
on the mediation of the Pharaoh. From the beginning crops must
have benefited from the natural irrigation brought about by the
Nile flood, but for any great extension of the fertile zone it was
necessary to cut channels and lift the Nile water into them by
some such device as the schaduf. The increase in population that
seems from all appearances to have marked the Predynastic
period, suggests that some such works must have been initiated
before the end of the prehistoric period. On the other hand the
institution of a highly centralized government, while in itself
expensive to maintain, made it possible to undertake public works
on a scale not hitherto possible.
   In addition to centralizing sovereignty and administration, the
Pharaohs were careful to promote an official religion. This was
                                109
                ANCIENT    EGYPT      AND   AFRICA

centred on the solar cult whose priests evolved a cosmogony,
accounting for the genesis of nine main deities, at their head-
quarters in Heliopolis (the ancient Egyptian On), a little north of
Memphis. Of the progeny of Ra-Atum, the sun-god, the most
influential was Osiris, lord of the regions of the dead, whose cult
wasa direct counterpart. Preoccupation with death, or rather with
the continuance of life after physical death, played an immensely
important part in the life of ancient Egypt. The basic belief was
that the spirit could survive only if the body was adequately
preserved and provided with what was needed for its well-being
in the after life. As the Egyptians grew richer and their social
structure became more elaborate the tombs of the more important
members of the community took on a monumental form and were
furnished richly to accord with the position in life of the dead. By
the First Dynasty substantial structures of sun-baked bricks,
known as Mastabas, began to be erected over the graves of promi-
nent people, and by the Third Dynasty stone was employed for
royal tombs. The first or Stepped Pyramid, erected by Zoser at
this time, was built over a Mastaba, already twice enlarged, the
burial being made amid a maze of passages and rooms at the foot
of a deep shaft beneath. The Old Kingdom was symbolized above
all by the regular pyramids, which began to be made in the Fourth
Dynasty and reached an early climax in the Great Pyramid built
for Cheops and his queen. The dimensions of this structure—
approximately 756 feet square at the base, which covered over
13 acres, and rising, when complete, to a height of 481 feet—are
impressive in themselves, but the great cause for wonder is the
sheer labour involved in the preparation and transport of the
stone. Approximately 2,300,000 blocks, weighing on the average
some 24 tons, were used and the mere transport of these by man-
power would have involved the labour of perhaps 100,000 levies
for a three months’ spell in each of twenty years, the time it took
to complete the work, according to the story recorded by Hero-
dotus; and in addition to this a permanent force of masons and
                                IIo
                                EGYPT

labourers would have been needed on the site, perhaps as many as
4ooo in all. When it is recalled that upwards of twenty pyramids,
none so large, but all substantial, were erected during the Old
Kingdom alone, the overwhelming force of the idea behind them,
the conservation of the bodies of the Pharaoh and his consort and
their provision for life after physical death, and the almost
incredible concentration of the forces of an essentially poor society
on the needs of one man will be even more apparent.
   By contrast, no trace of the houses or even of the palaces of
these divine rulers survives. For the purposes of transient life
even the greatest were content to live in flimsy structures, while
lavishing their power and substance on the construction and
provisioning of their own tombs. In this respect the difference
between Egypt and Sumer is marked, even when we remember the
tiches of the Royal Tombs of Ur. Although in abstract terms
civilization had developed by way of the same broad stages of
development, the actual expression or form of the two civilizations
was markedly distinct. Nourished by the Nile and sheltered by
protective deserts and their own superior technology, the ancient
Egyptians were able to maintain their way of life with remarkably
little change over something like three thousand years of recorded
history. The breakdown of central authority that marked the end
of the Old Kingdom would in an Asiatic state almost certainly
have led to alien domination, but in Egypt it was the local
nomarchs who profited and when the royal power was re-
established with the Middle Kingdom (c. 2132-1777 B.c.) the
construction of pyramids was begun again as though no interrup-
tion had been. During the second intermediate period, it is true,
Egypt fell under the yoke of foreign rulers, the Hyksos or
Shepherd kings, but it is significant that their eviction (1573/0 B.c.)
inaugurated, in the New Kingdom, the greatest phase in the
history of the land, during which Egyptian armies warred against
the leading powers of western Asia and campaigned as far east as
the Euphrates. Even during the period of decline that followed
                                  III
                ANCIENT     EGYPT     AND   AFRICA

the close of the Twentieth Dynasty (c. 1090 B.c.) and witnessed
conquests by Assyrians, Persians and Greeks the fundamentals of
Egyptian civilization survived: indeed, under the earlier Ptolemies,
whose rule began with the death of Alexander in 323 B.c., the
Egyptian state experienced something of an imperial revival; and
independence was only ended with its conversion into a province
of the Roman Empire on the death of Cleopatra in 30 B.c.

     THE.    LATER,     PREHISTORY,           OF     AFRICA
Ancient Egypt owed its history to the twin facts of being near
enough to share in the basic advances made in the creative zone
of south-west Asia, while at the same time being remote and self-
suficient enough to mature and conserve its own distinctive
civilization over what in terms of other and later traditions must
be accounted an immensely long period. For the rest of Africa the
consequences were less happy. The ancient Egyptians, secure in
their homeland, made no conscious effort to extend their civiliza-
tion or even their sphere of influence over other peoples: they
defended their frontiers and during the New Kingdom extended
these far into south-west Asia; but in their African homeland they
contented themselves with holding their neighbours at arm’s
length. In effect therefore Ancient Egypt served as a buffer rather
than as a connecting link between the progressive territories of
western Asia and a continent that had already during Late
Pleistocene times slipped far behind in the race of progress.
   This is not to say that the ancient Egyptians refrained from all
contact with other African peoples: apart from anything else they
were constrained from time to time to campaign in Nubia, send
trading expeditions to the land of Punt or employ Libyan
mercenaries, each of which might in one way or another result
in a limited degree of cultural exchange. Whatever the precise
mechanism, certain elements of higher culture managed, however
fitfully and belatedly, to spread over more or less extensive tracts
of Africa, even if outside a limited zone of the Nile Valley Africa
                                II2
III   Sumerian statue of Early Dynastic times from
             Tell Asmar, Mesopotamia


                                                     (facing p. 112)
                                                     WG




I\ 7   Relief carvin 8 of K ing Nar mer On stone palette from
                  H ie rakonpol 1s, Upper Egypt
            THE   LATER     PREHISTORY    OF   AFRICA

remained in the Stone Age until the diffusion of iron-working.
Such feeble impulses as can be discerned from societies depending
to a significant degree on farming spread on the one hand west-
ward to North Africa and on the other southward by way of the
Sudan to East, central and West Africa.

The Neolithic of Capsian tradition in North Africa
   Neolithic impulses passed westward along the northern fringes
of the Sahara to enrich the lives of the Capsian hunter-fishers of
the Maghreb. Examination of caves and open-air middens has .
shown that, though they continued to rely to a large extent on
hunting and on the collection of molluscs, these people had
begun to keep domestic animals as an additional source of food.
They continued to make lunate and trapeziform microliths for
arming their arrows,      but in addition they used chisel-ended
arrowheads. Other acquisitions from the east included polished
stone axes and coil-built pottery, mainly in the form of round- or
conical-based bowls with perforated lugs and impressed decora-
tion. Blades of reaping-knives or sickles, on the other hand, were
notably absent and there is no evidence that agriculture was
practised. Confirmation that they lived by hunting and pastoral
activities is provided by the rock-engravings, which in addition to
elephants, rhinoceroses, buffaloes, giraffe and a number of carni-
vores, depict domesticated sheep. In style and content and
technique—they were either pecked or deeply incised and
polished—these early naturalistic engravings of the Maghreb
compare closely with those of Upper Egypt with which they are
linked geographically across Libya. Similar engravings, together
with paintings, are widely distributed over the Sahara. The tradi-
tion of engraving and painting rocks certainly endured into the
New Kingdom, because horse-drawn chariots occur as far west as
the western Sahara; indeed, representations of domesticated
camels shows that it must have been continued into the Christian
era. The art of potting seems to have spread by the fourth
   75                            113                         CP
                 ANCIENT     EGYPT     AND   AFRICA

millennium B.c. to communities of hunter-fishers in the Khartoum
area, whose barbed bone spear and harpoon-heads recall those of
the Fayum and to less degree those of the French Sudan. They
also made lunate armatures for arrows of a type stemming
ultimately from Epi-Levalloisian sources (p. 46). The first signs
of domestication in the form of small straight-horned goats
appeared at the site of Shaheinab (3493 + 380 B.c.) on the left bank
of the Nile some thirty miles north of Omdurman, together with
pottery and hollow-ground adzes like those from the Fayum, in
a context best described as Sub-Neolithic: lunate microliths, bone
harpoon heads and barbless hooks testify to the importance of
catching activities; and it is important to stress both the absence
of any trace of agriculture and the fact that only 2 per cent of the
animal bones were those of domesticated species.

Pastoralism in East Africa
   It was presumably from the upper reaches of the Nile that the
practice of breeding and maintaining herds of sheep or goats as an
adjunct to wild sources of food spread south to Kenya. Here it
occurred already at Hyrax Hill, the first of a series of cultures
marked in the archaeological record by stone bowls and pestles
used presumably for crushing wild plant foods, by coil-built
pottery decorated in a variety of styles including some suggesting
basketry prototypes, and by lithic industries with lunate micro-
liths like those widespread in the Late Stone Age of Africa. The
precise age in terms of years of the sequence formed by the Hyrax
Hill, Gumban A, Gumban B and Njoro River cultures cannot yet
be told, but it is suggestive that a faience bead of a kind that spread
most widely during the period 1500-1300 B.c. has been found
with a burial at Nakuru assigned to Gumban B. There is no certain
evidence that pastoral activities spread further south until much
later, but isolated ‘neolithic’ traits, like polished stone axes and
pottery, were adopted by Nachikufu and Wilton groups in the
Rhodesias and even as far south as the Union of South Africa
                                 114
            THE   LATER    PREHISTORY       OF   AFRICA

without disturbing their hunter-fisher mode of subsistence. No
doubt it is to this southward drift of culture that we may attribute
the earlier styles of naturalistic rock art characteristic of much of
East and South Africa.

Polished stone-axe cultures of the equatorial forests

  Although polished stone axes have been found sporadically in
Kenya and occur with implements of Wilton type in the Rhodesias
and even in South Africa, it is only in the northern part of the
forest zone from French Guinea to the northern and eastern parts
of the Congo that they are present in really large numbers. The
fact that the densest concentration of these tools falls in the forest
zone, where many have been encountered in modern clearings, as
well as on tracks and in a variety of diggings, argues that they were
discarded in the process of temporary clearance of the ground for
raising crops, in the manner practised in the same region down to
modern times. What crops were grown is still unknown, but
modern analogy might suggest yams, more than one species of
which is native to the region. Cultivation today is simply
effected by removing the eyes from tubers and planting them in
plots temporarily cleared from the forest to admit light: as the
yield declines after a year or two the plots are abandoned and new
ones cleared; this process, practised in the past, would naturally
have led to a wide distribution of discarded axeheads. The
excavation of rock-shelters in French Guinea and Ghana has
shown that the people who first adopted polished stone axes also
made pottery with impressed decoration and possessed a lithic
industry of Late Stone Age type with lunate microliths, backed
blades and some chisel-ended arrowheads. The upper levels at the
Bosumpra cave at Abetifi, Ghana, testify that in due course these
same people adopted iron-working and made more advanced
pottery decorated with grooves. Recent discoveries in alluvial
tin-workings at Nok and other localities in Nigeria have brought
to light a series of remarkable terracottas of Negroid type (Pl. V),
                                 115                            5-2
                ANCIENT     EGYPT     AND   AFRICA

which appear to belong precisely to the time when iron tools were
beginning to supplement ones of polished stone.

The diffusion of iron-working
   The first community in Africa to make general use of iron tools
seems to have been at Carthage, founded near the site of modern
Tunis by Phoenicians from Tyre at a date set traditionally at
814/13 B.c. From Carthage the new technology spread to the
borders of Cyrenaica by the end of the sixth century B.c. The
ancient Egyptians made no general move to adopt iron until
subjected to intensive Greek influence under the Saite or Twenty-
sixth Dynasty around the middle of the sixth century B.c., but it
was ultimately from Egypt that iron metallurgy spread far and
wide over central and southern Africa. The immediate source of
diffusion was probably Meroe, fifty miles or so above the con-
fluence of the Nile and the Atbara, and which served as capital of
the kingdom of Nubia or Ethiopia from the fifth century B.c. to
the third century A.D. From this centre iron-working seems to
have spread westward along the steppe corridor between the
Sahara and the forest belt, where, as at Abetifi, it was adopted by
the local Late Stone Age people, and southward by way of East
and central Africa.
   The southward spread of iron-working came with immigrants,
many of whom were probably Bantu-speaking. Everywhere they
brought with them a high standard of potting and also the practice
of agriculture, generally associated with stock-raising. Various
millets were cultivated, together with ground nuts and peas, all of
them derived from wild species indigenous to Africa and each,
together with maize introduced by the Portuguese, still cultivated
by Africans to-day. Although compelled through ignorance or
lack of manure to shift their cultivation at frequent intervals, the
prehistoric farmers found it worthwhile to terrace valley slopes
for their crops. Already before the end of the first millennium
A.D. the Arabs, who controlled trade in the Indian Ocean until
                                116
             THE   LATER   PREHISTORY       OF   AFRICA

they were displaced in the sixteenth century by the Portuguese,
had established trading-posts on the east coast of central Africa.
From these they were able to draw precious substances like ivory,
gold and presumably copper in exchange for such things as cloth
and beads of Indian manufacture. One result of this trade and of
the contacts which it involved was the adoption among the Bantu
peoples of building in dry-stone technique. The commonest
structures of which the ruins confront us today were clusters of
round huts in irregular enclosures. One of the most impressive of
these kraals at Zimbabwe, Southern Rhodesia, was built on such
a scale as to attract the misleading designation of ‘temple’. Other
outstanding structures are best interpreted as forts, and many of
these were doubtless erected against the Portuguese colonists.

European exploration and colonization
   South of the Nile Valley and of the strip of territory north of the
Sahara, which were successively absorbed into the Roman Empire
and, in the mid-seventh century, overrun by the Moslem religion
and the Arabic language, the greater part of the continent of
Africa was brought within the range of civilization through
maritime exploration from without. Between them the moun-
tainous country of Abyssinia and the Sahara imposed formidable
barriers to the expansion of civilization overland, even if we must
not overlook the influence of camel-riding Moslems in the forma-
tion of the ancient kingdoms of the western Sudan. On the east
it was Arab traders who controlled the Indian Ocean and through
their trading stations on the coast created a market and so
stimulated mining activities in the interior. On the west it was not
until the middle of the fifteenth century that the Portuguese under
the lead of Henry the Navigator emulated the voyage undertaken
around 450 B.c. by Hanno the Carthaginian and reached the
Senegal; the first European settlement was effected in Guinea in
1481; in 1488 Batholomew Diaz rounded the Cape of Good Hope
and ten years later Vasco da Gama crossed the Indian Ocean to
                                 117
                ANCIENT     EGYPT      AND   AFRICA

Calcutta. Within the next few years the Portuguese wrested
control of the Indian Ocean from the Arabs and established their
influence on the east as well as on the west coast of Africa. When
in due course the Dutch gained maritime supremacy they founded
a station at the Cape and so inaugurated the European settlement
of South Africa.
   Down to the beginning of the nineteenth century Europeans
occupied only comparatively small areas of what is now the Cape
province. The prehistory of large parts of central and East Africa
were first brought to an end during the latter part of the century,
through the extension of exploration, missionary endeavour,
trade, settlement and government administration. It is well to
remember that at a time when North Americans and Europeans
were already riding in railway trains and reading newspapers the
Bushmen of South Africa were still practising a culture in many
respects comparable with those existing during Neothermal times
in the northern temperate zone. Even today the Bushmen of the
Kalahari and the pygmies of the equatorial forests maintain a
basically ‘Mesolithic’ mode of life, modified by barter with their
agricultural neighbours. Of even greater relevance to our times is
the circumstance that many of the Africans working in mines
operated by Europeans return to families whose general way of
life recalls that prevailing in Britain during the earlier part of the
pre-Roman Iron Age.




                                 118
