the first appearance of Advanced Palaeolithic culture, with which
indeed it seems to have been intimately connected. Quite clearly
the immense and accelerating advances in social evolution of the
last 50,000 years must, though conferring biological advantages in
the sense of permitting greater fullness and security of life, have
been independent of organic evolution; indeed it could be argued
that in certain respects cultural evolution may have been achieved
at some cost to man’s purely physical endowment.
   The ability to learn, on which culture depends, is widespread in
the natural world. In man this ability is not only more developed,
                                 255
                          RETROSPECT

but, thanks to speech, social institutions and, beyond the stage
of complexity termed civilization, to writing, advances made
by individuals can be absorbed into the traditional lore trans-
mitted from one generation to another. The cultural endowment
of humanity thus persistently grows. This occurs even though the
centre of cultural advance may shift and certain areas undergo
more or less pronounced cultural regression. Moreover, the
advance is not merely cumulative but tends to gain in momentum,
so that the advances of the last five thousand years exceed those
of the previous fifty thousand and are in turn eclipsed in many
respects by those of the last fifty. All this goes to emphasize the
immense importance of transmission or of what in modern
society we would speak of as the educational process.
    Much of the mounting weight of knowledge transmitted to
successive generations can be viewed as no more than the accom-
paniment of economic and technological advance, part of the
cultural apparatus by which men made themselves more effective
as biological organisms. There remain spheres of knowledge or
awareness which, though not immediately concerned with making
life more abundant for mankind in general, have been of supreme
importance to individual men and as a matter of fact, through their
influence on social life have ultimately served to enhance bio-
logical effectiveness. I refer to self-knowledge, awareness of
limitations in relation to others and apprehension of unseen
powers, qualities that differentiate human personality from those
of organisms wholly regulated by instinctive appetites and drives.
A crucial moment in the growth of personal awareness was
reached with the symbolic recognition of death as the fate of the
individual, and for this there is no evidence before the onset of
the last major glaciation, when Neanderthaloid people began to
give careful burial to the dead and deposited objects with them
for use after death. The first sign of aesthetic awareness, evidenced
by personal adornment and graphic art, two of the leading features
of Advanced    Palaeolithic culture, was delayed until the ap-
                                256
                           RETROSPECT

pearance of Homo sapiens in his fully developed form. Advanced
Palaeolithic art, particularly that applied to the walls and ceilings
of caves, is further revealing for the clear indications it gives of a
belief in magic, a belief that by going through prescribed motions
it is possible automatically to activate supernatural forces for the
accomplishing of human desires. It is in the Advanced Palaeo-
lithic art that we first encounter representations of human beings,
representations which though primarily intended as symbols of
fertility were nevertheless endowed with genuine human feelings
(frontispiece). The first portrayals of definite individuals are those
modelled in clay on human skulls from the earlier Proto-Neolithic
level at Jericho (Pl. II). This is particularly appropriate because it
was precisely at this critical juncture in human history that men
were beginning to enter an era marked by a progressive widening
of the range of social choice, a factor which together with the
adoption of settled life made for an increasing variation of cultural
style and expression.
   The growth of urban civilizations involved a progressive
elaboration of social organization, an ever greater subdivision of
economic and social functions and an increasingly complex nexus
of rights and obligations or, to put it another way, a growing
burden of ethical demands. Although individuals were nominally
free to reject these, they were under strong pressure to conform;
indeed, a certain standard of conformity was necessary if societies
were to cohere and survive in the face of internal stresses and
external competition, and it must be supposed that those societies
were favoured in the struggle for survival which most effectively
harnessed the energies of outstanding individuals to the overriding
social purpose of maintaining cultural continuity. Customary
constraints operated in part through family upbringing and the
complex net-work of social institutions and in part through his-
torical lore enshrined for most of human history in oral traditions;
but behind all these was the force of supernatural sanctions
embodied in religion.
    10                           257                            cP
                           RETROSPECT

   Speculations about the origins and earliest history of religion
based solely on what ethnologists have been able to discover
about the peoples of simpler culture living in our own time are
no longer held of much account, since the primitive stages must
have been passed through thousands of years ago under quite
different historical circumstances. On the other hand the archaeo-
logical traces relate solely to overt manifestations. As a working
hypothesis it may be assumed that awareness of superhuman
powers and of the need to establish some relation with them formed
part and parcel of the emergence of something that we can recog-
nize as human personality: the more consciously aware prehistoric
man became of his predicament, the more anxious he would have
been to resolve it. The most pressing anxiety, or at least the one
which elicited the first overt response, seems as we have already
emphasized to have been the full realization of death as a personal
fate. The careful disposal of the dead by Neanderthal man initiated
funeral rituals which down to our own day have served to re-
assure the living: the material settings of these rituals varied
according to the economic level reached, from shallow graves
scooped out of earlier cave deposits to the Pyramids of Egypt,
the royal graves of Ur or Mycenae, or the timber-lined shaft-graves
of the Altai; but their purpose        remained   fundamentally    the
same. Others of the main anxieties, those relating to subsistence
and reproduction, found their first expression in the figurines of
pregnant women and the representations of game animals ac-
companied by weapons and other signs on the walls and ceilings
of caves, attributable to various groups of Advanced Palaeolithic
hunters in Europe. The cult of the generative forces embodied in
various symbols of the male and female principles was a persisting
element in prehistoric culture that in due course became embodied
in the religious traditions of the great literate civilizations of man-
kind. In the same way subsistence continued to form the object
of religious preoccupation. Among agricultural peoples the
vegetative principle and forces powerfully affecting this, such as
                                 258
                           RETROSPECT

the sun, grew increasingly important and, together with fertility
and death, contributed most powerfully to the organized religions
that first grew up in the earliest civilizations of western Asia.
    Archaeology of itself can hardly answer the question, so often
raised, whether the concept of an overall, supreme power or god
appeared relatively late as the final outcome of a long evolution
or whether, as Wilhelm Schmidt and his followers have main-
tained, the notion of a transcendent deity was apprehended by
primitive man. Even if it were possible to study the oral traditions
of the pre-literate societies of remote antiquity, it is doubtful how
explicit an answer would be forthcoming, since it was of the
essence of primitive religion to be nebulous; clarification had to
wait on abstract formulation of speculative thought of the kind
first achieved by the philosophical schools of advanced literate
societies. The realities of religion among primitive peoples must
surely have resided in the ritual by which they assuaged their more
pressing anxieties and in the acts of worship by which they sought
to establish relations with supernatural forces; and these, whether
recognized as stemming from a deity or not, certainly manifested
themselves in a multiplicity of outward appearances. Of the
existence of ritual practices as far back as the middle of the Late
Pleistocene archaeology offers abounding evidence, more parti-
cularly of those concerning burial of the dead. Traces of the earliest
worship are more elusive, partly because at a certain level reli-
gions can hardly be separated from magical practices and partly
because of the difficulty of distinguishing for example between
sacred and profane structures or between votive offerings and
hoards buried for security. The first certain evidence for domestic
shrines and public temples comes from the earliest fixed settlements
of western Asia. In this region it can be said that the earliest cities
grew up with temples at their cores and that the earliest citizens
conceived themselves to be subjects of gods and members of
temple communities. Indeed it seems to have been for the purpose
of maintaining temple records that writing was first devised, as if
                                  259                          10-2
                          RETROSPECT

to emphasize that the earliest civilizations were as much the pro-
ducts of religion as of technology;    each in its own way served to
enhance the biological effectiveness of society, the former by
relieving tensions that would otherwise impede its smooth
working, the latter by improving the degree of control over
physical environments.
   To the individuals who comprise human societies the effect of
social evolution has been to enrich the quality of their lives. The
cultural endowment of mankind has become more variegated,
both in respect of the range of potential functions within indi-
vidual societies and on account of wider divergencies between the
form and style of different communities; and this occurred at a
time when men were becoming more keenly aware, both aesthetic-
ally and intellectually, of the nature and possibilities of their sur-
roundings. One of the most significant lines of progress in
human evolution has been a growth in the appreciation of the past
and the future. The whole possibility of economic advance has
been bound up with the notion of deferring immediate satisfaction
in the expectation of future benefits, as when seed corn was pre-
served even in times of famine to ensure the next crop; hard labour
sunk in extensive workings in the hope of reaching ores; or when
distant voyages were undertaken in the hope of trade or discovery.
Indeed one can say that speculation or prediction, whether in the
economic or purely intellectual fields, are among the most signifi-
cant attributes of man, serving to differentiate him increasingly
from the brutes. Again, the transmission of culture has been made
possible by storing up experience of the past; much of this com-
munal memory has in course of time been so to speak built into
the structure of society, for example into the means of production,
but a body of explicit tradition must also have been transmitted
largely by word of mouth. Most peoples at a simple level of
culture transmit mythological stories purporting to account for
outstanding features of their social organization, technology and
even physical surroundings. Stories of this kind served at once
                                 260
                           RETROSPECT

to invest the existing usages of the community with ancestral
sanctions and to enhance the feelings of solidarity of those
subscribing to them. In literate communities these functions
are to a large degree performed by histories: indeed the major
political and cultural units of the modern world owe their very
existence to awareness of their common pasts. This is why pre-
history, the only kind of history capable of being shared by men of
all levels of cultural attainment, whether heirs of ancient literate
traditions or only recently preliterate, is so peculiarly relevant to
a world which from the standpoint of science and technology is
already one.




                                261
