                          PREFACE

The object of this book is to present a brief outline of man’s
prehistoric past. The varying intensity of archaeological research
in different parts of the world, the author’s unequal reading and
the insistent progress of knowledge, which modifies conclusions
almost before they can be set down, all help to distort the picture.
Yet, as a teacher, the author is aware that even an imperfect text
may have its uses, more especially to those prepared to adventure
more widely in the literature of the subject.
   In a volume of this scope and size an author has no choice but
to state conclusions without being able to argue his case in any
detail or even, save on occasion, to specify alternatives or do more
than indicate the very extensive areas of uncertainty which enve-
lope his subject. The present author trusts that where his inter-
pretation differs without explanation from that of some authorities
cited at the end of this volume, the nature and limitations of his
book will be remembered. One of the pleasures of preparing it
has been the stimulus to read more widely, and the author acknow-
ledges the benefits he has received in this way.
   In seeing the book into print the author has received valuable
help and criticism from members of the staff of the University Press.
   Permission to publish photographs has been kindly given by
the following: the University Museum of Archaeology and
Ethnology and the Museum of Classical Archaeology at Cam-
bridge; the Cambridge University Press; Messrs Thames and
Hudson; Dr K. M. Kenyon; the Museum of National Antiquities,
St Germain; the Oriental Institute, Chicago; the Museum, Jos,
Nigeria; the National Museum, Copenhagen; and the State
Historical Museum, Stockholm.
   Finally, the author would like to acknowledge the skill and
understanding with which Mrs Ruth Daniel has drawn the maps.
PETERHOUSE, CAMBRIDGE                         GRAHAME       CLARK
August 1960
                            a,
                            x         be             A       ")

                            aie                     bs                    a




           i    j           iia                 |        a        a       7   ?     :   A



       a
               ot       4Aerie oe                                             ais ane
    pu Aly
                      .
      maeag
                            f                                         7
                                                                  Ter
                                                                                    y       mi
                                                                                    te                  :




                            % My
                            tk         :        =
                            :              ry
                                at     a



                     Fi ni Ay
                kenneironte «run
                       ae ee ia) brbeltalt a
    Clidllng:                      angen pe‘wer wip ailsorelgy aan
    some yiien nrld 42 + Nate te Riecin
                                        ang
    ior o7tl vitnit                   a> ud 54a: Ashi                               avd          de
\          {Viet                            Wh ‘nado                          tt “enya
                    Le ey   ihe: *aeges Ws               ented                    hy QUEM             quel
                    Wet ewagle, (ell qumopce’), aebaki; n
                    wit              lias            avoreaidase (vituegninaeahe
                                                                                                             y
                                                                  D               retin? UaseheSy
                                                                              elites        14 egal f
                                                                                  lea?                masa
                                                                          f       & diuny7 * stabtses
                                                                          itl igh a                   ih opie
                    INTRODUCTION

The idea that human history began when the first hominids pro-
claimed their humanity by making tools according to socially
transmitted patterns is one that has only taken shape during the
hundred years or so since Darwin published The Origin of Species.
It had of course been realized much earlier that something could
be learned about times before the earliest written records by
diligent study of monuments and other material traces, though to
begin with antiquarians were mainly concerned with traces of
classical or medieval civilization. By the end of the eighteenth
century archaeology had already begun to be applied systemati-
cally to a study of the prehistoric, as well as the historic, ages of
man. A close relationship can indeed be observed between the
development of men’s ideas about the biological world and about
their own earliest history, and it may be said that scientific enquiry
killed the idea that history was limited to the span of literate
tradition as surely as it did the dogma of the fixity of species.
   The first systematic attempts to classify archaeological data
were both evolutionary in conception and show very clearly the
impact on the study of human history of ideas that had been
stirring in the realm of biology since the days of Buffon. C. J.
Thompsen’s Three Age System (1836) was based on the succession
of stone, bronze and iron as the leading raw materials for tools and
weapons; and Sven Nilsson’s (1838-43) classification was based
on a supposed progression from a hunter-fisher mode of life to
that of literate civilization by way of herding and cultivation.
These and later attempts to grade prehistoric societies in terms of
evolutionary development owed much to the observation of
modern primitive peoples. In much the same way, it was the
opportunities for studying nature at work gained on Darwin’s
journey with the Beagle and Wallace’s travels in the Malay
                                  I
                         INTRODUCTION
