    Social Theory and
      Archaeology
     MICHAEL SHANKS AND
     CHRISTOPHER TILLEY




UNIVERSITY OF NEW MEXICO PRESS
           Albuquerque
Copyright © by Michael Shanks and Christopher Tilley, 1987
All rights reserved.
First published 1987 by Polity Press in association with Basil Blackwell.

Published in the United States of America 1988
by the University of New Mexico Press.

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Data applied for.




Printed in Great Britain
                       Contents


PREFACE                                         vii

1 THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                1
  Theoretical archaeology: a preliminary
    and conventional outline                     1
  Archaeological theory: method                  5
  Archaeology as theoretical practice           25

2 SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY                            29
  Social archaeology: a textual critique        29
  Social archaeology: a summary                 51
  Social archaeology and a logic of necessity   54
  A logic of contingency                        57

3 THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL                 61
  Archaeology and the individual                61
  Social practice and structure                 71
  Power                                         72
  The symbolic                                  73
  Ideology and subjectivity                     75

4 MATERIAL CULTURE                               79
  Types, culture and cognition                   79
  Style and function                             86
  History, structure and material culture        95
  Studying material culture                     105
  Conclusion                                    116

5 TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                          118
  The time of chronology                        118
Vi                            CONTENTS

     Bailey in the aporiai of temporal landscape     120
     Chronology and its origins                      125
     Time and praxis                                 126

6    SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE            137
     Social change and social system                 138
     Socio-cultural evolution: change
       and development                               143
     Marxism, structural, Marxism and
       evolutionary change                           165
     Beyond evolution: the social texture
       of change                                     175
     Conclusion: specificity and change              185

7 ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY             186
  The emergence of a critically self-conscious
    archaeology                                      186
  Criticism and archaeological practice              194
  Intellectual labour and the socio-political role
    of the archaeologist                             201
  Conclusion                                         208

APPENDIX                                             209
  Notes Towards a New Problematic
  1. Archaeology and theory                          209
  2. The social and the individual                   209
  3. Materialculture                                 210
  4. Time and archaeology                            211
  5. Social change                                   212
  6. The form and politics of theory                 212

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING                      214

REFERENCES                                           217

INDEX                                                235
                          Preface


Archaeologists for the first time in the history of the discipline are
beginning to be faced with a wide variety of different theoretical
perspectives on the past. The majority of these have only emerged
during the last seven years and are currently having a major impact
in breaking down the theoretical hegemony of positivism and
functionalism which formed the twin pillars of 'new' archaeology.
Despite the growing plethora of theories, archaeology still remains
today a deeply empiricist and antitheoretical discipline. Yet it is
quite clear that after 150 years of empiricism in one form or
another we still have little more than a rudimentary understanding
of the archaeological past. No amount of excavation, survey,
ethnoarchaeological work or so-called 'middle-range' empiricism
will cure the perceived fundamental isolation of past from present.
This gap can only be dealt with adequately if we develop conceptual
tools and theoretical structures with which to reinscribe the past
into the present, to realize their interaction. This book is intended
as an advanced introduction to some current debates which may
help to achieve that goal.
   The impetus to the development of fresh theoretical perspectives
in archaeology has come almost entirely from outside the discipline
and has brought archaeology into increasingly closer contact with
wider debates in social theory. In the format of a single book we
have neither attempted, nor do we claim, any degree of compre-
hensive coverage. Instead we have chosen to discuss a limited
number of key areas for the reconstruction of archaeological
theory. In the first chapter we discuss what theory in archaeology
should be about, criticize the reduction of theory to methodology,
and consider the dominant forms of textual production in contem-
porary archaeology. Chapters 2 and 3 consider the competing
theoretical discourses of recent social archaeology, and the
Viii                          PREFACE

relationship of the individual to society. Chapters 4, 5 and 6 focus
on key areas that have been quintessentially archaeological
concerns: the relationship of material culture to the social and the
study of change over long time spans. Here the relative lack of
theorization in the discipline has been quite striking - we might
expect a discipline whose primary data base is material culture to
have a developed theory of its meaning and significance. Similarly,
archaeologists, although dealing with long time spans, have little
questioned the concept of time, and reductionist, essentialist and
ethnocentric notions of social evolution have long been dominant.
If we achieve little more in this book we hope at least to initiate
further conceptualization and debate in these vital areas. Chapter 7
situates archaeology as a cultural practice firmly in the present and
argues that it needs to become fully self-reflexive, aware of itself as
political practice. We do not think it either possible or desirable to
attempt to achieve a fresh unification of archaeological theory
within one all-encompassing framework. The only essential unity
we propose is that all archaeology ought to be cultural critique, a
practice both produced in the present and contributing to the
present. Archaeological discourse is a form of power while at the
same time being the study of power. The final chapter sets out in a
formal way a number of theses which we regard as essential to the
development of a fresh problematic for the discipline.
   The book is partly based on two joint undergraduate and graduate
seminar courses given in the Department of Archaeology, University
of Cambridge, during the spring and autumn of 1986. We would like
to thank those people who kindly agreed to chair the seminars:
 Robin Boast, Grant Chambers, Ian Hodder, Matthew Johnson,
Sandar van de Leeuw, Olivier de Montmillon, Ajay Pratrap, Colin
 Renfrew; and all those who participated in them and contributed to
the debate. Parts of chapters 6 and 7 were also presented and
discussed at the University of Tromso. Michael Shanks would like
to thank his history class of 1986-7 for their support. Grant
Chambers, Tony Giddens, Ian Hodder and Mike Rowlands all
 kindly provided detailed comments on the text and suggested
 valuable improvements.
                                 1

       Theory and Method in
           Archaeology

THEORETICAL ARCHAEOLOGY: A PRELIMINARY AND
           CONVENTIONAL OUTLINE

Theory has been an important issue in archaeology since the 1960s
and has taken the form of a contentious field of polemical
manoeuvring within the discipline and between archaeology and
other social sciences. In his essay, 'Archaeology: the loss of
innocence' (1973), David Clarke, a seminal figure in British
theoretical archaeology, specified different aspects of theory. He
distinguished a theory of concepts from a theory of information
and a theory of reasoning, terming these respectively archae-
ological metaphysics, epistemology and archaeological logic
and explanation. For Clarke these three aspects are overlain and
permeated by a series of other levels of archaeological theory; these
are steps in archaeological interpretation. Predepositional and
depositional theory considers the relationships between activities,
social patterning, and environmental factors and the traces
deposited in the archaeological record. Postdepositional theory
considers what happens to the deposited traces: processes such as
destruction, erosion and disturbance. Retrieval theory is predomi-
nantly a theory of the sampling of the surviving deposited traces in
excavation and fieldwork. Analytical theory is concerned with
retrieved information and its processing; interpretative theory
considers how the traces relate to their ancient social and
environmental sources which are not now open to direct observation
and experience.
   The literature on most of these aspects of theoretical archaeology
is quite sizeable. Most of the concepts of traditional archaeology,
such as 'culture' and 'diffusion', have been challenged, found
wanting and replaced (e.g. Shennan, 1978; Renfrew, 1978). New
2              THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY
archaeology in America favoured an explicitly systemic conceptu-
alization of the archaeological past focusing on culture systems
adapting to environmental factors (e.g. Binford, 1965; Flannery,
 1968). In Britain the new conceptual framework of the 1970s
mirrored more functionalist anthropology with organically con-
ceived social systems functioning within environmental milieux (see
chapter 2). Since the late 1970s attention has been channelled to the
boundaries of such systems. The idea of interaction between social
units has developed into theories of peer polity interaction
(Renfrew and Cherry (eds), 1986) and world systems theory
(Gledhill and Rowlands, 1982). Varieties of neo-evolutionary
theory have been the most influential frameworks utilized to
account for mechanisms of social change, from simple unilineal
and stadial positions to more complex multilinear or epigenetic
theories (see chapter 6).
   In regard to the information that archaeology might reveal about
the past, the new archaeology initiated a new optimism that
archaeology was not confined to description of materials and
technologies with the social and ideological increasingly removed
from the reach of archaeological speculation: new archaeology was
constituted as a new theory of archaeological information whereby
it was to become anthropology (Binford, 1962).
   The theory of archaeological logic and explanatory structure has
been dominated by the consideration of hypothesis-based deductive
reasoning processes (involving subsuming particular occurrences
under generalizations) with an equivalence of prediction and explan-
ation (Fritz and Plog, 1970; Watson, LeBlanc and Redman, 1971).
The most influential aspect of such theory has been procedures of
rigorous and explicit testing of clearly formulated hypotheses,
known as problem-oriented research (Hill, 1972; Plog, 1974).
   In retrieval theory sampling procedures have been applied to
excavation and fieldwork (Cherry, Gamble and Shennan (eds),
1978; Mueller (ed.), 1975). Binford's middle-range theory aspires
to a statistical correlation of material culture patterning and social
behaviour (Binford, 1977; 1981). Schiffer's behavioural archaeology
(1976) aims at an analogous general theory, a science of material
culture patterning. Ethnoarchaeological and modern material
culture studies have investigated the relation of social patterning to
material culture and its deposition (e.g. Hodder, 1982; Gould (ed.),
1978; Gould, 1980; Gould and Schiffer (eds), 1981; Binford, 1978).
   New ways of processing data, in particular computer based, have
been developed in line with the developing range of new concepts,
aiming at extracting more subtle and precisely documented pat-
               THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                     3
terning in archaeological data (Doran and Hodson, 1975; Orton,
1980; Richards and Ryan, 1985).
   Two particular fields of interpretative theory can be briefly
mentioned here: theories of artefact exchange and prehistoric
exchange networks; and theories of the relation of mortuary
practices to the society which practised them. In the former,
different artefact distributions are interpreted in terms of changing
patterns of exchange between individuals and/or groups (Earle and
Ericson, 1977; Ericson and Earle, 1982); the latter considers the
traces of mortuary practices and the ritual deposition of artefacts in
terms of symbolic dimensions of social relations (see Chapman,
Kinnes and Randsborg (eds), 1981; and chapter 2 below).
   Clarke reckoned that the introspective fervour in archaeology of
the late 1960s and 1970s amounted to 'a precipitate, unplanned and
unfinished exploration of new disciplinary fieldspace .. . profound
practical, theoretical and philosophical problems to which the new
archaeologies have responded with diverse new methods, new
observations, new paradigms and new theory' (1973, p. 17).
Adapting Kuhn's notion Clarke identified four new paradigms
(1972, p. 5) (characterized as being systems of assumptions,
conventions, fields of concepts which specify data, significant
problems and exemplary solutions for a 'community' of
archaeologists): the morphological, anthropological, ecological
and geographical. So, according to Clarke, some archaeologists
focus on artefact systems, their specification and quantitative
derivation. Anthropological archaeologists consider the relation of
data to social patterning. Ecological archaeologists aim to delineate
palaeoenvironments and the place of human communities within
them. And archaeology's geographical paradigm is dominated by
locational and spatial analysis of settlement and artefact
distributions.
   These 'paradigms' have developed in criticism of, and in
addition to, archaeology's traditional paradigm - an artefact-
based, particularizing and qualitative archaeology aiming at a
culture history expressed in literary narrative cliches. The
theoretical developments have also been inextricably coupled with
technical advances forming the basis for, or arising in response to,
new theoretical orientations: lithic and ceramic analyses (including
trace element analysis); analysis of botanical, faunal, skeletal and
environmental material. All of these have refined and augmented
archaeological data quite considerably.
   Clarke conceived a unity or a logic behind this proliferation of
new archaeologies, approaches, theories, paradigms. It all
4                 THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY

amounted to the transformation from a self-conscious to a critically
self-conscious discipline. (See table 1.1.)
  Clarke's Analytical Archaeology (1968) was meant to provide a
general theory:

    Archaeology, is, after all, one discipline and that unity largely resides
    in the latent theory of archaeology - that disconnected bundle of
    inadequate subtheories which we must .seek to formulate and struc-
    ture within an articulated and comprehensive system; a common
    theoretical hat-rack for all our parochical hats.
                                                                (1973, p. 18)

Clarke's was essentially a positivist vision of a unified archaeology,
scientific progress precipitating the emergence of a scientific
archaeology from its pre-scientific anterior. This fundamentalist
vision of a scientific archaeology has been predominant in the
United States. There the emergence of the theoretically introspec-
tive new archaeology has been interpreted as a Kuhnian paradigm
shift; a major disciplinary change; the inauguration of a new period
of normal science; a new scientific hegemony (Martin, 1971;
Sterud, 1973, 1978; Zubrow, 1972).
   In Britain the positivism of the new archaeology has not achieved
anything like the acceptance it has had in the United States.
Traditional archaeology has successfully met the challenge. Its
empiricism has incorporated the methodology of explicit problem
posing and rigorous testing and came to appreciate the possibility
of archaeology acquiring a far wider range and a higher refinement
of data, while its scepticism has eschewed ideas of scientific objec-

       TABLE 1.1 Clarke's summary of the traditionalist and the
                         new archaeology

                                  Traditionalist              New
Philosophy                       Historical                   Experimental
Approach                        Qualitative                  Quantitative
                                Particularizing              Generalizing
Mode of expression              Literary                     Symbolic
                                Narrative                    Jargon
Attitude                        Isolationist                 Condisciplinary
                                Authoritarian                Anarchic

Source: Clark 1972, p. 54. Reprinted by permission of Methuen & Co.
               THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                     5
tivity and theoretical elaboration. So theory is still most frequently
conceived as abstract and secondary to data acquisition, different
fashions explaining the same data, while traditional archaeology's
explanations are based on common sense and natural language.
There has been work within an explicit systemic framework, most
notably by Colin Renfrew (1972), but social archaeology in Britain
has emerged predominantly as a soft functionalism, the offspring
of a colonialist anthropology.
   This hegemony of hard scientific fundamentalism, sceptical
empiricism and soft functionalism has received serious theoretical
challenges since the late 1970s. Some archaeologists have drawn on
structural Marxist anthropology and emphasized a conception of the
social which differs from functionalist models in stressing internal
contradiction rather than states of social equilibrium (see Spriggs
(ed.), 1984). Structuralist and contextual archaeologists have
emphasized the meaning and symbolic dimensions of social
practices, stressing the culturally specific and variable meanings
of material culture rather than simply concentrating on its pattern-
ing supposedly 'explained' within a framework of reductionist
cross-cultural generalization (e.g. Hodder (ed.), 1982; Hodder,
1986). Other archaeologists have begun to examine archaeological
work and explanations in the context of contemporary capitalism,
critically assessing the ideology of archaeology (Shanks and Tilley,
1987; Miller and Tilley (eds), 1984). However, these challenges are
only beginning to be widely acknowledged.
   Fragmentation, specialization, divergent approaches, 'para-
digms', theories of the social: different archaeologies. Rather
than enter this labyrinth and perhaps identify the most likely
archaeological exit, we intend instead to take a different line. We
aim to ask the meaning of the fragmentation, the significance of
the theoretical hegemony; to ask what theory itself might be; to
assess the questions 'theoretical' archaeology has been posing; to ask
what questions should be posed. So, in this chapter we wish to
begin with some Metatheoretical questions, questions about theory
itself.


          ARCHAEOLOGICAL THEORY: METHOD
The developments that have taken place in archaeology since the
1960s amount to a process of rationalization of the discipline, a
reaction to fact collection, the literary narrative, and unexamined
common-sense categories and concepts of traditional archaeology.
6              THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY
But this rationalization has, for the most part, taken the form of
methodological inquiry, a search for methods or approaches to the
data, which will give a better, more complete, more objective view
or account of the past. A valid method is conceived as being as
objective as possible (some would equate this with being scientific),
eliminating subjective bias. Approaches may vary as to what
aspects of the archaeological record they concentrate on, what
different patterns in the data they isolate and claim to explain, but
all must be objective, reasonable, realistic, based on the primacy of
the object of investigation. Concomitantly, the primary questions
of theory have been:

1  How to extract the maximum information from what is left of
  the past.
2 Which concepts are the most efficient at achieving the aim of
  establishing an objective past.
3 How to bring the archaeologist • into the closest possible
  accordance with the object of investigation; that is, with the
  artefact and its depositional context.

Discussions of social theory in archaeology have, until recently,
been very much undertaken in the context of these questions:
reference has been made to other social sciences for concepts which
might be applied to archaeological data in order to gain access to a
fuller and more reliable account of the past. The aim has been to
establish which social (or indeed other) concepts might be most
efficiently applied to archaeological data. For example, palaeo-
economy (Higgs (ed.), 1972, 1975) draws on biological and etho-
logical theories of evolution, conceiving these as more applicable to
archaeological data than social theory. Marxist archaeologists con-
ceive their conceptualization of the social context of artefacts as
more accurate than systems theory and social typologies of bands,
tribes etc. (e.g. Friedman and Rowlands, 1978; Bender, 1978).

                   Images of the archaeologist
Within this conceptualization of theory we can sketch two
dominant underlying images of the archaeologist: the archaeologist
as detective and the archaeologist as therapist.

The archaeologist as detective
The simile of archaeologist as detective is one not infrequently
employed in introductory texts and prefaces (e.g. de Paor, 1967;
                THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                       7
Clark, 1969) and is undoubtedly part of the popular mythology of
archaeology. The archaeologist pieces together clues in order to
reconstruct the past; the archaeologist is a Sherlock Holmes. The
major theme underlying Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes stories is
the expulsion of magic and mystery. Holmes, through the rigorous
application of his method, makes everything explicit, accountable,
subject to scientific analysis. Holmes, an obvious genius and man
of science, always manages somehow to stumble upon the
deduction which unravels the subtle connections between the clues.
The stories usually end with Holmes recounting with devastating
simplicity how the code of the clues was broken, how he eventually
arrived at his final and all-encapsulating deduction. What was
initially enigma, mystery, fascination, impossibility, becomes
dispelled by a simple explanation. The application of pure method
renders all the mysteries and the enigmas accountable in the burning
light of reason. Once the deductions are revealed the solution to the
mystery always appears absurdly simple, open to the commonest
common sense. Holmes' logic is applicable to all areas of human
experience: his ability to predict or 'read' even Dr Watson's
somewhat illogical trains of thought are repeatedly displayed.
Conan Doyle's books are a celebration of the power of empiricist
or positivist science - cold, calculating reason dispelling illusion,
eliminating subjectivity. They are also, of course, works of literary
fiction.
   The parallels with archaeology are readily apparent. The past,
initially mysterious and seemingly impossible to adequately grasp
or comprehend from mere fragments, can be reached, probed,
ultimately known, through the operation of scientific method.
Archaeologists are detectives travelling in the rattling carriages of
scientific logic, boarding the Flying Scotsman, steaming back to
discover the past to shatter the illusion, to tell everyone else, all the
non-archaeologists, how it really was: what happened and why,
what and who created the past leading to our present. But we all
know that it is really not that simple. If it was, we would already
have reached the past. We could stop writing archaeology books
and write science fiction instead - dream of the future. One great
problem with the future is that it has an annoying tendency to
always create new pasts. What has gone wrong with our logical
train of positivist science, of rationalized inquiry? Rather than
moving back into the past is it, in fact, shunting back and forth in a
siding? Do the rails, that we are sometimes told represent the logic
of a truly scientific methodology, represent a viable and coherent
route back to the past?
8              THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY


The archaeologist as therapist
Doing archaeology, the process of acquiring knowledge of the
archaeological object, has now become, with the advent of the new
archaeology, a therapeutic process. Various methods represent
various remedies, cures for pathological thinking, for contradiction
within the process of acquiring knowledge. Most theory in
archaeology today acts as a pharmacopoeia. The goal is to avoid
subjectivity, the pathology. Archaeological method instills health,
a healthy regard to the objective artefact. Each new approach,
systems theory to middle-range theory, is an implicit or explicit
remedy for the failings of the others.
   It is relevant and significant to consider the roots of
pharmacopoeia in the Greek Pharmakon meaning drug, cure,
remedy and poison. Pharmakon is related to pharmakeus and
pharmakos which mean, respectively, sorcerer or magician and one
sacrificed or executed as atonement or purification for others, a
scapegoat (cf. Derrida, 1981). Archaeological method consists of
shamanistic cures, exorcisms resulting in the expulsion of a
scapegoat, itself also poison, pollution, and remedy. Method aims
at an expulsion of the subjective whose absence supposedly
guarantees epistemological security. Yet method's curative powers
simultaneously poison the study of the past, riddling our practice
with dualisms - subject becomes split from object, fact from value,
past from present. Method is to provide psychological security that
we have eliminated ourselves in the present in order to return to the
past. By immersing us in the object world, method tries to alleviate
us from the burden of choice: choice of alternative meanings,
alternative pasts. Ultimately method wants to place the
archaeologist in the image of god, or alternatively as mindless
automaton: god because the archaeologist is supposedly able to
determine how the past was for once and all; automaton because all
that is required is an application of method - the archaeologist
becomes spiritual medium on earth, magical representative of the
absent creator of the past.


                      Method and objectivity
Methods are operations on the artefact, the object, the basis for
providing explanations. Ultimately everything becomes reduced to
the object. The data, the material traces, stand supreme. Ideas,
theories, hypotheses (call them what you will), are all refracted
from that great solid bedrock of archaeological data we all know
exists. Kick a megalith and it hurts! However, typologists know
                THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                     9
their megaliths in just the same sense as witch hunters know their
witches: both are social creations. Archaeology today amounts to
excavating and processing artefacts according to positivist rational
method. It does not matter which facts are subjected to
archaeology because what matters is the quality the objects
supposedly possess - objectivity. This is what the archaeologist is
after: objectivity conceived as abstract, in itself. The quality of the
object is considered not in concrete terms but abstractly or quanti-
tatively. Objectivity is abstract, uniform, neutral, because it exists
separately from the archaeologist, the observing subject. Objective
'facts' count and archaeological knowledge is thought to be entirely
dependent on them. They are, after all, hard physical reality. So
archaeological method (rational and objective) produces its object
in advance. Artefacts have meaning primarily as objectivity and
this is claimed to be the basis or origin of good archaeology.
   On most accounts archaeology becomes the perception and
experience of objectivity, the artefacts of the past. Such objectivity
is regarded as sacred, disembodied, essential, as constituting an
essence. The archaeological object is present to our senses, real,
with immediate proximity. Furthermore, the object as object is
regarded as being theory and value-free, in-itself, identical to
itself, transcendent. Objects become, in such a conception, archai
(originals), outward manifestations of implicit historical essence.
History is supposedly to be found in the archaeological object. The
artefact is a punctum, a punctual presence, piercing time; it is the
mark of history, the historical moment. Possess in consciousness
this absolute spiritual plenitude, this property, the past immediately
present with us, and you have history. This is a deference, a
deferment of meaning to the object. Write up this experience and
interpretation and theory can supposedly follow.

                       Theory, data, practice
Few archaeologists believe in induction any more. Some, following
a reading of Popper (1959), have suggested that an earlier advocacy
of verification procedures must now give way to falsification (see
Renfrew, Rowlands and Segraves (eds), 1982, section I). Most
realize that facts are selected and that research must be problem
orientated; facts only answer the questions the archaeologist asks
of them. Paradigms have been discussed at length (Meltzer, 1979;
Binford and Sabloff, 1982) and there is a growing realization that
data are theory-laden. However, this has made very little difference
to archaeology. There is still a wide consensus in the belief in
'objective reality' or the archaeological record.
10             THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY
   Consider Fowler's Approaches to Archaeology (1977), a relatively
sophisticated introduction to 1970s British sceptical empiricism. In
a chapter entitled 'Theoretical archaeology' he claims that 'all
archaeology is theoretical' (p. 131). He argues that theory is involved
from the beginning of the archaeological process, emphasizing
'models', defined as conscious and unconscious mental frame-
works applied to the data: 'archaeological evidence does not mean
anything' (p. 132), because it is dependent on the models applied by
the archaeologist. The corollary is that 'there is no ultimate, finite
truth revealed by archaeological evidence... all interpretation of it
is relative' (p. 138). What remains in Fowler's text is an assertion of
the primacy of the data, archaeological information to which
theory and models are merely 'applied': 'whatever the theory, in
the last resort quality of interpretation depends on the quality of
the evidence' (p. 152). Fowler goes further in relating quality of the
evidence to the 'quality of the archaeologist' (p. 152). Data are,
after all, retrieved in the practice of excavation and theory can,
perhaps, be quietly forgotten.
   This position regards concrete practical method as operating on
the archaeological record. In such a framework methods,
approaches, are the means of doing archaeology, and
archaeological theory has all too often come to refer to this 'real
world' of archaeological practice. A hierarchy is implied:

         Excavation
         Data processing         Technique; method
         Synthesis
         Interpretation
         Theory

Such a common-sense conception of 'theory' is of a system of
ideas, concepts or statements, abstract rather than empirical, held
to constitute an explanation or account of archaeological
phenomena and essentially separate from those phenomena.
Traditional archaeology has frequently taken an attitude that
theory detracts from the real business of archaeology. Its quietude
on matters of theory results not so much from a rejection of
philosophical underpinnings but rather from a largely silent
consensus around empiricist norms. A general characteristic of
empiricism, whether the 'straight empiricism' of fact collection and
subsequent description and interpretation, or in the positivist shape
of hypothetico-deductive testing procedures advocated in the new
archaeology, is that theoretical reflection is always systematically
               THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                     11
discouraged in favour of the primacy of facts or methodologies
geared to producing such facts. However, this suspicion of theory is
ultimately itself a philosophical statement of priorities emerging in
the guise of a supposedly common-sense embargo on useless
speculation regarded as being a diversion from day-to-day practical
work (see e.g. Flannery, 1982). This is a non-sense. Any argument
that theory is irrelevant to archaeology is itself theoretical, as is
another 'common-sense' proposition that the world consists of a
series of observable facts whose regularities and interrelationships
can only be known through observation - that the external visible
aspects of artefacts exhaust their meaning.
   In the new archaeology theory is similarly regarded as abstract
and parasitic on method. It can sometimes be useful, but any
theory which relates to the real practice of archaeology in any other
way than by strengthening and perfecting the possibilities for
technique and method is considered dogmatic, irrelevant or mere
fantasy (Schiffer, 1981). Theory can have only one relevance to
practice: perfecting method. Does it work? The question asked of
us all will be: 'but what does this look like in practice?' Theory
must be 'applied' to archaeological 'reality'. But this very notion of
'application' presupposes the gap between theory and practice as
always already a problem. Ultimately the relation can only be
conceived as arbitrary, contingent or incidental. Social theory, for
example, is relevant to archaeology: it provides new models and
categories which may be applied to the archaeological object world.
We find patterning of structures of power and hierarchy in the
neolithic where before there were tribal chiefdoms, where there
were cultures and before that druids. After all, we know that we are
not simply digging up objects: they must be related to their social
context - eventually - or otherwise we regress into antiquarianism.
However, the real practice of archaeology always tends to be
separated from theory. This split is one homologous with that
between mental and manual labour, decision and execution, ends
and means. It is a split running throughout the capitalist division of
labour. An emphasis on methodology is one on logistics,
administration, management, surveillance: defining that which is
'reasonable', asserting realistic limits and goals to archaeological
practice.
   The effects of this relationship of theory to practice are familiar:
isolated empirical, 'expert' studies; intensive empirical special-
ization accompanying efforts to divest concepts of empirical
content; mathematical operations; use of catastrophe theory
(Renfrew, 1978a); emphasis on the formulation of laws of culture
12                  THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY

process or high-level generalization. All aim to provide an intuition
of the essence of prehistory - its objectivity, its essential meaning,
order and logic. But the essence so arrived at is not that different
from the mythical essence of prehistory implied by ley-lines and
megalith builders arriving from outer space. A rabid empiricism
accompanies idealism and fantasy because empiricism is little more
than an idealism of the object. Furthermore, all choice between
competing archaeologies, alternative pasts, is suspended in a
proliferation of archaeologies, a pluralism allowing comparison
only on the terms of a conception of method which decides means
of application, of execution, but not ends: there can be no
comment on the social, political and philosophical meaning of
particular archaeologies, particular pasts.

                           Idealism, fantasy, text
As a way forward into further specifying and investigating these
effects of a coupling of empiricism and idealism found in
contemporary archaeology, it is interesting to consider a fantasy by
Jorge Luis Borges. In 'Tlon, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius' (1981) he re-
counts his (fictional) discovery of an encyclopaedia which
catalogues the planet Tlon, a reality of complete idealism.

     Centuries and centuries of idealism have not failed to influence reality.
     In the most ancient regions of Tlon, the duplication of lost objects is
     not infrequent. Two persons look for a pencil; the first finds it and
     says nothing; the second finds a second pencil, no less real, but closer
     to his expectations. These secondary objects are called hronir and
     are, though awkward in form, somewhat longer. Until recently, the
     hronir were the accidental products of distraction and forgetfulness.
     It seems unbelievable that their methodological production dates
     back scarcely a hundred years, but this is what the Eleventh Volume
     tells us. The first efforts were unsuccessful. However, the modus
     operandi merits description. The director of one of the state prisons
     told his inmates that there were certain tombs in an ancient river bed
     and promised freedom to whoever might make an important
     discovery. During the months preceding the excavation the inmates
     were shown photographs of what they were to find. This first effort
     proved that expectation and anxiety can be inhibitory; a week's work
     with pick and shovel did not manage to unearth anything in the way
     of a hron except a rusty wheel of a period posterior to the
     experiment. But this was kept secret and the process was repeated
     later in four schools. In three of them the failure was almost
     complete; in the fourth (whose director died accidentally during the
     first excavations) the students unearthed - or produced - a gold
                THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                        13
  mask, an archaic sword, two or three clay urns and the mouldy and
  mutilated torso of a king whose chest bore an inscription which it has
  not yet been possible to decipher . . . The methodical fabrication of
  hr&nir (says the Eleventh Volume) has performed prodigious services
  for archaeologists. It has made possible the interrogation and even
  the modification of the past, which is now no less plastic and docile
  than the future.
                                                 (Borges, 1981, pp. 37-8)

Peeling back the layers of text in this fantasy, we might say the
following about archaeology. Traditional and new archaeology
represent a desire for the past in itself and for itself; a desire for an
objective past, for primary originary objectivity, the essence of the
past, the essential meaning, an ideal presence of the past. The past
is to be perceived by the autonomous archaeologist whose subjec-
tivity is to be marginalized in a simple immediate experience and
expression of the past.
   This is an idealist fiction. The past cannot be exactly reproduced.
Exact reproduction is repetition, tautology, silence. The
archaeological past is not re-created as it was or in whatever
approximation. It is, of course, excavated away. As such, the
archaeological past must be written. We argue that it is vital to
realize the specific form and nature of this act of writing, this form
of the material production of the past. Objects are recovered in
excavation. They may be lodged and displayed in museums and
made to stand for the past of which they are a part (metonymy).
They also need to be enshrined in books (the exhortation to publish
excavations is common). The archaeological object and its context
are both described and represented in the informational report
(metaphor). Museum and text represent metonymy and metaphor.
These are not neutral vehicles for an ideal presence of the past;
equally, they are not simply rhetorical detours to a picture of the
past. We have argued elsewhere (Shanks and Tilley, 1987,
pp. 22-3) that fieldwork and excavation are not neutral instru-
ments for recovering the past. Their supposed passive observation
and conceptual detachment with regard to the past, equated with
objectivity, is rooted in a particular vision of time, a spatial time
(see chapter 5) which is treated as an independent variable
separating past (conceived as a problem) from a voyeuristic
present. This temporality has no way of coping with the personal,
active and productive (or destructive) experience of fieldwork and
excavation since 'what is historic in thought - the practice of
archaeology, our experience of digging - is equated with
irrelevance' (Shanks and Tilley, 1987, p. 23). We have also focused
14              THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY
(ibid., ch. 4) on the museum's aesthetic, its way of representing the
past, and have argued the way the past is presented is profoundly
part of what is represented. Forms of display, such as free-standing
sculpture and 'realistic' period settings, make statements about the
relation of artefacts to their social context and the manner in which
space, time and history are themselves conceived. So, we have
located the temporality of museum cases - where date, (an abstract
dimensional co-ordinate) is represented as the time of an artefact
- in the spatial and quantified time of capitalism where the factory
clock organizes routine and discipline of an alienated workforce.
The period room, essentially a visual inventory, represents history
as information and indicates that a meaningful understanding of
history may be gained through a window on the past where the
social meaning of artefacts is to be seen in their 'naturalistic' spatial
juxtaposition. We have questioned these and other meanings of the
museum's aesthetic. Analogous arguments can be presented
concerning archaeological writing, archaeological texts.
   The archaeological text is a medium for the inscription of
representations of artefacts and their meanings. The artefact and
its context, the subject matter of archaeology, must necessarily be
given metaphorical expression, be signified in a text. This textual
production means archaeology is fundamentally expressive, a signi-
fying practice which confers meaning on the past. Language and
writing are not neutral, objective instruments. Rather than
representing the world, they are a means of coping with it. In this
way a purely objective representation of the past is a textual
impossibility. Now archaeologists conceive writing ideally as a
neutral and technical resource rather than a transformative
medium, a medium arising from the relationship of the
archaeologist to the artefact and its context, and from the relation
of an archaeologist to an audience. Writing and language may
intrude on the representation of the past, but they should not: this
is the conventional position in archaeological discourse which
remains largely silent on such issues. But instead we stress that
language is a social phenomenon and as a corollary archaeological
writing, as part of archaeological work more generally, has to be
seen and theorized as social production. We need to consider
archaeology as discourse - a structured system of rules, conventions
and meanings for the production of knowledges, texts.
   Despite the concern with theory that developed in the new
archaeology there are still comparatively few works of general
theory in archaeology. Textual production in archaeology is still
overwhelmingly dominated by texts which describe specific sites,
                THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                    15
types of data, regions or time periods. In the section which follows
we present a series of comments on four archaeological texts: a site
report, a pottery study, a general synopsis and an introduction to
archaeology. Texts of these kinds still account for the vast majority
of the world's output of archaeological textual production. We will
focus on what these texts reveal about our arguments concerning
the nature of theory in archaeology.

                        Archaeological texts
An excavation report: archival logistics
 Wainwright's Gussage All Saints (1979) is a report on a total
 excavation of a settlement of the second half of the first millenium
 BC. The excavation is described as a 'problem orientated project
 within a rescue framework, designed to look back at Dr. Gerhardt
 Bersu's excavation of the site of Little Woodbury which, although
 a partial excavation, had for many years provided the pattern for
 Iron Age economy in southern Britain' (Wainwright, 1979, p. vii).
 The project, then, is clearly supposed to be in keeping with advanced
 (problem-orientated) principles of excavation. Such volumes as
 this, published by Her Majesty's Stationery Office have also been
 considered almost exemplary (e.g. Barker, 1977, p. 224).
     In a standard work on archaeological publication, Grinsell,
 Rahtz and Williams remark that site reports for the most part
 remain unread (1974, p. 19). The site report is not meant to be read:
this implies too much of an involvement of the reader; they are to
be 'consulted'. The report is a textual archive and catalogue, a
spectacular text making visible and textual the reality of the past.
Measured drawings, tables, measurements, lists of numbered finds,
scaled photographs and third person narrative - all represent a
rhetoric of neutrality, of objectivity, from which subjective
experience and impressions have been purged. Of the 205 pages
only 23 discuss what was found. Setting; structural sequence;
chronology; summary comments on artefacts, trade and external
contacts; basic details of economy, environment and population:
the discussion climbs Hawkes' (1954) empiricist ladder of inference
culminating in the now cliched expression of caution and wariness
regarding the difficulty of moving from the 'facts' to 'highly
speculative matters' (Bowen, in Wainwright, p. 182) such as, in this
case, settlement status. This would certainly seem to be the case
judging from Bowen's and Wainwright's own inferences. Taking
into account debris from a bronze foundry which produced
'prestige chariot fittings', they reckon the entrance to the settlement
16                THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY
was wide enough for a chariot and 'indicative of an assured
position in the social order for a member or members of the
community' (p. 193). They tentatively propose, referring to
classical authors, the Mabinogion and song of Culwich and Olwen,
that Gussage All Saints is a settlement 'quite high up a settlement
hierarchy', perhaps even an Ilys - the residence of a Celtic lord.
Wainwright also comments:

     the arthritic fanners of Gussage should also be reviewed within the
     more general theme of Celtic society in which the traits of frankness,
     spirited temperament, bravery, boastfulness, personal vanity,
     feasting and love of eulogistic verse combine to produce a type which
     Professor Cunliffe has bleakly castigated as combining a 'furious
     impetus . . . and a total lack of forward planning' . . . It is in this
     context, imbued with tradition and personal example, that one
     should view the status of the Gussage farmers.
                                                  (Wainwright, 1979, p. 193)

But to criticize this essentially empty and sterile speculation is to miss
the point. Such comments and 'interpretation' are consciously
superfluous: 'Comment, interpretation, or synthesis are repeatable
experiments which vary with whatever archaeological model
happens to be fashionable at the time' (Grinsell, Rahtz and
Williams, 1974, p. 20). Informational reports are, then, meant to
avoid interpretation. 'The ideal report would enable a reader to
reconstruct the whole site layer by layer, feature by feature, each
with its constituents such as clay, gravel and charcoal flecks in due
proportion' (ibid., p. 58). Barker, in Principles of Archaeological
Excavation, recommends that the core of an excavation report be
the illustrations, forming a 'planned guided tour' (1977, p. 228), a
tour free from interpretation. In the spectacular text interpretation
is superfluous.
   Writing becomes the issue of publication, of record and
description, what and how, and relative time and financial cost: an
archival logistics. The issue is one of rescue and preservation of
data. This has been a major issue especially since the advent of
Rescue Archaeology in the early 1970s. Consequently, a report by a
working party of the Ancient Monuments Board for England
specifies four levels of data (see table 1.2). Levels I and II are
considered appropriate to an archive or museum in the site's
locality. Wainwright's Gussage All Saints is publication at level III.
The issue at stake in publication is how much and how to publish.
It is in this context that the extraordinary redundancy of empirical
detail to be found in a site report should be considered. What really
                  THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                     17

TABLE 1.2 Levels of data according to site descriptions and loose material
              (Ancient Monuments Board for England)

Level     Site Descriptions               Loose Material

I         Site itself                     Excavated finds
          General Notes
II        Site note books                 Finds records
          Recording forms                 Photographs
          Drawings                        Negatives
III       Full illustration and           Classified find lists
          description of all structural   and drawings and all specialist
          and stratigraphical             analyses
          relationships
IV        Synthesized description and     Selected finds and reports
          data                            relevant to synthesis

Source: P. Barker (1977), p. 230.



is to be made of the 52 drawn sections (detailing layering and type
of infill) of pits found within the settlement? Of the tables of
measurements of bones? The authors presumably assume that such
things are self-explanatory and may be of interest or use. But is this
the case?
   An archival logistics is, then, a logic of neutrality, literally of
objectivity. The site report as archival catalogue names the object
world of the archaeological site, identifying, specifying, classifying
each and everything. The mark of the informational report is the
category. Categories reduce the heterogeneity of the object world.
The conventional sequence of categories in Wainwright is:

1 Structures: enclosures; pits; settlement phases.
2 Artefact finds: pottery; stone; metal; other.
3 Organic finds: animal; human; plant.

The sequence includes 'everything' found at Gussage All Saints.
The sequence of categories effects closure. But what is the origin
of the categories and their social meaning? Conventionally,
categories are points of method, part of reducing the data to
manageable units, securing a place for everything. They are part of
the law of neutral archaeological reason; categories are meant to
be neutral. But why should this 'neutral' categorization be used
rather than another?
18            THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY
   And is such categorization really neutral? It in no ways cures the
fundamental isolation of each self-present object in the report, the
assumed basic units of empirical science. The objects remain
detached from a historically located materiality, from the question
of their meaning other than that of objectivity (a meaning which
belongs to the historical present): the objects are simply
manipulated by neutral reason. So the past is, in effect, presented
with identity papers and locked up. There is a place for everything
and, apparently, everything is in its place. The tendency, ideal or
telos is a total administration of the past. No ambiguity is to be
allowed, no heterogeneity. Such deviance is to be banished to the
margins or eliminated.
   Categories gather together, but each category is not classifiable
according to itself. Categories gather but prevent closure. They are
both inside and outside the object world. Archaeology cannot be
absorbed into its object. Categories imply a signifying practice, a
material practice in the present. The theorization of categories
requires their relation to archaeology as a material and political
practice in the present.

A work of synthesis
The two volumes of Gibson's Beaker Domestic Sites (1982) are
aimed at filling a gap: drawing together and examining a neglected
category of data - non-ritual pottery and sites from the second
millenium BC in Britain. Gibson's study is a display of
archaeological reality: objects, archai - original sources, an
originary archaeological reality, objects through which access may
be gained to the past. While presenting a history of the study of
beaker domestic pottery, examining typologies, chronology, tra-
ditional problems of diffusion and influence of beaker style on
other ceramic design, and considering the possibility of a category
'Beaker domestic assemblage', the bulk of Gibson's book is a
catalogue of 167 pages, plus 210 pages of half scale drawings
of some 5,000 pot fragments of which all but 24 are 2.5 cm2 or
smaller.
   Such work encapsulates empiricism's subjective idealism: that
the archaeological object is identified with the conventional and
contemporary experience of it. Here we have a fetishism of the
object, a blindness towards the genesis of an object, its material
and conceptual production in past and present. As such, the text,
the drawings, utterly fail reality. The archaeologist becomes
museum scribe, copying and copying the past: ritualistic scrutiny,
display and repetition. And there is also the same redundancy of
               THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                    19
detail as we noted in the site report - the detail of 5,000 diminutive
pot sherds and . . . sites to be studied in the future?
   The aim of such works is primarily synthesis, to draw together a
body of data conceived as related according to archaeological
categorization, to classify and reclassify. But the issue of
categorization is again seriously abbreviated. Gibson's problem is
that of beaker domestic pottery. We might ask the meaning of a
study, a catalogue with commentary, devoted to such a category.
He talks of the problem of distinguishing 'ritual from domestic'
and defines domestic pottery as 'all finds not directly associated
with a burial' and presents a diagram labelled as a 'Model for
beaker context possibilities' (figure 1.1). All the categories he
adopts - fabric, fine, coarse, burial, ritual, domestic - are
categories of common sense, assumed as meaningful and self-
evident. They remain unexamined, their definition regarded as
essentially transparent. That there are variations in the meanings
attached to different linguistic expressions of the same phenomena
and differences in the meanings attached to the same words or
phrases, according to who interprets them and according to their
context of appearance, according that is to their inscription in
textual and social practices, is forgotten. Nor are the categories of
material culture, the social, ceramic production, critically
theorized. The consequence is statements such as the following,
taken from the conclusion to 92 pages of discussion: 'Domestic
sites act as a type of cauldron for interaction between contem-
porary pottery styles. This interaction is, however, natural, and to
be expected where individual potters are at work and producing
goods which they regard as aesthetically pleasing' (Gibson, 1982,
p. 92). Nowhere has Gibson considered the concept of interaction
(of pottery styles?), style, the 'natural', the individual, work,
goods, or the aesthetic. All are taken from common sense, all
remain untheorized.
   Gibson's study is certainly not exceptional in the archaeological
literature, not even in the single-minded devotion to empiricism, to
the aura of the archaeological find, required to produce measured
drawings of 5,000 sherds 2.5 cm2. Whatever the supposed value of
such studies, gathering and making accessible arrays of data, they
only serve to reveal the effects of the lack of critical theoretical
reflection on conventional archaeological practice.

A work of synopsis
Smooth, 'readable', well-illustrated, comprehensive and relatively
progressive, Prehistoric Europe by Champion et al. (1984) is an
20             THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY




     FIGURE 1.1      Gibson's 'Model for beaker context possibilities'
Source: A Gibson (1982).
               THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                     21
excellent textbook covering all of Europe from earliest times to
the Roman Empire. It is a synoptic text, a general summarizing
view from a detached viewpoint. Abridging and crystallizing, this is
a withdrawal from practical engagements with the archaeological
object into interpretation. It represents reason's claim to legislate a
truth as synoptic, rational and conceptual, with heterogeneity
marginalized in a strategy of comparison, compilation and
coherence.
   In this book, a sophisticated example of British processual
archaeology about which we will have much to say later, prehistory
is brought to coherence as a kaleidoscopic interaction of the same
'essential' categories of economy, environment, population and the
social: this is conceived as socio-economic process. So each chapter
is an application of this conceptual scheme to stretches of
prehistory, comparing different regions, compiling patterns,
trends, discontinuities. The overall result is the establishment of a
pattern of 'development'.
   The text attempts to produce a 'balanced' account using
different archaeological approaches, from palaeoeconomy to
structural Marxism, different investments in the archaeological
data bearing returns in the form of synoptic width. But we argue
that the width, the academic neutrality, the attempted balance of
different views within an all-embracing atemporal, aspatial 'socio-
economic' process is ultimately incoherent. 'Materialist'
explanations of material culture-patterning according to a logic of
the ecosystem do not simply stress different aspects of the same
socio-economic process to those theorized in structural Marxist
archaeologies which give primacy to the structuring of social
relations of production; they do not simply represent different
interpretations of the same data (see, for example, pp. 149-51).
This narrative line, subsuming fundamentally incompatible
approaches, reveals such processual archaeology as an old
historicism glossed with new jargon and methods. We argue instead
that it is essential to question the political status and meaning of
categories and theory. This applies equally to the book's theme
of European prehistory. As Rowlands has argued: 'a prehistory of
Europe cannot be assumed (except ideologically) . . . it does not
exist except as the presentist projection into prehistory of current
interest in establishing a unified sense of a "European" past'
(1984, p. 154). Indeed much evidence could be extracted from this
work that 'Europe' is a coherent archaeological concept only in the
terms of university courses in prehistory. The explicit intention
behind the book - the authors would probably agree - is to fill a
22                THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY
particular gap in archaeological discourse and provide an elemen-
tary student text. Yet a text which does not appear to be critically
aware of its own insertion within an established socio-economic
political structure and smoothes over the social and political
implications of choosing alternative frameworks for the inter-
pretation of the 'European' or any other past, can hardly be
expected to provide a stimulus for critical thought.

An introductory text
Attractively packaged and cleanly written, Greene's Archaeology:
an Introduction (1983) is designed for an undergraduate course
introducing archaeology. As with all introductions to archaeology,
we find an overwhelming emphasis on method and technique
- excavation, fieldwork and techniques of artefact analysis
- involving the recovery and scrutiny of basic evidence (114 out of
175 pages). The unfortunate effect of such texts is to identify the
discipline of archaeology with its technical instrumentation. Some
primers may supplement this with a precis of archaeological
achievements - discoveries - or, as in Greene's book, a history of
archaeology, presented as the histories of the archaeological
achievements of imaginative individuals (30 out of 175 pages).
   In the final chapter, entitled 'Making sense of the past', Greene
gives his account and assessment of recent developments: 'the
hottest area of debate in contemporary archaeology is between
traditional and new archaeology, and the applicability of various
theoretical approaches and their resultant frameworks'
(pp. 154-5). Different theories for Greene produce different
frameworks which may be applied to the data. He comments that
this is the excitement of contemporary archaeology, the fervent
debate. But archaeology's fundamental unity is apparently not
challenged. In the first place, theory is identified as essentially
heuristic, as providing different ways of looking at the same data.
So Greene comments;

     the new archaeology has greatly improved the quality of information
     in some areas of archaeology, and has produced a better framework
     for seeking explanations for that very reason. It is in many ways
     similar to the demands made by Edward de Bono in the general field
     of problem solving by lateral thinking.
                                                                 (p. 162)

   Second, Greene follows Daniel in seeing a coherence in the
history of archaeology as a discipline - not much has really changed
since the eighteenth century! The history of archaeology apparently
                THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                    23
shows that 'the terminology and preoccupations do of course
change, but the objectives and attitudes to the evidence . . . have a
familiar ring' (p. 174). Daniel makes almost identical assertions:
'archaeologists have always been talking about evolutionary
change and cultural process' (1981, p. 191). The underlying
argument is, of course, that all that really matters are the data
'sources', nothing else really changes in its fundamentals. Greene,
'liberal' and detached, is sceptical of any final answers, any
certainty. There are no wholly right or wrong answers, no final
truths. The only certainty we are left with is the objectivity of the
past, its 'facticity'. Hence the emphasis in such introductions to
archaeology on methods and techniques, and the corollary that
archaeology is detached from its historical reality as academic
disciplinary practice. Its history becomes, as mentioned, a succession
of individual imaginative consciousnesses.


              Contemporary archaeological discourse
At the moment archaeological discourse is seriously abbreviated. It
doesn't matter what you say as long as you say it in the right way;
as long as you conform to the rules of empiricist/positivist
discourse, rational method; as long as what you say is reasonable,
not fantasy or extreme, is open to 'testing' against the data, is not
overtly political, is not subjective. And if you transgress these laws
of discourse, the epistemology and ontology police are waiting.
   A repressive pluralism holds sway; we can only decide between
different archaeologies according to prescribed laws of method and
discourse. Different archaeologies are conceived as simply different
approaches to the same past. Consequently, decision becomes
paralysed. Contemporary archaeology has no way of coping with
the perceived crisis of information, the large amount of
archaeological information now being amassed, and what we
identify as a redundancy of detail, other than by management and
archival strategies.
   Archaeological discourse is practised and dominated by experts,
detached academic specialists for the most part ignoring or blind to
the social conditions of their practice, conceiving these and their
personal subjective experiences of archaeology as theoretically
irrelevant. A subjective idealism privileges essential objectivity, the
transcendental origin of knowledge, identifying the object and
archaeological experiences of it. This is the only manner in which
subjective experience is theoretically acceptable.
24            THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY

   A teleology specifies the transcendental goal of archaeology as
the past in itself and for itself. This goal is beyond question and
decision, overriding and regulating the process and method of
attaining the goal. The past is the aim; the task is to follow method,
keep to the laws of discourse. Generally, contemporary archae-
ology can be characterized as being pervaded by a set of categorical
oppositions.

           Practice                     Theory
           Object                       Subject
           Past                         Present
           Presence                     Absence
           Substance                    Re-presentation
           Reality                      Rhetoric, text

           SECURITY                     SUSPICION

Underlying and giving meaning to these oppositions are the two
other terms: security and suspicion. 'Practice' through to 'reality'
imply a nexus of security and, accordingly, these are considered
primary in contrast to the questionability and suspicion underlying
their opposites. Practice or doing archaeology via the application
of method is given primacy over ideas and conceptualization. Hard
facts are deemed to expel and annihilate soft ideas. The interpreting
subject always becomes something to be regretted - all archae-
ologists ought to be suspicious of themselves and others, and
the past shouldn't become infected with the present. Consequently,
the past becomes conceived as a set of presences (artefacts and their
associations) contrasted with the present, absented and distanced
from the past. The past is felt to reside in an objective substance of
its own - the reality, the presence, of the hand axe. However, the
past clearly does not possess objective substance when described or
re-presented in a text. The admittance of the relevance of theory,
subjectivity, the present, writing, makes us feel suspicious,
insecure, on weak ground. Essentially, it becomes problematic that
people who write archaeology have different aspirations, live in the
present and write texts.
   The solution of the aporiai of these oppositions appears an
impossible one. If we could go back in a time capsule would we not
produce better archaeology? Ultimately on this line of reasoning,
all archaeology must be suspicious, dangerous. But this is, as we
have said, idealist fantasy.
               THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                    25

      ARCHAEOLOGY AS THEORETICAL PRACTICE

It is time to subvert these oppositions. Each opposed term in fact
defines the other. No single term can be considered to stand on its
own, self-referring. Each term is defined by what it excludes, what
it denies. Consequently, subverting these oppositions requires their
mediation. This is not simply to say, for example, that theory and
data are equal and paired, each affecting the other, each as
important as the other in archaeological practice (Renfrew, 1982).
It is to contend that all the terms are aspects of the same material
process, the same material practice. It is to accept our experience as
archaeologists of producing the past now. Accordingly, theory is
not something mental as opposed to practical, not an abstraction
(distraction), which can be applied to objective data if so wished.
Consider theory's metaphorical roots in the Greek:

Theaomai: to gaze at, spectate (with a sense of wonder).
Theoreo: spectate, review, inspect, contemplate, consider, to
  consult an oracle.
Theoros: a spectator at the theatre or the games.
Theorema: object of contemplation, subject of investigation.
Theatron: place for seeing, for assembly.
Theoria: mission to an oracle, contemplation, consideration.

Theory is not separate from practice. Theory is reflection, critique,
performance, a theatre for action, an act and object of
contemplation: these are aspects of the same material process, the
theoretical practice of archaeology. So knowing the past means
producing it in the present. Past and present are mediated in the
practice of archaeology, in excavation and the writing of
archaeological texts.
   The archaeological text represents the necessary inscription of
the artefact. Inscription is signifying practice which cannot be
absorbed into the archaeological object. The object and its context
(the subject of archaeology) must necessarily be given metaphorical
expression, be signified in the text. As we have argued, simple,
unmediated, immediate experience and expression of the past is an
idealist fiction. No text is a transparent medium expressing an
essential meaning of the past. Writing occurs in the present, it is a
material means of production. As a social practice it is a threading
together of the social, historical, linguistic and personal. There is
no escape from this nexus. Archaeology is, then, immediately
26              THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY
theoretical, social, political and autobiographical. Subjectivity, in
the sense of autobiography, relating practice to the living of which
it is an aspect, is not a deviation from real archaeology; it is the
gesture which defuses the power of the public law of archaeological
reason or discourse. To express it another way: to contend that we
can only know the mediated object requires the mediation of the
object world and the archaeologist's subjectivity. The subjective
becomes the form of the objective because both are aspects of the
same material process.
   To return to categorization: a materialist emphasis on theory as
practice requires a redefinition of the object world, a reconcep-
tualizing centred on mediation. Instead of self-contained objects
possessing identity, there are fields of relations. Identity
presupposes difference from something else. There are no
conclusive categories which can incorporate the differential and
relational complexity of material reality and production. No
concept or category is ever adequate to that which it signifies; the
world cannot be compartmentalized according to categories of
consciousness. There are, then, flaws in every concept and these
make it necessary to refer to other concepts. Each category,
apparently self-referring and inside itself, is in reality defined by
what it excludes, by its chronic relation of difference to other
categories. The result is a texture of webs of meaning. Meaning is
never fully present, never fully disclosed, never final or conclusive;
it is always deferred, in some ways absent, subject to redefinition
and negotiation.
   Categories are never adequate to the past. Interpretation does
not produce stability nor effect closure. In the same way there are
no universal truths to be found in the past. We, as archaeologists,
are not gradually piecing together a better and better or more
complete account of the past. Truths apply to the historical
conjuncture and are wrapped up in the historical, social and
personal mediation of subject and object, theory and practice, past
and present. Interpretation, rather than effecting closure, opens up
or discloses, creating discontinuity, difference.
   The past, then, is gone; it can't be recaptured in itself, relived as
object. It only exists now in its connection with the present, in the
present's practice of interpretation. So it is not the objects of the
past and their preservation which matter so much as the relations
revealed and created between them in the historical act of inter-
pretation. Instead of a past whose meaning is transparent to
enlightened reason, or lost in mystery, we emphasize the act of
interpretation. Indeed, according to our contention of the
               THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                     27
mediation of past and present, subjectivity and objectivity, theory
and data, the past like an oracle requires interpretation.
   Interpretation cannot be reduced to a methodology. We decry
method as a way back to an absent past and refuse a rigorous
method-ology. Method must instead be understood to arise out of
a practical confrontation with the object. It is the affective as
opposed to the effective. To argue that the past is chronically
subject to interpretation and reinterpretation does not imply that
all pasts are equally valid. Nor can it be accommodated in a shrug
of the shoulders or a scepticism which would doubt the ultimate
validity of any archaeology. It means the past forms an expansive
space for intellectual struggle in the present and that we must
accept the necessity for self-reflection and critique, situating
archaeology in the present. Critique involves evaluation and makes
taking sides a necessity, accepting responsibility for a decision as to
why and how to write the past, and for whom. This responsibility
belongs to us however much we might try to privilege the objectivity
of the artefact or the neutrality of academic discourse.
   What is the substance of this theoretical practice? What should
be the focus of archaeology? There are the following unavoidable
and crucial questions.

1 How is social reality created and structured?
2 What is the place of material culture, archaeology's object,
  within social reality?
3 How is social reality related to time; how and why does social
  reality change?
4 What is the meaning and form of gaining knowledge of past
  social reality?
There is no question of whether or not a consideration of social
theory is needed in archaeology. The question to be asked is what
kind of theory it should be - a strategic question. The questions
posed above can receive no simple answers prior to being worked
out in practice. So we are not proposing to replace a bad theory
with a better theory, of archaeology, society, or whatever. To
propose another theory to be applied, a theory reckoned to be
better in some way, is to reproduce the split between theory and
practice and to add to the proliferation of archaeological
'approaches' to the past. We are not going to argue that any
particular method or approach or concept is automatically and
wholly to be rejected. To do so abstractly would be to commit
the error of theoreticism. What we shall do in the following
28             THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY

chapters is to consider each of the above questions and examine
and emphasize theory as a practice which cannot be separated from
the object of archaeology, itself indelibly social, and the present
socio-political context of this practice, this mediation of past and
present.
            Social Archaeology


Archaeologists have long realized the necessity of going beyond
antiquarianism, the collection and study of artefacts for their own
sake, and have attempted various forms of historical narrative and
social reconstruction, setting artefacts in their context. This has
predominantly involved relating material culture to units which
subsume the individual - cultures, societies, culture systems: social
totalities. This is because archaeology's data have been thought to
require a conceptual occlusion of the agents who were originally
responsible for producing the past. Before considering this striking
absence of the individual social actor in archaeological theory we
will examine the project of a social archaeology as it has developed
in Britain by examining a series of texts.


    SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY: A TEXTUAL CRITIQUE

          The social narrative of traditional archaeology
A synopsis of prehistory from the first farmers to the Roman
empire, Piggott's Ancient Europe (1965) is a chronological
narrative of archaeological material, selected as outstanding or
exemplary. For Piggott the narrative is one of a contrast to Western
civilization: aggression and violence, barbarism and brutality, the
less endearing attributes of humanity (p. 14ff). And the narrative is
the traditional one of change explained by invasions, folk
movements, cultural diffusion and warfare.
   Piggott's account of the societies acting out this narrative is
entirely descriptive, rooted in common-sense categories of the
social. He proclaims (p. 7) that prehistorians 'move in a world of
anonymous societies, defined by their distinctive traditions in the
30                           SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

style and manufacture of everyday objects'. So the book outlines
the ways of life: early farmers' house design (invariably peasant),
economy, and when evidence is available, clothing and hairstyles.
Examples are given of craft skills and workmanship, and artistic
achievement is suitably appreciated:

     In Celtic art, 'man is a stranger'. . . attractive and repellent; it is far
     from primitiveness and simplicity . . . is refined in thought and
     technique; elaborate and clever: full of paradoxes, restless,
     puzzlingly ambiguous.
                                                                       (P. 243)

Temples, henges, cursus monuments, ritual accoutrements - all
attest to the limitations of archaeological inference: 'we have no
information on the beliefs which prompted the construction of
these sacred places, nor of the rites performed within them'
(p. 116). Such material expressions of religious or ritual
phenomena are shrouded in mystery; they can only be described
Occasionally, however, from evidence such as 'the presumed cult-
figures of obese women' in Malta (p. 115), a guess may be made of
the existence of some divinity.
   In the terms of Piggott's empiricism the structure of society can-
not be directly perceived, although inference from a diversity in the
quality and richness of artefacts and burials may lead to a
conception of a ranked society. Social hierarchy is consistently and
simply seen in terms of princes or chieftains: this is the extent of
Piggott's analyses of social ranking. For example, the rich round
barrow burials in Wessex, England are described in terms of princely
panoply: ' "they are assuredly the single sepulchres of kings and
great personages . . . " wrote William Stukeley in the eighteenth
century of the barrows on Salisbury plain, and he was right'
(P. 129).
   A repeated stress on the limitations of archaeological evidence is
accompanied by its literary elaboration and enlivenment. Here is
Piggott on the Celtic chieftain:

     The panoply and equipment of the battle-drunk, screaming tribal
     chieftain, in his chariot hung with the decapitated heads of his foes,
     the air raucous with the sound of the baritus and the carnyx . . .
                                                                       (p. 243)

   The values, aspirations and theoretical outlook of such works
(for Hawkes (1968) the distillation of history from disparate facts,
'writing of quality and humanity' (p. 256)) are still held today by
                       SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

many archaeologists. Burgess's work, The Age of Stonehenge
(1980), aspires to such an example. The first 130 pages of this 330
page book are an artefact-centred chronicle of British prehistory
(3200 - 1200 BC) interspersed with rudimentary social sketching,
again rooted in common-sense categories. So Burgess comments
that far-reaching social, ideological and spiritual upheavals are
indicated by important changes in material Culture, in burial
practices, and in the fate of the great public centres of the third
millennium (p. 79). Artefact change means social change. And,
somewhat earlier, 'the bewildering variety of burial customs which
emerged in the Meldon Bridge period in part reflects the very
complex structure of society at that time' (p. 61). After the
chronicle, Burgess presents a description of society in this 'Age of
Stonehenge': what the people were like, what they wore, what sort
of settlements they lived in, the agriculture, crafts and industries
they practised, their means of transport and communication, their
burial ritual and ceremony are all featured. For Burgess, such
description represents society as available to the archaeologist.
Simple statements about social stratification (chiefdoms,
paramount chiefs and superchiefs) are elaborated by reference to
later literary sources (particularly Irish sagas). This, along with
discussion of Celtic origins, amounts to the full extent of Burgess's
social analysis.
   In this index card (already a floppy disc?) archaeology, the
particularity of the past is preserved in descriptive detail:
description of hair styles, inventories of cinerary urns, discussions
of post hole patterning. The sort of speculation as to the meaning
of such variety is, perhaps, encapsulated in Burgess's comments
on the reason for increasing deposition of bronzes in rivers, lakes
and springs at the end of his period: 'with the increased precipi-
tation and waterlogging after 1500 BC a development of water-
cults makes good sense' (p. 351). People were fed up with the


                         Systems theory
Renfrew's Emergence of Civilisation (1972) was the first major
application of systems theory in British archaeology. Following
Clarke's general programmatic statement of a systems-based
archaeology (1968), Renfrew set out to explicitly theorize the
workings of Aegean society in the third millennium BC and trace
an explanation for the emergence of the 'civilized' palace
economies of Crete and mainland Greece.
                           SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

   Society is conceived as a system, 'an intercommunicating network
of attributes or entities forming a complex whole' (Clarke, 1968,
p. 42). These entities are subsystems which amount to regularized
patterns of social behaviours (figure 2.1). The interconnections are
mechanisms of negative feedback maintaining balance or
equilibrium. Each subsystem, and the system itself, are kept within
assigned limits or maintained in a stable state by homoeostatic
mechanisms which counteract any disturbance. So, for example,
poor fishing means less fish to eat; negative feedback results in
more fishing or use of food other than fish. Relations of positive
feedback involve the amplification of an initial deviation,
extending and increasing processes already present. Renfrew
defines a particular variant of positive feedback as the 'multiplier


                               POPULATION


               SUBSISTENCE                     METALLURGY




 COMMUNI-                                                          CRAFTS
  CATION




                 PROJECTIVE                        SOCIAL
                 SUBSYSTEM                       SUBSYSTEM


                                POPULATION


                FIGURE 2.1 Renfrew's'Culture system'
 Notes: All the subsystems are linked with each other and the external system
          environment with relations of positive or negative feedback.
Source: From C. Renfrew (1972). Reprinted by permission of Methuen & Co.
                         SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

effect, where a deviation in one subsystem has the effect of
bringing about innovation in another:
  Changes or innovations occurring in one field of human activity (in
  one subsystem of a culture) sometimes act so as to favour changes in
  other fields (in other subsystems). The multiplier effect is said to
  operate when these induced changes in one or more subsystems them-
  selves act so as to enhance the original changes in the first subsystem.
                                                                   (p. 37)

The multiplier effect is Renfrew's explanation of the emergence of
Aegean civilization. In what he claims as a 'necessary preliminary'
(p. 17) Renfrew produces 160 pages of traditional archaeological
discourse specifying and describing details of cultural sequences.
This is followed by a description of 'culture process' - a chapter is
devoted to the parameters of his system (environment, population
and settlement pattern), and individual chapters to the various
subsystems (subsistence, metallurgy, crafts, social, the symbolic,
trade and communication). For each he summarizes the general
patterns and trends: for example, the development of craft
specialization and metal working enabling new tools and new
weapons and new forms of wealth; transformation of tribe into
chiefdom, into principality or state. In the final chapter Renfrew
presents two multiplier effects: 'the decisive factor for the
development of Aegean civilization was the development of a
redistributive system for subsistence commodities. This emerged as
a consequence of the intensive exploitation of a new spectrum of
food plants/notably tree crops, yielding a new diversity in produce'
(p. 480). The second: 'the decisive factor . . . is the emergence of a
stratified society, where high status correlates with material wealth
and military prowess. These features arose largely as a consequence
of the development of metallurgy and of maritime trade' (p. 483).
Both are taken as models offering explanation for the emergence of
civilization.
   Renfrew's systems framework offered many advantages over
traditional archaeologies:
1 it required explicit theorization of the social.
2 It directed attention to social process as lying behind material
  culture patterning.
3 In focusing on social process it involved considering
  explanation and causality rather than simple documentation of
  variety in space and time.
4 It involved a stress on complex causality: 'no single factor,
  however striking its growth, can of itself produce changes in the
  structure of culture' (p. 39).
34                         SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

.    It necessitated a consideration of subsystem interaction within a
     cultural whole, rather than permitting concentration on any
     single cultural phenomenon, such as subsistence or ceramic
     design.

However, in common with other uses of systems theory in
archaeology, culture is conceived as man's extrasomatic means
of adaptation (p. 13). The social logic of Renfrew's systems theory
is that of function. Each subsystem is 'explained' in terms of its
function in maintaining the existence of the whole cultural system,
while the system itself is conceived as a mediatory entity,
biologically adapting a population to its natural environment.
Civilization, Renfrew's ultimate theme, thus becomes a socio-
cultural form of adaptation to nature: 'civilisation is the complex
artificial environment of man; it is the insulation created by man,
an artefact which mediates between himself and the world of
nature. Since man's environment is multi-dimensional so too is
civilisation' (p. 13). This logic of adaptation and functionalist
explanation has long been questioned in the social sciences, and
criticism within archaeology is also well established (e.g. Hodder,
1982; Tilley, 1981a, 1981b). Theorizing a cultural entity as adaptive
or functional simply affirms its existence and provides little
comprehension of its specific form of articulation. To say that
institutions and regularized customs of society are artefacts and can
be regarded to fulfil functions broadly analogous to those of
material artefacts which mediate between people and the natural
environment, as Renfrew does, is to say nothing about why the
institutions and customs take the specific form they do.
  To conceive culture as adaptive means that societies are regarded
as primarily conservative - maintaining equilibrium within their
environment through homoeostatic negative feedback devices.
Change becomes a problem:

     This conservative nature of culture cannot too strongly be stressed.
     In terms of our model it is the natural tendency of culture to persist
     unchanged... it is change, any change, which demands explanation.
                                                                   (p. 487)

Stability, apparently, just happens - it does not require explanation.
For Renfrew the multiplier effect is 'needed to overcome this innate
conservative homoeostasis of culture' (p. 487). The problem of
change is solved by reference to a mechanistic relation between
subsystems, and the notion of 'relation' becomes reified. The
mechanism is conceptualized as existing separately from the entities
                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

it unites: subsystems can be defined independently of their relations
with other subsystems. This begs the question of the ontology of
both subsystem and relation: what is negative feedback? what
exactly is a subsystem? do subsystems and systems exist? how are
they to be defined? Patterns of interactions, activities and artefacts
would seem to be Renfrew's answer (pp. 19-23). Renfrew accepts
that these regularized patterns are arbitrary categories imposed in
analysis (p. 20). This throws the burden of their specification on to
theory but Renfrew gives no justification for specifying sub-
systems as 'subsistence', 'technological', 'social', 'symbolic' and
'communicative', other than convenience. Why are they convenient,
and for what purpose? Renfrew does not confront the meaning or
significance of such categories. He accepts that boundaries are
difficult to define: 'Criteria of different degrees of uniformity will
lead to the definition of larger or smaller units' (p. 21). But what is
to specify the application of different criteria? Intuition?
Usefulness? Obviousness? Again, this is not theorized. In
Renfrew's book the categories of system and subsystem are
descriptive, referring to empirical patterning. The entire procedure
of systems analysis is heuristic, its usefulness being its stress on
complexity and interaction. Renfrew has realized this (p. 495) and
his later work with catastrophe theory (1978, 1979) may be seen as
an attempted solution, a solution involving the quantification of
culture and the specification of a mathematized social process.
   The interactions of negative and positive feedback are, as we
have said, reified mechanisms between arbitrary analytical
categories, mechanisms derived from cybernetic theory. They are
not a social logic but based on analogies with machines, analogies
which take no account of human agency and praxis (cf. below).
   In that subsystems and interactions are defined independently,
the synchronic is separated from the diachronic, static analysis
from the explanation of change. This relates to society being
conceived as naturally conservative, denying change, being
naturally timeless, and change being problematic, that which is to
be explained (see chapter 5 below).
   Renfrew's systems analysis proceeds by successive reduction of
empirical detail to categories, a process of simplification. So
culture sequence is transformed into systemic categories, sub-
systems, whose general patterning and trends are isolated. These
general trends are then encapsulated in a dual model of emergence
of complex society - 'civilization'. The result is an extraordinary
redundancy of detail (the redundancy already noted in chapter 1).
The relation between the culture sequence of part I and the
                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

processual analyses in part II of Renfrew's book seems to be that
the first is chronicle - neutral exposition - while part II is theory
applied to this data as an explanation. Archaeological remains
from over a thousand years of Aegean prehistory are reduced to
some 24 pages of multiplier effect (pp. 480-504). Now, of course,
simplification and generalization are essential to any analytical or
theoretical practice but it is as essential to pose the question of the
meaning, significance and character of this generalization. We
argue that Renfrew's study is an application, an imposition of pre-
defined categories of system and subsystem on to the 'data'. It
lacks self-reflexiveness. The categories of system, subsystem, feed-
back, exist in no 'real' or 'theoretical' relation to the object of
study. The only relation is that of application (p. 18); it is purely
methodological - theory is held to exist separately from data. This
is the corollary to the arbitrary definition of subsystem and the non-
social cybernetic logic of the mechanisms of interaction. The con-
comitant of this is that any complexity claimed for the explanation is
entirely a function (sic) of the model of system (the applied theory)
and does not necessarily apply to the data which are meant to be
explained. This imposition throws into focus the politics of
Renfrew's theory - the stress on the conservative nature of society,
and the adopted model of homo oeconomicus (see esp. pp. 497ff).
   Renfrew's Emergence of Civilisation prefigures many of the
major aspects and developments in the social archaeology of the
1970s and early 1980s:
1 Procedures of applying social theories to archaeological data.
2 Processual explanation based on an identification of patterned
   behaviours from archaeological remains and specification of
   their complex interaction.
3 Theoretical use of social typologies: evolutionary sequences of
   bands, tribes, chiefdoms, etc.
4 A related focus on the identification of social ranking.
5 An emphasis, often economistic, on the general importance of
   social control of material resources.
6 A focus on the analysis of mortuary remains from a structural-
   functionalist and role-model perspective.
 ' The development of models of trade and exchange.
8 Use of the notion of prestige goods economies.
9 Use of cross-cultural generalizations.

In the following sections we analyse some of these developments in
archaeological theorizations of the social.
                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY                         37

                          Social typologies
The social typology, band, tribe, chiefdom and state (Sahlins,
 1968; Service, 1962) has had tremendous influence on social
archaeology. While forming the basis of various forms of
evolutionary thinking in archaeology it has also, more generally,
provided a vocabulary for social archaeology. The static and
descriptive nature of the categories has meant that change from one
category to another is problematical and has led to the claim that
identification of a particular 'type' of society somehow constitutes
an explanation. This is clear from Renfrew's 'recognition' of
chiefdoms in neolithic Wessex, southern England (1973). He first
specifies 20 features of chiefdoms (following Sahlins and Service),
including ranking, the distribution of surplus by chiefs, 'clearly
defined territorial boundaries', 'frequent ceremonies and rituals
serving wide social purposes' (p. 543). There is no discussion of
social process, of the working of a chiefdom social system.
Renfrew proceeds to identify territorial divisions on the basis of
ceremonial monuments - causewayed camps - in the earlier
neolithic. He thinks these were emerging chiefdoms coalescing in
the later neolithic into one greater chiefdom with constituent tribes.
The archaeological evidence is considered to fit into this social
categorization: mobilization of humanpower; craft specialization;
religious specialization. For example, the Stonehenge area with
major ceremonial monuments is considered evidence of the
existence of a paramount chief. This checklist archaeology, and the
social typologies on which it is based, although much criticized
(e.g. Tainter, 1978) for its reductive subsumption of variability,
nevertheless remains in use (e.g. Collis, 1984; and see chapter 6
below).


                 Ranking, resource and exchange
The volume Ranking, Resource and Exchange (Renfrew and
Shennan (eds), 1982) in many respects represents the culmination
of the programme of functionalist social archaeology in Britain,
covering almost all of the elements of what is now a virtual
theoretical hegemony standing opposed to traditional archaeology.
The fifteen essays exemplify three routes for exploring ranking:
settlement ranking and political structures involving ideas of co-
ordinating political centres and core-periphery relations; the
mobilization and organization of surplus labour especially in
ceremonial monument construction; ranking and status of
                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

individual social personae identified particularly in the analysis of
mortuary remains.
   The predominant focus is on resources and their control and
management. Sherratt considers agricultural wealth in the
Carpathian basin from the sixth millennium BC, proposing
regional exchange networks linking nodal lowland areas and
highland hinterlands involving domestic cattle. He argues this is a
primary feature in emerging social hierarchy. Shennan and S.
Champion consider the role of rare exchanged items, amber and
coral respectively, in the earlier Bronze and Iron Ages of central and
western Europe. Both propose prestige goods ranking systems,
hierarchical societies where social position depended on
consumption of prestige goods. Haselgrove has an elaborated
prestige goods system in the late pre-Roman Iron Age centralized
polities of south-east England, elaborated in its incorporation at
the periphery of an expansive Roman empire, the core polity and
source of prestige goods. Thus one process in social hierarchization
is identified as relating to trade, exchange and societal interaction.
Another process relates to the intensification and specialization of
production of agriculture and crafts and subsequent management
and control. Chapman considers control of critical resources -
land, water, copper and interregional traded items - as a deter-
minant factor in the development of social ranking in Iberia,
4000-1000 BC. The Rhine Main basin, 1500-500 BC, is con-
sidered by T. Champion who derives the pattern of settlement
relocation, subsistence innovation, enhanced social ranking,
technological development and ritual activities ('Urnfield'
phenomena) from an imbalance between subsistence resources
and population.
   This social logic of giving priority to relations between
population, subsistence and environment is frequent in such
'processual' studies. So Halstead and O'Shea present a self-styled
'adaptive model' for the emergence of redistributive economies and
apply it to the 'palaces' of Bronze Age Crete. Accumulation of
tokens of value which may be exchanged for foodstuffs in times of
shortage is termed social storage - an adaptive response to periodic
failure in food supply. The tokens used in social storage -craft
items, durable and convertible - 'would have permitted the sustained
accumulation and manipulation of wealth and power and so have
facilitated the emergence of institutionalised social inequality'
(p. 98) - the Cretan palace civilization. Gamble relates settlement
nucleation and political developments in the Bronze Age Aegean
(Melos) to agricultural intensification and control.
                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY                                39

   There is no doubt that this volume of studies represents a
considerable advance over traditional archaeology in its concen-
tration on the patterning of social process. But this is conceived in
purely descriptive terms (cf. Whallon, 1982). The relations between
a limited number of cross-cultural variables are described in their
various combinations (figure 2.2). These variables amount to
resources and the mechanisms of their control as is indicated by the
reduction of social ranking to the effects of two processes: those of
exchange and societal interaction, and intensification of
production.
   The functionalist logic of such processes is very apparent in
many of the studies. So, for example, T. Champion talks of the
strain on subsistence resources in late second-millennium BC
Germany:

  The particular strategy adopted to meet this strain was to minimise
  risk and provide a buffer against subsistence failure. This required
  increased levels of managerial control internally and of exchange
  relations externally, and had an inbuilt predisposition towards
  growth.
                                                                (P. 65)


So the different parts of the system - production, ranking,
exchange, ritual - interact coherently in a whole adapted to its
particular environment. The task of archaeological explanation has
become that of describing the workings of such systems which are
held to account for patterning in the archaeological record.
Analysis of ranking is reduced to tracing the development of
complexity.
   This emphasis on descriptive process is in accordance with the
structure of the whole book - the attempt to develop a coherent
narrative of the emergence of hierarchical structure: appearance of
salient ranking; discussion of the resource base of early states and
post-collapse resurgence, the first millennium BC and post-Roman
dark ages. This background narrative to the individual studies is
foregrounded in the editorial introductions to each section. The
relations of this project to neo-evolutionary theory are also clear in
the functionalist frame of reference adopted and the use of cross-
cultural comparison associated with the identification of particular
instances of general processes claimed to have universal relevance
(Halstead and O'Shea, p. 98; Renfrew, p. 91). Hence it is possible
to reduce several thousand years of prehistory essentially to the
particular manifestations of the two processes outlined above.
                       SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY




FIGURE 2.2 Sherratt's social model for the Great Hungarian Plain
                            6OOO-35OOBC
              Notes: Rectangles represent external factors.
Source: From Renfrew and Shennan (eds), (1982). Reprinted by permission of
                      Cambridge University Press.
                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY                          41

   The separation of process and its manifestation in the.
archaeological record relates to the separation of theory and data,
the general and the particular, a separation which is frequently
duplicated in the structure of the essays themselves: general points
followed by empirical illustration. However, a more serious
criticism must be the lack of theorization of archaeology's primary
data - material culture. Identified patterning in material culture is
conceived as an immediate expression of social process; it is not
(see chapter 4).

                      Peer Polity Interaction
The effects of the simple descriptive basis of much processual
archaeology are very evident in the recent volume, Peer Polity
Interaction and Socio-Political Change (Renfrew and Cherry (eds),
1986). The concept of peer polity interaction refers to a series of
empirical observations which have been noted to occur together in
several instances. They are: (1) polities occur in regional clusters;
(2) organizational changes occur not singly within these clusters but
in more than one polity at about the same time; (3) changes in, for
example, conceptual systems for the communication of
information in artefacts associated with high status and in ritual
activities occur together and seem to be attributable to no single
locus of innovation (Renfrew, pp. 7-8). It is proposed that the
changes are the result of interaction between autonomous polities
within a single geographical region. These interactions include
competition; warfare and competitive emulation; symbolic entrain-
ment (adoption of a more developed symbolic system upon contact
with a less developed one); transmission of information; and
exchange of goods. The book consists of a series of illustrations of
these generalizations and processes in Aegean city-states, Minoan
palaces, complex chiefdoms in the European Iron age, Classic
Mayan centres, the Midwestern Hopewell, USA.
   The concept of peer polity interaction usefully emphasizes
societal interaction and complex processes of transformation rather
than synchronic analyses of the workings of a single polity.
Attention is also drawn to interactions which might be termed
symbolic or stylistic. However, as with the systems approach, there
is the very real problem of defining the units of interest - here peer
polities. Such a concept is clearly much easier to apply to early
civilizations with literary evidence available (Cherry and Renfrew,
pp. 150-1; Champion and Champion, p. 63). Elsewhere there is the
usual reliance on social typologies. Again the descriptive nature of
                          SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

the concept is evident, leaving untheorized so much of the social
logic of the phenomenon, in particular the role of material culture.
Renfrew and Cherry clearly think that peer polity interaction
allows consideration of the symbolic and the stylistic as well as the
economic and technological in a processual rather than an 'idealist'
context (p. viii). But the recurring assumption is that symbolic
entrainment, symbolic interaction, would be manifested as stylistic
similarity or homogeneity. We have already commented that the
relation of material culture to the social is not such a simple matter.
We might agree with Sabloff: 'we must be able to tie the
interactions of the hypothesized peers to specific features of the
archaeological record' (p. 116).

                   Analysis of mortuary practices
The pioneering work of Saxe (1970) and Binford (1972a) opened up
the analysis of mortuary practices as a primary means of
investigating past social systems. They developed the general
argument that mortuary practices need to be analysed in the
context of variations in types of society and social complexity. In
his paper Binford argued that:

  We would expect that other things being equal, the heterogeneity in
  mortuary practice which is characteristic of a single sociocultural
  unit would vary directly with the complexity of the status hierarchy,
  as well as with the complexity of the overall organization of the
  society with regard to membership units and other forms of
  sodalities.
                                                         (1972a, pp. 221-2)




  It is proposed that there are two general components of the social
  situation to be evaluated . . . First is what we may call, with
  Goodenough (1965, p. 7) the social persona of the deceased. This is a
  composite of the social identities maintained in life and recognized as
  appropriate for consideration at death. Second is the composition
  and size of the social unit recognizing status responsibilities to the
  deceased. We would expect direct correlations between the relative
  rank of the social position held by the deceased and the number of
  persons having duty-status relationships vis-a-vis the deceased.
                                                         (Ibid., pp. 225-6)

According to Binford, the main features which archaeologists may
be able to detect with regard to prehistoric social organization from
                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY                         43

an analysis of mortuary practices are: (1) the type of organization
present, whether or not it was essentially egalitarian or stratified,
whether or not the presence of distinct and/or competing corporate
groups is indicated; (2) the complexity of past social systems or, in
other words, how much structural differentiation there appears to
be. The main dimensions of social persona or roles which might be
recognized are age, sex, social affiliation and position as well as, in
certain cases, the conditions and locations of death.
   The volume, The Archaeology of Death (Chapman, Kinnes and
Randsborg (eds), 1981), fleshes out this position and succinctly
summarizes the theoretical position developed in the archaeological
literature at the outset of the 1980s. As Chapman, Randsborg and
Brown comment, effort has predominantly gone into analysing the
variety within the mortuary practices of a particular social unit in
attempting to identify social ranking. Attention has thus focused
on the range of artefacts deposited with the dead, assuming that
certain artefacts will symbolize social status (e.g. S. E. Shennan,
1975). Effort expenditure on the treatment of the deceased has also
been proposed as a key variable: greater expenditure correlating
with higher rank (e.g. Tainter, 1975, 1977, 1978). Other analyses
have considered the demographic structure of skeletal populations
searching for physical indications of social difference (e.g.
Buikstra, 1981). Analyses of mortuary practices have relied heavily
on the utilization of a range of statistical techniques, many
computer based, ranging from simple tests of statistical
significance to multivariate techniques such as cluster analysis and
principal components analysis.
   The general strategy in such studies is the identification of
pattern and its correlation with social complexity. Questions asked
of the data include: do certain artefacts regularly occur with others
in individual graves, or with sex or a particular age set of the
burial population; are certain burials orientated in a particular
direction as opposed to others; to what extent is the arrangement of
burials in a cemetery random or regularly patterned; how does the
spatial organization of burials differ within and between cemeteries;
what are the demographic parameters of deceased populations and
what symbolic dimensions (e.g. use of burial monuments as
territorial markers) might be inferred. Attention has also centred
on the arrangement of artefacts in graves and attempts to calculate
measures of effort expenditure. Such work has drawn heavily on
cross-cultural ethnographic 'tests' or surveys, with attempts being
made to set up more or less directly deterministic links, or
'behavioural correlates' between people, resources, and mortuary
                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

practices. These surveys are of dubious value and can hardly be
considered to vindicate the overall approach. A correlation is a very
different thing from an explanation, and there is no reason to
suppose that ethnographically documented cases of mortuary
practices provide a representative sample of forms of prehistoric
social organization.
   There has been increasing awareness of the complexity that
might be encountered and a call has been made for investigation of
processes of the formation of the archaeological record, processes
which may complicate the expression of social organization in
mortuary practices (O'Shea, 1981, 1984). In his study of 5 Plains
Indian cemeteries O'Shea reaffirms the direct expression of social
organization in burial practices but focuses on the additional
relationship between the practices and their archaeological
observation. It has also been noted that status need not be directly
reflected in burial but may be suppressed as a form of ideology
(Chapman and Randsborg, 1981, p. 14). However, rather than
directing attention to the need to theorize such aspects of material
culture they have been conceived primarily as just adding further
complexity, distortion to be counteracted in the derivation of social
pattern from the patterning of mortuary practices: 'what matters
here is that the archaeologist evaluates the degree to which the
mortuary data do reflect the social structure by means of
complementary data (e.g. settlements and settlement patterns,
metal hoards etc.)' (Chapman and Randsborg, 1981, p. 14).
   The entire theoretical perspective on which this work is based
draws heavily on structural-functionalist and role theory, as
developed in anthropology and sociology (Firth, 1971;
Dahrendorf, 1968; Merton, 1957; Nadel, 1957; Radcliffe-Brown,
1952). However, the theoretical basis of this work remains scantily
discussed. In the Archaeology of Death volume discussion of the
theoretical basis underlying the archaeological approaches and
analyses is virtually absent, apart from a few passing references to
the work of Goodenough. Within the perspective offered in this
book the notion of social structure implicitly employed is more or
less equivalent to pattern. Significantly, the concept does not even
appear in the index. Social structure (referred to in processual
archaeology predominantly in terms of ranking) is considered to
reside in the network of patterns of interactions between individual
agents, arising either from an analysis of empirically given realities
in social life, or abstractions based on these, such as the notion of
social persona or role. Such a conception is directly analogous to
that of anatomical pattern in biology, where the skeleton and
                       SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY                        45

organs may be held to provide a physical support for the body.
Radcliffe-Brown considered social structures in terms of three basic
problems: What kinds of structures are there and how best may we
categorize them? How do they function and maintain themselves?
How are the structures of different form constituted? For him, the
basic unit of structure was the 'elementary family' from which other
structural relations or kin ties could be deduced (1952, pp. 178-80).
In role theory a number of different roles forming an actor's
social persona are held to be enacted in different situations,
with the roles changing according to whether they have been
ascribed or achieved, and in terms of temporal enactment and
context. Various roles may be acted out by any one person (e.g. a bank
manager may also be a father and a Conservative Party official).
   In any role system there may be various degrees of role
summation, coherence, dependence or independence, within
society or with regard to other roles. Such a theory provides an
implausible and deterministic model of the relationships between
individuals and groups. As Giddens notes, 'the actors only perform
according to scripts which have already been written out for them'
(1976, p. 16). A person's role is regarded as given rather than
negotiated and renegotiated in practice. Actors merely slot into a
number of prescribed roles and act in conformity with them. But it
is people and not roles that actually constitute society. A serious
debilitating effect of this conception of social structure adopted in
processual archaeology is that it lacks any explanatory significance.
Conceptions of role, social persona, or social structure only have
significance as redescriptions of the archaeological evidence, they
are not explanatory. Function, rather than structure, plays the
explanatory role as human society can exist only in its activity; but
as we have argued, the specification of function is yet another form
of redescription of social practices and similarly remains non-
explanatory. The possibility that underlying principles of social
conduct exist in social forms, not directly discernible in terms of
perceived social relationships or roles, does not exist within the
framework of processual archaeology (cf. the consideration of
social structure below and in chapter 3). This lack may go some
way to affording an understanding of its predominantly descriptive
emphasis and lack of explanatory content.


                       Marxist archaeologies
From an explicitly Marxist outlook, Rowlands in his later work
(1982, 1984a) has outlined an alternative programme for a social
  46             SOCIAL            ARCHAEOLOGY

archaeology. With Gledhill (Gledhill and Rowlands, 1982, pp.
162-4) he has proposed a conception of the social totality which
differs markedly from the mechanical interactions of a systemic
perspective, or the largely untheorized concepts of 'society' used in
traditional archaeological narrative. Avoiding the formalism of
Althusser's conception of the social formation with its determinate
levels of economic base and superstructure and ultimate economic
determinism and functionalism (see chapter 6), Rowlands has
emphasized the necessity of theorizing total social systems with no
implied hierarchy of determination:

   theorising about long term socio-economic change in prehistory
   involves us in the construction of models of total social systems in
   which ideological, political and economic processes are linked to
   each other in a dialectical interplay rather than as determinate levels
   in a social formation.
                                       (Gledhill and Rowlands, 1982, p. 145)

But rather than an indeterminate interplay of relations Rowlands
gives weight to the political:

  History, in a concrete sense, emerges as the resolution of continuous
  antagonisms existing between social subjects. What defines the social
  whole, therefore, is the form of political articulation that constitutes
  the totality of social relations . . . it has no particular locus (in the
  state, for example)... It follows that politics is not definable in any
  institutional form but refers more generally to power struggle and to
  the idioms, symbols, and other means used to define relative status
  and position.
                                                   (Rowlands, 1982, p. 167)

We shall take up these points in more detail below (pp. 57-60;
7 2 - 8 ) . Rowlands has also raised the issue of the boundaries of
units of analysis. First, in advocating world systems analysis, inter-
societal exchange and interdependency, involving especially the
development of core and periphery areas (e.g. Frankenstein and
Rowlands, 1978). So,

  The distinction between 'internal' and 'external' relationships is
  therefore only a viable one in a limited sense. At given moments of
  time, existing societies can be linked together in new ways, and the
  results of this linking are not predictable without understanding how
  this change in external conditions of reproduction bears on internal
  structures.
                                      (Gledhill and Rowlands, 1982, p. 148)
                          SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

Secondly, Rowlands points to the analytical process of
classification and categorization. So the notion of society 'forms a
category only because archaeologists classify it as such, as part of
the taxonomic space within which they operate and as part of the
definition of their own discipline' (Rowlands, 1982, p. 164).
Ultimately notions of society relate to the emergence of nation-
states in Western Europe in recent times (ibid.) He also emphasizes
the importance of analysis of contradiction within social forms or
totalities - the internal generation of processes of transformation.
This is associated with a call for a genuine theory of history
'centred on social dynamics and transformation processes'
(Gledhill and Rowlands, 1982, p. 14S), a denial of the opposition
between the synchronic and the diachronic found in systems theory
and functionalist archaeology more generally.
   Rowlands stresses the materiality of the political and the
ideological and, therefore, that both are written into the archae-
ological record. The dialectical conception of social relations and
social totalities advanced (as opposed to mechanical articulation)
means, for example, that the economic and socio-political cannot
be separated. It also means that the conception of totality is
inseparable from its place in analysis. In Rowlands' words:

  Analysis proceeds from the abstraction of the whole to that of its
  parts and back to the whole again and from the abstract to the
  concrete at each of these levels. Such a view is always partial in the
  sense that some things are always left out, and the whole may or may
  not correspond to what may be isolated empirically as a concrete
  'society'. The totality is therefore a conceptual entity that has reality
  only in the sense that it forms a mental appropriation of a real world
  that exists separate from thought process. In this sense, population,
  society, or a mode of subsistence could all be totalities and
  abstractions at the same moment, the validity of their application
  depending on how they relate to each other in the analysis of
  concrete situations.
                                                  (Rowlands, 1982, p. 163)

This forms part of Rowlands' rejection of the categorical
opposition between materialism and idealism, facts and values, the
objective and the subjective, and the concept of reality (Rowlands,
1984a), replacing these with a recognition of the active intellectual
production of the past, with a critical awareness of the insertion of
archaeological categorization and theorization within a Western
political and intellectual context. This is, of course, in accordance
with his conception of the political.
                       SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

   It will be clear from the discussions which follow in this book,
and elsewhere (Tilley, 1982; Shanks and Tilley, 1982; Miller and
Tilley, 1984a, 1984b; Tilley, 1984, 1985; Shanks and Tilley, 1987),
that we fully endorse Rowlands' programmatic statements
concerning a true 'social archaeology'. However, we must reserve
criticism for the specific form of the development of models of
general processes of social transformation (Friedman and
Rowlands, 1978) (see chapter 6).
   Those archaeologists drawing inspiration in particular from
recent Marxist anthropology (see Spriggs (ed.), 1984, for a
bibliography) have made significant advances over competing
social archaeologies. They have produced more sophisticated
conceptualization of social totalities, extending consideration of
the political and ideological issues of legitimation from a narrower
focus on subsistence adaptation and interactions between
technologies, environment and population found in processual
functionalist archaeology (see above). However, most of
Rowlands' aims for a Marxist social archaeology have unfortu-
nately not yet been achieved.
   Consider, for example, Parker Pearson's work on the early Iron
Age of Denmark (1984a, 1984b); He makes a series of reasonable
abstract statements about the implications of a Marxist
archaeology:

1 Marxist theory has practical (political) implications.
2 Central to social analysis are conceptions of contradiction and
   conflict.
3 The role of ideology of articulating action and belief is another
   key concept requiring theorization and analysis (1984,
   pp. 60-3).
4 This last point implies that artefacts cannot simply be categorized
   according to economic, social or ideological criteria: a hoe may
   be as ideological as a law code.
5 Institutions may embody the social, economic and ideological;
   the economy conversely may be considered religious or ideo-
   logical practice. (1984b, p. 71)

However, this theorizing appears quite separate from its
application to the Iron Age of Denmark. In fact, what is 'applied'
to the data is Friedman's model of social change among the Kachin
of Burma (Friedman, 1975, based on Leach, 1954). Parker Pearson
correlates and compares patterning in conventional classes of data
in prehistoric Denmark (burial, votive and settlement evidence),
                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

tracing the supposed expressions of Friedman's transformational
cycles leading to the emergence of states. He claims that his study
has attempted to outline one way of transforming material remains
into social insights (1984a, p. 69). This involves a consideration
of legitimation - conspicuous consumption, manipulation of
ancestors and consciousness of social identity in ritual practices. So
Parker Pearson produces some interesting comments on the
possible relations between the living, the dead, ancestors, gods,
tradition and spiritual sanctioning (1984a, p. 64). But the relation
of material culture to practice is predominantly, for him, one of
exemplification or expression. The particularity and detail of votive
deposits, grave goods, bronze forms, pot designs, are simply
absorbed into the general model.
   Parker Pearson fits together a coherent social logic of transform-
ation, one of competitive aristocracies, inflationary spirals,
appropriation of surplus production and its legitimation (1984,
p. 89). The only significant difference between this and the
processual archaeologies outlined above is its emphasis on relations
of production, their structuring effects on the social totality, and
their ideological legitimation. However, this consideration of
ideology needs to be taken much further (see chapter 3 below).
   The reduction of vital insights and principles of Marxist theory
to the status, of just another approach to be applied to
archaeological data is even more clear in Kristiansen's work on
prehistoric Denmark (1984). Marxist theory is to supply an
evolutionary and systemic explanatory superstructure able to cope
with all forms of archaeological data (1984, pp. 74-5). For
Kristiansen, in effect, Marxism simply provides different boxes and
connecting arrows (figure 2.3). The real strength of approaches
derived from structural Marxist anthropology lies in the attempt to
overcome a functionalist separation and reification of religion,
politics, economics etc. as separate interacting subsystems.
However, in practice, in the process of writing an account of the
past, this seems to have made very little difference, hence the
frequently adopted economistic models and 'applications'.
Kristiansen places great emphasis On the distinction between
cultural form and material function. Basically this amounts to say-
ing that it is necessary to consider the material function of cultural
manifestations: so Kristiansen regards megalithic monuments as an
extension of the organization of production; this is their material
function (pp. 80-1). Religion may have an economic role (p. 76).
This highlights ideological legitimation: cultural form may have a
legitimating (ideological) material function. This, of course, gives
FIGURE 2.3 Kristiansen's 'Basic theoretical concepts' for the analysis of
                        the social formation
  Notes: The solid lines represent selective pressure; the broken lines represent
                                adaptive response.
 Source: From K. Kristiansen (1984). Reprinted by permission of Cambridge
                               University Press.


primacy to the social relations of production - that which needs
legitimation. For Kristiansen ideology thus becomes a 'subjective'
representation of the 'objective' - that which pertains to the social
relations of production (settlement, subsistence, technology) (p. 78).
  A functionalist logic and economism are quite evident here.
Kristiansen proceeds to apply his general social model to the data,
assuming the well-worn distinction between territorial megalithic
chiefdoms and segmentary tribes of the Battle-Axe culture (social
typologies again) (p. 77). It turns out that these represent an
'agricultural' as opposed to a 'pastoral' tribal economy (p. 85).
This, apparently, is the essence of 1,200 years of Danish prehistory.
The different categories of data are mobilized around this
distinction, described as 'very different cultural manifestations of
                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

rather similar material functions of production' (p. 77); that is both
belong to the category of tribal economy.
  As with the processual social archaeologies, Parker Pearson and
Kristiansen present us with a complex and often ingenious and
imaginative interplay of social process involving more or fewer
institutional categories such as economy, ritual, technology,
ideology. This interplay is held to account for patterning identified
in the archaeological record.


           SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY: A SUMMARY

While we acknowledge that the developments in conceptions of the
social advances in archaeology since the early 1960s represent an
immense theoretical improvement vis a vis traditional archaeology,
we wish to follow Hodder (1982a, 1982b, 1985, 1986) in his
summary critique of social archaeology. Hodder draws the
fundamental distinction between social system and structure.
System refers to the patterning and organization of social relation-
ships; structure refers to the rules and concepts which give meaning
to system. He argues that social archaeologies have been almost
entirely concerned with the workings of social systems. This focus
on system has several aspects and implications:

   1 The concept of system emphasizes relations of power
(dependence and authority and hierarchy, the movement and
control of resources), exchange and trade, the character and
control of subsistence, and in Marxist-influenced work strategies of
ideological legitimation.
  2 This conception of the social has been mobilized in archaeology
as research strategies of the recognition and description of pattern.
This has involved classification and ordering of artefacts according
to their attributes, definition of types and styles, and correlation
with other features of system; analysis of artefact distributions for
possible correlations with social groups, activities, exchange
networks; site locational analysis, searching for site hierarchies;
analysis of the patterning of mortuary remains for correlation with
original social context; societal categorization - the description of
the past in terms of bands, tribes etc., its degrees of complexity; the
description of subsistence strategies. These research aims have
provided justification for the utilization of a wide range of
statistical and mathematical techniques (e.g. Hodder and Orton,
1976; Doran and Hodson, 1975).
  .                     SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

   3 In its descriptive emphasis the focus is on what people do
(although Marxist archaeologists may also focus on the structuring
effects of social relations of production). The recognition of system
(not necessarily implying the explicit adoption of a systems theory
framework) is the recognition of regularized patterns of
behaviours. There is little or no theorizing of social action, the
intentional and meaningful practice of knowledgeable social
actors.
   4 The focus on behaviour rather than social action reduces
material culture to an epiphenomenon of the social relations within
which it is inserted - a product of social behaviour; a material
resource to be controlled, exchanged; a sign of social interaction or
difference; or a technology mediating population and environment.
Hence the relative lack of theorization of material culture.
   5 The descriptive emphasis involving behaviours rather than
social action and reduction of material culture to epiphenomenon
allows the fragmentation of theory. Economy may be theorized
separately from ritual because it refers to different sets of
behaviours (compare the outline of archaeological theory at the
beginning of chapter 1).
   6 The reduction of material culture to epiphenomenon also
allows the development of levels of theory. Binford's 'middle-range
theory' (1977, 1983, chs 17, 23-5, 28), as opposed to high-level
social theory, depends on it being possible to predict artefact
deposition without reference to social process.
   7 The aim of processual archaeology is the specification of
relations between variables such as subsistence, environment,
technology, social ranking. These variables are the regularized
patterns of behaviours just mentioned. Hence such social
archaeologies can often be reduced to synoptic diagrams of social
process: boxes and arrows, flow diagrams such as those illustrated
above. A function of the emphasis on description, this reifies the
variables and relations. There is little questioning of the meaning of
the variables which remain essentially arbitrary: why subsistence,
technology, ideology, rather than another categorization? There is
a lack of theorization of the location of these variables in the
practice of archaeological analysis. Usually their choice depends
simply On the acceptance that the variables are analytical.
   8 These variables are defined prior to analysis and, as just
mentioned, are reified categories. This permits and encourages
cross-cultural comparison and generalization. But historical
particularity then becomes a problem: why any particular
subsistence strategy?
                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY                         53

   9 The emphasis on description of system as relations between
variables of patterned behaviours results in a radical occlusion
of the individual. The individual social actor is reduced to a
support (theoretically absent) for the patterns of behaviours or
becomes aggregated into just another variable - population.
   10 A specification of the relations between variables, the
working of the system, and its correlation with, or identification in,
archaeological data is held to constitute an explanation. This is
often implicitly or explicitly functionalist: a variable is held to be
explained if it functions in the working of a whole. But this
singularly fails to explain anything about the particularity of any
variable. Again: why this subsistence strategy, this form of burial
rather than another? Function is not an explanatory concept when
applied to the social; it remains descriptive. Function also tends to
be separated out from style which then becomes a problem: why
this pot design rather than another? (See chapter 4.)
   11 The other problems of functionalism are also present; concepts
such as homoeostatis or adaptation mean that change becomes a
problem originating necessarily in dysfunction or alteration of
parameters external to the system, in the society-environment
relation. This separates statics and dynamics: specification of the
workings of a system is separated from processes of change.
   12 Processual social archaeologies have treated the theorization
of social totality as an issue of definition or specification. The
problem of social units and their boundaries and interaction has
been recognized with the development of concepts of world system
and peer polity interaction. However, there has been little
theorization of the structuring of the totality: what structures the
whole; what is the meaning of the particular relations between the
constituent variables and the wider question of the meaning of
categories such as band, chiefdom; and theorization of societal
boundaries.
   13 Social change tends to be conceived purely descriptively as
the empirical rearrangement of the variables of patterned
behaviours. In that these variables are reified and defined prior to
analysis, neo-evolutionary cross-cultural frameworks of cultural
change are facilitated. These are extensively criticized in chapter 6.
We simply comment here that the particularity of the historical
event and context becomes a problem, occluded in the description
of social process.
   Hodder has stressed the necessity of considering social structure
- the context of meanings of any social act; the generative rules
                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

which form structured sets. A question such as why one subsistence
strategy existed in a particular social totality rather than another,
equally 'adaptive', can only be answered by considering the
meaningful context of the subsistence strategy, the rules which
generate any particular social action - this is the question of
structure (cf. the notion of structure adopted in processual
archaeology in the analysis of mortuary practices discussed above).
It is necessary to consider the meaning context and structure of, for
example, a particular system of ranking or a particular subsistence
strategy, not least because 'behind the social system is a structure of
meaning which determines the relationship between material
culture and society' (Hodder, 1982b, p. 153). As archaeologists we
are concerned with how social system extends into material culture;
this requires a theorization of material culture which must take
structure into account. We take up the concept of structure in more
detail in chapter 3 and consider it in relation to material culture in
chapter 4.



 SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY AND A LOGIC OF NECESSITY

In extending our critique of social archaeology we now take up
some ideas developed by Laclau and Mouffe (1985) and consider
two assumptions which lie behind most social archaeology:

1 That the social constitutes an intelligible totality, conceptually
  explicable and definable (in whatever senses).
2 That the history of society has a rational substratum (this is, of
  course, the rationale for evolutionary archaeology of whatever
  sort).
We argue that both of these assumptions involve a logic of
necessity. Key elements of 'society' or the social totality are defined
in the abstract and related by some form of social logic: descriptive,
cybernetic, economistic, functionalist etc. These elements become
the metasubject of History. The concrete, the particular is subsumed
beneath the abstract categories; the mass of data is brought to
order, classified, reduced to its essentials.
   There are two basic arguments in this process:

1    An argument from appearance: surface appearances, differ-
    ences can be reduced to identity.
                         SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

2 An argument from contingency: if surface data or differences
  cannot be easily incorporated into a category, they do not
  matter, or at the very least are irrelevant, contingent to the
  social model being used.

   A logic of necessity defines the necessary categories, the
necessary character and relations of elements of the social. It
specifies which things are necessary for society to be society. A
logic of necessity involves a research strategy of recognition
- recognizing pattern in the data which relates to elements or
categories or concepts defined and related in the assumed social
model. Pattern becomes an emanation of the pre-defined and
eternal essential: what necessarily constitutes the social totality.
History and the social totality are conceived as having essences,
essential features, which operate as their principle of unity. They
have something in common: the essential, the necessary. History
itself is ordered according to processes of selection (of that which
supposedly pertains to its essential meaning), incorporation into
general abstract and necessary categories, and exclusion of that
which is deemed irrelevant. History is brought to order. Everything
is to be accounted for, whether in terms of incorporation or
exclusion, conceived as representing the necessary or the
contingent. So the telos of a logic of necessity is totality: everything
in its place. Selection, incorporation and exclusion thus become a
legal system behind the order; they represent reason's pretension to
legislate and control history, bringing order to an anarchy of
dispersed particularity and difference.
   Consider Bradley's book, The Social Foundations of Prehistoric
Britain (1984). This is a thematic synopsis. It brings the mass of
data to order through the literal application of models drawn from
anthropology and anthropologically informed archaeology. Each
chapter takes a theme as a means of explaining a particular stretch
of chronology. Hence in chapter 2, entitled 'Constructions of the
dead', scenarios are sketched for the period 3500-2500 BC
involving the possible relation of farming communities to economic
resources and ancestors and focusing on the construction of
communal tombs. Test implications are drawn (how to recognize
each scenario or model); then the patterning in the data is assessed
against the model. It is, again, a search for empirical patterning
directly representing social process. But there is a remainder to
Bradley's effort: variety. He comments: 'within the general
framework suggested here [chapter 7: a general synthesis], there are
numerous variants... I doubt whether this book has come to terms
  •                     SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

with the sheer complexity of the evidence' (p. 166). The range of
explanatory models appearing in the book are very limited: prestige
goods economies (some with core/periphery distinction); ritual in
agricultural society; conspicuous consumption. Bradley ends up
with three cycles of prestige goods economies explaining 4,500
years of prehistory in Britain.
   But what happens to all the detail? It is all subsumed? Does it
simply support the models? Will there always be this remainder?
This contingency? The irrelevancy of so much detail? One answer
offered to this problem is that of pluralism. It is accepted that
different archaeological approaches emphasize or select different
aspects of the data base. So subsistence studies supplement social
evolutionary work supplemented by palaeoenvironmental studies
(e.g. Rowley-Conwy, 1986, p. 28). Such pluralism is considered
healthy, fostering debate, adding to the richness of archaeology as
a discipline (Renfrew, 1982, 1983) and covering a wide variety of
aspects of the archaeological past.
   However, the different approaches may well imply different
totalities conceived as explanatory context for archaeological data:
for example, the ecosystem for palaeoeconomy as opposed to social
formation for Marxist archaeologists. How are these different
totalities to be reconciled? One answer has been the search for a
metasystem, a totality, theoretical or substantive, which can
incorporate all approaches. Clarke's project of an analytical
archaeology (1968; cf. 1973) can be viewed as such a totalizing
systematics. More recently, Kristiansen (1984, p. 74) has claimed
that Marxism (or, at least, his version of it) provides an integrative
framework which supposedly incorporates all archaeological
aspirations (for him a systemic and evolutionary outlook). On the
other hand, we have already argued that any approach may be
deemed to be acceptable so long as it conforms to the canons of
what is presupposed to be rational method (see chapter 1). Hence
different approaches are simply irreconcilable; their sole unity is
simply that they have been used by those individuals who label
themselves archaeologists.
   None of these answers challenge a logic of necessity. The result is
as we described in chapter 1: archaeology labouring under an
extraordinary redundancy of detail, so much apparently irrelevant
particularity, theoretically fragmented, a labyrinth of borrowed
approaches and levels of theory.
   We have described a logic of necessity as involving a set of
categorical oppositions:
                          SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

             Totality                        Fragment
             Necessity                       Contingency
             Essence                         Appearance
             General                         Particular
             Abstract                        Concrete
             Identity                        Difference
             Incorporation                   Dispersal
             Legality                        Anarchy

The left hand column is given priority over the right. Ultimately
this relates to the general conception of the archaeological record
(mentioned at the beginning of this chapter) which involves an
occlusion of the individual; social actors are conceived as
essentially lost in comparison to the social unit or whole of which
they were a part. The social whole is thus split, theoretically and
substantively, from the individual. As in chapter 1, we shall use the
strategy of mediation as a way forward. First, we shall outline a
logic of contingency, and then in the next chapter present a theory
of the individual and social practice.


                  A LOGIC OF CONTINGENCY

We argue that 'Society', in the sense of the social totality of a logic
of necessity, doesn't exist. There can be no general and abstract
categories nor systems of logic which coherently represent social
totalities or history. Nothing exists in itself, self-identical, a full
presence to itself in a relationship of total interiority. Such
existence is by definition transcendental; so involving a
metaphysical assumption, an appeal to foundational legislative
authority, substantia, the Cartesian cogito, a legal system (such as
rational method), a logic of essences. There is no ultimate literality,
literal existence, objective substance, 'society', from which
artefacts, social relations etc. can be derived; there are no identities
fixed for all time. It is therefore not possible to specify society as the
object of archaeology (Rowlands had made this point in advocating
'world systems', stressing the problem of the edges of 'society'; cf.
also Giddens, 1981, pp, 23, 82-3, on societal space-time edges).
Instead, we wish to stress internal relations (relations which have no
existence separate from the entities they relate, being part of those
entities). On the question of identity - the identity of anything does
not consist of a list of attributes (to what would they belong?), but
                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

must be referred to a relational order. As we argued in chapter 1,
identity presupposes a relation of difference to something else.
Identity is differential, depending on systems of difference,
relational sequences. Identity is always incomplete, never final
because of the potential infinity of relations of difference. There is
always a surplus of meaning because the presence or trace of some
things in others (their internal relations) prevents total fixation,
prevents meaning being pinned precisely down. And that identity is
regularity in a relational system presupposes a practice of
establishing order. Identities are established in practice. All this
means that every identity - social, conceptual or material - is
negotiated in practice. This act of negotiation is a political practice.
   To adopt such a position is to assert that the social is open. Social
order is an achievement of practice, it is a domestication of
difference, a political project of creating order, fixing identity,
cutting down the surplus of meaning. 'Society' is not a datum, an
abstract given, but a construction. Hence 'necessity', as we have
used the term, doesn't refer to underlying principles or essences
(that which is necessary for 'society' to be 'society'), but refers to a
practice of fixing contingency. This is also to accept over-
determination (Althusser's use of the term) of entities - the
'economic' may be overdetermined by the 'religious' because the
economic has no essential identity, no automatic necessity, its
meaning is established in social practice.
   At this point it is instructive to consider another 'remainder' in
Bradley's book (1984): the series of epigraphs heading the chapters.
What is their purpose? Entertainment? They appear unnecessary,
contingent; some seem to be held to convey eternal truths about the
human lot, but none are discussed or taken up in detail. The
epigraphs punctuate the text, punctuate history. As literary devices,
they are a presence of textuality. They draw attention to the book
as text; but textuality, discourse, is an absent theoretical presence in
Bradley's synopsis. Bradley's discourse is one of plenitude
- compilation, the filling out of a theme, a position. The text fills a
gap. Its presence presents the past; it conveys the past more or less
transparently; language is conceived as a neutral vehicle to present
the past. That discourse itself is an event is eclipsed (existing only in
the gaps, at the margins - in Bradley's epigraphs). But, as we have
stressed, we write archaeology now. Discourse is not identical with
the past; concepts are not identical with the past. It is essential to
realize this. There is no necessity about doing archaeology or
writing archaeological texts; archaeological discourse is a contem-
porary event, not abstract plenitude. Knowledge is not a
                         SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY                          59

recognition of the eternal (as implied in a logic of necessity) but is
fundamentally part of contemporary social practice, rooted
therefore in political relations of power.
  We can now draw some points together:

   1 We argue against social archaeologies which are reductionist
or essentialist, reducing the particular to an abstract social logic, to
a priori categories, defining and searching for essential features of
society and history.
   2 This means there can be no hierarchy of determination: for
example, that the economic, or more general relations between
population and environment, determine the general form and
trajectory of society as opposed to other institutional forms such as
the 'political' or the 'religious'.
   3 Concomitantly, there are no universal series of social units,
such as band, tribe, lineage, mode of production, available for use
in archaeological analysis. Such over-generalised concepts need to
be abandoned.
   4 We wish to stress not a better definition of 'society' as a layer
cake or flow diagram, but rather the construction and constitution
of social order in social practice. The social is an overdetermined
relational whole, an open field of relations, an indeterminate
articulation. Social order is constituted in the practice of individual
social actors which relates to historical context, not an abstract
universal pattern. This is to stress the primacy of the political:
practical negotiation, strategy and power in the structuring of
social reality.
   5 A corollary of the fourth point is the need to stress the prac-
tical constitution of the past in the discipline of archaeology.
Archaeology is a discursive event; its practice is a mediation of
archaeological subject and object, present and past. Neither can be
reduced to the other. The archaeological object cannot be precisely
and conceptually captured. Past and present can only be held
together in their difference, in their non-identity in the event of
interpretation. Rather than a totalizing systematics of precise self-
contained concepts, this requires a different and critical set of con-
cepts themselves rooted in the event of interpretation. For example,
'totality' is not to be regarded as an affirmative, but as a critical
category - the idea of critique finds its roots in the Greek krinein:
to separate, distinguish, judge, condemn, contend, struggle. This is
to affirm the importance of polemic; only polemically, we might
also say politically and rhetorically, does reason present itself as a
total reality. Hence a total system is a political project of fixing
 60            SOCIAL          ARCHAEOLOGY
everything in place, a legal system of control. In this sense we need
to convict totality of non-identity with itself, to deny a totalizing
systematics, the final solution to all archaeological ills. But at the
same time material culture can only be understood through teasing
out its relations with other entities, setting it within a relational
whole, tracing its dispersal, its meaning within social practice.
   6 We need also to appreciate the materiality of'the archaeological
object. The artefact is a material fragment, a riddle neither directly
revealing nor concealing 'the past', 'society' or whatever category.
Artefacts do not represent the past, they are not a property of
the past. Artefacts signify. Signification requires reading, inter-
pretation, not an application of 'method' which produces its
object in advance. Consequently, there are no progressive stages
through which analysis must pass, for example moving from the
more general to the particular, or incorporating data in wider and
wider scales of categories. We conceive interpretation as an act
renouncing finality, as a denial of universal history, the idea of
coherent unity and completed development. Interpretation is
associated with a strategic knowledge (Shanks and Tilley, 1987,
ch. 5), not abstracted from its social conditions of production, but
polemically responding to specific conditions, attending to historical
and political circumstances, a knowledge rooted in contemporary
structures of power.
   In the chapter that follows we present a set of concepts which we
intend as a contribution to this programme of a critical social
archaeology, beginning with the concept of the individual or the
subject.
       The Individual and the
               Social

          ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE INDIVIDUAL

If, as Wheeler claimed (1954, p. 13), archaeologists are digging up
people, how is this the case? Where is the individual in the archae-
ological past? Are archaeological data collective, going beyond the
individual personality? If so, in what sense? Individuals have
appeared in the archaeological literature as powerful but
anonymous agencies, for example a 'paramount chief might be
inferred from the construction of Stonehenge, Silbury Hill or the
Bush Barrow in the second millenium BC of Wessex. The work of
an individual artisan may, perhaps, be recognized from examples
of their work (Hill and Gunn (eds), 1977), but here individuality is
reduced to idiosyncracy and creativity. Literary sources may, of
course, rescue an individual from anonymity. However,
archaeology has been predominantly concerned with units larger
than the individual. We now want to assess this absence of the
individual in considering the mediation of the individual and
society.


                 Other cultures and other subjects
In the conclusion to his Huxley Memorial lecture of 1938 Mauss
wrote:

  From a mere masquerade to a mask, from a role to a person, to a
  name, to an individual, from the last to a being with a metaphysical
  and ethical value, from a moral consciousness to a sacred being,
  from the latter to a fundamental form of thought and action... who
  knows even if this 'category', which all of us believe to be well
  founded, will always be recognised as such.
                                                   (Mauss, 1979, p. 90)
62                    THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

The 'category' that Mauss was referring to is the concept of the
human subject, here conceived as a muted and variable entity
radically open to different forms of constitution, both temporally
and in different societies. Such a notion conflicts with our
common-sense, twentieth-century Western ideas about what it
means to be a human subject and the manner in which people live,
think and relate to others.
   There has probably never been a society which did not recognize
the individual subject by such means as naming or being able to
differentiate between and perceive physical bodies, but we should
not conclude from this too readily that a transhistorical or
transcultural form of subjectivity has ever existed, or exists now.
Persons are not in any sense to be regarded as given and un-
problematic entities. Conceptions of the subject differ between
cultures and have altered historically in tandem with the practices,
institutions and forms of reference constituting subjectivity; the
obvious concomitants of this are differences in bodily gesture,
practices of discourse, and patterns of conduct and interaction.
Mauss (ibid.) usefully challenges any notion of a person as being
reducible to a set of natural (biological) processes or as arising as a
transcendental spin-off of a unitary 'human experience' of the
world or society; or equally, as being a datum related to some
supposed universal consciousness of individuality. Particular ways
of specifying the individual or individuality may arise in all
societies, but this does not necessarily entail a specification of
subjects as being in any sense unique entities imbued with a distinc-
tive consciousness, will or intentionality. Although naming of
individuals is a commonplace in societies, i.e. the specification of a
subject within systems of persons, this naming does not necessarily
imply the constitution of persons as distinctive individual beings. In
other words names and statuses while specifying persons do not
necessarily individuate an autonomous ego as a separate agent with
a personalized consciousness and independently constituted mode
of individuality. In regard to Zuni: 'on the one hand the clan is
conceived as constituted by a certain number of persons, activities,
roles; and, on the other, the purpose of all these roles is really to
symbolize, each in its own portion, the pre-figured totality of the
clan' (Mauss, 1979, 65). In ancient China the individuality of a
person was his or her ming and this removed from individuals all
the connotations of perceptible, individual being:

     the name, the ming, is a collective noun, it is something that has
     come from elsewhere: the corresponding ancestor had borne it and it
                    THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL                           63

   will be inherited by a descendant of the bearer. And when the matter
   was considered philosophically, when in certain metaphysical
   systems the attempt was made to express the matter, it was said that
   the individual is a compound of shen and kwei (two more collective
   nouns).
                                                         (Ibid., p. 76-7)


   This suggests that actual concepts of personage may vary
markedly from one group to the next and that the modern Western
conception of a person as a bounded, unified and integrated being,
a subject of distinctive cognition and dynamic centre of awareness,
emotion, action and judgement is a rather peculiar idea. The ethno-
centric bias of such a notion is very clearly brought out in Geertz's
analysis of individuality in Javanese, Balinese and Moroccan
societies. The Javanese concept of a person is arranged in terms of
two sets of essentially religious symbolic contrasts: inside/outside;
refined/vulgar - both of which subsume individuals. The former
contrast differentiates between relations of human experience and
spirituality and is contrasted with the observed realm of bodily
behaviour, but both are considered to be an identical component of
all individuals; the latter distinguishes between different sets of
conduct. Individual persons become the momentary locus through
which the two sets of oppositions prevail and confront each other
- a passing expression of the permanency of these oppositions in
human existence (Geertz, 1979, pp. 230-1). In Balinese society all
aspects of personalized individuation are completely stylized, so
that individuals become, in effect, dramatis personae in a symbolic
play of affective emotions and actions. Physical subjects become,
according to Geertz, 'incidents in a happenstance history' (p. 232).
In Morocco personal being has a chameleon-like quality, differing
according to the context for action, and individuals become
effectively kaleidoscopes in the mosaic of social organization.


    Construction of the self: the imaginary and the symbolic
Lacan, in his rereading of Freud, has explored the problematic
relation between the subject and the social. This relation, he
proposes, can be conceptualized in terms of two modes or realms in
which the subject apprehends reality: the symbolic and the
imaginary. As these are interdependent, the subject is always
located at the intersection of the criss-crossing axes of the real, the
symbolic and the imaginary. The symbolic order is that which
confers meaning and relates the subject to a place in the social
order of other subjects. The imaginary is the order in which the
64                THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

subject develops a self-centred consciousness. The real is always an
absent presence - that to which the symbolic and imaginary relate.
Such a conception leads to the decentering of individual con-
sciousness which is no longer regarded as the origin of meaning,
knowledge and action.
   Lacan proposes that the child, at birth, is a hommelette, a little
person and also 'like a broken egg spreading in all directions'
(Coward and Ellis, 1977, p. 101). The child, at this stage, has no
sense of its own identity and no possibility of conceiving of itself as
a unity distanced from that which is other or exterior to it. In the
'mirror phase' (Lacan, 1977, pp. 1-7), the child learns to recognize
itself through the mirror as a being distinct from the outside world,
yet this identity is also imaginary because it is an imaged or a
specular knowledge. The child's imaginary identity with its image
in the mirror (the 'other') is the manner in which the infant forms
an image of itself as a distinctive objective entity. The imaginary
relation of the ego to the body characterized by the mirror phase is
constituted via a specular counterpart and so the relationship
between subject and ego is essentially narcissistic. The image is
more constituent than constituted for the infant. This specular
form situates the agency of the ego prior to any social deter-
mination in an imaginary or fictional direction - imaginary and
fictional because it suggests some degree of permanency to the I,
rather than the I as always something being constructed. In the
mirror phase the subject is represented as an image or something
other, a stand-in reflection of the self and yet, paradoxically, this
image constitutes part of the subject's self-knowledge and self-
awareness.
   It is only with the child's entry into language that it becomes a.
'full' subject entering into a determinate field of signification, of
which the paramount example is language use. Speech entails the
differentiation of I from you and creates a division between the
subject of the enunciation and the subject of the enonce, between
the I that speaks and the I that is represented in discourse and that
ultimately disperses the unity of the subject. The subject is situated
in discourse by the 'I' and yet this I is always a substitute for the
subject that speaks. The child that speaks always has to identify
with the I yet this I is formed in terms of a matrix of symbolically
defined relations and subject positions. As the subject is always
linguistically and discursively constructed he or she is always a
displaced or decentred subject, displaced and constituted across the
whole gamut of discursive symbolic and material practices making
up the social field. Hence there can be no unmediated discourse, no
pure constitution of the self. The self is always created in relation to
                     THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL                              65

the other and the subject loses control over meaning and
signification in the parallel objectivity of discourse (Lacan, 1977, p.
70). Rather than being a given, the subject is an entity linked to and
dependent on various strata of consciousness so that 'a signifier is
that which represents a subject not for another subject, but for
another signifier' (Lacan, 1973, pp. 180-1). Signifiers do not link
individuals to other individuals, or even to the world, but to other
signifiers. The subject therefore becomes an effect of the realm of
signifiers within any particular socially constructed symbolic field
and the subject's 'reality' is situated within this order. The subject
should be considered as a subject in process, in a constant state of
definement, individuation and construction: a network rather than
a point in the social field. The reality of the subject, produced by
discourse, is a transindividual reality. This entails that the
experience of the subject has to be located at the level of the sym-
bolic. The capacity to symbolize allows people to situate themselves
in reality and yet subjects are never in a position to establish any
control over the symbolic because people do not produce their own
meaning: structures of signification are always given to them.
Signification is a function of language and material practices which
are both part of the being of the subject and yet at the same time
distanced. Language is always received ready-made for subjects to
use. At the same time it is through language use that the individual
gains an identity and a capacity to transform the conditions of his
or her existence. The subject cannot find his or her truth in a cogito
because identity is dispersed in a field of signifiers in which the
individual locates himself or herself and yet is dependent on a
dimension which is always something more. The realm of the
imaginary constructs and organizes a world centred on the subject
while the subject's existential reality is radically decentred. The
thought of humanity

   always faces the exhausting task of going back from the thought to
   the thinker; everything it says about man, is said by man, and this
   man is man only through that which isn't he, through the life of him
   and the culture around him . . . he is always other, the other of
   others, and the other of his self: subject when he is object, object
   when he is subject.
                    (Dufrenne. 1967, p. 73, cited in Racevskis, 1983, p. 144)

                         History and the subject
It is, perhaps, most fully in the dialogue promoted by
psychoanalysis that the paradoxical nature of the Western myth of
the autonomous ego is most clearly revealed:
66                    THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

     Does the subject not become engaged in an ever-growing
     dispossession of that being of his, concerning which - by dint of
     sincere portraits which leave its idea no less incoherent, of
     rectifications that do not succeed in freeing its essence, of stays and
     defences that do not prevent his statue from tottering, of narcissistic
     embraces that become like a puff of air in animating it - he ends up
     by recognizing that this being has never been anything more than his
     construct in the imaginary and that this construct disappoints all his
     certainties? For in this labour which he undertakes to reconstruct for
     another, he rediscovers the fundamental alienation that made him
     construct it like another, and which has always destined it to be taken
     from him by another.
                                                        (Lacan, 1977, p. 42)

Lacan notes that the 'ce suis-je' of the time of Villon (mid-fifteenth
century) has become completely reversed in the 'c'est moi' of the
contemporary subject (ibid., p. 70). The subject and subjectivity in
mathematics, politics, religion or \ advertising animates
contemporary society and yet the symbolic character of these
cultural interventions has at the same time never been more
manifest. Yet this symbolic culture appears to us as having the
character of an objective plenitude, the 'objectivity' of the
mathematical symbol, the 'objectivity' of law and political
discourse, of religious statements and the advertising image.
   Foucault, in stating that 'man is an invention of recent date' and
that were the structure of contemporary discourse transcended he
would be 'erased like a face drawn in sand at the edge of the sea'
(Foucault, 1974, p. 387), is making more than a rhetorical point.
Foucault's archaeologies of Western culture, of knowledge, the
clinic, incarceration and sexuality, have all signalled poignantly the
radically different conception of the subject in Western capitalism
as compared to that existing in pre-capitalist social formations. His
focus on the decades around 1800 in The Order of Things is
especially significant in so far as this was the period in which the
'sciences of man' - those sciences which privileged humanity as a
centre and telos of their domain - were originally constructed, soon
to take on their recognizable modern positivity. This was the
appearance of Western humanity as a subject in and of discourse.
Sometime at the end of the eighteenth century humanity appeared.
Previously discourse had provided a fairly transparent medium of
representation with linguistic forms and relations corresponding to
specific elements in the world in which God had arranged a great
chain of being and drawn language into correspondence with it.
Humans were merely one kind of creation among many, each with
                   THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL                      67

its allotted space, the essences, natures and definitions of which
could be read off from a table of beings. There was no need for a
finite being, MAN, to make representation possible or posit the
existence of the nature of being in the world: 'In Classical thought,
the personage for whom the representation exists, and who
represents himself therein as an image or reflection, he who ties
together all the interlacing threads of the "representation in the
form of a picture or table" - he is never to be found in that table
himself (ibid., p. 308). Instead of humanity as a being amongst
other beings, he or she becomes a subject amongst objects and both
the subject and object of self-understanding, knowledge and the
organizer of a spectacle for self-appearance: 'the threshold of our
modernity is situated not by the attempt to apply objective methods
to the study of man, but rather by the constitution of an empirico-
transcendental doublet which was called man' (ibid., p. 319).
   Under this doublet 'man' appears as (1) a fact among other facts
to be studied empirically yet at the same time providing a
transcendental grounding for this knowledge; (2) surrounded by
that which cannot be comprehended (the unknown) and yet as a
potentially lucid cogito and source of all intelligibility (the cogito of
Descartes); (3) a product of history, the origins of which could not
be reached, and also the source or foundation for that history.

             Formation and constitution of the subject
The subject of Western society is a subject very much bound up
with and arising from the field of capitalist social relations and
lending support to the principles underlying capitalist production
(entrepreneurial freedom, competition etc.) Forms of property, law •
and contract, notions of individual mortality and the proprietal
subject enjoying certain 'rights' all arise from the reality of
individual private possession linked with commodity exchange
(Hirst, 1980). The proprietal subject who owns and acquires com-
modities also has certain possessive rights. Notions of greed,
selfishness, laziness etc. only make sense in terms of, are ideational
prerequisites for, and concomitants of capitalism which produces
and reinforces subjects of a specific type - subjects who must be
held accountable for their doings in the capitalist market place and
who are supposedly free to radically alter the conditions of their
own social existence.
   This is not to claim that the mode of production simply deter-
mines the nature of subjectivity but that subjectivity is inextricably
bound up with it. As we have argued, any social totality must be
68                     THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

viewed as an ensemble of partially integrated symbolic systems
including language, economic relations, cultural production,
religion, politics, which are mutually determining without there
being any primacy of determination at any one level. Different
forms of social life coexist in the form of an overall and overdeter-
mined set of correspondences made possible by the symbolic nature
of human thought and interaction. It is in terms of this network of
correspondences, which do not exclude the possibility of gaps or
fissures, that the subject finds explanation and justification for a
particular mode of being and action. The subject becomes a
transindividual relation made possible by the symbolic order both
permitting the existence of subjects and the symbolic experience of
those subjects. So-called 'humanist' attempts to explain society and
history by taking as their starting point a human essence, the free
subject of needs, work, moral and political action, find their reflec-
tion in the 'free' subject that is also the subject of the Law, playing
a key role in the reproduction of capitalist social relations. As
Barthes notes, the judicial notion of a consistent and unitary
subject derives its power only in the form of being a particular
representation:

     this psychology has . . . the pretext of giving as a basis for action a
     pre-existing inner person, it postulates 'the soul': it judges men as a
     'conscience'... in the name of which you can very well today have
     your head cut off [and] comes straight from our traditional
     literature, that which one calls in bourgeois style literature of the
     Human Document.
                                                        (Barthes, 1973, p. 45)

Social relations cannot be reduced to the fiction of a domain of
interacting and free agents.
   The very idea of a subject that can both speak and be spoken
about entails a paradox inherent in the use of the term in ordinary
language. The subject of discourse can be that which denotes as
well as that which is denoted. The subject understood as an
embodiment of thought is a subject that creates or sustains sense.
The subject can also be something that is brought under
domination or repressive control: that which has the capacity to
subject. So, the subject can be a support or medium for discourse
and at the same time be controlled or dominated by discourse or
material practices: an active agent and an agent acted upon. This
brings us to subjectivity, subjugation, agency and power.
                  THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL                    69

                      Subjectivity and power
The appearance of humanity in a field of discourse, as documented
by Foucault, can be regarded as issuing in a new mode of social
existence in which people become subjectified and reified as objects
of knowledge - 'bodies' in a field of forces constituted by power-
knowledge strategies instituting an integration of the subject in
terms of the overall social field.
   New methods of classification, hierarchization, codification,
surveillance and a disciplinary technology focusing upon the body
developed in the nineteenth century, producing fresh types of
coercion and subjectification. The prison (Foucault, 1977) remains
one example, among many, of the technology of discipline,
surveillance and punishment - one of the most visible and clearly
articulated sites of practices widespread in society. In Foucault's
terms Western societies are disciplinary societies. In the present
context this is important because discipline creates a new type of
subject, a fresh form of subjectivity, and a novel manner of sub-
jugation.

   1 Discipline operates on the body. The subject is approached as
an object to be analysed and separated into finely controlled consti-
tuent parts: arms, legs, head etc. The aim of these operations is to
produce a docile and easily manipulated body. For example
different parts of the body may be minutely trained, as in army
drill, with a standardization of operations being the ideal.
   2 Discipline results in the control of time and space. Discipline
requires precise control of time and the regular repetition of
practices in time, for example the school timetable. Space and the
organization of individuals in space is produced in specific ways;
hospitals, prisons, schools, factories and military establishments all
establish and operate in terms of ordered grid patterns allowing
individuals to be divided, organized and supervised. The act of
looking over and being looked at is a central means by which
individuals become controlled in disciplinary space and time.
   3 Discipline results in a proliferation of discourses enmeshing the
subject and individualizing him or her. By means of the
compilation of detailed records and dossiers on individuals every
subject becomes a subject that can be known, subjected to a
normalizing judgement and discourses of power. Deviancy from
the standards of the disciplinary apparatus can be measured, defined
and controlled.
70                THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

Discipline in contemporary Western societies is a manifestation of
power. The development of Western discursive practices, especially
in institutional and official bureaucratic forms, has favoured the
development of discourses and practices that actualize domination
and repression throughout the social field: the family, the school,
the museum, the hospital, the factory. Thus a new potential for
violence and subjugation is actualized in the very systematism of
power strategies. What constitutes the subject and forms of
subjugation is the operation of power, both as a positive and as a
negative force in society, by producing knowledges and actualizing
them in specific forms. We might then say no power without
subjects and subjugation and no subjects or subjugation without
power.
   What we are stressing is the centrality of power in social life.
Power is a force and process to be found in all social totalities and,
historically, different modalities of the operation of power produce
different subjects, forms of subjectivity and types of subjugation,
One concomitant of this is that the subject in capitalist social
formations will have a fundamentally different type of subjectivity
and be subject to different forms of subjugation than in other
societies. Specific forms of practices which produce subjects in
contemporary western society might be delineated:

1 Modes of inquiry which produce 'truths' giving themselves the
  status of sciences and objectivizing the subject in various ways:
  for example the positivist social sciences.
2 The development of practices in which the subject becomes
  divided from within or without so objectivizing him or her: for
  example divisions between the criminal and the upright citizen,
  the sane and the insane, the healthy and the sick, the sober and
  the alcoholic or drug user.
3 Discourses in which people turn themselves into subjects:: for
  example as subjects of sexuality or capital accumulation and
  commodity exchange.
4 Creation of subjects in terms of ethnic or social or religious
  divisions.
5 Creation of subjects in terms of those who possess knowledge
  and those who do not.
6 Creation of subjects as effects of the division of labour and
  economic exploitation separating individuals from what they
  produce.
7 Forms of property, law and contract create subjects with
  specific 'rights' and 'claims'.
                   THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL                   71

8 Creation of subjects in language, communication through
  material or linguistic forms, i.e. the realm of the symbolic.
9 Ideological practices create subjects, practices which are
  interbedded and intertwined in points 1-8 above.

   An examination of the category 'person ', 'subject' or 'agent'
reveals it to be by no means universal, nor a homogeneous unity.
Following Lacan we might also argue that individual consciousness
is not the simple origin of meaning, knowledge and action. Instead
the human subject is situated in a social and symbolic field. The
conception of an autonomous ego, is, after Foucault and Lacan,
historically specific; a feature of the emergence of the human
sciences, the agent must be situated within historical practice. This
draws attention again to archaeology as discourse, a practice
constituting objects of knowledge. Foucault's work also shows the
centrality of power in the constitution of subjectivity, and in social
practices more generally. Social practice involves subjectivity and
subjugation, power to and power over, agency and control. So
power is both creative and oppressive and social actors are
knowledgeable, not passive.
   In the last chapter we questioned the category of the social,
interrogating its coherence and definition and pointing to its
location within archaeological practice. We argued instead for an
open conception of social order stressing its constitution in social
practices, which immediately involve relations of negotiation,
strategy and power. In this chapter we have extended this position
in arguing that the individual social subject is dispersed and
decentred, situated in a nexus of power, historical and political
practice and the symbolic. We now focus on the mediation of the
social and the individual in considering social practice and
structure.


            SOCIAL PRACTICE AND STRUCTURE

In social practice the individual agent is always already positioned
in relation to structure: relational sets of meanings,.concepts, signs
which provide principles for conduct in a meaningful life-world.
Any social acts draws upon these already existing structured sign
systems or conceptual schemes for the ordering of experience; but
every manifestation of structure in an action is a concretization of
structure through its effects on social practice and on the object
world. This realization of structure contains the possibility of the
72                THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

reordering or transformation of structures because meanings and
principles for conduct are re-evaluated in practice, in the
negotiation between and manipulation of social agents, in the
historical and conjunctural circumstances of practice, and through
the contingent effects of unintended consequences of practice.
   Action, in other words, is in dialectical relation to structure and
social context. It begins in structure, is mediated by structure, and
ends in structure, but its realization in the world may result in the
rearticulation or transformation of structure. This is the concept of
structuration: structure is both a medium and an outcome of social
practice (Giddens, 1979, 1984). So individuals pursue projects
which make sense in terms of structure. Negotiation and strategy
are central to this social practice which is a chronic relation of
forces between social agents with differing aims and interests. This
is what we mean in emphasizing social practice as fundamentally
political, in emphasizing the centrality of relations of power.


                              POWER

Power, in archaeology, has been conceived primarily in terms of
ranking and control. As a possession, some sections of society have
more power than others; they have more status. In this way power
is conceived to flow from the top to the bottom of society. Ranking
comes to refer to the unequal distribution of power. Power
seemingly requires theorization in terms .of some sort of essence
which may be possessed. The concept is reified. Archaeologists
have concentrated very much on the role played by power and
ranking in the reproduction of society, on describing patterns of
hierarchy and control of resources (see chapter 2).
   We take a different line. Any analysis of power concerns us with
the social roots of power, attempts to achieve and maintain power,
and counter attempts to subvert power strategies and sap the social
bases of power on the part of those subjected to its exercise. Power
should not be understood in terms of an all-important essence in
society residing at a specific place, something which may be
possessed, 'taken up' and exercised. Instead, power is a feature of
society which is irreducible to individuals or groups or specific
areas of the social field such as the economic or the political. In
other words, power has no necessary and unitary form of existence.
Rather than being conceived as a feature of the social we regard it
as being coextensive with the social field as a whole. Relations of
power are thus interwoven and networked with respect to the
                   THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL                   73

specific conditions of existence and effects of social practices.
Power resides throughout: the entire gamut of social practices and
in the structural ordering of society. Power is that aspect of human
practices which brings about effects, or permits the achievement or
attempted achievement of outcomes. These may or may not be
transformative in intent. Power may usually be connected with the
sectional interests of individuals or groups involving exploitation,
domination and subjection, and resistance to these practices, but
this is its usual effect rather than part of its definition. Power is
also a positive and not just a repressive feature of the social.
   Power resides in all social intercourse because in any social
encounter actors inevitably employ, to a greater or lesser extent,
different sets of resources, material or non-material. Power relates
to and works in terms of these material (technologies, raw
materials, control over coercive and non-coercive media) and non-
material resources (knowledge, information, position within the
overall field of social relations, competences and skills), which
individuals, groups and collectivities draw upon routinely in their
day-to-day conduct. Power is dialectically related to these
resources. It both draws upon and reproduces them. This is why
power is not something exercised by individuals, something which
can be possessed, but the effects of its operation usually result in a
structured asymmetry of resources benefiting certain individuals or
groups as opposed to others. Power is, therefore, to be linked with
interests, but not as a reflection of interests but rather a feature
which works through interests in a variety of forms and without a
predetermined outcome. Consequently power, and struggles
operating in terms of power, form a fundamental feature of
societal reproduction and transformation (see chapter 6).


                         THE SYMBOLIC

We have already discussed how the subject is situated in a symbolic
field: the symbolic, signs and signification, is an essential
dimension of social practice. It, too, mediates practice.
   Actions are not just constrained and limited by external
conditions such as the friction of physical space but also by the
conceptual categories by means of which the social is constituted.
Cognition, however, does not simply posit limits but also creates a
field of possibilities for action. The social world as cognized by
social actors has both referential value and existential meaning.
Any conception of history as meaningful must recognize that signs
74                     THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

are always already situated in structures but whose meaning may be
reconstituted in action. Signs relate to other signs in structure as a
collective symbolic scheme providing meaning for action. In
structure signs have an abstract sense, signifying within a collective
scheme of signification in terms of their relations with other signs
(see chapter 4, pp. 136-43). Although signs relate to other signs in
structure in an abstract fashion, their relationship to action entails a
different significance. It is one of potential rearticulation and the
constitution of fresh meanings. In action signs become positioned
in a contingent relationship with regard to individual purposive
activity and collective social strategies. In the contextual matrices
of situated social activities signs become set in a contingent
relationship to objects. They may take on a particular rather than a
purely abstract referentiality and become subject to combination
and recombination with objects and other signs from which fresh
form and meaning may arise. In other words, signs, codes, symbols
and categories may always take on new meanings because their
meanings have their realization in relation to specific political
projects and strategies.
   So in social practice signs are brought into a referential relation-
ship to the objects of actions. Action grafts particular contextual
meanings to the conceptual values of signs. Secondly, they become
subject to contingent relationships affecting their semantic values
because signs are not just experienced by actors as something
standing outside themselves but are always dialectically related to
their political interests. As Sahlins point out:
                                           i


     the sign represents a differential interest to various subjects
     according to its place in their specific life schemes. 'Interest' and
     'sense' (or 'meaning') are two sides of the same thing, the sign, as
     related respectively to persons and to other signs . . . Reference is a
     dialectic between the conceptual polysemy of the sign and its
     indexical connection to a specific context. Notoriously, signs have
     multiple meanings as conceptual values, but in human practice they
     find determinative representations, amounting to some selection or
     inflection of the conceptual sense. And because the 'Objective' world
     to which they are applied has its own refractory characteristics and
     dynamics, the signs, and by derivation the people who live by them,
     may then be categorically revalued.
                                                            (1981, pp. 69-70)

Put more simply, what this suggests is that signs or conceptual
categories are always dialectically related to situated social action
and the interests and values of actors. Meaning is precarious; its
                    THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL                     75

reproduction may result in its reconstitution, because action results
in the re-evaluation of the meaning of the sign in practice, in a
fundamentally political and historical context of power, interest
and strategy.


                IDEOLOGY AND SUBJECTIVITY

As a concomitant of the considerations advanced above, we argue
that no social practices exist without signification and without
being situated within an overall symbolic field. Signifying practices
have specific determinations and effects in the field of social
relations, creating, reproducing or transforming this field. They are
a necessary element in any form of social practice.
   Ideology is a form of signifying practice which acts to constitute
subjects in a specific way in specific circumstances in order to
reproduce rather than transform the social totality. Consequently,
ideology can only have an existence and an effectivity through
subjects. As a form of power it subjugates subjects. Following
Althusser (1971) we can regard ideology as an imaginary relation-
ship between people and their conditions of existence. It is not an
illusion or a 'false consciousness' of that reality. Rather than
regard ideology as a set of illusions we can think of it as forming a
set of representations (discourses, images, myths, practices)
concerning the real relations in which people live. This notion of
ideology as representation in and for subjects emphasizes its
familiarity and naturalizing qualities. Ideological practices are
always likely to be practices that are recurrent, practices presented
in a new way, practices that are already 'obvious' from previous
discourses and practices. Ideology may be particularly effective in
the constitution of forms of subjectivity and in effecting
subjugation because it tends to represent not the real, or even a
distorted reflection of the real, but that which is supposedly
natural, obvious or beyond question. What ideology systematically
suppresses is the nature of its own construction in signifying
practices. As emphasized by Althusser (1971, p. 155), ideology is
both a real and an imaginary relation to the world: real in that it is
the way that people live their subjectivity within the field of social
relations that governs their existence; imaginary in that it system-
atically prevents full self-reflection of the conditions of existence in
which subjects find themselves. Within the ideologies of capitalism
it is perfectly 'obvious' that we are all autonomous individuals,
possessing a distinctive will and consciousness, an enclosed,
76                 THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

personal subjectivity, and 'free' to participate in the capitalist
market and to direct the development of our own destinies. As
individual speakers it is also 'obvious' that we are both the owners
and origins of our utterances.
   In considering Lacan's work in psychoanalysis we have already
been concerned to demonstrate the construction of the subject in
language and the symbolic order. Since the symbolic order must be
considered to be, in part, an ideological order all subjects are
constructed in and constrained by ideology. The network of subject
positions which make action possible are produced in the symbolic
realm of human signifying practices and ideology tends to displace
the contradictions which exist between different forms of signifying
practices. As ideologies are not merely reflected in the psyche but
lived they are always inscribed in the materiality of social practices
and objectified in material manifestations. Subjects must necessarily
live their relations to their conditions of existence and hence they
must live through ideological practices. Ideology operates by
positioning the individual as a subject in relation to a certain
meaning. So, ideology both produces individuals with a subjec-
tivity and also subjugates them within the social totality with its
always already existing sets of contradictory principles for action,
motivation and meaning. As Coward and Ellis note, 'ideological
practice is necessary to societies of whatever kind because the
individual is not the centre of the social whole: the social process
has no centre, no motivating force' (1977, p. 74). If ideology is
necessary to any society in the process of subjectification and
subjugation then we must distinguish between two senses of
ideology: ideology as a necessary and positive force; and ideology
as legitimating systems of repression and social domination. The
former creates subjects; the latter, as a dimension of power,
subjugates subjects in the interests of certain hegemonic
individuals, interest groups or classes (we take this up further in
chapter 6).
   The concept of ideology has already been taken up in
archaeology. Some have used the concept as part of a social
reconstruction of the past: ideology refers to that part of society
which masks social inequality or contradiction in society and so
prevents radical social change (e.g. Shennan, 1982; Kristiansen,
1984), Others have applied the concept to archaeology itself and
have shown how archaeological reconstruction, for example in
museums, may hide social inequality or contradiction in the
present. The concept of ideology is here central to the project of a
critical archaeology (see chapter 7) which aims to investigate the
                    THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL                    77

production of the past in the present (e.g. Leone, 1981, 1984;
Meltzer, 1981).
   Hodder has produced an effective critique of such use of the
concept (1986, pp. 61-70). He argues that people are not fooled by
ideologies; they do not simply succumb to 'false consciousness'.
And that if ideology masks 'real' reality, how is objective social
reality to be defined? How are we to decide,between different
definitions of social reality (masked by ideology)? Hodder also
criticizes the cross-cultural nature of the concept: that it pays
insufficient regard to the specific historical context; and it pays
little attention to the production of particular ideologies, where
they come from.
   While we also criticize the identification of ideology with false
consciousness (Shanks and Tilley, 1982, p. 130) and the simple
functionalist use of the concept as masking contradiction, we hope
to show how ideology may be situated within particular social
practices (see above and chapter 4) and is involved in social change
(chapter 6), while the concept remains central to a critical
awareness of archaeology as a disciplinary practice (Shanks and
Tilley, 1987; chapter 7 below).
   We have presented a case for a fresh notion of subjectivity - a
position which goes beyond dogmatic humanism or anti-
humanism. Any position which displaces or decentres the subject is
regarded by some (e.g. Thompson, 1978) as fundamentally
dehumanizing, a Stalinist intervention. What such a position tends
to overlook is the constitution of different types of subjects in
different societies and the historically peculiar conception of the
subject in our own society and its relation to capitalism. The free,
autonomous subject going around conferring meaning and
significance at will is also an ideological component of capitalist
social relations. We should not, of course, seek to abolish the
subject or humanity. To the contrary, we should restore that
humanity by founding a critical position for conceptualizing a new
type of subject: the subject as a trace within the social field; as con-
structed in language, by relations of power and signifying practices;
a subject ideologically constituted but also aware of the possibility
of being subjugated by, that ideology. To regard human subjects as
being constructed is to recognize their sociality, their insertion
within a symbolic field. Any subject is therefore transindividual, a
locus for action rather than a point from which that action arises.
The subject is always present, always doing, creating,
knowledgeable of many aspects of his or her social existence. But
this presence, action and knowledgeability also entails an absence
78                THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

- the absence of the other - of the domain of the symbolic, a primary
area of which is material culture. We must therefore aim to divert
attention from the essentially isolated subject of the capitalist
market-place to focus on a social subject that is created in the
otherness of human existence. We are refusing that symbolic
violence which ignores who we are, that would make us a mere
component of the system, and we refuse the inquisition of those
'scientific' practices which would place us in a field of objectifying
determination that goes beyond the social. This brings us to a pos-
ition where we may tackle material culture, the primary object of
archaeology, as a signifying practice.
              Material Culture


We wish to address two basic questions in this chapter. First, how
do we interpret material culture; what meaning, if any, does it
possess? Secondly, how does material culture patterning relate to
the social? As a way of approaching these questions we wish to
briefly examine some of the answers provided by both traditional
and 'new' archaeology.


            TYPES, CULTURE AND COGNITION
In traditional archaeology the question of the relationship between
material culture and society was addressed in a fairly limited
fashion and was very closely bound up with considerations of
artefact classification and the establishment of typological
sequences. The attempt to establish a spatio-temporal systematics
for the pigeon-holing of artefacts formed the backbone of research
in Anglo-American archaeology until the relatively recent rise of
the new archaeology.
   Given that artefacts exhibited demonstrable variation across
both time and space, one of the primary aims of traditional
archaeology was to bring order to this variability by stipulating
redundancies in the form of classificatory schemes often explicitly
modelled on the basis of biological analogies in which artefacts
were to be sorted and 'identified' in a manner equivalent to plants,
animals, or mushrooms and toadstools. For example, the 1930
Pecos Conference concerned with the formulation of procedures
for classifying American south-western ceramics adopted the
following scheme: 'Kingdom: artefacts; Phylum: ceramics; Class:
pottery; Order: basic combination of paste and temper; Ware:
basic surface colour after firing; Genus: surface treatment; Type or
80                            MATERIAL CULTURE

Subtype . . .' (Hargrave, 1932, p. 8, cited in Hill and Evans, 1972,
p. 237). Clark notes that 'the fact that industrial and art forms are
subject to evolutionary processes is a great aid when it comes to
arranging them in sequence . . . [The problem is] to determine the
direction in which the development has proceeded, to determine in
other words whether one is dealing with progressive evolution or
with a series of degeneration' (Clark, 1972, pp. 134-6, cf. Kreiger,
 1944, p. 273). One task of the archaeologist was to determine types,
usually descriptively labelled according to the locality where first
identified (e.g. Flagstaff red pottery; Folsom point; Peterborough
Ware), or presumed function, or a mixture of the two (e.g. La Tene
fibulae). Artefacts could then, ideally, be assigned to these type
groupings on the basis of perceived similarities and differences.
Different groups of artefacts, associated together in hoards,
burials, settlements, votive deposits etc., could be grouped together
in more inclusive entities, 'cultures'. But what did the 'types' and
the 'cultures' mean in social terms?


                        Meaning and artefact types
Traditional archaeology provided three main answers to this
question. The first largely evaded the question of social meaning
altogether. Types were developed as purely classificatory devices to
bring order to the immense range of archaeological materials
discovered and to facilitate comparison of specimens and expedite
field recording and cataloguing (Kreiger, 1944, p. 275).
   The second answer was that the types defined by the archae-
ologist were expressions of the 'mental templates' of their makers:

     It may be said that, ideally, an archaeological type should represent a
     unit of cultural practice equivalent to the 'culture trait' of ethno-
     graphy. Each type should approximate as closely as possible that
     combination of mechanical and aesthetic executions which formed a
     definite structural pattern in the minds of a number of workers, who
     attained this pattern with varying degrees of . success . and
     interpretation.
                                                  (Kreiger, 1944, pp. 272,278).

Rouse makes a similar point when he writes: 'Types are stylistic
patterns, to which the artisan tries to make his completed artefacts
conform'(1939, p. 15). Compare Gifford:

     When entire cultural configurations are, taken into account, certain
     regularities are discernible that are due to the interaction of
                           MATERIALCULTURE                                   81
   individuals and small social groups within a society, and these are
   observed as types. Types in this sense are material manifestations of
   the regularities of human behaviour. . . The basic attributes involved
   in any type come together in the combination of a mental image plus
   the motor habits of the prehistoric artisans of a culture in such a way
   that when executed in clay, they fulfilled the requirements of the
   ceramic and stylistic values of that culture.
                                                         19 6 0 , pp. 341-2)

And Chang:

  The 'right' categories are those that reflect or approximate the
  natives' own thinking about how their physical world is to be
  classified, consciously or unconsciously, explicitly or implicitly,
  within which framework they accordingly act.
                                                         (1967, p. 78)

  The third answer, very closely related to the second, was that
types and cultures primarily had meaning as historical indicators of
temporal and spatial relationships between human groups:

   We find certain types of remains - pots, implements, burial rites,
   house forms - constantly recurring together. Such a complex of
   regularly associated traits we shall term a 'cultural group' or a
   'culture'. We assume that such a complex is the material expression
   of what today would be called a people.
                                                (Childe, 1929, pp. v-vi).

The ideas of artefacts as Hypes' reflecting basic ideas, mental
images, preferences or culturally prescribed ways to do things, and
of regularly occurring patterns of different material items as
representing peoples or ethnic groups, formed the interpretative
basis for assigning meaning to material culture and the
archaeological record. It is represented perhaps most succinctly in
the 'type-variety' concept developed in,the US, initially for classify-
ing ceramics (figure 4.1).
  European and American prehistory was, in essentials, written as
the history of cultural continuity and change of types and cultures.
A number of assumptions underpinned such an approach.Learn-
ing formed the basic means for cultural transmission between
generations in any particular cultural group, while; diffusion of
ideas between discrete non-breeding' populations accounted for
cultural similarities and differences. This cultural transmission of
ideas took place in inverse proportion to the degree of physical or
social distance between them. Concomitantly spatial discontinuities
82                                         MATERIAL CULTURE

                                             THEORETlCAl
                                             CONCEPTIONS
                                         UNITS OF INTEGRATION
                                         (COMPLEXES, CERAMIC
                                   /SEQUENCES, CERAMIC COMPLEXES\
                                        WARES. HORIZON STYLES)

                                                  •
                              /                                   TYPES \
                                                                            \

                  /
                          /       INCLUDING ONE OR MORE VARIETIES
                                                      A
                                                                            \
              /                               VARIETIES                         \
     /                        ATTRIBUTES              -THE DATA

          •           •                                    \
                                                                                    \
 F I G U R E 4.1 The Type-variety method of ceramic classification, after
                                 Gifford
Source: From 1. Gifford (I960).



in culture resulted from either natural boundaries to interaction or
social value systems inhibiting the acceptance or adoption of new
ideas. Internal cultural change was deemed to be essentially slow
and incremental resulting either from an inbuilt dynamic or 'drift'
away from previously accepted norms governing artefact
production, vagaries of fashion, or technological innovation.
Alternatively, obvious discontinuities in the archaeological record
were explained as resulting from the development of exchange net-
works with other groups; migration or invasion of populations; or
diffusion of radically new and powerful ideas, for example
religious cults. Binford termed such an interpretative framework
the 'aquatic view' of culture:

     Culture is viewed as a vast flowing stream with minor variations in
     ideational norms concerning appropriate ways of making pots,
     getting married, treating one's mother-in-law, building houses,
     temples . . . a n d even dying. These ideational variations are
     periodically 'crystallized' at different points in time and space,
     resulting in distinctive and sometimes striking cultural climaxes
     which allow us to break up the continuum of culture into cultural
     phases.
                         MATERIAL CULTURE                           83

                       Artefact classification
One idea underlying the development and refinement of the
classificatory schemes was that the act of classification was usually
held to be a neutral device and independent of theory.
Classification followed data collection and once carried out could
lead to inferences being made from the materials thus sorted.
Material culture had a meaning or significance inherent in itself and
the task of the archaeologist was to extract this meaning which was
restricted, i.e. each artefact retained within itself one or a few
meanings. Much debate centred on how artefacts might be best
classified (e.g. Rouse, 1960; Sears, 1960) and whether these
classifications were 'real' or 'ideal', i.e. whether they actually
reflected the ideas of prehistoric artisans which were then
discovered, or were imposed by the archaeologist (Ford, 1954a,
  1954b; Spaulding, 1953, 1954). Because many of the typologies
obviously worked, at least as limited temporal indicators, they were
assumed to be in essentials correct and the 'types' and 'cultures'
became canonized in the literature as the types and the cultures:
 'pottery types are not primarily descriptive devices but are refined
tools for the elucidation of space-time problems' (Sears, 1960,
p. 326).
   As we have mentioned above, the meaning of archaeological
data was its supposed direct relationship to cognitive structures
collectively held by peoples or ethnic groups; but despite this
interest traditional archaeology never really developed such
concerns because to identify types, cultures and spatio-temporal
relationships between them became ends in themselves. This was
coupled with a pessimism in which it was claimed that little could
be known beyond the realms of technology and the economy
(Hawkes, 1954; Piggott, 1959, pp. 9-12).
   The cognitive and social reality of artefact taxonomies and
cultures have been much disputed during the last 25 years. As
regards artefact classification, it has begun to be recognized that
classification is not independent of theory (Dunnell, 1971; Hill and
Evans, 1972) and that there is no such thing as a 'best' classifi-
cation. All classifications are partial and select from observed
features of the data set. Attempts to create some kind of 'natural'
classification, good for all purposes, and dealing with; all possible
variation within the data set studied is simply unattainable. Any
form of classification involves the definition of significant criteria
(significant to the classifier) to be used in the process of forming
classes. This may involve the arrangement of these criteria in some
84                      MATERIAL CULTURE

order of importance which depends on theory or what we know or
want to know. The link between classificatory systems and
theoretical knowledge of the data universe to be studied is
insoluble. Classifications are dependent on and derived from
theory; they are not in some sense independent formal schemes
which may be considered to be more or less convenient or useful.
An infinite number of different classificatory systems may be
developed for the same data set and there is no automatic
obligation for the archaeologist to model, or attempt to model, his
or her taxonomic systems on the basis of those utilized by
prehistoric artisans.

                      Cognition and the past
Archaeological taxonomies and descriptions of the past may tell us
a great deal about the manner in which the archaeologist thinks
about past socio-cultural systems, but is there any reason to think
that they tell us anything about the manner in which prehistoric
social actors thought about their culture? Is this irrelevant anyway?
One answer is provided by Eggert (1977) who makes four points:

1   A native people's way of thinking about and explaining their
   world should represent a starting rather than an end point for
   inquiry and this inquiry has to be undertaken from another
   (scientific) frame of reference.
2 Material forms not explicitly devised for communicative pur-
   poses, unlike language, are too ambiguous to reflect in an
   unequivocal manner the ideas embodied in them.
3 Cognitive systems are abstractions of the anthropologist. They
   are idealized and tend to subsume or ignore the considerable'
   degree of individual variability in action sequences and thought.
4 People's conceptions of what they do and how they should act
   may differ markedly from their actual practices.
Eggert concludes that any attempt on the part of the archaeologist
to study or infer or attempt to model taxonomic systems in terms of
prehistoric cognitive systems is fundamentally misguided.
   Some ethnoarchaeological studies, on the other hand, have
attempted to demonstrate; that cognitive systems are embodied in
material culture and cannot be ignored by the archaeologist if he or
she wishes to arrive at an adequate understanding of that being
investigated (eg. Arnold, 1971; Friedrich, 1970; Hardin, 1979,1983;
and see the discussion below pp. 148-58). Arnold suggests that
                            MATERIAL CULTURE                                   85

   Since artifacts are the result of what people actually do and not what
   they say they do, it seems more reasonable to attempt to reconstruct
   non-verbal behaviour from ancient artifacts rather than from
   anything else. But, if it can be demonstrated from an analysis of
   verbal behaviour, non-verbal behaviour, and from the material
   aspects of culture that a cognitive system common to a particular
   group is really conditioning all of these factors, then, it seems
   reasonable to suggest that cognitive systems should warrant some
   attention as a significant factor in the production of artifacts.
                                                       (Arnold, 1971, p. 22)

Arnold's study attempts to demonstrate a clear relationship
between the cognitive ethnomineralogical system used by potters in
Ticul, Yucatan, and verbal, non-verbal and material aspects of
processes involved in selecting and using raw materials for making
pottery. He finds a correlation between certain emic
ethnomineralogical categories of raw materials used to make
pottery (clays, temper etc.) and actual (etic) composition as deter-
mined by X-ray diffraction studies. However, studies such as those
by Arnold and Hardin seem to fall rather short of mapping a
cognitive system in terms of material culture patterning - a point
we wish to elaborate by returning to consider Eggert's strictures.
   Even if an archaeologist were able to reproduce an exact replica
of a prehistoric taxonomic system how much would this tell us? It
appears to be insufficient to regard such an attempt at a
reconstruction of the 'templates' of prehistoric artisans as
providing an explanation of material culture patterning. An
archaeologist duplicating a prehistoric taxonomic system would be
arriving at a description of that system, but such a description of
the manner of ordering and thinking about artefacts is itself in need
of explanation or further description in relation to social strategies
and practices. Material culture should be regarded as not merely a
reflection of cognitive systems and social practices but actively
involved in the formation and structuring of those practices. So,
we are never likely to be dealing with a simple correspondence
relationship between idea and/or action and material culture form
but a situation in which material culture actively mediates ideas and
practices. The fact that material culture differs from language in its
communicative form and effect does hot require that we evaluate
the communicative intent of material culture negatively, in terms of
its difference from language, and conclude that material culture as
a communicative form is too ambiguous to repay study. Cognitive
systems are, of course, attributed by the anthropologist or the
archaeologist to ethnic groups and material culture: patterning.
86                        MATERIAL CULTURE

Such systems are constructs; but this in no way implies that they do
not exist or that the actions of individuals might be contradictory
or variable. In fact, as we argue in chapter 6, societies are inherently
contradictory entities. The idea of society as being constituted in
terms of a normative (and cognitive) set of beliefs held and
subscribed to by all social actors cannot be sustained. The problem
with the studies by Arnold, Hardin and others is that while they do
usefully point out the significance of cognitive bases for social
action and their manifestation in material culture, in common with
the work of traditional archaeologists the assumption is made that
all social actors in a society share an undifferentiated and
normative set of beliefs. There is little consideration of the
negotiation and renegotiation of meaning frames within the context
of social strategies which may very well be oppositional and con-
tradictory. An emphasis on contradiction and conflict of interest
goes some way to explain why social practices, as often as not, con-
flict with idealized models of these practices.


                     STYLE AND FUNCTION

In much of the literature post-dating the mid-1960s the notion of
material culture as more or less directly relating to cognition or
peoples was challenged or abandoned by many. A realization
developed that archaeological cultures could simply not be
correlated in any direct or immediate manner with ethnicity and
there were in fact multiple factors affecting the nature of
distributions of material culture items perceived in the
archaeological record (e.g. Hodder (ed.), 1978). The types used to
define cultures were as often as not atypical features of the
archaeological record in any particular region (e.g. Clarke, 1968,
pp. 29-31). What traditional archaeologists took as representing
ethnicity might instead refer to functional variability in the types of
activities carried out on different sites. This point provided the
essence of the debate between Binford (1973) and Bordes (1973)
regarding the meaning of assemblage variability in Mousterian sites
in south-western France: Bordes arguing that the differences
reflected ethnic identity, and Binford claiming they related to
functional variability between different activity sets. Clarice (1968)
argued that cultures were to be polythetically rather than
monothetically defined and that such cultures were distinct
analytical entities in themselves with no necessary relationship with
ethnicity. Renfrew (1978) questioned the existence of homogeneous
                           MATERIALCULTURE                                  87

assemblages, suggesting that cultures were little more than
arbitrary taxonomic categories imposed on a continuum of change.
   In short, the interpretative basis of the meaning of material
culture provided by traditional archaeology was undermined.
Instead, material culture was granted a fresh significance which
became grafted in terms of the opposition between two
dichotomous terms: style and function. Much of the debate which
has taken place during the last 15 years about the relationship
between material culture and the social hinges on the definition and
use of these terms and whether primacy can (or should) be granted
to one or the other in an understanding of the past.


             Material culture: system and adaptation
Two major developments in thinking occurred. Firstly, culture
became redefined as a system composed of distinct subsystems. It
became fashionable to talk about the interaction between sub-
systems rather than people, the latter being effectively screened out
of the analysis (see chapter 2). Secondly, Binford (1962), following
White (1959), redefined culture as an extrasomatic means of
adaptation. Consequently the primary meaning of material culture
was its role as an interface between people, the environment, and
interactions of individuals regarded as components of social
systems. Culture was no longer to be regarded as something shared
by people but as participated in differentially:

  A basic characteristic of cultural systems is the integration of
  individuals and social units performing different tasks, frequently at
  different locations. .. Within any one cultural system, the degree to
  which the participants share the same ideational basis should vary
  with the degree of cultural complexity of the system as a whole. '
                                                  (Binford, 1972, p. 199)

  As Binford regarded material culture as an extrasomatic means
of adaptation it was entirely consistent that he should regard it in
wholly functional terms. It either had a direct utilitarian function
or a social function. In an early paper Binford (1962) defined three
distinct classes of artefacts: technomic, sociotechnic and
ideotechnic, functioning respectively in coping with the environ-
ment, social and ideological relations. Residually cross-cutting
these three functionally defined artefact classes was style: 'formal
qualities that are not directly explicable in terms of the nature of
the raw materials, technology of production, or variability in the
88                      MATERIAL CULTURE

structure of the technological and social subsystems of the total
cultural system' (1972, p. 25). Style functioned in terms of
promoting group solidarity, awareness and identity. Later
recognizing that it was impossible to sustain any meaningful
distinction between functional classes of artefacts operating in
different social subsystems, Binford (1965) redefined artefacts as
possessing primary (utilitarian) and secondary (stylistic) functions
cross-cutting morphological and decorative variation (in the case of
ceramics). Primary functional variation referred to utilitarian use
(e.g. the difference between a drinking vessel and a plate). Secon-
dary functional variation referred to the social context of the
production and use of material culture: 'this variation may arise
from a traditional way of doing things within a family or a larger
social unit, or it may serve as a conscious expression of between-
group solidarity' Binford, 1972, p. 200).
   The examination of what Binford teamed primary and secondary
functional variability in the archaeological record has played a
major role in the recent development of archaeology. In prehistoric
and ethnoarchaeological studies much attention has focused on
technologies of artefact production (e.g. Semenov, 1964; Van de
Leeuw, 1976; Kramer, 1985, pp. 78-83; Howard and Morris (eds),
 1981; Steponaitis, 1983). A second area that has been investigated
is the determination of the utilization of particular artefacts (e.g.
Hayden (ed.), 1979; Wilmsen, 1968; Braun, 1983; Hally, 1986). In
such studies attention has focused on the suitability of particular
artefact types for different purposes which are supposedly strictly
delimited by the physical properties of the artefacts themselves.
Characterization studies of sources of raw materials have been used
to suggest the existence of exchange networks or social interaction
spheres (e.g. Earle and Ericson (eds), 1977; Ericson and Earle (eds),
 1982; Sabloff and Lamberg-Karlovsky (eds), 1975), and attention
has been paid to the rate of breakage of artefacts, discard and reuse
patterns (e.g. DeBoer and Lathrap, 1979; David, 1972; Kramer,
 1985, pp. 89-92; Schiffer, 1976; Binford, 1979). Other studies have
investigated sites in terms of the relationship between artefact
patterning and different activities such as tool manufacturing, food
processing and group size (e.g. Binford, 1978, 1981; Schapiro,
 1984; Kent, 1984; Hietala, 1984). Such work has certainly alerted
archaeologists to the complexities of the formation processes of the
archaeological record but the symbolic and social meaning of
artefact production and usage has been neglected. Meaning tends
to be only investigated insofar as it can be reduced to an effect of
various technologies or utilitarian considerations.
                         MATERIAL CULTURE                          89

                         Ceramic sociology
Some innovative research in the 1960s and 1970s on ceramics was
based on the assumption that degrees of stylistic similarity in
material culture patterning might reflect social interaction. In cases
where it could be assumed on the basis of ethnographic evidence, as
in the American South-West, that residence was uxorial and
women made the pottery intended for household use and traditions
of pottery manufacture and, decoration were passed down from
mother to daughter, the spatial concentration of micro traditions in
design style would be expected to indicate distinct clan or residence
groupings within a settlement (for synchronic studies see e.g.
Longacre, 1970; Hill, 1970; and for a diachronic perspective Deetz,
 1965; Whallon, 1968).
   On a broader regional scale, degrees of social interaction
resulting in the borrowing of designs or design fields would be
reflected in the degree of stylistic similarity between sites
(Engelbrecht, 1978; S. Plog, 1976; Washburn,. 1983). Such studies
have been subjected to much critical assessment (Allen and
Richardson, 1971; Hodder, 1982; Stanislawski and Stanislawski,
 1978; Longacre, 1981; S. Plog, 1978), focusing on the feasibility (or
necessity) of reconstructing kinship patterns from archaeological
data given that concepts such as matrilocal kinship are often
second or third order anthropological abstractions themselves.
Ceramics may also often be produced by groups rather than
individuals and learning networks may differ considerably from a
simple transmission from mother to daughter within a social unit
essentially conceived as isolated. Nor is there any necessary
correlation between interaction and stylistic similarity because style
may be actively used to mark put boundaries of different social
groups where there is intense interaction between them. The theory
assumes that style is a passive reflection of group or social identity
and the cross-cultural generalizing perspective, in terms of which
this research has often been framed, denies the specificity of
cultural context, that in some situations style may relate to learning
networks while in others it clearly does not. We need to know why
this is the case. In one sense the idea that decorative style reflects
the composition of social groups in space arid time bears a very close
resemblance to traditional archaeology, but at a fine-grained level.

                Choice, function and information
Many archaeologists, however, have always realized that given
consideration of technological and utilitarian parameters there still
90                           MATERIAL CULTURE

exists a latitude for choice in the manner in which artefacts may be
produced and the meanings which they may carry. But how much
choice and what are these social meanings?
  Choice is predominantly regarded as strictly delimited by
environment and function:
     If our interest resides in ancient artefacts and our aims in the most
     powerful interpretation of these artefacts, then we must realise that
     archaeological artefact systems express the individually modified
     imprints of environmental constraint on particularly valued cultural
     matrices.
                                                        (Clarke, 1968, p. 83)

According to Braun,

     Where pottery making is a domestic craft, we can then assume a
     selective process. Pottery techniques that produce vessels that are in-
     efficient as tools, require relatively high labour or material costs, or
     require relatively frequent placement, will tend to be avoided in
     favour of techniques that produce more efficient results, at lower
     costs . . . The mechanical uses of ceramic vessels directly constrain
     the kinds of decoration they receive and hence the kinds of social
     information they carry.
                                                           (1983, pp. 112-13)

And Arnold:

     Viewed from the perspective of cybernetics, weather and climate can
     provide either deviation counteracting feedback or deviation
     amplifying feedback for pottery production depending on the
     character of the climate . . . In areas where a wet, cold and foggy •
     climate persists for the entire year, the negative feedback is totally
     effective in preventing the development of pottery making, even if
     the craft is introduced by innovation or diffusion.
                                                          (1985, pp. 76, 83)

Such statements are so widespread in the literature that they require
no further documentation. While rigid environmental and
functional constraint on the choice of the form and nature of
material culture is usually emphasized, meaning is sometimes
addressed in a purely abstract manner as 'information' and in
terms of information flow structures (e.g. Johnson, 1978; Van de
Leeuw, 1981).
   Clarke (1968) defined material culture as a separate subsystem of
society providing information, the messages being 'accumulated
survival information plus miscellaneous and random noise peculiar
                             MATERIAL CULTURE                                      91

to each system and its past trajectory' (1968, p. 85) and this general
approach to meaning as survival information has been frequently
advocated in debates about the significance of style and function in
material culture. Dunnell regards style as denoting 'those forms
 that do not have detectable selective values. Function is manifest as
those forms that directly affect the Darwinian fitness of the
populations in which they occur' (1978, p. 199 emphasis in original).
A priority of function is asserted in purely adaptive terms with the
 significance of style marginalized in terms of stochastic processes
 - trivial socio-cultural variation. On the other hand, style may be
regarded as important but only insofar as it can be explained away
 as just another form of adaptation to the natural and social
environment (e.g. Conkey, 1978; Fritz, 1978; Jochim, 1983).
   Wobst regards style as a strategy of information exchange with
both functional and adaptive significance. Artefacts convey
messages and Wobst conceives the content of such messages as
being more or less isomorphic with spoken language. Consequently
he suggests that because it is relatively costly to produce messages
in the stylistic mode of artefacts as opposed to conveying
information through language, only a relatively narrow range of
information will be expressed in the form of simple invariant and
recurrent messages - messages of emotional state, social identifi-
cation, group affiliation, rank, authorship and ownership,
behavioural norms, religious and political belief (Wobst, 1977, p.
323). Stylistic messaging will usually be 'targeted' at individuals
beyond the immediate household or residence group but loses its
usefulness in relation to socially distant populations because they
will either be unable to encounter or decode the messages. This
leads Wobst to claim that

   the majority of functions of stylistic behaviour should relate to
   processes of social integration and social differentiation. Stylistic
   messages of identification, ownership, and authorship link efficiently
   those members of a community who are not in constant verbal
   contact and who have little opportunity to observe each others'
   behaviour p a t t e r n s . . . it makes social intercourse more predictable.
                                                                 (Ibid., p. 327)

So style transmits information about social group membership and
internal differentiation, functioning to keep a society running
smoothly by reducing stress or conflict, and may be used to main-
tain social boundaries. This general perspective has been frequently
adopted in the subsequent literature (e.g. Weissner, 1983; Pollock,
 1983; Graves, 1982; S. Plog, 1980, pp. 126-39; Braun and S. Plog,
92                        MATERIAL CULTURE
1982). All such a perspective purports to explain is the existence or
non-existence of style; it is incapable of telling us anything at all
with regard to its specific form and nature, such as why pots might
have one set of designs rather than another.

                         Style and meaning
Whether explicitly stated or implicitly assumed, in most studies
style is regarded as something left over in material culture after
utilitarian function has been taken into account. It is generally
regarded as having social significance which may or may not be
regarded as important and possible or impossible to study with any
degree of 'rigour'.
   Underlying much of this discussion are two assumptions: (1)
style can be separated out from utilitarian aspects of artefacts; (2) it
'functions' in social rather than utilitarian areas of life. In a series
of papers Sackett (1973, 1977, 1982, 1985) has been specifically
concerned to stress the inseparability.. of style and function,
challenging the idea that stylistic aspects of artefacts merely
constitute a residue, something left over when function has been
taken into account. He argues that style does not constitute a
distinct domain but is to be encountered in all formal variability in
individual artefacts and that style and function share equal
responsibility for the finished product, a view which we wish to
fully endorse. It is impossible, for example, to separate out the style
and the function in either vessel shape or projectile point
morphology. There is no way in which we can meaningfully
measure and determine what proportion of a vessel's shape
performs some utilitarian end, the remainder being assigned to the
domain of style. To take a chair - what proportion of this is
functional as opposed to stylistic? No answer can be given; the style
inheres in the function and vice versa. Furthermore, ascribing any
specific or strictly delimited function to an object is in many,if not
all cases, an extremely dubious exercise. A chair may be to sit on, it
nominally fulfils this; function,. but chairs can also be used for
standing on, or for knocking people over the head with, as pen-
dulums, rulers, or almost anything else. This is not to deny the
banal point that objects have uses and may normally be used in just
one way, but it is to suggest that such a position represents, at best,
a starting point rather than an end point for archaeological
a n a l y s i s . ,

  The second point is far more crucial, and we will consider it in
relation to Sackett's work. What is at issue here is the socialmean-
                           MATERIAL CULTURE                                    93

ing of style. Sackett argues that 'any artifact has an active voice
which connotes function . . . [and] a passive voice which connotes
style' (1977, p. 370; our emphasis). The implication here is that
function is something dynamic and active depending on the use of
artefacts and the roles they play as technology or in social terms,
while style merely reflects aspects of the social world, playing no
significant role in either creating or transforming it. Sackett
distinguishes between two domains of artefacts: those which may
be taken to be utilitarian in function; and those which are primarily
non-utilitarian, for example a crown or a head-dress. Both may be
cross-cut by adjunct form, for example pottery decoration. Stone
tools, by contrast, have no obvious adjunct form. Sackett's non-
utilitarian class of artefacts clearly embraces both Binford's
sociotechnic and ideotechnic classes, while adjunct form is that
which is normally taken to be stylistic in the archaeological
literature. Sackett's further and most important argument is worth
quoting at some length:

   Although the form of any given object may be entirely appropriate
   to its function . . . there exists nevertheless a great range of
   alternative forms that would be more or less equally appropriate. In
   other words, there usually is a variety of functionally equivalent
   means of achieving a given end, whether these concern the design
   of a weapon with which to kill reindeer, the execution of pot
   decoration that symbolically identifies a specific residence group, or
   the manufacture of a chisel-ended burin. The seemingly equally valid
   and feasible options we may regard as functional equivalents with
   respect to a given end constitute a spectrum of what I choose to term
   isochrestic form . . . The artisans in any given society tend to
    'choose' but one, or at most but a very few, of the isochrestic options
   that at least in theory are potentially available to them from this
   spectrum . . . Given the large number of options that are at least
   potentially available, chance alone dictates that any single one is
   unlikely to be chosen by two societies which are not ethnically related
   in some fashion; and chance would appear to exclude altogether the
   possibility that the same combination of several such choices in
   different spectra of isochrestic form could be made by two unrelated
   societies. . . Since material culture is largely the product of learned
   behaviours that are socially transmitted, there exists a strong and
   direct correlation between the specific choices a society makes and its
   specific position in the stream of culture history.
                                                   (Sackett, 1982, pp. 72-3)
In this formulation style, viewed as isochrestic variation, has no
social meaning whatsoever other than being a habitualized
expression of ethnicity and, apparently, neither suggests nor
94                       MATERIAL CULTURE
requires any further explanation (Sackett, 1985, p. 157). Sackett's
position, while being sensitive to the detection of style in all
artefacts, at the same time explicitly avoids any consideration of its
meaning and significance because in his view style just happens as a
product of habit and socialization processes; hence the claim which
he makes that style is function writ small.
   To summarize: while in traditional archaeology the meaning of
material culture was its supposedly direct reflection of ethnicity and
(unspecified) ideas, the new archaeology reduced its meaning to
function - as an adaptive interface between people and the
environment (as technology) or as a means of cementing together
social groups or symbolizing group identity (as style). In the case of
Sackett's work this is a purely passive process, while for Wobst and
others it has a more active dimension as a form of social signalling.
In all accounts, function has either been privileged in relation to
style or style has been explained away as existing because of an
inherent social function. However, specifying a social function for
stylistic aspects of material culture patterning tells us virtually
nothing about its specificity, for example all the multitudes of
different chair forms, past or present, their shapes, decorative
features, arrangements in different rooms or types of rooms. The
general conclusion that may be drawn is that the term function is
virtually redundant.
   When we are dealing with material culture we are analysing a
world of stylistic form and conceptual choice, creating things in
one way rather than another. The corollary is that the
archaeological record is a record of form according to specific
cognitive orientations toward the world. The first stage in trying to
understand material culture is to accept it as a stylistic cultural
production. The second stage is to make full use of the range of
variability in the material culture patterning apparent to us and not
to subsume this variability under high-level generalizations.
Exploiting the variability in material culture patterning is of vital
importance: it gives us clues on which to hinge our statements and
ensures we realize the full potential of the archaeological record.
   Place a brick somewhere in London. Imagine that London
represents the totality of the social relations and practices existing
in a prehistoric society. The brick represents the archaeological
evidence from which we have to extrapolate to come to an
understanding of that past social totality. Obviously the variability
in the brick is of vital importance if we are going to understand
anything at all. However, for many archaeologists, it appears as if
even our solitary brick in the centre of London is too variable and
                         MATERIALCULTURE                           95

complicated, so much so that high-level generalizations must be
employed to further reduce the brick to a few fragments via the
operation of certain methodological hammers. One of the most
powerful of these hammers - the hammer of function - has already
been discussed above, and is often combined with another even
more powerful tool, the sledge hammer of cross-cultural
generalization (e.g. Arnold, 1985; and see the discussion above),
which finally manages to reduce our brick to fine particles of dust.
London appears to be lost.


   HISTORY,.STRUCTURE AND MATERIAL CULTURE

Most of contemporary archaeological discourse concerns itself with
the delimitation and analysis of constraints, usually of an asocial
nature, impinging upon societies - environment, ecology,
population pressure, economic resource availability - presupposing
that human potentialities are strictly bounded and limited.
However, in most of the substantive analyses, such a position is
simply assumed rather than demonstrated, and there is little, if any,
evidence to support it. Rather than thinking in terms of asocial
constraints, perhaps we should think in terms of human potentialities
and possibilities for action. In any given determinate social field
societies to a greater or lesser extent constrain themselves, rather
than being constrained by external forces or purely utilitarian
considerations. Such amove parallels a shift from viewing material
culture as primarily functional to regarding it as constituting a
symbolic, active communicative field. How then do we conceive of
material culture and its relation to the social?


             Perception, history and material culture
Very broadly, a history of perception or the manner in which
people regard the world provides one link between the content of
thought and the structuring of society (Lowe, 1982). Merleau-
Ponty, in The Phenomenology of Perception (1962), emphasizes
three main features of perception together creating a perceptive
field: the subject as perceiver; the action of perceiving; and the
content of that perceived. The perceiving subject from an
embodied spatial location always approaches and conceives of the
world as a lived, dynamic, open, horizontal field. The act of
perceiving unifies the subject with that perceived and the content of
the perceived resulting from the act of perception affects the
96                       MATERIAL CULTURE

subject's actions and relationship with the world. Perception is
bounded by three fundamental factors: (1) common media framing
and facilitating the act of perception; (2) the senses themselves -
hearing, touching, smelling, tasting, seeing - structuring the
subject as embodied receiver; (3) epistemic or cognitive
presuppositions ordering the content of that perceived. Together
these constitute a field of perception within which knowledge of the
world becomes possible. From such a perspective we can view
material culture as being involved actively in a process of
perception and as media framing and facilitating the act of
perception and gaining knowledge of the world. The question we
next have to ask is: how important is material culture as framing
and communicative media in society; and, historically, has it had a
differential importance?
   All communicative media from the patterns on a pot to television
and video not only transmit information but also form, package
and filter it. If the medium doesn't actually constitute the message
it certainly alters it. Historically, media for communication have
changed dramatically, from oral cultures in which there was no
written language, script or text, to cultures where writing was the
preserve of an elite minority, to the introduction of print and an
increase in literacy, to the mass media electronic communicative
forms of today. These changes have been additive rather than
substitutive. Ong (1967) and Lowe (1982) have claimed that such
changes from oral to chirographic to typographic to electronic
cultures are correlated with a changing hierarchy of the senses. In
oral cultures speech has to fulfil the role of both preserving know-
ledge and framing communication, for only in the act of speaking
can knowledge be preserved. Speech, memory and a primacy of hear-
ing as perception go together: oral communication is primarily aural
communication. A priority of hearing over seeing is implied. It is
only with the advent of a typographic culture that sight assumes
priority.
   This perspective, while privileging language, overlooks the role
of material culture as a perceptive medium and as a framework for
communicating knowledge and information. In an oral culture it
would seem to be quite plausible to regard material culture as a
communicative medium of considerable importance for transmit-
ting, storing and preserving social knowledge and as a symbolic
medium for orientating people in their natural and social environ-
ment because of the relative permanence of material culture vis a
vis speech acts. So material culture can be regarded in oral societies
as a form of writing and discourse inscribed in a material medium
                         MATERIAL CULTURE                           97

in just the same way as words in chirographic and typographic
cultures are inscribed on a page. It is then possible to go on to
suggest that as a communicative discourse material culture becomes
successively transformed in importance with the advent and spread
of communicative media directly related to spoken language -
writing, printing and the mass media of today, which do not
transcribe speech but actually transmit it.
   With the development of mass industrial production as opposed
to craft production the role of material culture as an active
symbolic transformative intervention in the social world is certainly
altered. In a world capitalist economy we may be wearing jeans at
the same time as a Lebanese gunman. The material form - in this
case jeans - remains the same but its meaning will alter according
to the context. Jeans will be consumed in different ways,
appropriated and incorporated into various symbolic structures
according to historical tradition and social context. In a prehistoric
situation not only will the meanings differ, but so will the par-
ticularity of the material form. Consequently it is possible to argue
that there is likely to be a closer relationship between material form
and meaning content than exists today.

         . Material culture, the individual and society
In considering the nature of material culture as communication, as
a form of writing and silent discourse, we need some perspective on
the relationship between the individual subject and society. In other
words, we need to consider to what extent material culture
production is simply a product of individuals and to be related to
their intentions, individual psychology and personal make-up, or to
what extent it can be considered a social production. How
important is the individual as individual in cultural production? Is
material culture to be regarded as a largely autonomous expression
of individual personality, or as indelibly structured in relation to
social processes which themselves encompass, define, create and
articulate the individual? We have already provided answers to
these questions in the previous chapter. It does not seem to be at all
theoretically acceptable to pursue a view of the human subject as
endowed with specific capacities and attributes, as the source of
social relations, font of meaning, knowledge and action. We
should insist, therefore, on the logical priority of the social and the
structuring of social relations in accounting for all social practices
including material culture production. Material culture is. in no
sense to be regarded as a product of unmediated individual inten-
     98                       MATERIAL CULTURE

    tionality but as a production of the intersubjective social
    construction of reality. Individuals are structured in terms of the
    social and, concomitantly, material culture is socially rather than
    individually structured.
       The intention here is not to uphold a radically anti-humanist
    position in the manner of Althusser and Balibar (1970) but, as we
    argued in chapter 3, to regard individuality as created and
    constructed in a social and symbolic field over which the subject
    has no immediate or direct degree of control or possibility for
    radical intervention. This is to decentre the subject and to regard
    material culture as a social production created in terms of a socially
    mediated symbolic field. We are placing emphasis on the
    constructedness of human meaning and that meaning is not a
    private experience but a product of shared systems of signification.
    Language and material culture pre-date the individual. The agent
    does not so much construct language or material culture but is,
    rather, constructed through them. Meaning is by no means a
    natural extension of personality but a product of linguistic and
    material culture systems. Reality is not reflected by language or
    material culture as much as actively produced by it. The meaning
    an individual is able to articulate in relation to the world is depen-
    dent on the construction of that world through language and
    material culture.

                       Material culture and structure
   We now want to explore the relationship between material culture
   and structure. The central proposition that follows from a position
   in which the subject is decentred vis a vis material culture
   production is that the archaeological record must be regarded not
   in terms of just a random collection of artefacts or attributes of
   individual artefacts but as a structured record, structured in
   relation to the social construction of reality and in relation to social
   strategies of interest and power and ideology as a form of power.
   The position we are taking is that material culture as
   communication is a structured sign system. The point has: already
   been made that material culture can be considered as a form of
   writing and in the absence of writing as we know it today as a
X. textual production it can be considered to play a much more power-
   ful role as a signifier in the comparatively less complex oral cultures
   archaeologists typically investigate. If we take up this notion of
   material culture as a form of writing does this imply that it can be
   considered in just the same manner as language - as a form of non-
                         MATERIAL CULTURE                           99
verbal discourse with grammars, codes and specific units of
signification? In other words does material culture act as a struc-
tured series of signs which signify something in social reality, or
does material culture form a kind of discourse signifying itself
rather than something external to it? If material culture signifies
the social or aspects of social reality in what manner is this
effected? Is material culture a supplement to language acting in a
similar way with an equivalent pattern of meaning structure? These
questions take us into the realm of structuralism, semiotics, post-
structuralism and deconstruction.
   Saussure, the father of contemporary structuralism, in his
Course in General Linguistics (1978), regarded the study of
linguistics as one day forming part of a general science of signs.
This would seem to suggest that language forms one sign system
among many and that there might be a relative autonomy among
different semiotic systems. Barthes, in his Elements of Semiology
(1967), strongly criticized such a view regarding all sign systems
as part of language. For him there could be no non-linguistic
semiotic system. Rather than adhering either to Saussure
or Barthes' position it would seem best to regard material culture as
forming a system of discourse which has a relative degree of
autonomy from a language, a second order type of writing which
shares some essential features with linguistic systems while at the
same time not being directly assimilable t o , or reducible t o ,
language. So, in what manner does material culture as a signifying
system have a relative autonomy from language and what features
does it share with language? T h e answer to this question depends,
of course, on how we regard language as a signifying system.
   Saussure in his Course viewed language as a system of signs
which must be studied synchronically rather than diachronically.
Each sign is made up of a signifier (sound-image or graphic
equivalent) and a signified (a concept or meaning). According to
Saussure the relationship between the signifier and that signified
was entirely arbitrary, a matter of cultural or historical convention.
Each sign in a system only had meaning by virtue of its difference
from other signs. For example, badger has meaning because it is
not rat, dog or pig; but its relationship with the four legged, black
and white striped creature is entirely arbitrary, a matter of
convention. In Saussure's conception of a linguistic system
emphasis is placed therefore on relational difference. Meaning does
not inhere in a sign in itself but by virtue of its difference from
other signs. Saussure was not particularly interested in actual
speech (parole) but with objective structures making speech
100                       MATERIAL CULTURE
possible (langue), i.e. the rules underlying and structuring any par-
ticular real speech act in the world. The nature of langue as a
system of rules lies underneath and governs the relative superficiality
of day-to-day speech. If language is an exchange of messages
constituted in their difference, governed by an underlying system of
grammatical rules and is taken as a paradigm for social and cultural
analysis, then the move made by Levi-Strauss (1968) to view
kinship as a structured exchange of mates within the confines of an
abstract system of underlying unconscious rules, the economy an
exchange of goods and services, politics an exchange of power and
so on, is quite easy to understand. But what of material culture? If
language is an exchange of messages, then material culture might
be thought to act as a kind of second level back-up, mirroring in
some sense this message exchange and reinforcing it by virtue of its
very materiality and relative permanence.
    There are two major problems with this structuralist perspective.
First it systematically diverts attention from history, the manner in
which people have altered and do alter their objectifications of the
social. A structuralist perspective concentrates on the synchronic
investigation of order, the codes underlying the order, and the
significance of the experience of the order.
    In archaeology formal analysis of pattern in material culture is
now well established. The aim has been to investigate pattern, to
establish the logic behind the patterning and establish rules for
constructing the patterns. Washburn (1978, 1983) has used
symmetry (repetition, rotation, reflection of a design element) as a
logic lying beneath pottery decoration. Hodder (1982, pp. 174-81)
has claimed a generative grammar for the decoration of calabashes
among the Sudanese Nuba, a system of rules operating on an
originary cross motif, which can generate a wide variety of actually
occurring calabash designs. His analysis included computer
simulation - 'testing' the rules he isolates as generating the designs
to see whether they fitted observed patterns. Fritz (1978) has iden-
tified symmetrical relationships in the organization of the direc-
tional orientation of settlement space in the Chaco Canyon in the
American south-west. Fletcher's (1977) work on the formal
arrangement of settlement space can be mentioned here - an
analysis aimed at identifying a syntax of space.
    In addition to attempts to identify rules of symmetry and design
combination and space syntax, analysis of pattern or structure
in archaeology has employed the use of binary oppositions
 such as bounded/unbounded, horizontal/vertical, left/right,
hierarchical/sequential. Hodder (1982d) has described a transfer-
                          MATERIAL CULTURE                             101

mation of the structure of designs on Dutch neolithic pottery
according to a horizontal/vertical distinction: from bounded
designs hierarchically organized, to later horizontally zoned
sequential designs. As in orthodox structuralism the meaning of
such patterning remains a problem. Hodder links the changes in
pottery design in the Dutch neolithic to a change from strongly
bounded to incorporative social groups; so designs are held to
directly mirror social entities. Another way of assigning meaning
is to invoke oppositions or distinctions such as male/female
(as in Leroi-Gourhan's early work (1965) oh upper paleolithic
cave painting), culture/nature, domestic/wild, living/dead, settle-
ment/burial, and these may be held to be cognitive universals as
implied by Hodder (1982, p. 215f).
   Secondly, a structuralist position privileges language and this
may hinder the recognition of the importance of non-verbal
signifying systems. Granting priority to the verbal, and suggesting
that non-verbal forms of communication merely directly mirror
(inadequately) linguistic structures and forms of signification is, as
Rossi-Landi points out, rather like

  asserting the priority of digestion upon breathing, or of rivers upon
  seas, or worse, of downhill roads upon uphill roads. Since language
  and all other sign systems of a community are in reciprocal relations
  in reality, we don't understand in what possible way one can
  attribute to any one of these sign systems a real priority.
                                           (Rossi-Landi, 1975, pp. 20-1)

Material culture as a coded sign system constitutes its own 'material
language', tied to production and consumption. It does not simply
reflect the significative structures of language in another form.
Like language it is itself a practice, a symbolic practice with its own
determinate meaning product which needs to be situated and
understood in relation to the overall structuration of the social.
   If for Saussure the relationship between the signifier and that
signified is entirely arbitrary within the context of an overall system
of difference, then for Derrida (1976, 1978), the later work of
Barthes (1977) and for Foucault (1981) this difference can be
extended infinitely. If meaning is a matter of difference and not
identity, taken to its logical conclusion language cannot be held to
constitute a stable closed system. Meanings of signs are always
elusive, for if a sign is constituted by what it is not, by difference
from other signs, there can be no final relationship between one
signifier and something that is signified, as the signified is always
already the signifier of another signified. Meaning is then the result
102                     MATERIAL CULTURE
of a never-ending play of signifiers rather than something that can
be firmly related to a particular referent. The meaning of one sign
depends on that of another; signifieds keep on changing into
signifiers and vice versa. Signs confer value as much by virtue of
what they are not as what they are. The concomitant of this
position is that meaning in language is floating rather than fixed -
dispersed along whole chains of signifiers, as each becomes in
effect a residue of others, a trace of language. For signs
to have any capacity for meaning they must be repeatable or
reproducible: something that occurs only once cannot count as a
sign. The reproduction of signs constitutes part of their identity
and difference but the very fact of their reproduction entails a Jack
of any unitary meaning or self-identity because they can always be
reproduced in different contexts, changing their meaning.
Signifieds always become altered by the chains of signified-
signifiers in which they become embroiled through usage.

             Materialculture, language and practice
We want to suggest that material culture can be considered to be an
articulated and structured silent material discourse forming a
channel of reified expression and being linked and bound up with
social practices and social strategies involving power, interests and
ideology. As a communicative signifying medium material culture
is quite literally a reification when compared with the relatively
free-flowing rhythms of actions of individuals in the world and the
spontaneity of spoken language. If we take up Saussure's notion of
the diacritical sign - i.e. the sign whose value is independent of
denoted objects and rests upon its insertion in a system of signs,
and Derrida's deconstruction of the notion of the sign as possessing
a plenitude of meaning by virtue of its relation to other signs - we
arrive at what might be termed the metacritical sign: the sign whose
meaning remains radically dispersed through an essentially open
chain of signifieds-signifiers. If we conceive of material culture as
embodying a series of metacritical signs then we must regard the
meaning of the archaeological record as being always already
irreducible to the elements which go to make up and compose that
record, characterized as a system of points or units. What we will
be involved with will be a search for the structures, and the prin-
ciples composing those structures, underlying the visible tangibility
of the material culture patterning. Our analysis must try to uncover
what lies beneath the observable presences, to take account of the
absences, the co-presences and co-absences, the similarities and the
                          MATERIAL CULTURE                           103

differences which constitute the patterning of material culture in a
particular spatial and temporal context. The principles governing
the form, nature and content of material culture patterning are to
be found at both the level of micro-relations (e.g. a set of designs
on a pot) and macro-relations (e.g. relationships between settle-
ment and burial), but they are irreducibly linked, each forming a
part of the other; hence any analysis which restricts itself to just
considering one feature of the archaeological record such as an
isolated study of pot design is bound to be inadequate.
   Material culture can be considered to be constituted in terms of a
 spiralling matrix of associative (paradigmatic) and syntagmatic
relations involving parallelism, opposition, linearity, equivalence
and inversion between its elements. Each individual act of material
culture production is at the same time a contextualized social act
involving the relocation of signs along axes which define the
relationships between signs and other signs. The meaning of these
signs is constituted in their lateral or spatial and horizontal or
temporal relations. The signs reach out beyond themselves and
toward others and become amplified in specific contexts or sub-
dued in others. Material culture does not so much signify a rela-
tionship between people and nature, since the environment is itself
socially constituted, but relationships between groups, relation-
ships of power. The form of social relations provides a grid into
which the signifying force of materialculture becomes inserted to
extend, define, redefine, bolster up or transform that grid. The
social relations are themselves articulated into a field of meaning
partially articulated through thought and language and capable of
reinforcement through the objectified and reified meanings inscribed
in material culture. The material logic of the relationships involved
in the contextual patterning of material culture may run parallel to,
subvert or invert the social logic or practices involved at the sites of
the production, use, exchange or destruction of artefacts. Material
culture as constituted by chains of signifiers-signifieds should not
be treated in a simplistic fashion as necessarily representing
anything in particular, such as red ochre or use of red as
symbolizing blood or pots of shape X as signifying male and pots
of shape Y as signifying female, on its own. The signifying force of
material culture depends on the structure of its interrelations, and
the signification of any particular artefact or item can be seen as
being intersected by the meanings of other items. So, particular
objects form nodes in a grid of other objects. This follows
from a view of material culture as being constituted in an open
Held rather than as a closed system of signs. The material culture
104                       MATERIAL CULTURE

record is a set of conjunctions, repetitions and differences, and
meaning shifts across from context to context, level to level,
association to association. Despite that, material culture forms part
of the encoding and decoding strategies involved in the active social
construction of reality helping to constitute a common cultural
field and tradition along with action and speech. It would be naive
to suppose that material culture expresses exactly that which might
be expressed in language but in a different form. The importance of
material-culture as a signifying force is precisely its difference from
language while at the same time being involved in a communication
of meanings. Material culture forms part of the social construction
of reality in which the precise status of meaning becomes
conceptually and physically shifted from one register to another:
from action to speech to the material. Meaning can be
communicated in all these areas but the medium alters the nature
and effectivity of the message. The depth of social meaning in the
world derives partly from the use of multiple channels for its
transmission. Material culture constitutes an external field to the
intersubjectivity of social relations and is dialectically related to
them, its signifying relations affecting the constitution and
transformation of the social.
   Material culture may be regarded as revealing its structure and
the principles which underlie it through its repetition. This is why,
as has long been recognized, consistent patterning in the
archaeological record is so important for understanding its nature.
Material culture as a communicative discourse solidifies, encodes
and reifies the social relations in which it is embedded and from
which it is derived. Social action is the product of discourse and
from this discourse both action and material culture arise. Material
culture plays less the role of signifying social relations than acting
in terms of established and fixed relations.
   We can argue, therefore, that artefacts constitute a code of signs
that exchange among themselves. The production, utilization and
consumption of material culture on the part of the individual agent
can be regarded as an act of bricolage. Material culture is used to
organize the existence of agents and invest this existence with
meaning and significance. The bricoleur, or handyman (L6vi-
Strauss, 1966, 1969), who uses odd scraps of wood, a bent saw or
whatever, to do a reasonable patching up job, cannot by the nature
of his or her situation create something entirely new, but is trapped
by the 'constitutive sets' from which the elements came. The
bricoleur is never fully in control or master of the situation with
which he or she is confronted. Similarly, the agent produces and
                          MATERIAL CULTURE                                   105
uses material culture, but is never aware of the entire system of
material significations. The agent lives through the world
metonymically. That which is being utilized, produced and con-
sumed is never the individual artefact or object (although it may
appear as such), but rather the entire symbolic structured system of
objects or artefacts of which it forms a part; the use and production
of artefacts is simultaneously the use and reproduction of the
system of which they form a part.
   The primary significance of material culture is not pragmatic, its
utilitarian or technological use-value, but its significative exchange
value. In our argument, we agree with Baudrillard (1981) in
suggesting that a theory of material culture simply cannot be
established in terms of biological needs and their satisfaction, but
must be based on a theory of signification and regarded as a
symbolic production, part of the social constitution of reality:

  the empirical 'object,' given in its contingency of form, colour,
  material, function and discourse . . . . is a myth. How often it has
  been wished away! But the object is nothing. It is nothing but the
  different types of relations and significations that converge,
  contradict themselves, and twist around it, as such - the hidden logic
  that not only arranges this bundle of relations, but directs the
  manifest discourse that overlays and occludes it.
                                                (Baudrillard, 1981, p. 63)

We need to analyse artefacts in terms that go entirely beyond them,
in relation to meaning structures and the social strategies to which
they are related, to determine what specific place in the social is
occupied by material culture as part of an overall pattern of
significations.


               STUDYING MATERIAL CULTURE

               Material culture and social practices
A growing number of recent archaeological studies are beginning to
work towards the position we have been proposing. Braithwaite's.
(1982) ethnoarchaeological study among the Azande (southern
Sudan) brings out the active use of material culture in processes of
definition and maintenance of social categories and boundaries.
Male/female differentiation and asymmetrical power relations
related to this differentiation form a fundamental feature of the
Azande social world. Power relations between the sexes are played
106                       MATERIAL CULTURE
out in terms of the sexual division of labour and its articulation
with the timing and spacing of productive activities. While men are
in a position of social domination, and greater prestige is associated
with their activities and labour product, this domination is never-
theless dependent on their relationship with and competition for
women who possess a more muted but nevertheless important
strength and influence. The male-female relationship is one of
considerable tension and ambiguity. Clay pots are made by the men
 and used and owned almost exclusively by women in the domestic
sphere of labour. The male/female opposition involving the
negotiation and renegotiation of social position is related to the use
of decorated and undecorated pottery: Pots only used by a single
sex are not decorated while the decorated pots are those used in the
transfer of foods or drink from one sex to another, e.g. a woman
serving a man food from a cooking vessel. So, pottery decoration is
associated with and serves to mark put situations in which there is
transfer of food across fundamental social boundaries; it serves to
mark out areas of concern and importance in Azande society.
   In the Wessex area of south England a new type of pottery, finely
decorated beakers, appears in the late neolithic at a time when the
social landscape is dominated by the use of large-scale ceremonial
monuments in what appears to have been a dispersed and
acephalous society with legitimation of authority being ritually
based in the activities taking place at the henge monuments.
Although the building of these monuments must have required
considerable labour input and co-ordination, contemporary burials
show little evidence of hierarchy or status differentiation (Shennan,
 1986, p. 145). Thorpe and Richards (1984) and Shennan (1986) note
that the new material culture form - the finely decorated beakers -
occur in graves on the peripheries of the assumed areas of ritual
influence of the henge monuments and moreover in graves in which
we have the first evidence of status differentiation. They suggest
that these beakers were actively adopted and used by those excluded
from the traditional power structures associated with the use of the
henges and mark the beginning of the development of an
alternative and competing structure of authority and power. This is
a markedly different kind of explanation for the adoption of
beakers than those previously proposed in the literature where their
introduction was discussed in terms of the appearance of new
peoples in the framework of traditional archaeology, or as a
prestige good in the new archaeology. Thorpe and Richards and
Shennan display sensitivity as to the particular context in which
beakers occur in Wessex and argue for their active use in competing
                          MATERIALCULTURE                              107

power strategies; however, neither explanation Is able to cope with
the specificity of the local context in which finely decorated beakers
first occur in large areas of Europe: these frameworks were unable
to explain why beakers appear in some areas in a particular context
(in graves or settlements or ritual structures) and not in others.
   These studies are also unable to explain within the framework
adopted the specificity of pot decoration, For example all that
Braithwaite's explanation does is to tell us why decoration might
occur - but what of its form? Similarly, why use beakers in Wessex
rather than decorated ox bones?
   Hodder's ethnoarchaeological studies, reported in Symbols in
Action (1982), usefully emphasize two important features of
material culture. First, and again, that material culture plays an
active symbolic role in social relations. Interacting groups
manipulate and negotiate, consciously and unconsciously, material
symbols according to their strategies and intentions. For example,
particular types of body decoration worn,, by young men and
women in the Baringo area of Kenya are a means by which the
authority of older men is contradicted. In the Lozi kingdom
material culture is used by status groups to legitimate authority. In
both these cases it is clear that material culture does not simply
reflect social relations but actively mediates intentions, strategies,
attitudes and ideologies.
   Secondly, material culture is meaningfully constituted; it is
produced in relation to symbolic schemes, structured according to
the system of meanings of particular social groups. These
structured meanings mediate social practices and material culture.
Hodder argues that all aspects of Nuba materialculture, from
burial to settlement to decoration to refuse disposal are related to
the same symbolic scheme. Among the Nuba there are well-
developed local groups, while roles and networks of individual
relationships are only weakly defined, Following Douglas (1970),
Hodder associates these features with an emphasis on the purity of
the group, the distinction insider/outsider, and on classification
and categorization:        .

   AH these aspects of ritual and world view are present in Nuba society,
   and particularly in Mesakin society. . . from the emphasis on spatial
   group seclusion to the pollution taboos, to the concern with body,
   home and granary boundaries, to the ritual surrounding the
   boundary between life and death and the breaking of items-
  : associated with a dead man, to the regular placing of items in
   particular places in the huts, to detailed classification and
108                        MATERIAL CULTURE
   categorisation of form and design, to, the: logically consistent set of
   generational rules in the art.
                                                    (Hodder, 1982, p. 183)

As indicated here, however, Hodder emphasizes a single unitary
logic within a social system which may nevertheless contain
tensions:

   Each material item has significance in terms of its place in the whole.
   This is not to say that the patterns in the different types of data are
   always direct mirror images of each other. Rather the identifiable
   patterns are transformations, often contrasting, disrupting, or
   commenting oh basic dichotomies and tensions within the social
   system and within the distribution of power.
                                                             (Ibid, p. 212)

The concomitant of such a position is that any unitary logic must
be argued to be historically specific and not a universal principle of
analysis.
  We have suggested (Shanks and Tilley, 1982) a series of
principles generating the patterning of human remains from
communal tombs (long barrows and chambered passage graves) in
neolithic Wessex and Skane, Sweden, based on the distinctions
individual/group, bounded/unbounded, male/female, right/left,
culture/nature and basic body symmetries such as body/limbs,
upper/lower in respect of disarticulated/articulated remains. Such
distinctions were argued to be part of what Bourdieu has termed
habitus (1977), aspects of lineage-based social systems, involving
social strategies arising from opposed structuring principles of
social control by individual lineage heads or elders in contradiction
with collective production, and direct, unmediated reciprocity and
exchange relations between kin groups. In such a social context we
argued that communal burial asserts the collective rather than the
individual.' • The regrouping of disarticulated remains, which we
identified, incorporates in the expression of symmetry between
body parts a denial of asymmetrical relationships in relations of
production. In this manner we focused on the possible ideological
dimension of the form and nature of material culture, how it may
act to naturalize and misrepresent other social practices.
   Tilley (1984) has extended the analysis to cover all aspects of
material culture patterning in the middle neolithic of southern
Sweden, identifying structural homologies running through the
directional orientation of tombs in the landscape, to burial
practices, ceramic designs and uses of settlement and mortuary
                           MATERIALCULTURE                                   109
space. These homologies are related to social strategies of group
competition in the context of status display and ritual elaboration.
Incorporating the distinctions ancestors/living, spiritual/social,
material culture is analysed as an ideological comment on other
social practices. Related transformations in diverse aspects of
material culture patterning are traced through to the emergence of
the Battle Axe/Corded W a r e tradition. It is proposed that the
manipulation of material culture in the sphere of ritual activities
was part of an ideological order which eventually failed to
misrepresent structural contradictions and justify asymmetries in
social relations, leading to a legitimation crisis and wholesale social
change: the emergence of the more egalitarian Battle Axe tradition.
   Miller (1985a) has similarly used concepts of ideology and a
legitimation crisis in the context of the Indus or Harappan
civilization. He articulates the material remains around a
culture/nature distinction and in relation to an emphasis on order,
standardization and purity. He invokes Foucault's notion of power
as relating not merely to coercive social processes manifested by
particular individuals, institutions or groups but as an overarching
and pervasive principle which generates as well as constrains social
forms. Arguing against notions of priest-kings and redistributive
temple bureaucracies, he suggests that power resides in a multiplicity
of organizational forms, this very dispersal of power ensuring the
reproduction of the social order.
   Miller's (1985) analysis of Indian Dangwara pottery is a
sophisticated elucidation of some of the principles we have been
emphasizing in this chapter. He represents a formal symbolic
framework summarizing the variability of pottery in Dangwara
society established by relating the pot forms, colours and uses to
cultural categories and codes such as food, gender and caste (figure
4.2). Having noted different classifications of the pottery
categories (e.g. according to colour, semantic label and function)
and related the pottery code to other codes or category systems,
Miller stresses that this formal order is his objectified postulation
which is to be superseded:

   rather there is a se{ of individual and transient realisations in
   particular contexts and strategies, which treats these alignments as
   generalised potentials rather than rules of meaning . . . the formal is
   constantly qualified as category (to the different actual pots of the
   same form), code (to the variety of classifications) and grid (to the
   variety of 'evocations') into the informal and realised, which
   produces an array of different and sometimes inconsistent patterns.
                                                                  (P. 175)
                        MATERIAL CULTURE
no                                       POT             STATUS     GENDER

                                         Kalash


                                         Dhupana.        Divine

                                         Divali matka

                                        Akhartij gagra



                                     — Marnette          Ritual


                                        Goli

                                        Matka                       Male

                                        Gagra


                                        Chuklya


                                        Batloi


                                         Brahman dohni


                                        Patya

                                        Wariya

                                        Kunda
                                                         Human
                                        Bhartiya


                                        Kareta

                                        Dohni


                                        Kareli                      Female

                                        Dhatrl

                                        Chayra dohni

                                        Jhawaliya


                                        Harawla          Polluted

FIGURE 4.2 The associations between pottery and major social variables
           in Dangwara society, India, according to Miller
    Source: From D. Miller (1985). Reprinted by permission of Cambridge
                             University Press.
                              MATERIALCULTURE                                111
COLOUR    CASTE          CONNOTATION    CONTENT   EXCHANGE   HEAT   RIGHTS




          Brahman




                                                  Jajman
Red                                               system
painted
                                                                    Contractual


                         Auspicious

                                        Water

                                                  Embedded          Proprietorial
          High                                    exchange
          castes




Red
and
buff

          Middle
          castes


                                                  Market
                                                  system
                         Inauspicious


                                                                    Non-contractual
          Low
          castes
                                        Sorghum                     Non-proprietorial

                                        Pulse     Monetary
                                                  economy



          Untouchables                                       Hot
112                       MATERIALCULTURE

The variability apparent in the interpretation of the meaning(s) of
the same pot depends on the particular context in which the
interpretation takes place. Miller adopts the term 'pragmatics' to
refer to this relationship of conceptualization and context. Two
important concepts of pragmatics are 'cue' and 'frame'. Cues and
frames divide off various contexts in which interpretation may
occur. Pots themselves may act as framing devices (see above),
providing cues as to the significance and meaning of events taking
place, controlling spheres of evocation. The notion of pragmatics
introduces substantial multivalency with regard to pottery, and
through pots acting as frames, into other categories.
   Context implies not only other category sets but also human
practice: the production and use of pots. Miller also considers the
relation of pot categories to social strategies - in particular
'emulation', a process in which attempts are made to raise status
through utilizing particular pot forms associated with dominant
groups; and 'naturalization', in which the socially contingent
appears natural. He rightly emphasizes this as an important feature
of material culture. Its frequency, apparent triviality and practicality
or simple functionality lend themselves to naturalization. Arbitrary
cultural distinctions may be superimposed on apparently natural
(functional) associations, without becoming a discursive focus of
attention.
   We may note several conclusions from Miller's work:

1  The notion of a formal set of discrete categories as forming the
  basis of classification systems is to be extended. Categories
  include non-incidental variability. Such variability involves the
  heterogeneity of social context and practice and does not
  involve a denial of structure (p. 202). The material artefact is
  polysemous.
2 Material variability is not a simple symbolic reflection of a prior
  social classification. Categories of social relationship such as
  caste or class are like the material dimension - 'constructs
  which capture and in turn constitute elements of culture, but
  within an array of alternative, sometimes complementary and
  sometimes conflicting representations. There is no privileged
  real "society" that is being represented: there is nothing else
  behind these mirrors. The term "representation" refers to a
  circle of form and understanding, and culture is exhausted by
  the same constructs through which it is understood' (pp. 202-3).
3 This means that different social dimensions are not reducible,
  one to the other (such as stylistic form to adaptive function).
                        MATERIALCULTURE                          113

   Consequently archaeologists are not in a weak position with
   regard to social analysis in the sense of having no direct access
   to the understanding of social actors which may he linguistically
   articulated. We have analogously argued above that
   archaeological analysis is not a recovery of a lost life-world
   through empathetic reconstruction of the consciousness of an
   ancient potter: 'a society studied through its material rather
   than its linguistic manifestation is in no sense less immediate or
   less real' (p. 198).
   This requires a theorization of material culture not readily
   available in contemporary sociologies. This will not be a
   specifically archaeological theory but theory directed at
   material culture and its particular properties: as an important
   aspect of Bourdieu's doxa, a representation of the given order
   of the world that constitutes an environment for living
   (Bourdieu, 1977, pp. 164-71); as an effective frame for social
   action; as ideologically informed due to its perceived simple
   functionality, concreteness and triviality which facilitate
   naturalization and misrepresentation.


   Our work (Shanks and Tilley, 1987) with the design of contem-
porary beer cans in Britain and Sweden also exemplifies some of
the features of material culture analysis we have been proposing.
Involving detailed analysis of the material culture of alcoholic
drink, both packaging and advertising, we located the design of
beer cans within a social context of brewing, commercial
marketing, consumerism, consumption and the relation of drinking
to images of health and the body. Eschewing cross-cultural
generalization with its resultant problems of lack of explanation of
specific features of material culture, we compared the two capitalist
nation-states Britain and Sweden, analysing the historical develop-
ment of brewing, drinking, the welfare state and technologies of
disciplinary power. We argued there was a contradiction embodied
in the material culture of drink in Britain and Sweden, between
alcohol as commercial product and alcohol as drug. The
differences between British and Swedish can design can be
understood as different ideological mediations of the contra-
diction between promoted consumption and disciplinary control
of drink. So design can hardly be conceived as reflecting a
separate social reality but is a structured mediation inscribed in
commercial, institutional and individual social practices and
strategies.
114                        MATERIALCULTURE


           Material culture and the archaeological record

 We have argued for a view of material culture as a constructed net-
 work of significations, linking this position with some recent
 studies. Considered in terms of the archaeological record material
 culture obviously has boundaries and thresholds in terms of its
 content and internal structure. It is not reducible t o , nor deducible
 from, a universal code because material culture is intimately linked
with social praxis and it is through praxis that it comes into being as
 an objectification and in an objectified form. Material culture is
 structured in relation to a specific social totality and is historically
 and spatially constituted                             • ,•       .
     Individual material culture items are concrete and particular.
 They are, after all, empirical objects. At the same time material
 culture items in the archaeological record are meaningfully
 constituted and linked in • structural relationships underlying their
 physical presence, forming a network of cross-references. The
 individual item forms part of the totality and the totality in part
 serves to constitute the nature of the individual artefact, its value
 and significance. The interrelatedness of the meaning of material
 culture in the archaeological record refers to the intersubjectivity of
 h u m a n actions. Material culture production, in any particular
context, is not an isolated act but is always already established as a
j u n c t u r e : a relation to the material culture which already exists in a
cultural tradition both spatially and temporally. Any fresh or novel
 material culture production is always a response to an established
tradition. The space and time of material culture patterning is
charged through with the space and time of the social relations to
which it refers and relates. This is not quantitative space and time
but lived h u m a n space and time (see chapter 6). Meaning is
 distributed across space and time through repetition and
 difference, contextualized parallels, associations, inversions and so
on. While the meaning of material culture is relatively fixed as
compared with the nuances of speech, i.e. it is likely to possess
fewer syntactic links, and differences between right and w r o n g are.
likely to be more clear cut t h a n in speech, the meaning of material
culture can by no means be regarded as stable. It can possess
 different meanings at different times and in different locations. A
large t o m b such as a megalith is unlikely to possess exactly the same
meaning 1,000 years after it was first constructed and this point
leads us on to a consideration of how we, as archaeologists, go
about interpreting material culture.
                         MATERIAL CULTURE                           115


                     Translating material culture
 The past is not an eternally open site in which the archaeologist
 rambles around conferring meaning and significance at will.
 Regarding material culture as meaningfully constituted forming a
 signifying field inevitably involves the archaeologist in a complex
process of interpretation, decoding or translation. The single most
important feature of material culture is that while it is irreducibly
 polysemous with an indeterminate range of meanings we can't just
 ascribe any old meaning to it. Material culture patterning is not a
 reality to be questioned in the way in which a hypothethico-
 deductive analysis might suggest but a reality that has to be
constructed in the process of translative, interpretative analysis.
 Gaining a representation of the significance of material culture
forms a process in which the significance is achieved by making
visible or drawing out certain features of the data rather than
others.                                        \ .
   In translating from the past to the present we are not trying to
convey exactly the form and meaning of artefacts in terms of their
significance for prehistoric social actors. They had their point,of
view; we have ours. Is one any better than the other? Are our
categories their categories? Much archaeological discussion,
particularly that concerned with erecting typologies, has concerned
itself, as we discussed earlier in this chapter, with this distinction.
Our present analysis of the archaeological record provides one
perspective on that record, and as all material objects have to be
interpreted, whether they exist in the present or the past, we cannot
restrict ourselves to some arcane attempt at a recovery of original
meaning for there is no such thing as original meaning given the
intersubjective context of the production and use of material
culture. In this the position of the archaeologist is no different
from an anthropologist faced with an essentially alien culture. So
we are not trying to convey form and meaning from an original,
somehow untainted past context into a present-day context as
accurately as possible. Such a perspective would find it hard to
define the nature of its own accuracy and, therefore, could shed no
light on what actually is important in the process of translating the
past. In the act of translating the past we change it just as we
change a text in translation from one language into another. No
translation or conceptually mediated intervention would, be
possible if it strove for an absolute degree of identity with the
original (see Benjamin, 1970). Translation is always active, it
changes the past while being constrained by that being translated,
116                     MATERIALCULTURE

the foreignness, the otherness. Translation is a mode of recovering
the meaning in the past, an active remembering on the part of the
archaeologist. The past does not somehow form a slate which we
can wipe clean since materiality is inscribed or written into it. No
interpretation can ever be complete or whole or exhaust the
meaning of the past because of the polysemous nature of the
structured series of metacritical signs that compose it. Content and
form in the past form a whole, like a banana in its skin. Our
interpretations can either envelop the past like a gigantic octopus
with ample tentacles to suck it in or,alternatively, can try to come
to terms with the otherness through a theory-data dialectic in
which we allow the data to challenge our presuppositions while at
the same time not privileging that data as in standard empiricist
approaches. This is in part a realization that all archaeology is
essentially derivative, derived from that which it studies.
   The artefact constitutes both a point of departure and a point of
return. The point of return is a translation of the archaeological
record into a fresh constellation. Truth does not reside in a
recovery or reproduction of some supposed original meaning but in
the process of the transformation of the past. The difference
between a translation of the past and the empirically perceived past
indicates the similarities and not vice versa. Because material
Culture relates to and was produced in a past social context we
should not think of it as being mute and enclosed in an isolation
which can only be broken by an infusion of our present
consciousness. The past still speaks in its traces, in the signifying
residues of the texture of the social world in which it was once
located. It is up to us to articulate that past in our own speech, to
come to terms with it as a vast network of signifying residues, to
trace the connections down the signifying axes and place them back'
in our present.


                          C O N C L U S I O N



In this chapter we have argued that to try and explain material
culture in functionalist terms or subsume it under cross-cultural
generalizations is entirely unsatisfactory. Instead we should be
thinking in terms of human potentialities linked with social con-
straints rather than the asocial and the environmental. Material
culture forms a set of resources, a symbolic order in practice,
something drawn on in political relations, activated and
manipulated in ideological systems. In other words, material
                        MATERIAL CULTURE                           117

culture is actively involved in the social world. We have suggested
that material culture should be regarded as a social production
rather than an individual creation. Conceived as a form of
communication it constitutes a form of 'writing' and is located
along structured axes of signification. We are not attempting to
argue that material culture, in a manner analagous to language,
directly represents things, features or concepts in the social world,
but that it is ordered in relation to the social. The structure of this
ordering is of vital significance. Material culture is polysemous,
located along open systems of signified-signifiers or metacritical
signs. This means that we can never exhaust or pin down its
meaning once and for all. Material culture in the archaeological
record consists of a set of conjunctions and repetitions with
meaning shifting between different levels and contexts. Interpreting
material culture might be regarded as a kind of translation which is
essentially transformative and does not aim at a recovery of
original meaning. Given the intersubjective context of the
production and use of material culture there is no original meaning
to be recovered as the meaning depends on the structured and
positioned social situation of the individual.
        Time and Archaeology


In about 2400 BC people began to live in a small community of
stone houses at Skara Brae in the Orkneys. They kept cows and
sheep, ate shellfish, made furniture out of stone, and made basically
the same sort of pots for perhaps 500 years. It would seem that little
changed over that stretch of time. How are we to understand those
centuries of life when compared with time in contemporary
capitalism and consumerist change? The issue is one of the meaning
of material culture and the character of social structures which we
have considered in earlier chapters. It is also an issue of the
meaning of time itself.
   Most of the human past is the province of archaeology: vast
stretches of time. Yet there is virtually no discussion of time in
archaeology. It is assumed as an unproblematic dimension. We aim
to direct attention to this lacuna, to challenge conventional
assumptions about time. Is time a dimension? What is the meaning
of chronology? How is time related to social change? Is time the
dimension of the historical disciplines? Is there a specifically
archaeological time - long term as opposed to short term? How are
past and present related in terms of time? We intend to argue that
these questions are vital to a critical reflection on contemporary
archaeology.

                  THE TIME OF CHRONOLOGY

                       Chronology: spatial time

  Any inquiry into the past which does not reckon with the dimension
  of time is obviously nonsense; the past is the past by virtue of the
  place it occupies in the time-scale.
                                                  (Piggott, 1959, p. 63)
                       TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                        119

The archaeological text legislates on chronology. Relative and
absolute; stratification and radiocarbon: time in archaeology is
presented as sequence and date. Time is identified as a dimension.
Each object or feature has a temporal attribute, objective and
quantifiable. This is its date, a universal index or scale according to
which everything may be related and compared. Time as dimension
is thus conceived spatially as location and distance. As a diachronic
dimension (abstract in that it is a neutral attribute separate from
that to which it refers), time provides a framework or context
within which the traces of the past may be situated and ordered.

                  Time in the space of excavation
Chronology is applied to the traces of the past to bring order and
sense. It is a technology for the reduction of difference and the
production of meaning.
   It is the excavation which establishes difference. The excavation
produces variety and variability in space - the three dimensional
volume of the site containing artefacts, features and layers. The
archaeological imperatives are to reduce this difference to
similarity, order, and to establish meaning. Reduction of difference
involves the identification of spatial pattern and temporal
sequence. The concept of stratigraphy translates variation in space
into variation in time, establishes relationships in time.
Technologies for identifying spatial pattern include taxonomics
(locating artefact, feature and site in a hierarchy of ordering taxa)
and spatial analysis.

                      Chronology and change
It is not now often accepted that any pattern produced is
meaningful in itself. There is the problem of the origin, meaning
and development of the ordered, classified archaeological universe.
The traditional answer to this problem is a narrative of 'cultures',
involving concepts of innovation, diffusion of ideas, population
shift and, more generally, notions of evolutionary progress - from
savagery to civilization.
  The new archaeology of the 1960s and since conceives of the
explanation of an identified pattern and sequence in terms of
culture process, the workings of culture systems, social systems and
cultural evolution. The problem of social change has been
foregrounded. Agents of change have been variously proposed:
prime movers such as population pressure and adaptation to
120                    TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY

environment; the technomics of economic rationality; the
mechanisms of mathematical logic (see the discussions in chapters 2
and 6).
   Time is assumed to be a theoretically unproblematic dimension
like space. With time and space separable from that to which they
refer, change becomes a problem. Change becomes variability
associated with time as abstract sequence. Change becomes a
catalogue of difference with an abstracted essence, the universal
motor of history, generating variability. Time conceived as
chronometric space is conceptually separate from social production
and reproduction. It is present only as a context, with change as a
problem.
   Time is separate from space; both are separate dimensions. This
separation is associated with a distinction between synchrony and
diachrony, social statics and dynamics, with dynamics or change
Apparently belonging to time. Such a separation is related to
functionalist conceptions of the social, organic units open to
synchronic analysis; it is related to static conceptions of social
entities ordered in evolutionary sequence: band, tribe, chiefdom,
early-state module . . .


 BAILEY IN THE APORIAI OF TEMPORAL LANDSCAPE

The most sophisticated and illuminating discussion of time in
archaeology has been produced by Bailey (1981,1983) and it merits
some considerable attention. Arguing for a duality within time,
between time as objective process and time as socially and so sub-
jectively represented, he identifies a series of distinctions (not
necessarily coincident or parallel):

      occurrence                       representation
      objective                        subjective
      duration                         event
      long term                        short term
      durable                          ephemeral
      collective                       individual
      present explained                past explained
        in terms of the past             in terms of the present
      nature                           history

Time as process is a function of objective occurrences. This may be
distinguished from time as existing in its representation as a
                        TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                         121

product of concepts which are to be related to their social context.
The single event, visible in the short term, is distinguished by Bailey
from long-term process possessing a duration, ex hypothesi, longer
than the event. Long-term process is presented by Bailey as going
beyond the individual and consequently having a collective aggregate
character (not necessarily 'social').
   These features of two aspects of time (Bailey assumes that
chronology is objective time, its representation is secondary and
subjective) are associated with a distinction between academic
disciplines. Environmentalist disciplines and the natural sciences
aim to explain the present in terms of the past. The present is a
dependent category within neutral and objective temporal scales
and involves long-term biological and ecological pressures which
eclipse the individual. Their frameworks employ cross-cultural and
generalizing regularities. For Bailey the social sciences and history
extrapolate from necessarily short-term behaviour in the present to
explain the past. They assume time to be internal to the social, as
part of the social, and regard the social as an independent variable.
   To be distinct and non-derivative a discipline must formulate its
own concepts and theories, conceptual schemes derived from its
own data base. Arguing that archaeological data refer to aggregate
behaviours, he proposes that archaeology's temporal index is not
the single momentary event but long-term process. Archaeology's
temporal scale is not that of the other social sciences whose concern
is with the short term. To be a distinct and autonomous discipline
archaeology must view the past in terms of processes probably not
visible in the present. Bailey claims that criticisms of concepts such
as adaptation apply only to the scale of the social sciences. In
archaeology's scale of long-term continuity the concept of
adaptation is meaningful. Archaeology, then, is to be grouped with
the natural sciences having an environmentalist perspective.

              Scale and the discipline of archaeology
For Bailey archaeology should be concerned with a different order
than that of the social sciences, for its scale is different. He suggests
that archaeological data refer to aggregates of behaviour, averages
which go beyond the individual event, short-term social process,
which are the focus of the conceptual schemes of the social scien-
tist. Social process is defined as short term by Bailey, or rather
he has it applying 'to a scale different to that of aggregate
behaviour. This definition is simply asserted; he only states that the
social sciences must show that social process can be long term. But
122                    TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY
the ancient city-state displays a continuity of social process that can
be historically documented for over a thousand years (de Ste.
Croix, 1981; Anderson, 1974). What constitutes long term as
opposed to short term? Bailey makes the point that environmental
phenomena can be as sudden as social phenomena: flood, drought,
earthquake. Clearly the answer cannot be a simple quantitative
reference to chronology: short term referring to year by year; long
term referring to century by century.
   Bailey relates temporal scale to process: different scales refer to
different processes. The processes pertain to a hierarchy of natural
entities from subatomic particles to organism to society to environ-
ment to cosmos. Scales apply to this hierarchy of entities and
moreover are incommensurate. The social sciences have their scale
and processes; archaeology shall have its own independent scale
and processes. The disciplines are incomparable. They exist side by
side (although within the same abstract temporal context -
chronology). The individual subject of the social sciences has no
relation to long term structure.
   But this surely implies a contradiction between his assumption of
time being chronology and time being specific to process, a
contradiction between empty abstracted time and a saturated time
inseparable from the process of an entity, a substantial time. How
can scales be, in Bailey's own terms, incommensurate within a
chronometric time? Furthermore, the process of archaeology he
outlines is the logic of economic and ecological relations, adaptive
logic within empty chronometric time; the logic and the time are
separate. Is there not, in fact, a confusion of logical sequence and
temporality? What is the temporality of scale? What is the
temporality of all these separate processes? Bailey needs to explain
how scale and process or logic has anything to do with temporality.
We might say with John Berger that 'reality should never be
confused with scale, it is only scale that has degrees' (1984, p. S3).
   A great deal is made of the claim that archaeology must be an
independent discipline with its own conceptual framework and
body of theory. Bailey's arguments about scale are meant to
support archaeology being defined as a specific discipline and are
meant to resolve or rather neutralize the increasingly emergent
splits within it. These rifts have been especially obvious to him at
Cambridge, origin of both palaeoeconomy (Bailey's subdisci-
pline) and the symbolic-structuralist-post-structuralist approach
associated with Ian Hodder and others. To Bailey both are
acceptable; they simply ask different questions, apply to different
processes, different scales. It is pointless arguing one against the
                       TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                        123

other but environmentalist palaeoeconomy is more archaeological.
Post-structuralist archaeologies are for Bailey essentially derived
from the present. They are nonetheless interesting.
   But isn't this simply a way of justifying essentially arbitrary
divisions between academic disciplines with the individual separate
from an independent realm of long-term 'structural' logic, with
incommensurate scales existing within the same spatial time? We
argue that all social disciplines, including archaeology, are
historical; long and short term, all deal with social practice. Bailey
is proposing a disabling theoretical fragmentation for the sake of
justifying archaeology as a separate discipline.

                        A subject of history •
The distinctiveness of Bailey's archaeology lies in its aggregate data.
Again the objective is given primacy. But what constitutes
aggregate behaviour? He makes the point that the whole is more
than the sum of the parts. But what are the parts and what is the
sum? To what, in his natural hierarchy of entities, does
archaeology refer? What is the subject of 'archaeological' process?
It is presumably not 'society' but a natural, as opposed to a social,
entity. Is it 'Man' ('Woman') and 'Nature'? Whatever Bailey's
answer (he does not provide one in the two papers concerned with
time), he must report to a metaphysics, an idealism. Bailey's
proposed archaeology is idealist in that it assumes an essential
principle or subject of archaeological history. History is assumed as
a coherent order, the workings not of social process (incoherent in
the long term) - but of what? A ratio naturae with its adaptive
logic? The logic of hyperscale?
   Bailey opposes history to nature, taking the natural as the
ontological first principle - prima ratio - the eternal against which
'Man' is measured. History is defined as a separate and incommen-
surate order. In this sense his archaeology is no history at all.
   Bailey's archaeology is a universal history applying to
'humanity' from the moment such an entity can be defined. His
scales and separate subjects assume an independent regularity,
single themes for different scales. The archaeologist is to become
initiate in the as yet mysterious laws of this reason, searching for
the key to diversity, the pattern, the regularity. Time is divided into
subject and law, metaphysical entities natura and ratio. In Bailey's
non-historical history human experience and suffering are
dismissed as belonging to another scale, subjective, contingent;
absorbed, rationalized into adaptive logic; subjected to the Law:
124                    TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY

natural reason, ratio, a goddess wreaking vengeance on those who
mark not the will of natura.

                          Past and present
Archaeology is to find its essential reality, its subject and its scale.
The archaeologist is observer of this reality; Bailey's idealism is
contemplative. Archaeology is locked into its time, the present,
observing a distant or rather incommensurate archaeological past.
But this temporal distance is postulated a priori. It is a function of
associating tense with date: conceiving the 'past' as of a different
date and so distant from the 'present'. Where is the present in
Bailey's spatial time? It becomes a durationless and invisible
instant in the overwhelming flow.
   Bailey's scheme of independent scales is logically connected with
the paradoxes of the division of time as dimension. The possibility
of the infinite subdivision of a chronometric time ends in the
durationless instant. This becomes the essence of temporality, just
as abstract space ends and begins in the dimensionless point.
   The material event is the province of the archaeological past, a
past which cannot, in Bailey's idealism, be thought as a present. He
presents no conceptual apparatus for dealing with the past as a
present - it is over and lost because of the nature of archaeological
data, and for Bailey the data are determinate. To treat the past as a
present, he says must result in archaeology being a derivative
discipline. The data are far better now for producing
generalizations about social process. But this is to privilege
generalization and again assumes a homogeneous past, a unified
and rational past.
   Nor is there an adequate consideration of the past in the present,
the presence of the past, the time of the archaeologist,' the
historiographic issue of the production of the past. He considers
that different archaeologies merely ask different questions of the
same data. The relation between present archaeologist and past
artefact is assumed to be unproblematic - simple reflection in
thought? The titles of both of his papers on time in archaeology
('Concepts, time-scales and explanations in economic prehistory'
and 'Concepts of time in Quaternary prehistory') refer to concepts
of time, but what is the relation of concept to 'reality'? This is not
considered.
   Bailey's dual conception of time amounts to a radical separation
of past and present and a valuation of the former; the past is where,
we are to find ontological and disciplinary security. The present
                        TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                             125

and subjective time, that is time as experienced and lived, time as
implicated in social relations, is marginalized. Human
consciousness is treated as an event like any other. Objective
occurrence is distinguished from representation in symbolic struc-
tures. He thus adheres to a split between material event and mental
appropriation. Bailey does mention that time is related to social
structure, but this relation is again lost in the archaeological past.
He also accepts that ideas of time may have had an influence on
behaviour in the past and refers to time scheduling and budgeting
in subsistence practices: a logistical time of calculation.


               CHRONOLOGY AND ITS ORIGINS

But what is the meaning of such temporality - the time of measure-
ment and calculation? Is such a conception of time itself
atemporal? We argue that temporality itself is historical, that any
definition of history is itself historical, and deny any chronology
which claims universality.
  Spatial neutral time, the time of archaeological taxonomics,
Bailey's fragmented temporality, are capitalism's chronometry.

  History since the French Revolution has changed its role. Once it was
  the guardian of the past: now it has become the midwife of the
  future. It no longer speaks of the changeless but, rather, of the laws
  of change which spare nothing . . . Social life which once offered an
  example of relative permanence is now the guarantor of imper-
  manence.
                                                     (Berger, 1984, p. 12)

Change is transformation, metamorphosis of the object. It belongs
to the object. But chronology is an index, a law applying to all
events, a single all-powerful force. Change under the law of
chronology becomes an aspect of time itself. Time as chronology,
abstract and inhuman, the law or principle which applies to
everything, becomes in Bailey's archaeology death triumphant over
all, adaptation, fatum naturae. No longer a condition of social
existence and life, time becomes sentence and punishment. The
archaeologist becomes the executor of the law and people become
the objects of history.
   Contemporary chronology flows. The past is lost in the distance
in the unceasing flow, exotic, mysterious and a problem. The past
is no longer organically related to the present. The present
represents ephemerality; the present is itself lost in the flow. This
126                    TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY

corresponds to the impermanence of consumerism, but also refers
to the possibility of social change in the non-Western world, the
promise of social revolution. Contemporary historical existence,
historicity, is both violence and possibility: violence to life, actual
and symbolic, and the possibility of revolution and change (Berger,
1984).
   Capitalism's chronometry is the calculus for organizing and
programming labour. It is a commodified time allowing the
calculation and comparison of incommensurate labours. It is
an ideology of production. Chronometric time is money.
Chronometry is the time of the factory clock. The private and the
public are separated as work-time and leisure-time. Lived time is
marginalized; times other than chronometry destroyed, condemned
as subjective, irrational, superstition.
   This is not to long for an age before capitalism's colonization of
time. Contemporary historicity is the emergence of a sense of
possibility, a possibility enabling a prospect of social justice, that
the present may be changed, that it is not under the guardianship of
a mythical past. Not nostalgia, but what is needed is a mediation of
Bailey's oppositions.
   This is to undo the identification of reason with reality, the
identification of chronology with the reality of time. In this way
nature and history come to mediate each other: what appears as
natural is historical production, and the identification of history
with what happened - objective occurrence - is dissolved in terms
of the concrete existence of the past. So the past is not assimilated
into the time of the archaeologist but realized as discontinuous with
the present, realized as being more than its representation by the
archaeologist.


                       TIME AND PRAXIS

We can agree with Bailey that time is to be grasped in relation to
particular processes. Time is thus substantial, not a dimension, not
a context. Context is to be subverted. Context is not exterior; there
is no stable 'event' and its 'context'. Temporal interval does not
consist of emptiness. Time exists in the relation between presence
and absence, both physical and temporal. Intervals are a part of
presences, defining, marking edges, structuring difference. There is
a chronic reciprocity between past, present and future. So the
archaeological past exists as a future project in the present, in the
social practice of archaeology. No time then exists in itself as
                       TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                           127

 abstract date or whatever. Time is not an abstract existent,
 contentless form. As we have argued, this would require a
 metaphysics of time. Substantial time is to replace the momentary
 present with the event of presencing. Presencing is a historic
 present, 'mutual reaching out and opening up of future, past and
 present' (Heidegger, 1972, p. 14), holding them together in their dif-
 ference, a relational nexus. Time is the event of praxis. So instead of
length of time we should refer to the density of relations of practice.
   Time is a condition of social practice. As we have stressed earlier
(chapter 3), in social practice social actors draw on structures which
enable action and in the action reproduce those structures. So every
social act implicates different temporalities: the occasion or event
of the action; the life history of the social actor; and the
 institutional time of structure. This is the social logic of 'scale'.
   In arguing against a 'Hegelian' total and abstract time, Althusser
proposes multiple temporalities within a social formation - times
specific to the separate instances: economic, political, legal and
ideological (Althusser and Balibar, 1970, chapter 4). There is thus
no single unifying time, no single 'now'. The only unity to different
temporalities is their location within a structured social formation.
While not agreeing with Althusser's characterization of 'social for-
mation' we agree that time is unavoidably implicated in social logic.
So chronology does not explain, nor does it provide a context. It
is part of that which is to be understood.
   Time may not involve chronology, as we shall illustrate in a
moment. Synchronic does not necessarily mean at the same date; at
the same date does not mean that two events were necessarily
synchronous. Dates act as taxa, uniting 'events' according to an
abstract calculus. We argue instead that any synchrony and
diachrony must arise out of the social structures of which they are a
part. Bailey was lost in the abstract landscape of a quantitative and
spatial time. We can conceive a substantial time as an eventful
landscape of continuity and discontinuity: structured difference.

                         A history of times
Our point is that different temporal orientations shape history itself.

   "The moment is a moment' (Bourdieu reporting an Algerian peasant)
                                                          (1963, p. 59)

  Time for the Algerian peasant is not measured but marked.
There are not spatial points of division, segments of regular
128                   TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY

succession, but self-enclosed, discontinuous units. Points of
reference are supplied by experience of the agricultural cycle: a
ritual calendar. The peasant temporality of tradition is not
coincident with chronology.

  Marked time                            Measured time
  Submission to the                      Managed time
  passage of time
  Self-enclosed                          Repetitive segments of
  recurrent moments                      regular succession
  The forthcoming:                       Future void, open
  exalted by tradition
  Imitation of past;                     Design of a projected
  conformity with                        future
  ancestral model
  Concrete horizon of                \   Mutually exclusive
  the present;                           possibility
  single context of
  meaning
  Reading signs to                       'Rational' calculation
  which tradition
  provides the key
  Deferred consumption                   Abstract absent
  (hoarding)                             accumulation
  Gift                                   Credit
  Social imperative                      'Rational' choice

  SUBSTANTIAL TIME                       ABSTRACT TIME

The measured time of abstract chronology, to be managed,
calculated, saved and expended, is distinct from the peasants'
immersion in a substantial time, a mythology in action, a
submission to the passage of time, with no one dreaming of 'saving
time', 'spending time'. The future in an abstract quantitative
chronometry is a void of mutually exclusive possibilities, a time to
come to be forecast; the forthcoming of substantial temporality is a
single context of meaning, the concrete horizon of the present
exalted by tradition, to be an imitation of the past, conforming to
the ancestral model. To presume to calculate the future is hubris.
So rational calculation of the future, opening up possibility,
opposes a prophetic readings of signs for which tradition furnishes
                        TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                                129

the key, a reduction of possibility. Provision for the forthcoming
involves hoarding, concrete deferred consumption, opposed to
abstract absent accumulation. The gift, with debt a social and
moral issue, is distinct from credit. Social imperative opposes
rational 'economic' choice.
   Reason (1979) locates what he calls the textual time of the
peasant and capitalism's abstract time in the organization of
production and relates this distinction to different forms of
classification. Socialized production by the peasant family is
orientated towards use-values of anticipated products that are
qualitatively distinct and strictly not commensurable. Accounting
practices and orientation to abstractly commensurable exchange-
values are inapplicable. Peasant work-time is substantial, rooted in
concrete labour: 'work time is a physiognomy of subsistence'
(Reason, 1979, p. 229). Conversely, capitalist labour presupposes
an abstract temporal frame: time is money. Reason opposes
abstract repetitive temporality to a textual time, a temporality that
constitutes and is 'constituted in, the narrative account as the prime
formula for reflecting [upon] the curses and causes of events, and
provides the essential means of explicating the sense of the
accomplished facts of life . . . With textual time, we deal not with a
dimension but with a way of grasping one's living' (ibid.; pp. 230-
1). He relates textual time to a world composed by exemplification
- 'the production of signs which "possess;" that to which they refer'
(p. 237) - categorization as opposed to a system of classification.
   Classification implies a separation of sign and sense, an arbitrary
signifier with a stable structure of rules and articulatory criteria of
identity which transcend the particular occasion. Reason here refers
to Saussure's observation that in linguistics 'as in political economy
we are confronted with the notion of value: both sciences are
concerned with a system for equating things of different orders -
labour and wages in one and signified and signifier in the other'
(Reason, 1979, p. 241, citing Saussure, 1974, p. 79; Saussure's
italics). In both, time is an indexical quality. These orders of
temporality are clearly implicated in social practice. It should also
be noted that they are not mutually exclusive: we can understand
the time of the peasant, just as the peasant can understand
chronology. The important point is the structural relation of time
to social practice, the social and historical production of time.
   Levi Strauss has written that

   The characteristic feature of the savage mind is its timelessness; its
   object is to grasp the world as both a synchronic and a diachronic
130                     TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY

   totality and the knowledge which it draws therefrom is like that afforded
   of a room by mirrors fixed on opposite walls, which reflect each other
   (as well as objects in the intervening space) although without being
   strictly parallel. A multitude of images forms simultaneously, none
   exactly like any other, so that no single one furnishes more than a
   partial knowledge of the decoration and furniture but the group is
   characterised by invariant properties expressing a truth. The savage
   mind deepens its knowledge with the help of imagines mundi. It
   builds mental structures which facilitate an understanding of the
   world in as much as they resemble it. In this sense savage thought can
   be defined as analogical thought.
                                                (Levi-Strauss, 1966, p. 263)

   He has distinguished systems of totemic classification from
history. In totemic system 'history' is eliminated or integrated; in
the Western present the historical process is internalized, becoming
a force of change. As we have already described, Western
chronology transcends discontinuity and, difference, closing gaps,
relating events and objects to one another. The totemic system
remains faithful to the timeless model of the past, the authority of
tradition, the legitimacy of absolute antiquity. The mythical past
appears as separate from the present. The ancestors, creators, were
different to ordinary people, their imitators; the mythical past is
joined to the present because nothing has been going on since the
appearance of the ancestors except events whose recurrence
periodically overcomes their particularity. The historical process is
not denied but admitted as form without content. There are before
and after, but each reflects the other.
   The traditional is the predictable, bringing past into present,
shortening chronology into present memory and model of the
mythical past. This predictability is not the mechanical predictability
of the identification of prediction and explanation which depends
on a temporality of date and sequence. It is a predictability which
arises from incorporating or eclipsing historicity, breaking chains
of events which have not occurred before, a predictability which is
a social accomplishment.
   The rhythm and nature of social change is related to social
temporality. Tradition's temporality is short, a thin overlay on the
authority of a timeless and mythical past. Chronology is thus
compressed. We might say that tradition's temporality is of a
different 'scale' to that of contemporary Western historicity.
   We can make reference here to Gurvitch's (1964) typology of
time. He specifies the parameters and forms of social time and
relates these to types of social frames and societies. His eight forms
                        TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                            131

of social time depend on different relations between past, present
and future, greater and lesser duration, continuity and
discontinuity, contingency and necessity, qualitative and
quantitative. Enduring time (the time of slowed down long
duration) involves the past

  projected in the present and in the future. This is the most
  continuous of the social times despite its retention of some
  proportion of the qualitative and the contingent penetrated with
  multiple meanings. For example, the ecological level moves in this
  time, particularly its demographic aspect. The past is relatively
  remote, yet it is dominant and projected into the present and the
  future: the latter thereby risks annihilation. It loses much of its
  concrete and qualitative coloration, and for this reason can be
  expressed in ordinary quantitative measures more easily than all
  other times. The quantitative measures, however, always remain in-
  adequate. Kinship and locality groupings, especially the rural, are the
  particular groupings which tend to move in this time.
                                                  (Gurvitch, 1964, p. 31)

Other types of time include cyclical time where past, present and
future are mutually projected into one another with an
accentuation of continuity and a weakening of contingency with
the qualitative element emphasized (ibid., p. 32); and explosive
time where the present as well as the past are dissolved in the
creation of an immediately transcended future: discontinuity,
contingency and the qualitative are stressed (p. 33). Other
parameters are real lived time as opposed to the perception and
awareness of time, and the control and mastery of time.
   Gurvitch's social frames and societies, correlated with these
different times, include social levels (ecological base, practice,
symbol and value systems, collective consciousness), interpersonal
and intergroup relations, structured and unstructured social groups
(such as kinship groups, organizations), social classes, archaic,
historical and contemporary societies. While we oppose the strong
typological basis of such work it is nevertheless a useful heuristic.
What needs emphasis is the social production of times - their
relation to determinate structures of power and interest. So we need
to consider the ideological implications of the temporality of
tradition (described above) and the relationship between writing
and time.
   Writing transforms the temporality of tradition, extending time,
producing the absent present in the graphical trace. Writing first
appears as the list, as a means of storage. No longer the storage of
132                      TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY

ritual information in the memory of the initiate in tradition, writing
allows the creation and control of information, of records and
archives (cf. Goody, 1978). As such it is the basis of the develop-
ment of surveillance and forms of social control. Inscription is
duration; writing transforms temporality, but temporality itself is
not neutral. As an aspect of social practice, temporality is related to
social control, written into relations of power.

           From historicism to the historicity of discourse
    Zeno says what is in motion moves neither in the place it is nor in the
    one in which it is not.
                                                  Diogenes Laertius IX, 72

    Aristotle summarises Zeno's third paradox: The arrow in flight is at
    rest.
                                                     Physics Z9 239b30

Zeno seems to have argued as follows:

1  The arrow at rest in the present moment is contained in space
  just its own size.
2 The arrow in flight in the present moment is contained in space
  just its own size.
3 In the present moment the arrow in flight is at rest.
4 The arrow in flight is always in its present, a sequence of present
  moments.
5 The arrow in flight is always at rest.

This is the paradox of statics and dynamics, synchrony and
diachrony, of time as date, moment, sequence, and duration as
length.
   But there is at least one resolution: the arrow flies and is at rest
when it is drawn. The paradox is resolved in the act of inscription
(Barthes, 1982a, pp. 232-3).
   The telos of objective chronologies is historicism where the
artefact is explained in terms of its location within its time, within
events and relations contemporary with it. Past is separated from
observing present, each located on a chronometric continuum. The
telos is eternal image. But what of the event of observation, of
excavation, of analysis, of writing? Objective chronologies eclipse
this historia rerum gestarum with the res gestae; discourse is eclipsed
by artefact and attribute, digging by the site.
                       TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                          133

                     Mediating past and present
Time is established as social practice. Archaeology is established as
social practice; it is a relation between past and present, the story
told and its telling. The artefact then is not in itself; it emerges in
the social practice of archaeology. So archaeology's object is not an
eternal image. Archaeology is act of excavation, act of writing.
Archaeology is a specific act of engagement with the past. So we
need to move from contemplative, distanced representation, an
image that goes beyond time, to the material act of production, act
of excavation and inscription, acts which have their own time. The
past is 'the subject of a construction whose locus is not empty
time, but the particular epoch, the particular life, the particular
work' (Benjamin, 1979, p. 352); each is to be broken from
historical continuity in the act of engaging with the past. So
understanding the past is not to look back along a continuum
which has led to the present. It is not to escape the present to see the
past in itself. Understanding the past is to break with the past.
   This is not to put the past at risk. The past can only be
determinate by virtue of the present. To be in itself the past requires
the exteriority of the present interpreter, the archaeologist. Past
and present must be held in tension, in relation. To conceive of the
archaeologist as executor of the laws of time, of change, of natural
reason is to disguise the assimilation of the time of the past to a
universal homogeneity. To preserve the time of the past we must
accept paradoxically the past's coexistence with the present, its
relation in the present. What separates past from present is not
knowledge, it is not date: it is the temporality of the past, the
experience of time as it was in the past. This means that people of
the past cannot be controlled as is implied in their assimilation to
abstract chronology. We can only trace them in the time they live
and we perceive. The past, the time is theirs. But the meaning of the
past is the present's.
   The tension between the past and the present involves a
redescription of past events in the light of subsequent events
unknown to the actors themselves; it involves the creation of
temporal wholes, historical plots. It is not possible to know of the
past as witnesses of the past. This is the fallacy of empathy: that the
subject, the social actor of the past is the locus of history. To
understand the past as archaeologist is to know the past as
 temporal wholes. It is vital to emphasize that these do not involve
 the foregone conclusions of universal history, but there are
 successions or developments in the past and it is the task of the
134                     TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY

archaeologist to elucidate and understand them. As Adorno has
remarked, 'no universal history leads from savagery to civilisation,
but there is one which leads from the slingshot to the hydrogen
bomb' (Adorno, 1973, p. 320). It is the archaeologist in the present
who develops the plot, the narrative.


        The event of archaeology; the archaeological event
   There is no one thing, no some thing, nor such a thing whatsoever.
   But it is from motion or being carried along, from change and from
   admixture with each other that everything comes to be which we
   declare to 'be', speaking incorrectly, for nothing ever is, but always
   becomes.
                                                   (Plato, Theaitetos 152d)

To say 'what is emerges' is to say that nothing exists in itself but
emerges or comes to be in a field of relations with others, emerges
as different to something else. It is also to say that what is emerges
from its transformation. For archaeology this transformation
occurs especially in the text.
   The past is excavated away. It must be recorded. The artefact is
described, drawn, symbolized; the event is similarly represented.
The past emerges in the archaeological text. Metaphor and allegory
are thus central to archaeology. Archaeological metaphor: an
assertion of identity in difference; the past is represented but the
difference, the tension between the past and its archaeological
representation remains. The archaeological past cannot be simply
represented or precisely imitated. There is no unmetamorphosed
reality of the past now.
   The past decays, is dismantled, and is constructed, The past is
not 'discovered' or simply presented to perceptive consciousness.
Artefact is not simply added to artefact, event to event, to
accumulate an archaeological past. The past is dis-closed; its
elements are grasped together in the archaeological judgement
which constructs meaningful wholes, meaningful pasts. So the
artefact is not simply the past but is inherently reflective, mediated
and mediatory, uniting past and present. It is critical, that is
existing in the time of krisis or judgement, the archaeological act
which brings together past and present. Archaeology then is a
mediated relation between what happened and its representation,
between being historical and doing history. So our historicity is in
part doing archaeology: this is simply to say that the past is
temporally inseparable from the event of archaeology.
                       TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                         135

   Now the archaeological event does not exist: the event has no
existential reality. There is no stable 'event', singular objective
occurrence, 'this happened then'. So what is an event? The idea of
event was the focus of the ideographic/nomothetic distinction as
applied to archaeology especially by Trigger (1978). Is archaeology
a historical or a natural discipline? Is its subject the unique and par-
ticular historical event, or a logic of the (social) event in general?
This distinction was often assumed to coincide with the difference
between traditional and new archaeology, between humanist
historical narrative and hard science providing explanation through
generalization. But a universe of radically dissimilar particular
events is meaningless, a literal chaos or non-sense; while a scientific
archaeology subsumes the particularity of the past beneath an
abstract concept of occurrence - an event is conceived as simply
that which occurs. This is to oppose abstract concepts of the
particular and the universal and begs the whole question of the
meaning of history.
   An event is an abstraction but an abstraction from a
configuration of which it is a component; an event only makes
sense in terms of a meaningful whole, a historical plot. So an event
cannot exist in itself; it cannot be separated from its context, its
relations with other events and meanings which contribute to the
understanding of plot. The event is more than singular occurrence.
And scale is not a reality but a construction.
   So the practice of archaeology is a construction of pasts. It
establishes event as event, artefact as artefact. The event emerges
from archaeology; the event, time, duration is inscription.
   We can draw some implications. We said above that metaphor
and allegory are central to archaeology; archaeology is unavoidably
historio-graphesis. It is a system of regimes for production of the
'past'. What is needed is a theory of archaeological inquiry: an
archaeological topology (a rhetoric); an archaeological tropology
(a stylistics); an archaeological poetics asking how the past is to be
written, how the past can be represented without identifying it with
its inscription in the present. To say the past is written, that it
emerges in inscriptions, is not to give primacy to text. It is to direct
attention to the tension between the traces of the past, now over,
completed, and their representation in discourse. It is to direct
attention to the mediation of the historical and fiction, the fictive,
that which is created. How can the past be expressed as completed
without making it a point in an abstract temporal continuum? It is
necessary again to challenge a unified past of formal coherence, to
point attention instead to the meaning of archaeological plot and
136                   TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY

ask the meaning of third-person report, of synthesizing narrative,
the disguises of figure and allegory. It is to ask why archaeologies
are written now, how and why they make sense, if they do.
  The question of time in archaeology is not a neutral and
academic question of method. Archaeology is not simply filling out
an empty time with the debris of history. Time is not simply a
neutral dimension in an academic discipline. Archaeology's
appropriation of the past is a moral and political act. Choosing a
past, that is constituting a past, is choosing a future; the ideology
of contemporary archaeology's temporality is that it is imposing a
Western valuation of measured abstract time on a multitude of
pasts which cannot answer for themselves - even the dead aren't
safe. The event of archaeology is disguised in a separation of past
and present with present disappearing and past becoming spectacle,
entertainment, illustration. We hope to have initiated a challenge to
this regime of archaeological temporality, and in the following
chapter consider the implication of time in social change, one of the
most important areas of archaeological theory.
           Social Evolution and
             Societal Change

In this chapter we wish to address the question of social change and
the manner in which transformations in the archaeological record
may be described, assessed and interpreted. Nowhere is the
intimate connection between archaeological theory and wider social
theory so evident as in considerations of social change in terms of a
long temporal perspective. In a very real sense the study of long-
term social change marks out an intellectual field in which
archaeology and social theory do not just come together, with
perhaps slightly different perspectives, but actually coalesce.
Consequently, we will be concerned to analyse conceptualizations
of long-term change within the broad context of the sociological
literature and archaeological texts, and in historical perspective.
   The question of why and how social change occurs is vital to
archaeology. Indeed, for many archaeologists it provides the
justification for archaeology as a worthwhile academic pursuit.
What other discipline can boast such a temporal perspective on
humanity? By comparison, sociologists and anthropologists (even
historians) lack such temporal data. They can, at best, hope to
provide fairly synchronic 'snapshot' views of social totalities in
which processes governing change have to be inferred from a
delimited 'slice' cut through an ongoing temporal sequence.
Despite such claims, frequently made in the archaeological
literature, it is worth noting that no distinctive theories of change
have been produced by archaeologists, nor does it seem likely that
there will be any in the future. All theories of social change utilized
in the discipline are derived from the wider social sciences and then
used as modelling devices for considering temporal and spatial
alterations in archaeological sequences. As in all other areas of
archaeological theory and practice, views of the past are
thoroughly embedded in the present.
138            SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

   Both social theorists and archaeologists, when considering social
change over long time spans have relied heavily on some notion of
evolutionary development, whether working within a Marxist or
non-Marxist framework. It is almost impossible to exaggerate the
profound influence an evolutionary conception of society has had
in considerations of the relationship between past and present. A
tendency to think in evolutionary or developmental terms has been
pervasive in Western thought since, at least, the Enlightenment. It
forms part and parcel of the nineteenth-century origins of both
archaeology and sociology as academic disciplines. Archaeological
views of the past have been greatly influenced by social theory of an
evolutionary type and, in turn, archaeology has been used in social
theory to provide a broader temporal perspective for its
consideration of the nature of change.
   We discuss a number of influential evolutionary perspectives
used in archaeology and social theory to conceptualize change,
studies relating change to forms of economic exploitation and the
environment within a systemic framework, cultural evolutionary,
Marxist and structural Marxist perspectives. In particular, we
intend to urge that any notion of social evolution is theoretically
flawed and almost always embodies unwarranted ethnocentric
evaluations. We suggest that evolutionary theories, of whatever
kind, need to be abandoned in favour of a theoretical framework
that can adequately cope with the indelibly social texture of change
within a framework avoiding both reductionism and essentialism.


          SOCIAL CHANGE AND SOCIAL SYSTEM

                          Systems theory
Systems theory was introduced into archaeology primarily in order
to explain change. Paradoxically, as utilized, it is a conservative
theory of persistence and stability (see chapter 2). Accounting for
change has always been the major problem with the approach. This
is a result of the emphasis put upon homoeostasis and pattern
maintenance, and owes much to the old Hobbesian problem of
order, or how is society possible in the struggle between competing
individuals, in the battle between all against all? In classical
sociology, and in the systemic perspective, this 'problem* becomes
resolved by the internalization of social facts, norms or values into
the consciousness of individuals in the form of needs dispositions
providing motivational referents for individualized action. Society
               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                 139

becomes treated in a reified manner in which change takes place
'behind the backs' of social actors who become irrelevant to the
analysis, mere 'components' of the system (Cooke and Renfrew,
1979). The sole theoretical function of the individual is to act as an
offset to the social realm, so serving to establish, in this difference,
the existence of the specific realm of the social.
   Systems theory provides a form of functional analysis no
different from the Malinowskian functionalism which dominated
anthropology until the late 1950s or the functionalist sociology of
Parsons (1952) or Merton (1957), based more or less on organismic
and physiological analogies. Any functional explanation of change
presupposes some needs, wants or goals. In other words it is
teleological in form. Something occurs as the result of reaching
towards or pertaining to a desirable state. Individuals may be very
well said to have needs. Indeed it is a fundamental feature of
humanity to have aspirations and desires. By contrast, social
systems themselves have no needs, they have no need to function,
to survive, to attain a goal range or to seek out homoeostatic states.
The needs of the social system cannot be independent of the actors
which make it up so any notion of system function or subsystem
function or the function of rituals or other institutionalized
practices is entirely irrelevant and misplaced. But in a systems
perspective feedback processes cannot be conceptualized except in
terms of some goal unless they are just random, but to
anthropomorphize such processes is invalid.
   Why change should occur becomes a very real problem in a
systemic perspective because the system has been defined in such a
way that stability is a norm. In other words, systems theory, as
utilized in archaeology, has a theoretical structure describing how a
system is maintained but not how it is transformed. The
theoretical structure is not isomorphic with the ontological struc-
ture it seeks to represent. Change via positive feedback mechanisms
is always circumscribed and does not really penetrate the internal
structure. The concepts used to analyse change are no different
from those used to explain system equilibrium, and the processes
operating to change a system are the same as those serving to main-
tain it in a stable state. They are only different forms of regulated
feedback. So in order to explain change a position of exogenous
causality must be resorted to. As a normative consensus is
attributed to the social actors within the system (whom, we are led
to suppose, all live together in a fairly harmonious fashion, with
few internal conflicts, tensions, struggles for power, and contradic-
tory sets of interests or wants), changes can only occur as a result of
140               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE
pressures induced from outside the system. Hill (1977, p. 76) claims
that to think that internal tensions might promote systems
change merely 'begs the question' as to why these arise and this
must result from factors external to the system impinging upon it.
Plog argues that changes are constantly occurring in systems but
these will always be 'deviation-countering changes' (1974, p. 47).
However, under 'abnormal' conditions

      there are conditions under which a change is so great that the
      response fails to restore the initial equilibrium. These conditions are
      called environmental changes, and the behavioural or sociocultural
      responses to them are called morphogenic or deviation-amplifying
      changes.
                                                                 (Ibid, p. 47)


The view is that the cumulative effect of regulatory mechanisms
and deviation countering devices will offset and countermand
change unless there is a particularly violent oscillation in the
system's environment which causes the normal operation of the
homoeostatic mechanisms to break down. Positive feedback
processes are then set into operation until a new state of
equilibrium is reached.
   Despite the general view, repeatedly advocated (most recently by
Juteson and Hampson, 198S), that a systems framework is superior
to other models of change because it enables change to be explained
in terms of multivariate causality, in practice the approach all too
often leads to the postulation of a few 'prime movers' such as
exchange (Renfrew, 1969, 1972), population increase (Cohen,
1977) or the environment (Binford, 1964; Flannery, 1968; Plog,
1974). Of these the second, population increase, is undoubtedly the
most popular and it is difficult to find texts ostensibly explaining
change which do not use this supposedly independent variable to
explain why change - any kind of change - occurs (e.g. Bradley,
1981; Sherratt, 1981; Dolukhanov, 1986), irrespective of whether
or not a systems perspective is explicitly adopted. This kind of
universal recipe is, in fact, no more than an easy way out. It
remains non-explanatory in precisely the same way as the
'normative' diffusionist theories to which the new archaeology so
strongly objected.
   Plog (1974) in his 'dynamic-equilibrium' model of change
isolates four features promoting change, which he also refers to as
'growth': population, differentiation, integration and energy. The
first refers to the size of the system; the second to the number of
               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                 141

'parts'; the third to the strength of internal system ties; and the
fourth to the nature and quality of the resources utilized in the
system. His analysis, in common with many others, suffers from
double determination. Plog characterizes systems as having inbuilt
emergent properties and as changing adaptively in relation to the
environment. These two modes of determination of systems change
are theoretically incompatible. Plog states that differentiation
'refers to evolution from multi-functional role structures to more
special ones' (1974, p. 62) while also stating that 'changes in the loci
of resources being utilized by an adaptation and experimentation
with new resources may account for changes in differentiation'
(ibid., p. 64). On the one hand, then, systems change becomes
teleological, an inbuilt capacity towards change in the direction of
increased differentiation; and at the same time change occurs as a
result of environmental adaptation. The effectiveness of the one
would appear to preclude that of the other.

               Systems theory and cultural evolution
Binford asserted that White's cultural evolutionism (1959) had 'laid
the theoretical basis for a logicodeductive science of culture'
(Binford, 1972, p. 110) and this involved viewing culture as an
extrasomatic means of adaptation. He argued that evolutionary
change was change occurring within maximizing systems which
included the adaptation of social systems to their environments, the
more efficient use of resources and energy flux. Concomitantly,
'evolutionary processes are one form of ecological dynamics'
(ibid., p. 106). The unit of evolutionary relevance is not changes in
parts of social systems which, according to him, may be given a
functional explanation, but changes in the integrated system as a
whole. Evolution thus takes place as a result of the interaction of
the total social system with its environmental field, and adequate
explanations 'must make reference to forms and kinds of selective
pressures operative in concrete environments' (ibid., p. 109). For
Binford, if statements are to be explanatory rather than descriptive,
this requires the formulation of evolutionary laws to relate relation-
ships between the environmental field and the socio-cultural
system. The search is for universal processes underlying different
empirical sequences of societal change, and the reason for this
change is environmental adaptation.
   Flannery's linkage of systems theory with a cultural evolutionary
perspective is important because he is prepared to view change as
arising from within as well as from outside the system. He criticizes
142           SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

'prime mover' explanations, concentrating attention on one
or a few variables and proposing multivariate causality. For
him, an adequate explanatory framework requires us to distinguish
between: (1) the processes of evolutionary change; (2) the mech-
anisms by means of which these processes take place; (3) the socio-
environmental stresses which serve to activate the mechanisms
(Flannery, 1972, p. 409). According to Flannery, the processes and
mechanisms are universal features of evolutionary development not
only in human societies but in all living systems, whereas different
selective stresses may be specific to any particular trajectory or
evolutionary sequence. Social evolution is to be understood in
terms of increasing segregation or differentiation and
centralization or integration. Two possible mechanisms are
discussed, promotion and linearization, corresponding to the twin
processes of segregation and centralization. Promotion is the
mechanism by means of which an institution or lower level office
such as chiefdomship moves to a higher position in the total system
with expanded and generalized functions. It results in increasing
segregation of the system. Linearization or the expropriation of
lower order by higher order controls leads to increasing
centralization of the system. Segregation, then, is the agent of
change.
   For Flannery, each member of an evolutionary series (e.g.
chiefdom or state) forms a set of structural conditions for further
segregation to a higher level of institutions, functions, offices etc.
These become, as it were, crystallized at various stages or levels of
complexity of articulation by centralization processes. Segregation
cannot proceed unabated for the social system would simply tear
itself apart from the centrifugal tendencies of promotion
mechanisms. In the long run the trend to increasing segregation
cannot be stopped as more complex forms of social organization
develop as a result of the failure of the simpler forms to fulfil their
functions effectively. The new offices and institutions are more
flexible than those they replace. So segregation is viewed as a
process of development and maturation. It is beneficial and may
serve to cure internal 'pathologies' subjecting the system to stress:

   In a multivariant model, we might see the state evolving through a
   long process of centralization and segregation, brought about by
   countless promotions and linearizations, in response not only to
   stressful socio-environmental conditions but also to stress brought
   on by internal pathologies.
                                                (Flannery, 1972, p. 414)
              SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                143
The use of the term pathology indicates quite clearly the biological
analogy that Flannery wants to make and also serves to indicate
that a failure of internal system function is a quite extreme
condition contrary to an assumed norm of systemic compatibility
or, translated into social terms, a normative consensus existing
between individuals. It is adaptation to socio-environmental
stresses that, for Flannery, as for Binford, provides the overall
meaning and direction for evolutionary change. Without it there
would be no reason for the segregation and centralization
processes. Evolution permits an increasing degree of efficiency and
control over the environmental field. If any particular social system
is unable to adapt through segregation it is no longer able to
maximize its environmental control and resultant energy yield and
must be extinguished in the long run. Societies, or those that
survive, attain new and higher levels of adaptive efficiency and are
able to compete more successfully with their neighbours.
   Sanders and Webster reiterate the point that environmental
stimuli are 'basic causes of cultural evolution' (1978, p. 251). The
model they use outlines various possible evolutionary trajectories
from egalitarian societies to states conditioned by the permutation
of environmental variables and assumes that population growth
occurs, that rates of growth remain constant, and that this is a
necessary precondition for evolution (ibid, p. 297). Adaptation
simply accommodates people to their environment and permits the
development of societal growth and higher order social structures.


     SOCIO-CULTURAL EVOLUTION: CHANGE AND
                 DEVELOPMENT
The 'new' archaeology has generally been regarded as marking a
revival of explicit interest in evolutionary theory on the part of
archaeologists, rather than the largely implicit adherence to vague
notions of social evolution found in much of the traditional
archaeological literature. The connection made by Binford and
Flannery (among others) between the conception of society as a
functional system and evolutionary change of such systems through
time is thus understandable. However, evolutionary perspectives
have always played an important role in the discipline, used for
example to explain artefact change (see chapter 4, p. 80). A recent
survey of American archaeologists carried out in the mid-1970s
listed 'the rise of civilisation' and 'sociocultural evolution' as
among the top research interests (Schiffer, 1978, p. 154). The
144             SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANCE
literature on evolution continues to grow (e.g. Bintliff (ed.), 1984;
Cohen, 1983; Dunnell, 1980; Foley (ed.). 1984; Flannery and
Marcus (eds), 1983; McGuire, 1983; Segraves, 1982; Van de Leeuw
(ed.), 1981; Wenke, 1981 - to mention only a few examples in the
more recent literature).

              Social evolution: a nineteenth-century view
The current popularity of evolutionary theory in archaeology seems
to be indicative of the discipline being unable to break free from the
shackles of its nineteenth-century origins. It is striking how little
the level of conceptualization of the social has really altered over
the last 120 years.
   A general unity of conceptualization underpinned the
evolutionary schemes developed during the nineteenth century by
Spencer, Morgan and Tylor, among, others, irrespective of the
details of the various frameworks advocated (Smith, 1973, pp.
27-8). This can be summarized by the following seven points:

1      A totalizing holism. The primary object of study was the entire
      history of humanity. Culture with a capital C was writ large and
      conceived as essentially unitary.
2     Gradualism. Social change was conceived to be an incremental
      and cumulative process without significant discontinuities or
      ruptures in the historical process.
3     Universality. Change was a generic and natural process shaping
      humanity and social institutions.
4     Potentiality. Change was conceived as being endogenous and an
      inherent feature within human societies.
5     A directional trajectory. Social change was neither cyclical nor
      random but conceived as a unified process leading to human
      fulfilment.
6     A deterministic perspective. Change being both irreversible and
      inevitable led from the simple to the complex, from the
      homogeneous to the heterogeneous.
7     A causal reductionism. Change was at all times and in all places
      subject to the same causal laws which conferred an underlying
      logic to the total social process.

Most of these features occur in one form or another in varieties of
twentieth century evolutionary theory.
  After Spencer became an evolutionist in the early 1840s he wrote
sociology as the history of societal evolution. There was no alternative
               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                         145

to this since not to consider the social life of human beings as an
all-embracing developmental totality would entail the abandon-
ment of large areas of social life as being random and arbitrary.
For Spencer, evolution was a unitary process and the theory he
advocated covered all types of natural processes from the develop-
ment of animal species, the maturation of the embryo and the
evolution of the solar system, to the development of human
society. He did not so much start from the phenomena to be
explained as from an ethical and metaphysical position to be
established. This was the doctrine of the universality of natural
causation and its inevitable corollary, the doctrine that the universe
and all things in it have reached their present forms through
physically necessitated successive stages (Peel, 1971, p. 132). The
source of evolutionary change was derived from an inverted
account of Malthus' account of population increase: 'from the
beginning population has been the proximate cause of progress . . .
It forced men into the social state; made social organisation
inevitable; and has developed the social sentiments . . . It is daily
pressing us into closer contact and more mutually dependent
relationships' (Spencer, 1852, cited in Peel, 1971, pp. 138-9).
Population pressure is only a proximate cause and the ultimate
source of change Spencer invokes is the inevitable differentiation of
human society from homogeneity to heterogeneity: 'from the law
that every active force produces more than one change, it is an
inevitable corollary that through all time there has been an ever-
growing complication of things' (Spencer, 1972, p. 47). Spencer did
not just produce a totalizing history; his conception was, quite
literally, cosmic. Everything could be reduced to a unitary process.
   While the contemporary literature on evolutionary theory in
archaeology is not quite so all-embracing as the framework
adopted by Spencer and other nineteenth-century evolutionists, the
'explanatory' perspective remains surprisingly similar. European
social evolution, from the neolithic to the Iron Age, according to
Bintliff, can be explained in terms of

  the relative balance between population density, resource availability
  and extraction efficiency (cultigens, technical skills). It is suggested
  that imbalances lead to regular or cyclical 'crashes' of population
  and linked political superstructure; that dramatic rises in absolute
  population density produce cumulative increases in the surpluses of
  food, raw material and manpower capable of supporting social hier-
  archies and complex division of labour; that high levels of absolute
  population density produce authoritarian potential and conflict
  resolution needs that are met by the elaboration of leadership roles.
                                                     (Bintliff, 1984, p. 29).
146           SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

 Bintliff endorses fully the role of population increase as the
causative agent in social evolution, asserting that the archaeological
record is entirely in keeping with Malthus' postulate of relentless
population increase (Bintliff, 1984a, p. 174). Population density,
resource availability and extraction efficiency, together with
population increase, 'cause' social evolution.
   Segraves (1982) similarly asserts the relation of population
pressure to available natural resources as a cause of evolutionary
change (1982, p. 294) and claims that 'people's "beliefs" and even
their value systems as a whole will ultimately change as the mutual
and reinforcing feedback between population size and technical
and economic organization presses the system in a new direction'
(ibid., p. 297).
   Such examples indicate how little this evolutionary theorizing has
moved beyond Spencer's speculations. Over and over again, the
same old 'mechanisms' and 'processes' are drawn out of the hat.
And if environmental adaptation, population pressure, resource
extraction efficiency and the like are not stressed, then equally
reductive explanatory mechanisms are drawn upon. Cohen, for
example, states quite unequivocally that 'evolutionary changes in
organizations of social relations are exogenic' (1983, p. 164) and
that change may be explained solely in terms of boundary-cultural
relations of inter-societal dependence for harnessing goods and
resources.
   Our aim, in the sections that follow, is not to provide a detailed
descriptive review of the uses of evolutionary theory to explain
societal change in the archaeological record. Instead we wish to
identify and criticize some of the fundamental assumptions (found
in both nineteenth- and twentieth-century uses of evolutionary
theory) underlying the use of an evolutionary perspective, of
whatever particular kind, in both social theory and the
archaeological literature. All forms of social evolutionary theory,
we contend, involve one or a number of the following four features
which undermine their validity for an understanding of social
change: (1) a spatialized view of time; (2) essentialism and reduc-
tionism; (3) problematic connections with biological evolution;
(4) ethnocentrism. We shall consider each of these in turn.

                          Spatialized time
One of the primary justifications for evolutionary theories has
always been the claim that they are ideally suited to the study of
long-term change over long time spans. Evolutionary theories
               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                  147

depend upon a particular conception of time: time as spatial,
uniform and abstract; time as a measurable empty duration, or
container utterly separate from the human activities that take place
in this flow of time (see Chapter 5). Time is supposedly a continuous
whole, a spatialized matrix for action. This time is repeatable, vacant,
a commodified time utterly different and opposed to lived human
time, the time of action and human practice. Such time allows and
permits the production of a homogeneous history, a history that
 claims to be the history of the whole of humanity. It provides
justification for the 'equal' treatment of human culture at all times
and in all places: the comparative method. Such time permits
general classificatory stages to be developed. It allows culture to be
compressed into evolutionary sequences.
   A qualitative view of substantial human time which would
recognize difference is replaced by quantitative classificatory time.
So, all 'tribes' are considered to be equal and hierarchically placed
in relation to 'chiefdoms', 'bands' or 'states', History is asserted to
be an intelligible unity and continuum, a longitudinal totality made
up of logical progression or developments in which there is a
continuous       concretization    of    particular    social    forms.
Spatial time becomes equated with change such that in most
evolutionary theories the terms time and change become more or
less interchangeable. A succession of societal forms in the distance
of spatial time invites ethnocentric evaluation and a constitution of
the other: the savage, the primitive. Spatial time lends justification
to the idea of necessity in the historical process, that things could
not be otherwise, they had to happen this way. But people do make
history in accordance with an awareness of history, of the
humanity of history; that history is a contingent and not a
necessary process.


         Essentialism, reductionism and social typologies
As well as a spatialized view of time, and partly as a concomitant of
it, social evolutionary theories are characterized, by either
essentialism or reductionism or both. These features permit and
encourage its ethnocentrism. Although evolutionary theories are
ostensibly about change in spatial time, by means of a reductionist
line of argument they contradict this emphasis and instead assert
stability - the static developmental processes or essential charac-
teristics of social forms that are supposed to induce change.
   Beneath the transformations in social and political systems
evolutionary theories attempt to reveal stability, and paradoxically
148           SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

this is always considered to be primary when dealing with social
change. Evolutionary theories seek out and attempt to elevate to
the status of generalities or laws supposedly irresistible processes,
iron constraints on human action and underlying tendencies that
transcend history. This is an attempt to reveal the essential features
moving beneath and governing individual events and the thick
empirical layers of the archaeological record. Everything is to be
boiled down, reduced and fitted to one single totalizing framework
which presupposes some underlying continuity, whether emergent,
divergent, progressive, regressive, cyclical, lineal or multilineal, in
the relationship between past and present. The archaeologist
becomes an investigator who pores over the past, sorting out the
essential from the inessential, the necessary from the merely
contingent, the wheat of process from the chaff of event.
Ultimately the past becomes domesticated in its essentialist, con-
tinuous inevitability. But this inevitability is at the same time an
intellectual construct, a form of power which in the attempt to
produce a totalizing history reduces that history to the shadow
world of essence, of economic and behavioural process.
   When the term evolution is used in any discussion (unless merely
used as a grandiose term for change - one of the most frequent
uses, or abuses of the term) what is implied is one or a series of
developmental and cumulative processes that lead somewhere.
Axiomatic authority is invariably given to the reality of the term
evolution. Exactly why this term is supposedly beneficial in
understanding change is rarely explicitly questioned. Emphasis is
instead placed on processes: is this or that process evolutionary?
does such and such a trait have evolutionary potential? In this
manner the validity of an evolutionary framework becomes
internally safeguarded. Archaeological research becomes a strategy
of recognizing what is evolutionary as distinct from what is not,
what is necessary rather than what is merely contingent.
   Evolutionary theories have generally relied upon typologies of
social forms: band, tribe, chiefdom, state (Service, 1962) and many
other variants. These have had an enormous impact upon
archaeological research with various attempts being made to
identify and define these stages in terms of the archaeological
evidence (see chapter 2). There have been those who have questioned
the validity of such typologies (Dunnell, 1980; Yoffee, 1979); but
others are still claiming the general utility of a typological model
and it is still very influential as a way of thinking about the past.
The use of such typological frameworks creates a view of history as
an overall intelligible unity and continuum History itself becomes
               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                 149
a continuous process of concretization of abstract, paradigmatic
stadial forms. It is also always an approximation - 'we haven't got
it quite right yet.' Bintliff, the major contributor to the volume
European Social Evolution (1984), claims that 'the overall sequence
[in the Bronze and Iron Age] is strongly comparable to the neo-
evolutionist model of band/big-man/tribe/chiefdom/early state
module' (1984, p. 30). He asserts the reality of developmental
stages and claims that 'the totality of archaeological data for the
European Bronze Age points to the dominance of small scale
chiefdom organisation throughout Europe' (1984a, p. 158). The
mass of archaeological data has been reduced to order with the
'recognition' of a chiefdom-type social organization. The concrete
and the particular become subsumed in terms of an abstract
category permitting the ordering and classification of the data, a
reduction to its essentials. Any that don't quite fit become merely
contingent to the model being used.
   Such a typological framework systematically excludes difference
and instead asserts identity. Identity is always the primordial term.
Although each documented chiefdom or hunter-gatherer band is
distinct from any other chiefdom or band, in an evolutionary
framework these differences become subsumed and relegated as
secondary or contingent. Hence all instances of hunter-gatherer
social organization become relegated to the classificatory stage
'band'. This is a reductionist search for the 'essential'. The supposed
identity of all hunter-gatherer societies permits a classificatory
distinction separating them from other forms of human social
organization divided into other categories, e.g. chiefdom or state.
However, difference is not to be derived from the supposed identity
of differential social forms - it makes these abstract categories
possible in the first place. The concomitant of this is that a notion
of difference, difference between forms of human social
organization, deconstructs any possibility of erecting rigid social
categories such as a 'band'. Bands, tribes etc, have no identity, no
reality whatsoever. What is primary is not the sameness of human
societies but their uniqueness. In order to be posited at all the
notion of band presupposes both an abstract identity and a
difference from some other abstract identity such as a chiefdom.
Differences between forms of human social organization both
permit the abstract identities of bands and chiefdoms to be posited
and, at the same time, deconstruct the possibility of these
abstractions having any analytical significance.
  A typology of social stages is an attempt to create self-sufficient
and exclusive categories. These are intended to order history
150              SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE




                   FIGURE 6.l A Bronze Age chieftain
Source: Modified from C. Burgess (1980). Reprinted by permission of J, M. Dent
                                   &Sons.
               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                151

conceptually. They also order it normatively. Plural differences
between societies become reduced to abstract forms, which in turn
support a normative hierarchy of good and bad. Any empirical
instance of an actual society undermines the efficacy of any such
typology. Social typologies are not only theoretical fictions, they
are also idealist fictions. Notions such as 'band' provide
semblances of conceptual unity, permitting and yet simultaneously
preventing and moulding thought. They promote a vision of
homogeneity in the archaeological record. The complexity and
variability in the archaeological data becomes ordered, fixed and
shaped according to an ideal model created from the 'detached'
subject position of the observer. The identity of social forms is only
possible and discoverable by fitting them into a diachronic totaliz-
ing framework: an inexorable succession of stages allows the
multitudes of different social forms to be divided into abstract
phenomena, their necessary characteristics to count as a band etc,
to be separated from contingent detail, and such a division is made
according to the degree to which societies approach modernity.

                  Biological and social evolution
One particular aspect of the use of essentialist and reductionist
frameworks in evolutionary theory is the relationship posited
between social and biological evolution, which merits some more
detailed discussion. Despite the fact that notions of social evolution
developed before the publication of Darwin's Origin of the Species
(1859), it is in biology that evolutionary processes have been most
successfully defined through work on the concepts of natural
selection and adaptation. Any use of the term evolution after the
publication of Darwin's work in the social sciences in general, or in
archaeology in particular, has not been able to avoid some kind of
conceptual connection with biological evolutionary theory. In prac-
tice most authors writing about social evolution have made explicit
links between social evolution and biological evolution. We wish to
make two main points in this section: firstly, that any author adopt-
ing the term 'evolution' cannot avoid some kind of homology be-
tween biological and social processes or the term would become
redundant. Secondly, any notion of biological evolution is funda-
mentally incompatible with an attempt to understand the social.

                      Biology and technology
Childe, throughout his work, asserted a position of technological
determinism in relation to a requirement for populations to adapt
152            SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

to their natural environments and this provided not only a
fundamental principle but also an ontological vindication and
justification for archaeology. A perspective in which societies were
viewed as being involved in an endless series of technologically
governed environmental adaptations gave a 'clue' for the analysis
of the archaeological record and a way of reducing its complexity
to 'an easily comprehensible order' (Childe, 1947, pp. 71-2). This
order was for Childe an evolutionary order in which social
evolution was deemed to form a logical progression from biological
evolution, while retaining many essential features in common.

  Prehistory is a continuation of natural history. . . there is an analogy
  between organic evolution and progress in culture. Natural history
  traces the emergence of new species each better adapted for survival,
  more fitted to obtain food and shelter, and so to multiply. Human
  history reveals man creating new industries and new economies that
  have furthered the increase of his species and thereby vindicated its
  enhanced fitness.                                  (Childe, 1936, p. 13)


The bulk of Man Makes Himself, as with almost all Childe's
works, is devoted to empirical description and discussion of culture
sequences and, in this book, such sequences are characterized as
being punctuated by a series of revolutionary developments which
result in denser population concentrations supposedly illustrating
the higher degree of adaptive fitness of technical innovations: the
neolithic revolution, the urban revolution and the 'revolution in
human knowledge' with the advent of literacy. Innovations (e.g.
the arch, bronze, the seal, irrigation and bricks in the urban
revolution) are explicitly likened by Childe to biological mutations
(Childe, 1936, p. 228). In Social Evolution, Childe claimed that a
Darwinian framework could not only be transferred from
biological to social evolution, but was 'even more intelligible in the
latter domain than in the former' (1951, p. 175), and that rigorous
processes of selection operated on cultural innovations in the same
manner as natural selection (ibid., p. 177). Cultural evolution, like
biological evolution, could best be represented as 'a tree with
branches all up the trunk and each branch bristling with twigs. . .
differentiation - the splitting of large homogeneous cultures - is a
conspicuous feature in the archaeological record' (ibid., p. 166).
However, cultural evolution is to be at least in part distinguished
from organic evolution because of the property of 'convergence'
between different cultures brought about through diffusion of
techniques and knowledge (ibid., p. 168).
               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                        153

   Much of the recent literature on social evolution in archaeology
differs remarkably little from Childe. Connections between
biological and social evolution generally remain on the same level
of a vague general analogy:

  Divergence from a common ancestor is one of the fundamental
  aspects of biological evolution, and it has undoubtedly played a
  major role in the evolution of a bewildering variety of human
  cultures with which the anthropologist is confronted. Each of those
  cultures also has a complex series of legacies from its evolutionary
  past, perhaps reinterpreted and integrated with adaptive
  innovations.
                                                   (Flannery, 1983, p. 2)

Or, again:

  In the process of both biological and societal evolution we witness a
  progressive differentiation of structure and a corresponding
  specialization of function: 'Wherever we look we discover
  evolutionary processes leading to diversification and increasing
  complexity.'
                                  (Segraves, 1982, p. 292, citing Prigogine,
                                        Allen and Herman, 1977, pp. 5-6)


                  Adaptation and natural selection
In Childe's work or in books such as The Cloud People (Flannery
and Marcus (eds), 1983) and European Social Evolution (Bintliff
(ed), 1984) notions of biological evolution, vaguely translated into
social terms, seem to play very little theoretical role whatsoever and
are entirely swamped in the morass of empirical detail. In most
social evolutionary theories adaptation is usually called upon to
play the major explanatory role but there is no counterpart in social
theory of Darwinian evolutionary theory. Societal adaptation
always has to do double service as both cause and consequence of
change. This can only lead to tautology when the concept of
adaptation is used to explain or account for the existence of par-
ticular traits. To say that adaptive traits are present in a society or
that those traits present are adaptive adds nothing to our
understanding. Arguments normally amount to little more than
saying that those traits present in a society are adaptive, therefore
those traits are present; or those societies that survive are adaptive,
therefore they survive. As Giddens notes, if it were the case that
there were some sort of generalized motivational impulse for
154            SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

human beings progressively to "adapt" more effectively to their
material environments, there would be a basis for sustaining
evolutionary theory. But there is not any such compulsion'
(Giddens, 1984, p. 236). Cohen, however, does suggest one such
'compulsion': that in small-scale societies direct producers have an
interest in reducing unpleasant labour or toil and so will accept
innovations that reduce toil and/or increase productivity (Cohen,
1978, pp. 302-7). Such an argument overlooks entirely the nature
of 'toil' as socially constituted in the first place and that in hunter-
gatherer societies at the bottom of the evolutionary ladder toil
seems to be very limited. In societies characterized by forms of
class exploitation there is anyway no necessary correspondence
between development of the productive forces and reduction of
labour time. When one reads attempts to provide accounts of why
adaptation occurs the level of reductionism involved often becomes
almost absurd. Socio-cultural systems, for example, may be
portrayed solely in terms of feeding behaviour (just who or what is
feeding is rather unclear!):

   More complex sociocultural systems tend to be more generalized in
   their overall feeding behaviour by virtue of their particular feeding
   specializations. This gives them a versatility when intersystem
   competition occurs. They can better exploit new energy sources, but
   also the complex sociocultural systems persevere because success in
   the long run goes to the specialist who can harness the greatest
   number of kilocalories.
                                          (Gall and Saxe, 1977, p. 264-5)

   Dunnell (1980, p. 77) notes that although the archaeological
literature is full of references to adaptation and adaptive process, it
tends to be rather short on selection. Although critical of cultural
evolutionary theories Dunnell wants to reinstate modern biological
evolutionary theory, suggesting that 'evolution is a particular
framework for explaining change as differential persistence of
variability' (ibid., p. 38). This entails that biological evolutionary
theory involving natural selection, mutation, drift etc. should be
translated in terms of the archaeological record: for example style
and function can be defined in terms of natural selection (Dunnell,
1978). Even if human beings are indeed animals and subject to
processes of natural selection in an equivalent manner to badgers,
hedgehogs or guinea-fowl, this by no means implies that any
adequate explanation or understanding of social totalities,
institutions or material culture patterning can be achieved by
reference to either natural selection or adaptation. Most social and
               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                155

material practices have no demonstrable physical survival value for
human populations whatsoever (see Shanks and Tilley, 1987).
   Societies, unlike individual organisms, do not have any clear-cut
physical parameters or boundaries, nor do societies have conscious
problems of self-maintenance or a need to adapt. Individuals may
have these characteristics but they cannot be validly anthropomor-
phized in terms of entire social totalities. Furthermore,
evolutionary theories must apply to some unit, a society or a
cultural system, and here again there is a problem. Is British society
of 1987 a society or cultural system in just the same sense as a group
of palaeolithic hunter-gatherers? Clearly not, and this leads one to
reject any totalizing account of change framed in terms of basic
processes supposedly good for all times and places. Societies
construct their own social reality and the reproduction of societies
entails far more than physical, biological reproduction.


                           Ethnocentrism
Although evolutionary theory logically need not involve
ethnocentrism and in Darwin's biological theory of natural
selection there is no such implication, theories of social evolution in
practice have always been riddled with ethnocentric evaluations. By
ethnocentrism is meant the manner in which a group identifies with
its own socio-cultural individuality and creates a privileged and
central image of itself in relation to others. This normally involves
an explicitly or implicitly defined valorization of the achievements,
social conditions etc. of a group (the in-group) with which the
individual or author identifies himself or herself and a reference
to other groups (the out groups) which are usually defined,
conceptually constituted and evaluated by reference to the in-group
adopting specific concepts, norms, measures of difference and
criteria (figure 6.2). Ethnocentrism in one form or another is likely
to be found in all societies and in the discourses those societies
produce.

          The Enlightenment and the colonial encounter
A very significant 'discovery' of the eighteenth century was the idea
of progress which emerged as a consistently reiterated feature of
social philosophies on a grand scale, permeating all aspects of
social and political thought (Sklair, 1970, ch. 2). Scientific
progress, material progress and moral progress were all conceived
as being inextricably linked in an overarching conception of the
FIGURE 6.2 Forms of ethnocentrism, after Preiswerk and Perrot
        Source: From R. Preiswerk and D. Perrot (1978).
                  SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                      157

growing perfection of human society which was both natural and
inevitable. The social evolutionary theories of the nineteenth
century gave substance and justification to the notion of progress
as providing the dominant classification and explanation of social
institutions and the history of humanity.
   Evolutionary theories were shaped during the period of British
world dominance and the consolidation of empire, a world shaped
and given significance by a confident and ascending middle class
and a perceived equation between scientific and social progress.
The nineteenth-century evolutionary schemes of Spencer, Morgan
and Tylor, among others, did not so much start from the
phenomena to be explained but from an ethical and metaphysical
principle to be established. For Spencer the goal to which evolution
led was perfection, and in terms of human society progress led to
civilization, the conditions of origin for this process being savagery
and ignorance. A natural outcome of social evolution was the
displacement of less developed societies by those that had differ-
entiated further along the road to perfection:

     in a struggle for existence among societies, the survival of the fittest
     is the survival of those in which power of military cooperation is
     the greatest, and military cooperation is that primary kind of
     cooperation which prepares the way for other kinds. So that this for-
     mation of larger societies by the union of smaller ones in war, and
     thus destruction or absorption of the smaller ununited societies by
     the united larger ones, is an inevitable process through which the
     varieties of men most adapted for social life supplant the less adapted
      varieties.
                                                       (Spencer, 1967, p. 78)

It    would     be   difficult   to   find   a   more    clearly   articulated
rationalization for the British imperial subjection of the colonies.
This was, after all, a natural and inevitable process.
   Like Spencer, Tylor and Morgan were leading exponents of the
progressionist argument that all societies and institutions go
through a gradual and natural process of development. While
Spencer used the biological organism as a useful analogy for social
analysis, Tylor and Morgan favoured the development of science as
an appropriate model. Just as sciences pass through stages utilizing
erroneous theories (e.g. alchemy), human societies develop through
the thrusting aside of false and inadequate knowledge. Societies
low on the scale of evolutionary development possess a high degree
of ignorance, superstition and error. Evolution occurs because, at
least in the long run, logic and rationality must prevail: 'it is a law
158            SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

of human progress that thought tends to work itself clear' (Tylor,
 1881, p. 341). Morgan's stages of savagery, barbarism and
civilization were the product of a process of historical
generalization, but history could not have happened otherwise. The
evidence showed that 'the principal institutions of mankind have
been developed from a few primary germs of thought; and the
course and manner of their development was predetermined . . . by
the natural logic of the human mind and the necessary limitation of
its powers' (Morgan, 1963, p. 18). Analysis was facilitated by the
study of primitive 'survivals' which provided both proof and
examples of the stages leading toward civilization. To Tylor in par-
ticular, cultural similarities and differences in artefacts or customs
were of no significance and 'little respect need be had in such com-
parisons for date in history or for place on the map' (Tylor, 1871,
vol. I, p. 6). Archaeology played no significant role in the develop-
ment of these theories, but was occasionally harnessed to provide
the necessary historical back-up, and general conceptions of
evolution were adopted (e.g. Lubbock, 1865).
   The evolutionary schemes of the nineteenth century provided a
picture of continuous and sustained endogenous growth gratifying
to the Victorian consciousness, making it possible to look down
benignly on the lowly savage (in some more literary works elevated to
the status of the noble savage). The social functions of anything
that was superstitious or supposedly irrational could only be
recognized provided they were someone else's beliefs, or a mere
relic and a transitory feature of Victorian society. This provided a
means of being both relativist and non-relativist at the same time,
'of admitting that many diverse modes of organising and inter-
preting social life might have something to say for them, and might
play vital roles in the lives of human beings, while continuing to
maintain the absolute validity of one such mode - the positivist'
(Burrow, 1966, p. 263). The social order of laissez-faire capitalism
became validated in terms of an inevitable all-embracing process. It
represented the highest point humanity had reached and, if not
perfect, was nearly so. If Marx (1859) was to dissent from all this,
socialism was only around the corner, predicated on the growing
contradictions between the social relations and forces of
production.


                      Evolution and progress
The ethnocentrism apparent in nineteenth-century evolutionary
thought hardly needs to be spelled out in detail. What is possibly
              SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                  159

not so readily apparent is the presence of ethnocentrism as an
underlying theme in varieties of mid-twentieth-century and
contemporary evolutionary schemes.
   The stadial perspectives of Childe (1951), Fried (1967) and
Service (1975) are, in essentials, only refinements of Morgan's
scheme. Steward's multilineal approach (1955) with its societal
typologies shares many of the assumptions of the stadial models,
while the primacy given to adaptation is clearly reminiscent of
Spencer. White stated in the introduction to The Evolution of
Culture that his position did not 'differ one whit in principle from
that expressed in Tylor's Anthropology in 1881' (White, 1959,
p. xi). White dealt with the entire history of humanity as Tylor had
done but this history was now primarily a history of technological
progress. Human culture was a means of adaptation and developed
as the efficiency of energy capture increased. This was the 'law' of
cultural evolution and culture was progressive, permitting a
steadily increasing control over the forces of nature. Furthermore
the process of cultural evolution was sui generis: people were swept
up in a cumulative process of exponential growth which was
impossible to control. Steward's multilineal evolution was not,
according to him, concerned to develop an a priori scheme but
'deals only with those limited parallels of form, function and
sequence which have empirical validity' (1955, p. 19). He con-
sidered that cultural laws or regularities could only be founded on
the detailed consideration of comparative sequences. However, the
differences between simple and complex societies could not be
conceptualized as being solely quantitative (an increase in size etc.)
but, more fundamentally, were qualitative in form, involving new
types of societal integration. Steward suggested that 'progress must
be measured by definable values' (1955, p. 13). In his perspective
progress was a necessary component of change, an 'attribute' of
development. Quoting Kroeber (1948, p. 304), Steward goes so far
as to list three criteria for the measurement of progress:

1  'The atrophy of magic based on psychopathology.'
2 "The decline of infantile obsession with the outstanding
  physiological events of human life.'
3 'The persistent tendency of technology and science to grow
  accumulatively.'
                                                          (Ibid., p. 14)

Such statements would have been readily embraced by any
Victorian social theorist! A point very similar to the first has been
160              SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

made by Habermas in his attempt to develop a revised version of
historical materialism in evolutionary terms (Habermas, 1979).
Drawing on Piaget's theories of cognitive development in children
Habermas proposes that homologies may be found between ego
development and the evolution of world views. In small-scale
societies thought is bound up with myth and it is only with the
transition from archaic to developed civilizations that there is a
break from mythological thought towards accounts of the world
with 'argumentative foundations' (ibid., pp. 104-5). The modern
world, for Habermas, is more enlightened than the 'primitive'.
Traditional cultures form closed and non-reflective worlds
compared with contemporary rationality which brings with it
potentiality for Change. Small-scale societies are composed of
individuals who have not yet undergone the 'learning processes'
that bring enlightenment. The highest forms of human rationality
turn out to be those of the contemporary West.
   Childe always maintained a rigid separation could be held
between facts, values and interpretations, expressing this as early as
the epilogue to The Danube in Prehistory (1929) in which he main-
tained that he had always attempted to consign to separate
paragraphs interpretations of data as opposed to their factual
description (1929, p. 418; cf. Childe, 1936, p. 2). Approaching
history in a 'humble and objective manner' meant that, paradox-
ically, a notion of progress was both objective and scientific and
non-objective and irrational. On the one hand to ask whether
hydroelectric power represents progress in relation to, say, a
neolithic technology could only be to Childe a meaningless question
involving dubious value judgements; one could still ask, on the
other hand, 'what is progress?' Childe's answer to the latter was
that the historical record itself was a record of progress and that
archaeology, given its long time scales, was ideally suited to
document this record of progress, illustrating 'improving technical
skill, accumulating knowledge, and advancing organization, for
securing a livelihood' (Childe, 1936, p. 34). The traditional
periodization of archaeology in terms of the technological stages of
stone, bronze and iron, broadly correlated with hunter-gatherer,
agricultural and urban economies, provided unassailable proof
of progress (ibid., p. 35), and this coloured all Childe's
interpretations. Prehistoric hunter-gatherers certainly lived in no
Garden of Eden:

      Faced with the terrifying fact of death, their primitive emotions
      shocked by its ravages, the bestial-looking Mousterians had been
              SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                     161

  roused to imaginative thinking. They would not believe in the
  complete cessation of earthly life, but dimly imagined some sort of
  continuance thereof in which the dead would still need material
  food and implements. The pathethic and futile tendency of the dead,
  [is] thus early attested.
                                                          (Ibid., p. 55)

Elsewhere he writes: 'getting food and shelter and indulging in
sexual intercourse . . . were presumably alone available to lower
palaeolithic savages' (Childe, 1944, p. 114).
   In Progress and Archaeology (1944) and Social Evolution (1951)
Childe admits the occurrence of certain 'dark ages' in which
technical progress seems to have halted, even declined. Such
periods are brushed aside as merely temporary phases (1944, p.
 109) in an overall cumulative development leading up to the
twentieth-century pursuit of scientific knowledge (ibid., p. 115).
History itself is defined by Childe as progress and science as the
mode of thought in which progress culminates. Consequently
history becomes the unfolding of scientific rationality and it
therefore becomes possible to make the claim that present-day
reality is reason itself: i.e. it is reasonable, ordered in accordance
with rationality. So the capitalist market system with its division of
labour and treatment of labour as a commodity is rational(ity). It is
also possible to claim that a 'scientific' history represents actual
history. Reason and contemporary reality become identified;
subject is collapsed into object, object into subject.
   Sahlins and Service (1960), in their well-known attempt to
reconcile the positions of White and Steward, coined the terms
general and specific evolution. General evolution, or White's con-
ception, was considered by them to be 'the central, inclusive,
organizing outlook of anthropology, comparable in its theoretical
power to evolutionism in biology' (ibid., p. 44). This entailed the
 'determination and explanation of the successive transformations
of culture through its several stages of overall progress' (ibid., p.
29). Evolution was, of course, a necessarily good thing and if it had
not taken its course the 'civilized', industrial West would never
have come into being and distinguished itself from other cultures.
   Parsons, in his paper on 'evolutionary universals in society'
(Parsons, 1964), was concerned to develop a generalized analytical
theory and remained opposed to any view that evolutionary theory
should be historical in the sense of historicism. Hence he only
adopts, tacitly, a two-stage model of social growth: the 'primitive'
and the 'modern'. He shuffles the evolutionary cards so as to
162                SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

distinguish between evolutionary universals and evolutionary
prerequisites. An evolutionary universal is identified as being 'a
complex of structures and associated processes the development of
which so increases the long-run adaptive capacity of living systems
in a given class that only systems that develop the complex can
attain certain higher levels of general adaptive capacity' (ibid., pp.
340-1). Evolutionary prerequisites are universal elements in all
human societies and Parsons lists four of these, their presence
marking a minimum for a society to be considered truly human:
technology, language, kinship and religion. He identifies six
evolutionary universals:

1 Social stratification.
2 Cultural legitimation of differentiated social functions.
3 A bureaucratic organization or the institutionalism of the
  authority of office.
4 A money and market complex.
5 Generalized universal norms, i.e. a formal legal system.
6 A democratic association or a liberal, elected leadership.

The first two of these evolutionary universals are of primary
importance for societies to 'break out' from a primitive stage of
social organization. The rest have served to promote advanced
industralization, our present social order. Now, as Gouldner (1970,
p. 367) is quick to point out, what all this implies is that capitalist
America happens, conveniently, to embody all those evolutionary
universals which, according to Parsons, have ever been invented.
Furthermore, the communist nations are structurally unsound,
inherently unstable, an evolutionary dead end:

      I must maintain that communist totalitarian organization will
      probably not fully match 'democracy' in political and integrative
      capacity in the long run. I do indeed predict that it will prove to be
      unstable and will either make adjustments in the general direction of
      electoral democracy or . . . 'regress' into . . . less advanced and
      politically less effective forms of organization.
                                                        (Parsons, 1964, p. 356)

In part, this is because 'those that restrict [the markets and money
system] too drastically are likely to suffer from severe adaptive
disadvantages in the long run' (ibid., p. 350). Had Parsons not
assigned technology to the status of an evolutionary prerequisite
but to an evolutionary universal, the socio-political conclusions
               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                          163

that he draws regarding the relative merits of American and Soviet
society might not have been so readily forthcoming.

              Valorization: from 'simple'to 'complex'
In the 'new' archaeology the term 'progress' is rarely used. It has
become conceptually shifted into the realm of adaptation and
relative adaptive efficiency. Nevertheless ethnocentric valorization
is hardly missing and one of the primary arenas in which this takes
place is in discussions of societal complexity. A string of examples
are readily to be found in almost any recent publication; here we
identify just a few from Marcus's conclusions to The Cloud People:
Divergent Evolution of the Zapotec and Mixtec Civilizations
(Flannery and Marcus (eds), 1983). 'Low population density could
be seen as a factor delaying divergent evolution [in the Archaic
period]' (Marcus, 1983, p. 356; our emphasis). It is implied that
evolution has reality as a process, is inevitable and that a high
population density is necessarily a good thing: 'The development of
urban centres in the Mixteca Alta seems to have lagged a few
centuries behind the Valley of Oaxaca' (ibid., p. 357; our
emphasis). Urbanization is positively valorized:

  Even if we grant the rise of the Oaxaca peoples from band-level
  hunters and gatherers to state-level stratified societies, this rise is
  insufficient to explain the differences between Mixtec and Zapotec
  culture . . . If we are genuinely interested in understanding
  individual Mesoamerican cultures, we cannot ignore drift, adaptive
  divergence, convergence, and parallel evolution while concentrating
  single mindedly on advance through stages of sociopolitical
  organization.
                                             (Ibid., p. 360; our emphasis)

Later 'stages' of social evolution are positively evaluated. Bands
may eventually 'rise' to the status of a state or a civilization; the
latter can only 'decline' or 'fall'.
   The direction in which evolution is invariably depicted as leading
is from the simple to the complex. The terms simple and complex in
evolutionary discourses also imply the absent presence of two other
strongly normative related concepts: respectively, the superior and
the inferior. Both complexity and simplicity are multidimensional
concepts and they cannot be defined except with reference to some
entity or social form. They are relative, not fixed, terms. In evolu-
tionary theories 'complex' is invariably associated with the state or
those social forms which are gratuitously labelled civilizations. Any
164               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE
use of terms such as 'complex', 'civilization' or 'state' - they are
virtually interchangeable in the literature on evolution - is
inevitably predicated on the basis of its difference from its absent
other, the uncivilized (savage), the simple, the non-state. Such a
notion of complexity is ideologically loaded. Despite the fact that
differentiation can be argued to exist in all societies from the
palaeolithic to the present, this differentiation only counts in the
case of a limited number of societies which become labelled
complex. Furthermore complex does not imply better organized,
better adapted, having better societal self-maintenance etc. (witness
Chernobyl). Nevertheless the complex always becomes valorized vis
a vis the simple, its polar opposite. As Rowlands points out,

      the significance of these categories of social life owe their origin to
      European deliberation on the important innovations marking the
      beginnings of modernity. Projected backwards such categories can
      be explored historically in order to address the degree of similarity
      and difference that provides us with an understanding on their
      contemporary unique forms . . . A universal monologue on the
      nature of social complexity has . . . been successfully disseminated
      from its original European power base.
                                                     (Rowlands 1986 pp. 1-2)

Such a perspective permits a situation in which the 'simple' or the
'savage' is not only temporally distant in evolutionary frameworks
from the West but is also transposed spatially in contemporary
anthropological discourse which has a persistent tendency to place
the societies that anthropologists study in a time other than the
present of the anthropological researcher (figure 6.3; see Fabian,
1983, pp. 3Iff). Temporal and spatial distanciation reinforce each
other.
   The schemes of 'explanation' in evolutionary theories easily slip
into ideologies of self-justification or assert the priorities of the
West in relation to other cultures whose primary importance
is precisely to act as offsets for our contemporary 'civilization'.
Genuine difference and radical incompatibility of social
forms become relegated in terms of schemes which permit the
evaluation of social life and the celebration of one social form vis a
vis others. This 'knowledge' is a political act, a form of power.
Societies become classified in an evaluative hierarchy judged
implicitly or explicitly by their degree of deviation from ours.
Hence complexity is elevated in relation to simplicity,
differentiation in relation to homogeneity, the urban form in
relation to the rural and so on. Levi-Strauss has cogently noted that
               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE              165
                            CIVILIZATION
                              BRITAIN
                                NOW
                                HERE




        THEN                                            THERE




                              SAVAGE
                              SOCIETY

FIGURE 6.3 Contemporary time/space distanciation and the constitution
                  of the primitive, after Fabian
              Source: From J. Fabian (1983), pp. 3Iff.



'if the criterion chosen had been the degree of ability to overcome
even the most inhospitable geographical conditions, there can be
scarcely any doubt that the Eskimos, on the one hand and the
Bedouins, on the other would carry off the palm' (Levi-Strauss,
1975, p. 113).


         MARXISM, STRUCTURAL MARXISM AND
              EVOLUTIONARY CHANGE

Marx's materialist conception of the historical process has been
subject to a very large number of specific interpretations both by
writers favourable to his work and by those deeply critical of it.
Here we shall not be concerned to attempt to review in any detail
Marx's vast corpus of writings and subsequent developments but
wish, rather, to draw out a few key features of Marx's conception
of social change and that employed more recently in structural
Marxist literature while analysing, in particular, the manner in
which this work has influenced archaeological theorizations of
change.
166            SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

               Technology: between Marx and Childe
Neither Marx nor Engels attempted to outline at length a systematic
exposition of their theory of historical change. There can however
be little doubt that Marx's account of social change asserted the
primacy of the economic within a general developmental
evolutionary framework. The major area of debate has been, and
is, to exactly what extent the economy 'determines' and/or
'dominates' the social. Some passages in Marx support very clearly
a reductionist form of simple techno-environmental determinism,
for example his comments in The Poverty of Philosophy: 'the hand
mill gives you society with the feudal lord; the steam mill, society
with the industrial capitalist (Marx, 1936, p. 92).' Marx's most
explicit comments on change occur in the 1859 'Preface to A
Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy' in which
contradiction between the productive forces and the social relations
of production is viewed as being the general mechanism of societal
change. This is based on an assertion of a privileged economic
causality determining the entire structure of society:

  In the social production of their existence, men inevitably enter into
  definite relations, which are independent of their will, namely re-
  lations of production appropriate to a given stage in the development
  of their material forces of production. The totality of these relations
  of production constitutes the economic structure of society, the real
  foundation, on which arises a legal and political superstructure and
  to which correspond definite forms of social consciousness . . . At a
  certain stage of development, the material productive forces of
  society come into conflict with the existing relations of production
  . . . From forms of development of the productive forces these
  relations turn into their fetters. Then begins an era of social
  revolution. The changes in the economic foundation lead sooner or
  later to the transformation of the whole immense superstructure.
                                                         (1968, pp. 20-1)

   In Marx's conception, the economic base of society provides 'the
real foundation on which arises a legal and political
superstructure'. If this economic base changes, then the superstruc-
ture will also. In other words the base is assigned a privileged
causality in relation to the superstructure, and the base and
superstructure correspond to each other. The actual dynamics
promoting change are located in a contradictory relation between
the forces of production (labour power, land, tools, raw materials,
technical knowledge and organization of production) and the social
               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                        167

relations of production (relations between people in the production
process which result from working on and with materials using
specific technologies). Beyond a certain conjuncture the social re-
lations of production act so as to restrict the further development
of the forces of production and this will ultimately result in
conflict between classes composing the relations of production
becoming social revolution. This specific conception of historical
change (at least partially contradicted elsewhere in Marx's writings)
was coupled by Marx and Engels to an evolutionary conception of
the historical process in which various stages or 'epochs' in the
development of human society are outlined as specific modes of
production: tribal, ancient or slave, feudal, capitalist and socialist
(Marx and Engels, 1970, pp. 43-56), with an asiatic form being
added later to the list.
   Childe's interpretation of Marxism was in terms of the provision
of a technological model for the understanding of social evolution,
a model which he reiterated over and over again:

  The way people get their living should be expected in the long run to
  'determine' their beliefs and institutions. But the way people get their
  living is determined on the one hand by environment . . . on the
  other by science and technology.
                                                       (Childe, 1979, p. 93)

Although Childe indicates by his use of the term 'determine' that
social change may not be rigidly determined by technology and the
environment in any immediate and automatic fashion,
technological development did amount to firmly conditioning
possible courses of social trajectories.

  The environments to which societies are adjusted are worlds of ideas,
  collective representations . . . these worlds of knowledge must each
  have been, and be, conditioned by the whole of society's culture and
  particularly its technologies.
                                                    (Childe, 1949, pp. 22-3)

Here Childe is clearly willing to allow some room for the social con-
struction of reality, but in the last analysis, archaeology reveals:

  the progressive extension of humanity's control over external nature
  by the invention and discovery of more efficient tools and processes.
  Marx and Engels were the first to remark that this technological
  development is the foundation for the whole of history, conditioning
  and limiting all other human activities. . . If science and technology
168             SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANCE
    are to progress, the relations of production must be adjusted
    accordingly.
                                             (Childe, 1947, pp. 69, 73)

Technological determinism and the requirement for environmental
adaptation become the essential motors of the historical process.

    Structural Marxism and the economic/non-economic relation
It can be argued that when Marx, in the 1859 'Preface' (cited
above), writes about the economic as a foundation on which arises
a juridico-political superstructure, to which definite forms of social
consciousness correspond, no unmediated and direct economic
causation is, in fact, implied (Hindness and Hirst, 1975, p. 16). The
manner in which the economic/non-economic relation may be
theorized in relation to processes of social change constitutes a
major part of what has been termed a 'structural Marxist'
problematic. Comparatively recent work within Marxism and
anthropology has attempted to build open and extend basic
Marxian concepts and elucidate Marx's conception of social
structure with reference to contemporary structuralist thought
(Althusser, 1977; Althusser and Balibar, 1970; Godelier, 1972,
1977, 1978; Poulantzas, 1973; among others). Poulantzas outlines
a threefold classification of Marxist concepts:

1  Marxism provides a theory of history and historical change
  insofar as its concepts can be considered to be transhistorical,
  i.e. applicable to all historically documented social forms such
  as mode of production, social relations of production, forces of
  production, labour or praxis, social formation and different
  structural levels within any particular social formation
  (economic, political, ideological).
2 Marxism utilizes specific sets of concepts in order to analyse
  each particular mode of production (tribal, ancient, asiatic,
  feudal, capitalist, socialist) as theoretically constituted in
  general theory; for example commodity relations, exchange and
  use value in the capitalist mode of production.
3 Marxism analyses particular structures or structural levels or
  regions within each mode of production; for example the
  ideological and political structures constituting the feudal or
  ancient mode. (Poulantzas, 1973, pp. 11-23)

For Althusser, the social totality or social formation is conceived as:
                 SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                           169
1  A complex unity of specific levels or 'instances', minimally the
  economic, ideological and political, constituting a 'structure in
  dominance'. It is not to be conceived in terms of a radical
  distinction between an economic base, conceived as an
  'essence', and an ethereal superstructure that simply reflects the
  base and is ultimately reducible to it.
2 The levels or instances are relatively autonomous of each other.
  The economic instance is made up of a mode or modes of
  production constituted by an articulation between the social
  relations and forces of production. The former are always
  dominant hence a simple techno-economic determinism is
  avoided.
3 The totality is asymmetric. It may be dominated by one of its
  elements but the economy is always 'determinant in the last
  instance'.
4 Change is not a simple matter of a contradiction between the
  social relations and forces of production "but is metonymic and
  overdetermined. All instances condition each other, and the
  structure of the whole totality affects the internal and external
  relations of the instances.

   Godelier's conception of the social totality is similar in many
respects, but rather than to consider specific points of similarity or
difference in the overall conception, we wish to concentrate on the
notion of change and the specific theorization of the
economic/non-economic relation with reference to pre-capitalist
social formations. In small-scale 'tribal' societies institutions and
social practices are thoroughly embedded in each other. There
simply is no apparent economic 'level' to be distinguished from
'superstructural levels'. In other words, it is difficult to
characterize the economy as being either dominant or determinant.
However, Godelier argues that kin relations are both infrastructure
and superstructure:

    the determining role of the economy, apparently contradicted by the
    dominant role of kinship, is rediscovered in this dominant role, since
    kinship functions as, inter alia, production-relations. Here the
    relationship between economy and kinship appears as an internal re-
    lationship without the economic relationships of the kinsfolk
    merging for all that, with their political, sexual, etc., relationships.
                                                      (Godelier, 1972, p. 95)

  For Godelier, as for Althusser, the economic 'level' is an in-
dependent domain and yet forms an aspect of other areas of social
170           SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE
life at the same time. Both Althusser and Godelier assert the
ultimately determining role of the economic which raises the
question as to how the 'relative autonomy' of other levels, areas or
aspects of the social can be maintained if the economic ultimately
holds sway. Both distinguish between primary contradictions pro-
viding the motility for structural change and secondary contra-
dictions developing around the primary contradictions. The
specific theorizations are different (for a detailed analysis see
Goodfriend, 1978) and need not concern us here. The important
point is that the primary motor of change is still situated in the
economic domain between the productive forces and social re-
lations. For Godelier this is a contradiction between structures
composing the forces and relations; for Althusser it resides in a
single structure composed of the productive forces and relations.


                       Epigenesis and change
The work of Godelier and, to a lesser extent, of Althusser has had
some considerable impact upon archaeological analyses of change,
especially through the influence of Friedman (1974, 1975) and
Friedman and Rowlands (1978), and we will now examine this
specific framework. Situating their work within an evolutionary
frame of reference, Friedman and Rowlands adopt a dynamic
model of change. Evolution is conceived as a set of 'homoeorhetic'
processes in which there is a structurally determined order. The
model is epigenetic in that the scheme that they present has no static
stages and at any one moment the seeds of future change are con-
tained within the social order. They present an abstract outline of
certain 'evolutionary' processes with examples of varied concrete
appearances in the archaeological and ethnographic record. As for
Godelier, this abstract outline is based on a logic of social relations
of production - a designation of the essential. The model is an
attempt to reveal basic transformational processes forming both
necessary and sufficient determinants of social evolution.
   The specific model adopted owes much to Althusser and
Godelier and is, of course, a variant of Marx's base/superstructure
conception with the social formation being divided into a number
of structurally autonomous functional levels. The properties of one
level cannot be derived from those of the others. The levels are
integrated in a single structure of material reproduction by two
types of relations. From the ecosystem upwards there is a hierarchy
of constraints determining the limits of functional compatibility
between the levels. Such constraints are characterized as being
               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                171

negative, i.e. they determine what cannot occur rather than
everything that does occur. Friedman and Rowlands note that
'positive determination would only exist where we could find
necessary and sufficient conditions for the occurrence of a given
structure, i.e. where only one set of productive relations could
dominate the process of reproduction' (1978, p. 203). Relations of
production are the dominant aspects of the social formation. They
determine the use to be made of the environment within the limits
of the available technology, the division of productive labour and
the form of the appropriation and distribution of the social product
of labour. In short, they define the rationality of the economic
system. The forces of production form the basic techno-ecological
conditions of production. These are the objective energy costs of
reproduction and the rate of potential surplus. The manner in
which the social relations of production relate to the objective con-
ditions of the forces of production determines the long-term
behaviour of the system and limits the conditions of its existence.
Friedman and Rowlands stress that social formations cannot be
conceived as isolated units because social reproduction is a spatial
as well as temporal process. Social formations are always linked
and 'production for exchange seems to be a constant factor in
social evolution' (1978, p. 204). Social evolution becomes a
multifaceted and multilineal set of interlinked spatial and temporal
transformations between individual social formations. Change
comes about because 'dominant relations of production determine
a given developmental pathway and functional incompatibilities in
the larger totality generate divergent transformations over time'
(1978, p. 204). In such a framework traditional archaeological
stadial typologies become no more than arbitrary cross-sections
through a continuously operating complex of processes.
  This framework remains one of the most attractive and
sophisticated conceptualizations of societal change to have been
used in archaeology, generating many specific studies (e.g.
Frankenstein and Rowlands, 1978; Haselgrove, 1982). However, it
has a number of shortcomings shared with both functionalist and
other evolutionary theories of change which detract from its
usefulness. Firstly, the notion of contradiction is simply reduced to
functional incompatibility between the levels of the social for-
mation; but as we argued in chapter 2, the idea of function and
functionality provides, at best, a low-level description of aspects of
the social and in no way provides an adequate explanation. Secondly,
the characterization of the social formation artificially separates the
organizational function of kinship systems in small-scale societies
172           SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

in organizing production (as the social relations of production)
from their ideational and juridico-political components which take
place in the sphere of the superstructure. This results in a damaging
theoretical barrier being imposed to understanding the relationship
between the economic and the non-economic.
   Thirdly, the totalizing framework of the model requires a
reductionist essentialism. It is proposed that history, the social, the
relations of production have essences or essential features which
operate as their principle of unity irrespective of any particular
society. But the timeless universality of this logos (economic
process) is dependent on that which it systematically excludes: the
contingent, social difference, particularity. The primary essence of
history is the dominance accredited to the social relations of pro-
duction in relation to both the superstructure and the forces of
production. While the latter may constrain the social relations, the
superstructure appears to have no primary role whatsoever in social
transformation. It becomes a pure effect of the dominance of the
social relations of production. What does this superstructure con-
sist of? The levels of the social formation in the model (see figure
6.4) clearly boil down to the economic - productive forces and re-
lations - and the rest. What is the remainder, this apparently
inessential and contingent left-over? The superstructure, of course,
includes law, politics, religion, philosophy, ideology, art, etc., and
it is this 'etc.' that is of importance because the 'etc.' implies that
we can simply substitute the terms 'society' and 'culture', the social
totality as a lived totality apart from abstract economic process.
Now this 'etc' would seem to be of fundamental importance for
explaining and understanding the nature of social transformations
but in the model provided the entire superstructure becomes an
unreal set of data, of appearances projected from an underlying
economic reality. It is secondary, derivative and ultimately an
accidental effect of the economic.
   The opposition economy/superstructure requires that the
economic be conceived as something natural and prior to the
superstructure, to power, ideology and political force. Such, a
model would seem to systematically evade or efface the role of sub-
jective labour in constituting the social world and it tends to have
the effect of neutralizing the coercive nature of political or
superstructural relations. There can be no clear boundary between
the economic and the superstructure. The economic cannot occur
independently of political force and such force is never likely to be
exercised purely for its own sake but for economic reasons. The
economic can not be free of the superstructure as an independently
                SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                          173




FIGURE 6.4 The 'Local population model' of Friedman and Rowlands
Notes: The solid line represents dominance; the broken line represents constraints.
  Source: i. Friedman and M. Rowlands (1978). Reprinted by permission of
                                Duckworth & Co.



structuring dominant entity. The nature of labour, the work form
itself is inextricably bound up with coercive power and politics. To
isolate the economic and present it as dominant is to ignore the
composition of the economic itself with politics.
   Although the constraints of the productive forces and the
ecosystem in the model are proposed as purely negative, in practice
this 'negativity' seems to have considerable selective power:

   The developmental situation of the chiefdom depends very much on
   techno-ecological conditions . . . In montane areas, for example,
   where soils are shallow and runoff a major problem, chiefdoms
174                SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE
      based on swiddening technology will tend to collapse in the course of
      their expansion due to decreasing productivity in an economy
      accelerating surpluses. . . The conditions of local production are a
      crucial factor permitting [the development of the asiatic state]. Thus,
      in fertile valleys and riverine plains the evolutionary tendencies of the
      tribal system are able to work themselves out to their fullest. . . We
      suggest that the emergence of urban territorial states will occur in
      techno-economic conditions where there is a combination of
      effective land scarcity plus the possibility of extreme agricultural in-
      tensification . . . Both Cuicuilco and Teotihuacan shared excep-
      tionally good conditions for urban growth, since they were sited on
      good water sources for irrigation and near obsidian deposits.
                          (Friedman and Rowlands, 1978, pp. 213, 216, 234, 260)

   Friedman and Rowlands appear to want to argue that the
economy is both determinant and non-determinant at the same
time. While there are vast areas of social life which are dominated
by the economy (i.e. in the superstructure) they are still supposedly
structurally autonomous. However, positing the social relations of
production as necessarily dominant clearly sets the limits of the
possibility for variation in the relatively non-determined
superstructure. Consequently the indeterminacy of this relation-
ships becomes reduced to a mere supplement (to use Derrida's term
as an exterior addition to what ought to be self-sufficient but is
deficient) of that which is dominant. The relationship between the
relations of production and the social formation are not
contingent, products of specific historical conditions but instead
become an a priori necessity in which the conditions for social
transformation are known in advance. If the social relations of
production are dominant or determinant in every type of social
formation then their conditions of existence must be deduced
independently from any concrete manifestation of social relations.
However, in this case, the only reality they would have would be to
assure in tautological fashion the existence of the economy as a
separate entity with a determining or dominant role.
   While the notion of contradiction between levels or instances of
the social formation is not explicitly introduced in Friedman and
Rowlands's paper, Gledhill and Rowlands (1982) do usefully
elevate the concept to an important causative role in social
transformation while stating that 'economic and socio-political
conditions cannot . . . be separated, and both are equally
"material": we cannot understand economic processes in the
narrowest sense in isolation, but neither can we argue that real
developmental trajectories are determined by purely "cultural" or
              SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                175

"political" processes' (Gledhill and Rowlands, 1982, p. 145). We
entirely agree with such a position and the implicit criticism of the
earlier model that it makes. What is required is a truly dialectical
theorization in which the economic, the political and the cultural
are viewed as being linked together in a relation of mutual
mediation without any a priori hierarchy of dominance or
determination.


             BEYOND EVOLUTION: THE SOCIAL
                 TEXTURE OF CHANGE

When considering social change in archaeology over either the long
or the short term, evolutionary frameworks appear to be inade-
quate. The prospect before us is not to invent a new or a better
evolutionary framework or model but to abandon the notion of
evolution altogether. There is no difficulty in sustaining the reality
of a conception, such as White's, that there is a fundamental
difference between microlith technology and microchip technology
or that energy capture has increased through time, so long as this is
devoid of ethnocentric valorization. However, such observations
do not take us very far in explaining the social and they certainly do
not merit being placed within a totalizing evolutionary framework.
It is far better to employ a simpler and far less loaded and conten-
tious concept - 'change'. What we should be thinking in terms of
are: social strategies, social transformation, power, ideology,
altereity, plurality, relationality, displacement, substitution,
difference - all terms that cannot be properly compressed or
integrated into an evolutionary framework. Ultimately we may say
that history is another term for undecidability.' What this means is
that we must regard social change as being an open, polysemous
text, a text to be written and interpreted, not something that
decides in any degree of finality what we write. Archaeology as a
historical science is fundamentally open-ended. Evolutionary
theories suggest that history is essentially closed in on itself,
residing in a basic set of processes; but there are no such basic pro-
cesses to be found. Processes exist but they are always different,
singular, non-identical with each other. It is this non-identity, this
singularity that we should be stressing. Rather than attempting to
formulate positions which would once and for all explain the past
in an absolute sense, we should be emphasizing that there are no
absolutes, no fundamentals to dig down to in order to ground our
analyses. The attempt to isolate series of events or essential
176           SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

elements and processes results in a turning away from history which
becomes overlooked. It results in the production of a reductionist
and ideological History.
   In discussing an alternative theoretical position all we can hope
to do is to outline a conceptual strategy for understanding social
change in general. The level of generality involved will mean that
such a perspective will only serve any useful purpose insofar as it is
worked through, mediated, modified, and transformed in practice,
in the act of trying to understand a particular case of social change.

                   Contingency and conjuncture
We start from two basic premises: (I) all social life is contingent;
(2) all episodes of social change are conjunctural. By stressing the
contingent and conjunctural nature of change we hope to avoid the
pitfalls of essentialism and reductionism discussed earlier in
this chapter. To say that social change is contingent is to adopt the
position that history is indelibly a social creation: it has no
predetermined teleological essence and there is no deterministic
necessity to the working through of the historical process - history
could have happened otherwise. Social change is conjunctural in
that any particular episode of change depends on the convergence
of overlapping sets of circumstances, actions and events which
differ in form and nature from case to case according to differences
in social context. By social change we specifically refer to the
structural transformation rather than the reproduction of the social
order. Such episodes of transformation are always endogenously
mediated processes resulting in ruptures or structural disjunctions.
This means that we conceive history as a series of ruptures and
discontinuities separated by periods of social reproduction of
variable duration. However, both stability and change are part and
parcel of structural transformation and reproduction.
   We are not dealing with a simplistic either/or distinction in
which structural reproduction is conceived in some sense as
absolute stability and structural transformation as a totalized set of
changes. The difference between one situation and another is a
matter of degree. Discontinuities depend on underlying continuities
and vice versa. So history is a dialectic of continuity-discontinuity
mediated by structural contingency and conjunctural events and
circumstances. There is nothing in the archaeological or historical
record which suggests that we should privilege or give
methodological priority to change, or its conceptual polar
opposite, stability. Indeed a radical opposition between the two
               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                  177

terms would seem to be unhelpful because in an obvious manner
societies are changing all the time in terms of the actual physical
and bodily composition of the population, interactions between
individuals, losses and gains in the transmission of knowledge and
information, use of specific artefacts, etc. On the other hand, basic
structural features of society, values and principles for conduct,
may remain unaltered. No society can be absolutely stable, nor will
social changes of even the most drastic sort alter every aspect of
action, thought and feeling. Stability and change are both relative
terms, neither can be conceptualized except in terms of the other,
and both reside in all social forms.
   It is important to stress that societies do not just exist in motion
or action, in human praxis, but also in thought, either at a level of
discursive or practical consciousness. In other words social actors
always draw on stocks of knowledge and may know to a greater or
lesser extent why they are acting in any particular manner and be
able to justify or rationalize their actions; or, alternatively, they
may know how to act without being able to verbalize the principles
on which they are acting. Hence actions may have intended or
unintended consequences and in any particular situation one or the
other, or both, may provide an important motor for change.
Thought and action are thoroughly interwoven and to avoid essen-
tialism we must posit a dialectic between thought and action such
that neither stands in relation to the other in a situation of
dominance or determination. Social being does not determine
consciousness nor can we reverse this Marxian formula. At any
particular conjuncture and with reference to a particular set of
contingent circumstances one may dominate the other but the
nature of this domination, always remaining partial in scope, is a
matter of practical demonstration rather than a priori theoretical
determination.
   The social world while being a practical world of situated action
is also a conceptualized world consisting of codes, signs and
symbols which are in a constant process of production and
reproduction, structuration and destruction. It is always ordered in
different societies according to a meaningful scheme and sets of
values. Agents act in terms of socially constituted categories
involving other persons, institutions and material culture.
   Societies do not, of course, exist in isolation - social life involves
interaction with and mediation of an environmental field and a
social field of other individuals and groups. This 'external' natural
and social field exerts influence. It may promote social
transformation but such radical change is not automatic; it always
178            SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

involves an internalization of external factors. The 'risk' of
carrying out various possible subsistence strategies and the effects
of natural disasters are conceived and transformed within the
structures of the social. That usually termed 'economic' has a style
- it is itself part of a symbolic referential field. Similarly, contact
between qualitatively different kinds of societies, such as hunter-
gatherer band groups and socially stratified agrarian groups, or
Captain Cook's arrival in Polynesia (Sahlins, 1981, 1985), is
mediated by internal structure and signification. Acculturation is
never a passive, but always an active and transformative process.


                   Social change: space and time
Space and time do not merely form containers within which social
life is played out but constitute a medium through which social
relations are produced and reproduced. Both are social productions
and in turn are actively involved in social reproduction and
transformation. As we argued in chapter 5 traditional
archaeological practices resulting in the formulation of
chronologies and periodizations of materials depend upon1 and
presuppose a linear and abstract time. We argue instead that social
practice and event have their own rhythms and their own time.
Such a perspective questions the validity of traditional
archaeological conceptions of time and the implicit identification
of time with change which results in the 'problem' of the reality of
archaeological periodizations (e.g. Halstatt and La Tene of the
European Iron Age) and how transitions might develop between
them.
   Regarding time as a medium in which social action and change is
played out means that societal transformation cannot be conceived
as chaotic, as structureless - a point to which we will return below.
Social change is not a single movement pervading the entire social
totality but is articulated in time and space forming a medium for
the restructuring of social relations. Spatiality and temporality
form a component of social life in a situational social context in
which purposeful human agency is structurally positioned and this
positioning serves to shape day-to-day activities and alterations in
their form and nature. Space and time are socially produced as
concrete material spatialities and temporalities (e.g. the time-space
of architectural forms) and as a set of relations between individuals
and groups. Such space-time is not abstract and apart from human
social existence but dense - filled up with the contents of social
existence related dialectically to physical space and physiological
              SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANCE                179

ageing and society's cognitive image of itself as a continuing form.
The spaces and times of the natural world (physical geography,
passage of the seasons, lunar cycles etc.) and those related to the
way the social field is conceptualized are incorporated into the
social production of temporality and spatiality and transformed in
the process. Social spatio-temporal production incorporates nature
and the physical world into a 'second nature' and this socially
constituted second nature may be redefined, reinforced,
reinterpreted, reproduced or transformed into something
qualitatively new. So, the historical sequence is one of contingent
and conjunctural spatiality and temporality. Space and time form a
medium serving to structure social life and are in turn structured by
social relations in a recursive manner (Giddens, 1981; Soja, 1985;
Pred, 1985).
  But this spatio-temporal medium for social reproduction and
transformation is not an indifferent one. The social constitution of
time-space is not just a routinized process but one pregnant with
contradictions, conflicts and struggles. Space and time form a
medium for the networking of power and ideology in relation to
competing interests and social strategies of individuals and groups.
Power, ideology, contradiction, conflict, space and time can only
be understood relationally. Each is infused with and partially
encompassed by the others. Furthermore, all these concepts are not
neutral but critical categories which can be turned in on themselves
and in relation to an analysis of the social production of
archaeological knowledge.


               Signification, interests and structure
In discussing the nature of change we must make reference to the
social-world

1  As constituted a conceptual scheme of signs and codes for the
  ordering and reordering of human existence.
2 As a determinate patterning of actions and event sequences.
3 As mediated by structures dialectically related to strategies of
  individual and/or group interest.

In other words we are concerned with the linkage between signs,
actions and constellations of actions or events, structures and
power. People are always inseparable from meaning and from the
world. The relationship between subject and object or thought and
action is not one of radical opposition, nor of identity, but rather
180            SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE
one of dialectical mediation. Subjects and objects form part of
each other, help to constitute each other, but do not collapse into a
single unitary entity.
   The cultural schemes by means of which the social order is con-
stituted are always arbitrary, never the only possibility for the
realization of action. As we argued in chapter 3 the individual agent
is always positioned in accordance with structure or relational sets
of signs providing principles for conduct. Although positioned in
the social field individuals do act and the consequences of these
actions are just as likely to be unintended as intended. Such action
is historically situated. It draws upon existing structured; sign
systems or conceptual schemes for the ordering of experiences but
every manifestation of structure in an action event is a
concretization of structure through its effects on social practice.
This concretization of structure through action contains within
itself the possibility of the reordering or structuration of structures
because meanings and principles for conduct become re-evaluated
in practice, in the contingent and conjunctural social circumstances
of human practical activities. The practical projects of people take
place within a context of received structured meanings and
signification. However, this meaning and signification becoming
concretized in and through action is at one and the same time re-
evaluated through the course of this action and may be reproduced
or transformed. Action, in other words, is in dialectical relation to
structure and situational social context. It begins in structure is
mediated by structure, and ends in structure but its realization in the
world may result in the rearticulation or transformation of structure.


                    Power, ideology and change
Power and ideology are integrally linked to the reproduction and
transformation of the social order and to structure. While power
is intimately involved in both social reproduction and trans-
formation, ideology as a limited material practice and form of
power is to be fundamentally linked with societal reproduction (see
chapter 3). Power may take on a directly coercive form bolstering
social domination in terms of direct physical control of subjects
(e.g. military regimes). In social situations in which social control
and exploitation are regularized features of life, the maintenance of
this control by sheer force alone is likely to be both unstable and in-
efficient in the long run. In such cases repressive power may rest far
more efficiently on some basis of perceived and maintained
legitimacy, however achieved.
               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                181

   This form of power not directly involving physical coercion is
ideological power which may (1) naturalize the social order through
the manipulation of the past making what is mutable appear to be
immutable; (2) represent as coherent aspects of the social order
which are contradictory; (3) represent that which is partial as
universal; (4) represent the social as being a pre-ordained natural
order; (5) represent the ideas and modes of organization operating
in terms of the specific interests of individuals or groups as being in
the interests of everyone. So, in various ways, ideology relates the
contingency of the present (social inequality) to a natural and
timeless order or to a mythical past. Ideology is the presentation of
antithesis, a strategy of social containment. Its structural effect in
society is to disperse, conceal, dilute, displace or deny
contradictions. Such a structural effect serves the interests of those
in positions of social dominance and justifies or provides apologies
for the social order. Hence ideology is a specific and limited
material form of social practice with structural effects. It is not
simply generalizable to 'world view' or to be conceived as 'false
consciousness' or as a 'pre-scientific' form of knowledge. Instead it
may be regarded as a solution at the level of social consciousness to
structural contradictions that cannot be dissipated or resolved in
practice.
 - Ideology is neither true nor false. It is a misrepresentation or
denial of contradiction. To claim that ideology is a 'solution in
consciousness' is not to suggest it merely operates in the realm of
consciousness or ideas. Ideology, insofar as it is conceived as a set
of ideas embodied in social action, is a real material force in the
social contributing to the maintenance or reproduction of society.
Although ideological relations may misrepresent contradictions
and the concrete social practices operating in terms of these con-
tradictions, at the same time they designate a real relation, both
material and necessary, rather than purely illusory. As a material
form ideology is bound up with, works through, and has definite
effects on social practices. It does not appear as some kind of purely
gratuitous invention of consciousness intentionally manipulating
reality, nor is it the result of a conspiracy on the part of those
whose interests it serves. However, the effects of the operation of
ideology as a form of power are the concealment of contradictions
obviously playing a powerful role in the reproduction of structure
mediating social practices. So ideology operates in such a manner
as to block the translation of structural contradiction into conjunc-
tural struggle between social actors.
182                SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANCE

                                 Contradiction
Structure, conceived as a set of signs and categories, principles and
resources, resulting from and making possible human social
experience and action, should not be conceived simplistically as a
dovetailing of a harmoniously ordered entity. To the contrary, the
principles embodied in structure exist in a relation of contradiction;
one may deny or oppose another. Difference and contrast required
in any sign system invites contradiction but this contradictory
relationship between signs and meanings only realizes itself in the
social through the practical effects of structure in action and
situated event. Signs have, of course, conceptual value by virtue of
their contrast to other signs, but in action signs become articulated
with respect to the referential meaning of what may be, in any
particular instance, the opposing interests of different social
strategies. Contradiction may be conceived as a component of the
social world giving rise to a potentiality for change in at least two
major senses. First, contradiction is an existential part of social
being. It is always and will always be present because it is part of
what it is to be human. Individual persons may consider themselves
to have a continuing identity, irrespective of any particular action
or action sequence, and yet can only be to others what they are at a
particular time and place. The activities of individuals and groups
result in the production of social conditions which, in some
respects, constrain and set limits to the possibilities of future
actions. These conditions are produced by individuals but become
independent of their wills and hence social reality is a contradictory
reality. Material production in most cases requires a division of
labour, and this must be seen as a result of productive activity and
by no means a consciously intended outcome.
  A second source of existential contradiction is in the contrast
between the 'natural' and the 'cultural' orders:

      the human being as Dasein, originates and disappears into the world
      of Being, the world of nature, yet as a conscious, reflective agent is
      the negation of the inorganic. The mediator of the contradictory
      character of human existence is society itself, for only in and through
      membership of a society does the human being acquire 'second
      nature'.
                           (Giddens, 1981, p. 236; cf. Goldmann, 1977, p. 101)


This notion of contradiction as residing in the very nature of social
being has to be complemented by a second sense of the term, if we
              SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                183

are to claim that contradiction provides the root of motility in the
social order.
   Earlier in this chapter we rejected the position that the social
order can adequately be conceived as a definite series of structural
levels or instances. Such a view is intimately linked with the exten-
sive debate over the concept of contradiction: whether it refers to
real or logical opposition; whether logical contradictions can be
real (see e.g. Colletti, 1975; Meikle, 1979; Elster, 1978; Larrain,
1983, ch. 4). In accordance with our arguments in other chapters
contradiction is not a logical concept nor does it refer to real
opposition or conflict. Furthermore, the notion of contradiction
does not suggest functional incompatibility between structures,
levels or instances of a social formation but refers to opposing prin-
ciples, drawn on in social action, but which are nevertheless depen-
dent on each other for their existence in any particular type of
society (cf. Giddens, 1979, ch. 4).
   Contradiction is an opposition between elements of structures
residing in practices which presuppose one another and constitute
conditions of existence for each other. It is to be conceived not as
an opposition between fixed identities but as an internal relation
where the identities of each contradictory element depend on each
other. These contradictions will differ in nature and form from one
society to another. In other words we avoid any essentialist notion
of contradiction such as the classic Marxist formula in the 1859
'Preface' where contradiction arises between the forces and
relations of production with primacy being given to the former in
the determination and working-out of the historical process.
We argue, instead, that contradiction is constitutive of the social
field as a whole and is never likely to be a simple matter of an
opposition between different areas of the economic or between
economic and social processes. Contradiction is to be conceived as
a reality lying within the very structuring of the social order
itself. Adopting such a position it is possible to argue that all
societies are contradictory totalities with the contradictions
differing temporally between different forms of society. Such
contradictions can never by dispelled except in terms of the
transformation of the principles structuring the social field as a
whole. Following from such an argument it is possible to argue that
we can distinguish between primary and secondary contradictions,
the former giving rise to and promoting the development of the
latter. A primary contradiction is one that presages a new social
system. Giddens, for example, argues that the primary
contradiction of capitalism is that between private appropriation of
184           SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANCE

wealth by the few, and a structural principle it presumes which
negates it, socialized production (1979, p. 142). However, the
ranking of contradictions in an evaluative hierarchy of importance
appears to us as a rather dubious and contentious exercise and in
itself may provide little insight into an understanding of why struc-
tural transformations occur. Following Althusser (1977, pp.
106-16) we will suggest that contradictions are always
overdetermined. For example, the contradiction between private
appropriation of wealth and socialized production in capitalist
society is always dependent on the historically contingent and
concrete forms and circumstances in which it takes place. In other
words, the contradiction is inseparable from the overall
structuration of the social order, and from its concrete realization
in human practices.
   Structural transformation is likely to occur when there is a
multiplicity of contradictions between structuring principles, each
affecting the other, which may give rise to further contradictions.
However, structural contradiction can only be realized in human
social practices, in situated action. So contradictions in structure,
between structural principles drawn upon by actors in their day-to-
day conduct, result in competing beliefs, evaluations and
rationalizations for socially situated actions. These ultimately alter
the conditions of existence for the form and nature of social
relations, and concomitantly the nature of these relations
themselves change. In other words, contradiction at the level of
structure becomes translated into a conflict of interests between
social actors which ultimately may become transcribed into the
entire social body at any particular historical conjuncture produc-
ing a radical 'break' or rupture in the social process. The outcome
of such a conflictual rupture will be a transformation of the
structures underlying social action. Contradictions, then, are the
precondition for social change, but they do not bring it about.
Change, as discussed above, depends on episodes, conjunctures of
events and conditions which build on each other around
contradiction producing conflicts which may be resolved by social
change.
   The accumulation of time in such conjunctures may or may not
involve a standard conception of chronology (see chapter 5). It may
not be chronology which is important but the intersection of
contradiction and event. In other words, meaningful connections
may transcend chronology. Chronology may be crucial to social
change, at points of sudden discontinuity, but for the most part we
may expect it to be irrelevant in pre-capitalist social forms because
               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                 185

of the absence of events which build on each other. Conjunctures,
clusterings of events, must be understood in terms of their
determinate temporality. The time of the events may overlap, but
the time in common between the events may not extend beyond the
clustering, the episode.


        CONCLUSION: SPECIFICITY AND CHANGE

In considering the nature of social change it is vital to avoid
theoretical frameworks which produce a totalizing history, a
history of the whole of humanity which does not recognize rupture,
difference, non-correspondence between social forms. Any
adequate analysis of change must take into account the subjective
constitution of the social as an active and differentiated set of
strategies involving power, group and individual interest and
signification. These cannot be simply reduced to a set of unitary
processes.
   We must take into consideration that the tempos, times, spaces,
nature and form of change in contemporary Western society are
fundamentally different from the prehistoric past. Furthermore,
societies constitute their own spaces and their own times. Change
has to be analysed in all the detail of its specificity. The concepts we
have outlined in the final part of this chapter are of necessity
general, but their purpose is to allow us to think historical and
contextual specificity in attempting to understand social
reproduction and transformation.
   In attempting to understand change we are always faced with
issues as to what type and degree of alteration in what is being
considered, and why this is thought to be of interest or importance
anyway. Ultimately these are practical questions that always
presuppose a politics. This issue of the politics of theory is one we
address in the next chapter.
          Archaeology and the
           Politics of Theory

              It is not my fault if reality is Marxist
                                 Sartre quoting Che Guevara
              Humanity is by nature political being.
                                     Aristotle, Politics 12533

Throughout this book we have been concerned to stress that
archaeology is an active production of the past, an intellectual and
cultural labour. Archaeology is to be situated in the present as
discourse in a political field, and as a practice located in relation to
structures of power. This has involved reference to the mediation
of present and past, theory and data, abstract and concrete,
epistemological subject and object in the practice of archaeology.
By the term mediation we mean that there can be no radical
separation and conclusive definition of these categories in
themselves, nor can they be conceived as separate but interacting in
some way; the categories are instead held together in a tension in
determinate practices. In this chapter we wish to draw out the
implications for archaeology of the proceeding discussions, and
explore the major issues further. These concern the development of
a critical archaeology.


            THE EMERGENCE OF A CRITICALLY
             SELF-CONSCIOUS ARCHAEOLOGY

It has been argued that particular archaeologies reflect contem-
porary cultural concerns or categories. For example, Trigger has
related theoretical changes in Anglo-American archaeology to the
changing fortunes (according to him, 1960s optimism and 1970s
pessimism) of the middle classes:
              ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                       187

  a sense of helplessness is . . . emphasized by framing much of the
  discussion of evolutionary change in terms of general systems theory
  . . . disillusionment about present day affairs has led many
  archaeologists to reject the view that cultural progress is inevitable or
  even desirable . . . What emerges is an eschatological materialism in
  which human consciousness plays no significant role.
                                                     (Trigger, 1981, p. 151)

   In another paper Trigger (1984) has described archaeologies as
being nationalist, colonialist or imperalist. Archaeology has been,
and is still, important in the establishment of national identities.
Colonial archaeologies denigrate non-Western societies to the
status of static yet living museums from which the nature of the
past might be inferred. Imperialist archaeologies (largely those
developed in Britain and America) exert theoretical hegemony over
research in the rest of the world through extensively engaging in
research abroad, playing a major role in training either foreign
students or those who subsequently obtain employment abroad,
and in the dissemination of texts. The American expression of the
new archaeology, advocating high-level generalization and a cross-
cultural comparative perspective, 'asserts the unimportance of
national traditions . . . and of anything that stands in the way of
American economic activity and political influence' (Trigger, 1984,
p. 366). At an even more general level, Friedman (1986) has
inserted archaeology into what he claims to be world cycles
of 'traditionalist-culturalist', 'modernist' and 'post-modernist'
cultural identities or cosmologies.
  There has been criticism of particular archaeologies as vulgar
ideology: that they are distorted fabrications lending support to a
system of 'false consciousness'. Kohl (1981, p. 92) has remarked on
the connection between ideas of hyperdiffusionism (spread of the
Aryan race) and fascism in the 1920s, while other work has focused
on ideological distortion in museum presentations of the past (see
below). More sophisticated ideology critique has focused on the
philosophical and methodological assumptions that lie behind many
archaeologies and that work ideologically. This may involve
representing particular social or political interests as universal,
misrepresenting crucial contradictions in society or theory, or
reifying particular categories (assuming that they are natural,
objective and concrete, rather than relating them to their social
conditions of production). As we. mentioned in chapter 1,
Rowlands has questioned the validity of the idea of a prehistory of
Europe (1984, p. 154) and criticized a prehistoric metanarrative of
development of societies from 'simple' to 'complex' forms:
188         ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

  the meta-narrative of simple to complex is a dominant ideology that
  organises the writing of contemporary world pre-history in favour of
  a modernising ethos and the primacy of the West. That the political
  context of colonialism is its natural progenitor. That for these
  reasons, such constructions of history have formed the dominant
  ideologies of the metropolitan centres, although changing their
  content from British imperialism to American neo-evolutionary,
  multi-lineal trajectories of the Modernisation kind . . . claims to
  autonomy and independence have taken the form of cognitive
  apartheid. If the West isn't the only area that has states, cities,
  writing, rationality etc. you show that you have something similar
  that is either equivalent or better. A universal dialogue about the
  nature of universal humanity is sustained but now with a radical em-
  phasis on difference and comparison.
                                              (Rowlands, 1986, pp. 3-4)

Elsewhere (Shanks and Tilley, 1987, ch. 3; Tilley, 1985) we have
extensively criticized theoretical perspectives advanced in the new
archaeology as lending explicit or implicit support to the value
systems of a capitalist society. For example, the projection of
present-day economic values such as maximizing returns and
minimizing costs to 'explain' resource utilization among prehistoric
hunter-gatherers naturalizes what are historically and culturally
specific values as universal features of humanity.
   The notion that archaeology can be separated from current
political events has been challenged: strongly held conceptions of
academic freedom have recently come into question. This question-
ing of a virtually dominant ideology - that archaeology constitutes
a neutral academic discipline and its practitioners should have
scholarly freedom and disciplinary autonomy - has been
precipitated by events surrounding the World Archaeological
Congress of 1986. As a result of a ban on South African and
Namibian participants by the British organizers, the UISPP
(International Union of Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences)
withdrew its official recognition of the Congress, and set up an
alternative congress. Many archaeologists from the West withdrew
as a result of the ban. This withdrawal, both of official recognition
and of discontented individuals, was justified in the cause of
academic freedom, the claimed infringement of the freedom of
South African archaeologists to attend the Congress, and in the
cause of keeping the pollution of politics out of archaeology. Shaw
(1986) and Hodder (1986a) have drawn attention to the complexity
of the issues and have effectively criticized a position which would
uphold an abstracted, detached and reified value of 'academic
freedom', however strong and evocative its connotations.
             ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                    189

  The domination of the UISPP, a supposedly internationally
representative body, by unelected authority figures of European
archaeology, brings up the issue of the relationships between an
academic West and non-Western 'developing' countries in a post-
colonial world capitalist economy. Rowlands (1986a), Sinclair
(1986) and Ray (1986) have considered the issues of a decolonialized
archaeology in non-Western countries. This was also a feature of
many papers at the World Archaeology Congress. Sinclair notes
that:

  Differences between development strategies which attempt to
  reproduce capitalist relations of production in the Third World and
  those which attempt to support economic and cultural disassociation
  from the capitalist system directly influence the context in which
  archaeological research is carried out. On the one hand, forms of
  archaeological practice based on neo-colonial dualistic conceptions
  of 'traditional' and 'modern' society can often result in a preser-
  vationist and academically exclusionist attitude to the remnants of
  'traditional' society. On the other hand, the focus on the 'tradi-
  tional' can also lead to biases emerging against the 'modern'. This
  differs markedly from a programme of research which seeks to
  recover and present archaeological data in a form relevant to the
  widespread extension of an historical consciousness as part of a non-
  capitalist development strategy.
                                                           (1986, p. 81)

  Another focus for discussion has been the relationship between
archaeological research and minority interests. The distortions and
political implications of archaeologies of the Native Americans
(Trigger, 1980), Australian Aborigines (Langford, 1983; Ucko,
1983), Norwegian Saami (Olsen, 1986) and the black community in
Britain (Belgrave, 1986), have been discussed. This, and other
work, (e.g. Hall, 1984; Fawcett, 1986) has involved a consideration
of the politics of ethnicity and the issue of nationalist
archaeologies. Academic archaeology, as often as not, operates as
part of a wider cultural discourse serving to reproduce the relation-
ship between the dominant and the dominated.
  The controversy surrounding the World Archaeology Congress
highlighted the conventional relationship between archaeology and
politics as entirely exterior, concerning government and
educational policy, administration and funding, public
archaeology and the 'rescue' and 'preservation' of the past, and
what has come to be termed cultural resource management. Here
again the dominant ideology emphasizes neutrality, consensus with
regard to conservation goals, and the disinterested pursuit of
190          ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY
knowledge in the hands of professional administrators and
academics: archaeology as a public service (cf. Cleere (ed.), 1984;
Green (ed.), 1984). There has been a notable lack of critical
reflection resulting in calls for archaeology to be explicitly
marketed to an uneducated public (Macleod, 1977), and the
specification of administrative and management strategies for max-
imizing archaeological productivity (Stephenson, 1977). Such a
perspective turns the past into the cultural capital of a supposedly
enlightened elite, who then may disseminate it at will to a passive,
and ultimately alienated, public (see Shanks and Tilley, 1987, Chs 1
and 3).
  The relationship of archaeology to the present necessarily
involves that between archaeology as an academic discipline and its
wider societal context. Hodder has reported preliminary results of
an attitude survey of what people think about archaeology. The
results are not surprising: 'certain groups of people in contem-
porary Britain know more about the past than others . . . these
people have often had more education . . . often have higher
valued jobs with more control over people and resources . . . are
more likely to be male' (1986, p. 162). Popular representations of
archaeology in books and magazines have also come under
scrutiny. Gero and Root (1986), in an analysis of the National
Geographic Magazine, illustrate the manner in which the past of
'exotic' countries becomes systematically incorporated into the
American imperialist present, a conception involving an utterly
materialistic and commodified conception of the past. The past is
frequently enlivened by reference to contemporary categories and
social relations, ultimately becoming homogenized and connected
to the 'rise' of Western 'civilization'. Photographs of modern
natives humanize the archaeological landscapes depicted,
connecting past with present and offsetting the present-past of
exotic countries with contemporary America. In the pages of the
National     Geographic,     'archaeology contributes       to   the
rationalisation of imperialism, legitimating these activities with a
congruent view of the past' (Gero and Root, 1986, p. 9).
   Investigations have also been made of the major institutional
relationship between the public and the discipline, the museum.
Many criticisms have been made of distorted representations of the
past (e.g. Leone, 1981,1981a; Horne, 1984). Leone shows how the
representation of Shaker society at the outdoor 'living-history'
museum at Pleasant Hill, Lexington, Kentucky imposes the values
of contemporary American capitalism. Efficiency, calculating
rationality, industry, export, profit, innovation and inventive
             ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY              191

ingenuity comprise the major organizing themes in the displays.
That Shaker society was based on an utterly different set of values
in which they laboured to avoid sin, rather than for profit and 'the
only efficiency they knew was the kind. created between self-
mortification and a hair shirt' (Leone, 1981a, p. 312) is almost
entirely 'forgotten'. We have produced an extended ideology
critique of the museum's aesthetic (see chapter 1; and Shanks and
Tilley, 1987), concentrating on the way it produces its message in a
number of individual museum exhibitions in Britain.
   Finally, an important but surprisingly undeveloped focus in the
emergence of a critically self-conscious archaeology is feminist
archaeology, work that has raised the consciousness of the absence
of women in archaeology, both conceptually in archaeological
discourses and substantively in terms of a male-dominated pro-
fession (Conkey and Spector, 1984; Gero, 1985).
   Despite growing awareness of the relationship between
archaeology and present-day national and global structures of
power and social domination, a great deal of critical work in
archaeology remains political but without any politics. For so many
the relation between present context and archaeology as
disciplinary practice is neutral. The purpose of critique is thus
regarded as one of consciousness raising and the correction of bias.
Ideology, a concept central to so much of this work, is often
regarded as false consciousness to be expelled by enlightened
reason. A view of ideology as false consciousness depends on the
classical empiricist conception of knowledge. In such a view
knowledge is to be derived from the subject's experience of an
external object. The telos is a better version of the past, the
inculcation of critical judgements. Another view underlying some
of the studies is a notion of ideology as related to class or social
position. This raises the question of why critique should be
accepted. Might not the critique also be socially determined? If the
epistemological issues are not considered the prospect is of infinite
regress and relativism, each group having its own legitimate past.


               Critique and contextual archaeology
Hodder has presented a critique of the concept ideology in
proposing a 'contextual' archaeology. He objects to the cross-
cultural connotations of the concept, that it may be taken to be a
historical universal and consequently fail to account for historical
particularity. He regards the concept as being incompatible with a
view of social actors as knowledgeable, who are not necessarily
192               ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

fooled by ideologies into a relation of false consciousness with
regard to their social conditions of existence. He backs up this
argument with the findings of public opinion surveys showing that
people do not believe everything they are told about the past.
Instead, Hodder argues all ideologies both mask and reveal:
'ideology can be socially active, revealing rather than masking,
enabling rather than repressing' (1986a, p. 117). Here the concept
of ideology is neutralized and depoliticized. It is simply regarded by
Hodder as a 'world view' or conceptual structure, linked to
knowledgeability on the part of social actors and power. This
knowledgeability, according to him, allows the possibility of
critical debate, and social change through social debate (ibid., p.
113). For Hodder, the solution to the problem of the verification of
a critical theory which would criticize on the basis of the social and
historical determination of truth and meaning is to abandon both
the project and a conception of ideology as tied to the reproduction
rather than the transformation of the social order.
   As an alternative Hodder stresses a particular and determinant
historical context within a structured cultural field produced by
knowledgeable social actors. There remains the problem of
relativism: if archaeological knowledges are contextual, with a sub-
jective dimension, and tied to the negotiation of power, how are
different archaeologies to be evaluated? Hodder's answer seems to
be to refer to a project of self-knowledge and debate. Debate
operates on a real, but not objective past. This allows critical
evaluation, but no right answers, no certainty:

      There is no finishing position since there can never be any way of
      evaluating whether the 'right' interpretation has been arrived a t . . .
      But better and better accommodations and new insights can be
      achieved in a continuing process of interpretation.
                                                      (Hodder, 1986, p. 155)

  Hodder has faced issues vital to the emergence of a post-processual
archaeology of the 1980s and 1990s, but there are problems. He
states that 'since the past cannot be known with certainty, we do
not have the right to impose our own universals on the data and to
present them as truth' (1986, p. 102). But this argument appears to
come close to a disabling relativism. Hodder argues in the same
context that universals deny people freedom, but such a statement
has no epistemological relevance. Hodder's only resistance to
relativism is the material reality of the past and a faith in the
effectivity of liberal and critical debate.
             ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                  193

   All archaeology is contextual and archaeologies in opposition to
mainstream academic archaeology are possible: non-Western
indigenous archaeologies, feminist archaeologies, 'fringe'
archaeologies. Hodder's answer to the compatibility or
incompatibility of these different archaeologies is rightly to resist
methodology - the specification of a universal method. Instead he
relies on epistemology, the manner in which we can hope to know
the past. He takes some points from a reading of Collingwood
(1946): data are not objective but they are nevertheless real and are
constituted in theory; they are activated by questions involving a
historical imagination giving insight into particular historical cir-
cumstances. This is a process of thinking ourselves into the past,
reliving the past (Hodder, 1986, p. 94). Such insights can be
evaluated according to the internal coherence of an argument and
the manner in which they correspond to evidence.
   The result of such a position is a vision of an ideal of a discipline
of archaeology characterized by open debate and operating in a
pluralistic society; archaeologists creating better and better accom-
modations to the past in a continuous process of interpretation,
aiming at self-knowledge of the present. Hodder's references
(almost nostalgic) to the value of traditional archaeologies and his
affirmation of the personal roots of his approach to archaeology
(1986a, p. 171) become simply symptoms of his desire for civilized
academic debate, the right to choose one's own past (within
reason), an affirmation of the particularity of the lived past. But
such a position seems all too readily to embrace a regressive
liberalism and a fragmentary relativism - consequences of a shaky
epistemology. Here we must ask whether a contextual archaeology
will really change anything; can it act as social critique as Hodder
seems to believe (1984,1986a, p. 113)? He has admitted that critical
debate seems, in the context of the events surrounding the World
Archaeological Congress, to have had little effect on established
ideologies and views even among supposedly enlightened
intellectuals (1986a, pp. 118-19).
   The vital question to be faced is the real implications of power to
the discipline of archaeology. Here we need to consider the power
relations between the academic community and the power interests
of educational and governmental state apparatuses, and their
linkage with a capitalist economy. These decide which educated
and creative individuals are allowed to exercise and publicize their
historical 'imaginations' in pursuit of their 'self-knowledge'. The
corollary is that no matter how many subordinated individuals,
minorities, classes or groups may realize, for example, the nonsense
194          ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

of a museum's representation of the past, it makes no difference. A
contextual archaeology, as Hodder conceives it, runs the very real
danger of disguising the reality of contemporary relations of
repressive power and social domination behind a spurious plurality
of archaeologies, neutralizing social objection, transforming it
into a point of liberal and critical debate. Such a position also
overlooks the contradictory relation of critical debate to
contemporary society. Critique may be highly valued and yet
matters little in reality as a feature of capitalism's hypocritical
acknowledgement of 'civilized' values.

            Marxist archaeology and political critique
Most Marxist approaches in archaeology have remained just that
-alternative approaches to the past. They have a strong tendency to
scientism. They may introduce different perspectives on the data
which are claimed to be truer or better representations of society or
the past than those produced by conventional archaeologies. This
also applies to those predominantly Marxist inspired critical
archaeologies which depend on a distinction between science and
ideology: Marxist science dispelling the false consciousness of
ideology, correcting the bias of those archaeologies remaining
rooted in present ideologies.
   There has been little serious consideration of what may be
termed Marxism's critical tradition which does not emphasize a
science/ideology distinction. Kristiansen explicitly discounts the
critical theory of the Frankfurt school as being irrelevant to
archaeology (1984, p. 96); Hodder's discussion of it, condensed
into a few pages (1986, pp. 164-6), is inevitably somewhat lacking.
We consider this critical tradition of Marxism as one of the most
important and essential sources for reconstructing archaeological
theory and practice (Shanks and Tilley, 1987). It would be a serious
matter if archaeology remained content to simply borrow from
alternative definitions of the social, as found for example in
Marxist anthropology, while making the odd rhetorical gesture to
critical radicalism. Spriggs astonishingly claims the French
'situationists' Vaneigem and Debord and the black leader Marcus
Garvey as precursors of the contributors to Marxist Perspectives in
Archaeology (1984, p. v: dedication)!


      CRITICISM AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL PRACTICE

Gouldner (1980) has discussed at length the dual aspects of
Marxism we mentioned above which stand in a relation of
              ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY               195

considerable tension: Marxism as science and Marxism as cultural
critique. For scientific Marxism in traditional or structural Marxist
form, the emergence of socialism depends on a prior set of
objective economic conditions produced through an accumulation
of antagonistic contradictions in the capitalist mode of production.
In aspects of Marx's own formulations impersonal and necessary
laws supposedly guarantee the organic evolution of socialism. Such
a position is subject to the criticisms made of evolutionary theories
discussed in chapter 6. However, the critical side of Marxism has
never been content to sit back and permit blind historical forces to
come to fruition but has been concerned to actively incite people
to change the course of their history. If capitalism really is doomed
to suffer a cultural demise there would seem to be little point in
preparing its graveyard.
   In situating archaeology as a social production taking place in
the present we wish to draw on the Marxist critical tradition and
stress the practice of critique. The past is a reconstruction, a
cultural product, an artefact. And as Benjamin remarked, every
document of civilization is at the same time a document of
barbarism (1979, p. 359). Critique is essential but it is not to be
conceived as the criticism of a theory we don't like. It is not simply
open debate. Critique does not arise from method but from
objection (Faris, 1986, p. 4), political and social objection. Critique
breaks with established epistemologies, abstractions and totalities
in the service of present social change.
   Marx's eleventh thesis on Feuerbach states that 'the philosophers
have only interpreted the world, in various ways; the point is to
change it' (Marx and Engels, 1970, p. 123). We will elaborate
several aspects we may take from this. The point of archaeology is
not merely to interpret the past but to change the manner in which
the past is interpreted in the service of social reconstruction in the
present. There is no way of choosing between alternative pasts
except on essentially political grounds, in terms of a definite value
system, a morality. So, criteria for truth and falsity are not to be
understood purely in terms of the logic and rationality, or other-
wise, of discourses but require judgements in terms of the practical
consequences of archaeological theory and practice for
contemporary social change.


                   Critique: past, present, future
Hodder has talked of the aim of archaeology being self-knowledge,
knowledge of the present. Such a view is not very different from the
traditional justification of archaeology as forming part of the
196           ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

human pursuit of knowledge. We will clarify some important
points.
   The study of the past as an end in itself seems to amount to an
antiquarian desire to escape from the burden of living in the
present, perhaps for personal self-gratification; it may also amount
to a nostalgic yearning for values, social structures and social
relations that are, and can be, no more. The historian, or the
archaeologist, becomes a kind of 'cultural necrophile', as White
puts it (1978, p. 41). We challenge this traditional view of the
discipline which would represent it as a disinterested study of the
past for the sake of 'knowledge'. Such a position has the effect of
concealing the work of archaeology as a contemporary cultural
practice. Hodder's notion of archaeology as self-knowledge in-
cludes an awareness of archaeology's location in the present (see
above); but we go further in arguing for a mediation of past and
present, held in tension in the practice of archaeology, involving a
temporality of 'presencing' (see chapters 1 and 5).
   A critical archaeology involves us in a reading of the past which
at the same time invites us to shape a different future. The study of
the past is a means of providing a medium for a critical challenge to
the present. It becomes an operation to change the world as we
know and experience it. The study of archaeology is not something
done to 'remind' men and women of the past but is a form of
cultural action that attempts to forge a transition from our present
to a different future. This involves an awareness of history as the
outcome of human agency. Humanity creates its own history and
so can change, or alter, the consequences of this historical develop-
ment through specific forms of social action and intervention. This
does not imply that the course of history is solely to be regarded as
an intentional production, a function of the desires of individual
agents, but such a perspective does stress the sociality of that
history and that no future is assured or inevitable. The future is
always open to construction and reconstruction in the present.
There is no iron cage of historical inevitability. The only inevitability
is that people make history with an awareness of history, and may
extend or rupture it through their day-to-day praxis in the world. A
critical archaeology is an invitation to live this awareness of our
historicity, this potentiality.

                    Knowledge, hegemony, truth
The knowledge derived from archaeology can be regarded as a
means and an instrument for carrying out work in and on the
               ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                     197

world. Such a position regards knowledge as being a form of
power, being constituted in definite material circumstances, and
having specific material effects. Archaeological knowledge has
material effects by virtue of the fact that it arises from the situated
practices of individuals living and working in society. In this sense
we can say that all archaeologists live a dialectic between their life
and work and the social order in which they find themselves.
Knowledge, characterized by a particular material mode of
production is always a production of positioned agents situated                 X'
within classes, institutions and disciplines.
   This relation of power and knowledge can be refined by con-
sidering the concept of hegemony. From a classical Marxist
perspective consciousness was always determined by social being
and this was conceived in terms of determinance by the economic
base. In other words, consciousness of social reality was deemed to
be a more or less automatic reflection of deeper socio-economic
processes. In elevating the role of consciousness in the constitution
of the social Gramsci stressed the key role of hegemony or
ideological ascendancy, arguing that class-bound social control is
not simply dependent on brute force but that another vital and
equally material element for the dominant class to exercise power
was the establishment of its own political, moral and social values
as supposedly self-evident and conventional norms for living. For
Gramsci, a hegemonic order is one in which a common coded value
system is expressed in which one conception of social reality is
dominant, affecting other modes of thought and action. Hegemony
is quintessentially ideological power, or power over others achieved
through consent rather than brute force. The coercive power of the
capitalist state is derived in part from intellectual and moral leader-
ship enforced through 'civil society' or the entire ensemble of
educational, religious and cultural institutions. Gramsci cogently
notes that

  One of the commonest totems is the belief about everything that
  exists, that it is 'natural' that it should exist, that it could not do
  otherwise than exist, and that however badly one's attempts at
  reform may go they will not stop life going on, since the traditional
  forces will continue to operate and precisely will keep life going on.
                                                    (Gramsci, 1971, p. 157)

  We stress the working of hegemony as a nexus (not necessarily
coherent or singular) of encoded value systems, working through
institutions and the day-to-day practices of individuals and groups,
198          ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

involving the acceptance (not necessarily in its entirety) of the social
and political order as being right, just, or at the very least
legitimate. So, yes, people are knowledgeable and may not be fooled
by ideology - no one may be fooled by that museum exhibit - but
the important feature is that people 'know' it doesn't matter: it is
only a museum, or a television programme, a book. The 'working
classes' do not generally go to museums, and anyway museums are
places you visit on rainy days, just one leisure activity among
others. But, precisely, this is the working of hegemony. The point is
that the past does matter; that story of the past or that museum
exhibit does matter. This is not because it educates the public,
teaches them critical awareness or whatever, but because it forms
part of our present, part of our conception of the present which
always involves the past. We are not born free of this connection
between past and present.
   There are no essential and obligatory foundations for making
truth claims which are not themselves the product of a politics of
truth. We must be concerned to investigate what kinds of power
and determinate social conditions make the truth of a text or a
museum's representation of the past appear plausible. Truth in
archaeology is always to be related to the kinds of vision of
material culture that are relevant to us, that respond to our social
need. So a critical archaeology is an invitation to engage in a
transformative practice. We must aim to detach the power of truth
from all repressive forms of class-bound social hegemony.
   Archaeologists, for example, have established a hegemony over
the distant past, a hegemony currently being reinforced by a
populist discourse of heritage, of communal tradition: a past that
'belongs' equally to everyone and yet at the .same time is to be
ordered and preserved by the trained professional, applying his or
her knowledge. We must investigate the meaning and significance
of such discourses, their power effects, whom they serve and to
what end. In terms of society as a whole archaeology obviously has
very little economic or political significance, but it does constitute a
cultural practice, integrated in the general hegemonic regime of
power in society. As such, archaeology is nothing if it is not
cultural critique.
   Any notion that academic archaeology has its own sectional
apolitical concerns and interests by and large irrelevant to, and
untainted by, contemporary social processes is impossible and
dangerous to attempt to sustain. Such a position amounts to
containing whatever might be deemed 'archaeological' within its
own limited academic space. But any attempt to artificially
              ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                         199

separate archaeology from politics only serves to benefit existing
power structures. A 'neutral' archaeology serves to sustain the
existing social order by its failure to engage actively with it and
criticize it. Thus any advocacy of an apolitical archaeology remains
itself a form of political action.
   The position we are taking involves the inscription of a fresh
politics of truth, itself a form of power. This is a struggle waged in
terms of the production of alternative regimes of truth. Truth is to
be conceived as a series of coded rules which permit divisions to be
drawn between various types of discourses in terms of a polar
truth/falsity opposition. We should not do battle 'in favour of
truth' but, rather, situate truths in relation to the social, economic
and political roles they play in society. Our aim is not so much to
change people's consciousness as to change the manner in which
truth is produced and becomes accepted. Power can never be
detached from truth; but we can work to subvert the power of truth
being attached to the existing social order and instead link truth to
a political future.

                        Critique and pluralism
This emphasis on the relation of truth and power, on the location
of the truth of the past in the contemporary cultural practice of
archaeology, an emphasis on the politics of theory, does not open
the way for an anarchic play with meaning, a profusion of
archaeologies each rooted in their own politics. Hodder is right to
stress the material resistance of the past: not just anything can be
said about it. But a simple reference to the materiality of the past
does not explain its facticity, that it is fact in the present. Such an
ontology requires a mediation of subject and object, a subjectivity
and objectivity constituted in social practice. Fabian, in another
context, notes:

  The object's present is founded in the writer's past. In that sense,
  facticity itself, that cornerstone of scientific thought, is
  autobiographic. This, incidentally, is why in anthropology objectivity
  can never be defined in opposition to subjectivity.
                                                     (Fabian, 1983, p. 89)

And social practice always implies a politics (where the political
refers to debate as to how social relations should be arranged). This
begins in the present and ends in a future. It must form the arena of
any critical debate concerning the archaeological past. It goes far
200         ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY
beyond the narrow forum of archaeology as academic discipline. A
critique of traditional, 'new' or standard 'Marxist' archaeologies in
terms of their deficient understanding of the past may be necessary,
but is by no means sufficient. Such archaeologies require not just
intellectual challenge but active displacement. This displacement,
we suggest, is a matter of condemning or supporting particular
archaeologies according to social and political values. Here it is
important to note that value is not something inherently residing in
archaeology as a whole or in some forms of archaeology as
opposed to others. It is, rather, something produced for
archaeology and in the practice of doing archaeology.
   We have already discussed the notion of a radical pluralism in
archaeology and counterposed this to a repressive pluralism (see
chapter 1). A realization of the social conditions underlying
archaeological practice must shatter the illusion, fostered in the
new archaeology with its emphasis on cross-cultural generalization,
that the results of archaeological research are applicable to the
whole of humanity. Archaeology, as the product of social
conditions and forms of social existence, is always produced in
terms of specific interests and values. There is not, and cannot be,
one correct archaeological view of the past, one indivisible
archaeology. There are instead many archaeologies, and
frameworks for understanding them must become sites of struggle.
Hence archaeology is always dependent on the political and social
position of the investigator and his or her awareness of the social
conditions in which archaeological production takes place. But we
must reassert that this is an issue itself with no necessary or final
solution. Rowlands has warned against the vitalism that might be
involved in supporting local knowledges, 'authentic' knowledges
deriving from a life-world organic and specific to those it
encompasses. He also remarks that a fragmented past may
discourage collective identity and reinforce hierarchization in that
while 'the subordinated and the powerless may have identity, the
powerful will have science' (1986a, p. 4). Rowlands is arguing
in the context of relations between the developed West and the
third world: 'a stress on radical heterogeneity and cultural dif-
ference would . . . be more compatible with the aims of dominant
elites in an industrialising third world seeking autonomy and
identity in order to obscure and mystify the sources of their own
power' (ibid., p. 4). This serves again to emphasize the import-
ance of the politics of theory and the manner in which such a
politics need to be situated in relation to a determinate social
context.
             ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                           201
 INTELLECTUAL LABOUR AND THE SOCIO-POLITICAL
          ROLE OF THE ARCHAEOLOGIST

                    Il faut etre absolument moderne.
                                              Baudelaire


                        Intellectuals and power
What is to be done? What is the role of the individual
archaeologist? We have defined archaeology as a cultural practice
and referred to the mediation of the individual and the social in
practice. The question that follows from this is the nature of what
actually is involved in the production of cultural or intellectual
work.
  Traditionally, in Marxist thought, the intellectual has been
regarded as being a bearer of universal truths, acting in the role of
the political consciousness of the masses. The intellectual spoke in
the name of freedom, equality and social justice. For Sartre, the role
of the thinker was, in the last analysis, a class situation with the
mode of production providing a horizon for thought undermining
the pretence that reason alone could somehow be in itself the final
arbiter of knowledge: reason is historical and class-bound. Sartre's
definition of the intellectual is provocative:

  someone who attends to what concerns him (in exteriority - the
  principles which guide the conduct of his life; and in interiority - his
  lived experience in society) and to whom others refer to a man who
  interferes in what does not concern him.
                                                     (Sartre, 1983, p. 244)

The relationship of the intellectual to the powers that be in society
is an oppositional one. The role of the intellectual is to call into
question the established socio-political order. The intellectual must
ceaselessly combat his or her own class (usually petty bourgeois),
itself moulded by hegemonic culture, thought and sentiment.
Reason must be related to the life and situation of the researcher,
and it is only in this manner that the limits that ideology pose on
knowledge may be questioned. It is at the level of concrete
situations in which the intellectual finds himself or herself that
Sartre's dialectic of exteriority and interiority operates. So the
radical intellectual combines life and work, seeking
  to produce, both in himself and in others, a true unity of the
  personality, a recuperation by each agent of the ends imposed on his
202           ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

   activity, a suppression of alienations, a real freedom for thought - by
   defeating external social prohibitions dictated by the class structure,
   and internal inhibitions and self-censorship.
                                                     (Sartre, 1983, pp. 250-1)

The intellectual must be entirely modern, of his or her own time,
constantly aware of and concerned about events in the society in
which he or she lives.
   Radical and intellectual commitment are vital components of
critique. Here we can say that those archaeologists who seek simply
to preserve and transmit information about the past are forced to
adopt a conservative position. If other archaeologists step out of
line and relinquish this role by criticizing the relationship of the
discipline to society they will probably be accused of mistaking
their proper role and purpose. Conceiving of archaeology as, in
part, an act of socio-political intellectual struggle will, no doubt, be
denounced as scandalous or denigrated as misrepresenting the true
goals of the discipline. Another means of coping with such a
perspective may be to attempt to neutralize it by integrating it with
mainstream archaeology as yet another facet. A third strategy may
be a conspiracy of silence; time will tell.
   For Foucault, intellectual knowledge is itself inserted within a
system of power and may serve either explicitly or inadvertently to
block or invalidate lay discourse and knowledge. Consequently, the
intellectual's role is

  no longer to place himself 'somewhat ahead and to the side' in order
  to express the stifled truth of the collectivity; rather, it is to struggle
  against the forms of power that transform him into its object and
  instrument in the sphere of 'knowledge,' 'truth,' 'consciousness,'
  and 'discourse.'
                                                    (Foucault, 1977a, p. 208)

The universalizing intellectual has, in such a perspective, to be
replaced by the specific intellectual. The specific intellectual fights
against repression and carries this work on in the determinate social
situations in which he or she is located in society and on the terms
of his or her expertise in a certain field. The specific intellectual,
then, is one who works at a particular node within society in-
evitably involved in what can only be a localized and regionalized
struggle. The work of the specific intellectual is intimately related
to class position, the conditions of his or her personal life and work
and particular area of research and expertise. The intellectual fights
and struggles in all areas of society against prevailing power-
               ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                      203

knowledge-truth strategies, and engages in concrete and real every-
day struggles. This is a process of undermining or burrowing away
in the midst of a multitude of different sectors, points and
intersections within the social system (Foucault, 1977b, 1980).
  This conception of the specific intellectual corresponds with
Foucault's view of theory:

   theory does not express, translate, or serve to apply practice: it is
   practice. But it is local and regional. . . and not totalizing. This is a
   struggle against power, a struggle aimed at revealing and under-
   mining power where it is most invisible and insidious. It is not to
   'awaken consciousness' that we struggle . . . but to sap power, to
   take power; it is an activity conducted alongside those who struggle
   for power, and not for their illumination from a safe distance. A
   'theory' is the regional system of this struggle.
                                                   (Foucault, 1977a, p. 208)

Power is not simply coercion and social order is not just a creation
of force. Hegemony is vital to maintaining order. Hence any
attempt to transform society cannot just concentrate on altering
that which appears to be most obviously economic and political:
the economic and the political are not at all to be considered as
strictly delimited 'subsystems', 'spheres', 'levels' or 'instances' but
pervade and permeate every aspect of living from the micro-context
of familial relations to the macro-institutional context and affect
everything from poetry and plays to sport and patterns of food
consumption, and not least the work of the archaeologist.
   Gramsci distinguishes two fundamental dimensions of social
change, the organic and the conjunctural (1971, pp. 210-76). The
organic component is a 'war of position', the establishment of a
counter-hegemony. The conjunctural component involves the
physical contestation for state power. A war of position on the
cultural front necessitates the penetration and subversion of
the complex and multifarious channels of ideological diffusion
through which hegemony becomes sustained and is bolstered, but
hegemony is never total but riddled with inconsistencies and
fissures. This means that we need to question educational objec-
tives, archaeological, courses and archaeological practices so as to
challenge the relation of the archaeologist to society.
   A 'radical' archaeologist might become involved in a trade
union, a party political organization, in demonstrations in the
streets or organize extra-curricula discussions about, say, radical
discrimination, or the violation of human rights. These may be, of
course, genuine and important political acts. The problem is that
204          ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

they have no necessary relationship to the archaeologist's day-to-
day work. The most powerful political work the archaeologist is
able to produce will be likely to be in that field he or she knows best
- archaeological theory and practice. It is vital not to forget that
archaeology forms part of contemporary culture. It works and acts
upon, influences and informs opinion in the present. Hegemony
has to be constantly reproduced, and one of the main sites of this
reproduction is located in educational institutions. As Lentricchia
puts it:

   struggles for hegemony are sometimes fought out in (certainly
   relayed through) colleges and universities; fought undramatically,
   yard for yard, and sometimes over minor texts of Balzac: no epic
   heroes, no epic acts.
                                               (Lentricchia, 198S, p. 10)

It might be suggested that a critical archaeology must, firstly, take
up an oppositional role to contemporary society; secondly,
embrace a conception of the archaeologist as specific, or at times
universal, intellectual fighting at his or her institutional site against
the prevailing regime of the production of truth; this involves,
thirdly, taking up a notion of archaeological discourse as being part
of a war of position. This will be a value-committed archaeology.

                    Value-committed archaeology
Contemporary academic archaeology determines effectively both
what archaeology is and how it should be taught and learnt; i.e.
what archaeological questions, problems, means, methods and
modes of analysis are. This certainly has a profound effect on the
entire gamut of secondary and tertiary education and the teaching
of archaeology in these sectors of the educational system; on
fictional writing about the past (e.g. Auel, 1981); and on
presentations in museums and the media - areas of hegemonic
culture. Unless its challenges extend this far, a critical archaeology
is likely to amount to little more than a self-congratulatory stance
that we are aware of biases and distortions in our work and that
this heightened consciousness will lead to better work being done in
the future.
   Discussions about the form and nature of archaeology in
academia inevitably filter back in one form or another to affect the
manner in which millions of people make sense of, or have sense
made for them, of their past, and its connection with the present. It
               ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                        205

is quite evident that the past may be used for expressing a wide
variety of supportive ideas and values for a capitalist society,
naturalized and legitimized through an emphasis on tradition and
long-term time scales: myths of genius; individuality; patriarchy;
humanity's essential economic nature; the universality and
inevitability of technological development as progressive; the
naturalness of social stability as opposed to contradiction; the
inferiority or superiority of certain forms of social organization,
etc. Such views may be strongly supported by archaeological texts
(they usually are), or they may be challenged.
   There is no possibility of a neutral and autonomous 'middle
way'. The effect of archaeology in socio-political terms depends on
the place that it chooses to occupy within a wider socio-cultural
field. A value-committed archaeology is one rejecting any position
which would suggest that research merely mirrors the past. Instead
it insists that research forms part of a process in which the
archaeologist actively decides upon one past rather than another.
Interpretation in archaeology constructs a socio-political position
in the process of engagement with the artefactual traces of the past.
Anything 'discovered' about the past is not a passive reflection of
what the 'facts' may or may not tell us. Archaeological texts which
re-present the past have an expressive, rhetorical and persuasive
purpose. They are not, and cannot be, neutral expositions of the
facticity of the past (see chapter 1). What is their influence on those
who read them?


  Any specialized activity participates in a larger unit of action.
  'Identification' is a word for the . . . activity's place in this wider
  context, a place with which the agent may be unconcerned. The
  shepherd qua shepherd, acts for the good of the sheep to protect
  them from discomfiture and harm. But he may be 'identified' with a
  project that is raising the sheep for market.
                       (Burke, 1969, p. 27, cited in Lentricchia, 1985, p. 88)


The shepherd's concern for the sheep, although it may appear
genuine enough, when set in its. wider context is hardly
disinterested. Placing academic archaeology firmly within its social
context as a cultural practice in late capitalist society in the West
brings into focus the inadequacy of a 'disinterested' concern with
the past. Such an educational role for archaeology may go quite
some way towards fulfilling the goal of socializing individuals both
to accept and wish to participate in the reproduction of the
206          ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

capitalist market. By contrast a value-committed archaeology is
one that situates disciplinary practice critically within its present
social context. There is no disinterested interpretation of the past
because it always makes a difference in what manner it is re-
presented.
  A value-committed archaeology inevitably demands personal
commitment on the part of the archaeologist who must be wary of
being incorporated into upholding the established institutional
framework. Such an archaeology would require a reorientation of
power structures within archaeological institutions. At present the
academic world all too faithfully mirrors wider social processes
in capitalist society with its emphasis on competition between
individuals for academic prestige and power in the framework of a
hierarchical professorial structure; the 'ownership' of ideas as if
they were equivalent to television sets; pressures to publish; the
maintenance of strict disciplinary boundaries hindering
understanding; and the often ritualized paying of homage to
authority figures in acknowledgements, prefaces, citations and
references. Here we can do no better than to refer to Gouldner's
passionate denouncement of the petty personal aspirations held by
many self-styled radicals:

  The man who can voice support for Black Power or who can
  denounce American imperialism in Latin America or Vietnam, but
  who plays the sycophant to the most petty authorities in his
  university, is no radical; the man who mouths phrases about the need
  for revolution abroad, but who is a coiled spring ready to punish
  the rebels among his own graduate students, is no radical; the
  academician who with mighty oaths denounces the President of the
  United States, but subserviently fawns upon his Department Chair-
  man, is no radical; the man who denounces opportunistic power
  politics, but practices it daily among his university colleagues, is no
  radical. Such men are playing one of the oldest games in personal
  politics; they are seeking to maintain a creditable image of
  themselves, while accommodating to the most vulgar careerism. Such
  men are seeking neither to change nor to know the world; their aim is
  to grab a piece of it for themselves.
                                     ,           (Gouldner, 1970, p. 503)

A radical value-committed archaeology involves a way of living
that requires that intellectual struggle be carried into the heart of
the discipline, on a daily basis as a willed personal act, and
irrespective of the possible personal consequences of the reactions
of those in authority.
             ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                    207

                           Writing the past
How is the past to be written? It may be dominated by a style of
textuality that either claims it has arrived at some truth in the past
or is groping towards this ultimate aim. This is almost exclusively
the position taken in archaeology at present, irrespective of
differences in the specific frameworks advanced. The object of
archaeology, then, is the production of knowledge about some
aspect of the past. However, this knowledge is generally conceived
in purely informational terms. 'Knowing' the past is to collect
together more and more bits of information about it by inductive
or deductive research strategies, or whatever. The information so
derived is pieced together into what basically amounts to a pictorial
statement. Such a knowledge of the past is at the same time a form
of domination and control. It is ill-suited to an increase in self-
awareness on the part of the investigator, the discipline, or society
at large. No doubt it satisfies those for whom the primary rationale
for archaeology is to provide either privatized or disciplinary
intellectual pleasure.
   Another way in which the past may be written is to provide a
position on it which does not establish closure in a picture but
dispels finality in a creative juxtaposition of past and present.
Sartre states:

  this is the measure we propose to the writer: as long as his books
  arouse anger, discomfort, shame, hatred, love, even if he is no more
  than a shade, he will live.
                                                  (Sartre, 1950, p. 238)

We might argue that what is needed is not the production of
archaeological texts that provide and permit a passive understand-
ing of the past, texts to be simply 'absorbed' (see the discussion of
archaeological texts in chapter 1), but texts that challenge the
reader: writerly texts (Barthes, 1974, p. 4) that have the effect of
dissonance creating and actively inviting discussion, debate, 'com-
pletion'. Polemic and rhetoric should be an essential part of ar-
chaeological textual production to stimulate the reader to be a pro-
ducer of the text's meaning and its relation to the meaning of the
past, not a passive consumer of a bland and smooth narrative, or
unapproachable information report inviting acquiescence rather
than critical reflection. A critical archaeology will produce texts
which interrogate the past in the form of a social document forged
in the present, stimulating a reply, a reaction, another text. This
208         ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

raises a whole host of questions such as how should a site be
represented? what is the significance of a measured pot drawing? is
a list of artefacts objective? what is the origin, the meaning of a
list? Whatever the answers, a politics of archaeology is also an
aesthetics and a poetics, a production of texts which interrogate the
past but do not pin it down to a set of mechanical and reified
essences, texts which subvert those archaeologies that would deny
the study of material culture as being fundamentally a study of
power, the mediation, representation and articulation of power
strategies through material forms.


                          CONCLUSION

An oppositional role for archaeology; the archaeologist as specific
or universal intellectual; war of position; establishment of a
counter-hegemony; value-commitment; the question of how reality
is to be represented, written according to a radical aesthetic and
poetic: we might also make reference to the idea of an avant-garde,
or the debate over socialist realism, or the emergence of a so-called
post-modernist culture. All are issues in a cultural practice, in a
politics of archaeology. These issues need to be faced - archaeology
must embrace a commitment to the present through a consideration
of the present's past. Archaeology should be conceived as acting as
a catalyst in the transformation of the present, for without commit-
ment to one's own historicity, the discipline becomes little more
than an escape from our own time and place.
                          Appendix
Notes Towards a New Problematic
                   1.   ARCHAEOLOGY AND THEORY

1.1. Archaeology is immediately theoretical. There can be no meaningful
separation of theory, method and practice in archaeology.

1.1.1. The idea of applying theories or models or concepts to
archaeological data and the idea of theories as abstract heuristics (different
ways of looking at the same data) both involve a disabling split between the
theory and practice of archaeology.

1.2. It is not possible to provide a set of abstract rules of archaeological
method. Method is in part style, or rhetoric, aspect of the relation between
theorizing and the practice of archaeology.

1.2.1. A stress on methodology associated most recently with the
advocacy of 'middle-range theory', or the attempt to produce a science of
the archaeological record, represent a retreat into a practical empiricism of
the most antitheoretical kind. Methodology is to be criticized as determin-
ing the past in advance of its confrontation in archaeological practice.

1.3. What is needed are not new answers to the old archaeological
questions such as the origin of the state or 'civilization' but the redefinition
of these questions in terms of a fresh problematic for social archaeology.
This problematic focuses on archaeology's specific object and context: the
place and meaning of material culture within the changing social worlds of
past and present, and the meaning and form of gaining knowledge of this
complex.


              2.    THE SOCIAL AND THE INDIVIDUAL

2.1. There is no such thing as 'society'; there can be no abstract and
universal definition of society.
210                              APPENDIX
2.1.1. Social typologies or hierarchies of determination (such as ritual
practices determined by material economic logic) are both essentialist and
reductionist.

2.2. The concepts of function, adaptation and evolution have no
explanatory role in a consideration of the social and need to be either
completely abandoned or reduced to a simple descriptive vocabulary.

2.3. The social is an open field fixed in the politics of social relations and
strategies and in the interpretative practices of discourses.

2.4 The individual cannot be screened out of archaeological analysis. The
individual is to be conceived as knowledgeable and active and yet at the
same time positioned in relation to social structures and strategies, a trace
within a structured social field. This means that social relations cannot be
reduced to interacting creative individuals.

2.5. The social practices of agents are always to be regarded as situated in
relation to power, group or individual interests, ideology and symbolic and
signifying practices.

2.6. Power is central to social analysis; power (both productive and
repressive) is coextensive with the social field.

2.6.1 Power does not simply involve social stratification, nor does it
simply arise from the logic of economic base or control over resources.

2.7. Ideology as a technology of power is a strategy for social contain-
ment and is fundamentally implicated in the reproduction as opposed to
the transformation of the social. It is never a unitary phenomenon and is
related both to forms of domination and the way in which agents must
necessarily relate to and live through forms of social signification within a
field of asymmetrical power relations.


                       3.   MATERIALCULTURE


3.1. Material culture does not provide a window through which we can
see through and read-off past social reality.

3.2. Actions refer and relate to sign systems. Material culture is to be
conceived as a sign system, a non-verbal discourse.

3.1.1. As a sign system there are multiple transformations involved in the
elements of material culture: parallelism, opposition, inversion, linearity,
equivalence.

3.3.   Material culture is a social, not an individual creation.
                                APPENDIX                                 211

3.4. Material culture is active. Meaning is always actively created; the
meaning attributed to any item always has to be argued for and against;
meanings are mediated in relation to interests and social strategies.

3.4.1. Material culture constitutes an open system, a chain of signifiers. It
is irreducibly polysemous.

3.5. Material culture forms a reified channel of communication and can
be drawn on as a significative resource, activiated in the contextualized
matrices of particular social strategies.

3.6. Understanding material culture is an act of translation. Meaning
depends on context and the position of the interpreter in relation to this
context, whether prehistoric social actor or contemporary archaeologist.
There is no original meaning to be discovered.


                 4.    TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY


4.1. There is no singular time, but temporalities. Time is related to social
practice. It is part of the social construction of reality. As with space, it
does not simply form a container for action but is a medium giving form to
action and establishing action as meaningful. Different structures of
temporality are implicated in different practices.

4.1.1. Time as chronometry, measured as date, is not a universal
temporality and only emerged as a dominant frame within capitalism.

4.2. Archaeology is in part a history of times, times to be related substan-
tially rather than abstractly to social structures and practices. Different
temporal orientations shape history itself.

4.3. History is a contingent and not a necessary progress, contingent
upon determinate and historically variable sets of social relations. There
can be no universal histories.

4.4. Archaeology is a mediation of past, present and future. It is a social
practice involving a temporal mode of presencing, uniting and yet holding
apart past, present and future, constituting each other in their difference.

4.4.1. The past exists not as the past studied in itself but represents a
project in the present.

4.4.2.   The past requires completion by the interpreting archaeologist.

4.4.3. Archaeology as contemporary practice reinscribes the past within
our own society. The interpretation of the past does not transport a truth
or property of the past into the present; it transforms or translates.
212                              APPENDIX
4.4.4. Choosing a past, constituting a past, is choosing a future. The
meaning of the past is political and belongs to the present.

4.5. Capitalism is unique in relation to the past. This requires the
rejection of uniformitarian assumptions as regards a connection between
past and present. The uniqueness of capitalism - in terms of (1) rapidity
and tempo 6f change; (2) dominance of the economy; (3) stress on the
individual as discrete centre of consciousness; (4) mass production and
mass consumption; (5) abstract or spatialized notion of time - has to be
offset against the otherness, the difference of the past. Conceptual tools
are required to theorize the otherness, this difference.


                          5.   SOCIAL CHANGE

5.1.   It is stability rather than social change that needs explaining.

5.1.1. Both stability and change are intimately connected, specific,
located in determinate historical and social conditions and not amenable to
redescription in terms of an atemporal aspatial 'culture process'.

5.2. Social change is a process of the mediation of strategic practice and
structure.

5.2.1. The social is immediately temporal. Social action, structured and
situated in relation to schemes of signification, involves the constant
reproduction of these structures and schemes within political, strategic
interests.

5.2.2. Social change involves structural contradiction and particular, con-
tingent historical conjunctures of actions and events.

5.3. The separation of statics and dynamics, synchrony and diachrony
depends on the abstract temporality characteristic of the alienating calculus
of the capitalist labour process. Analysis of social change which involves
such a duality and temporality may thus be ideological.

5.4. Any notion of social causality in the form of cause-effect type re-
lationships, however complex, needs to be abandoned.


             6.   THE FORM AND POLITICS OF THEORY

6.1.   Archaeology, as cultural practice, is always a politics, a morality.

6.2. Theory is thoroughly subjective. It is not a technical product of a
specialist but a delimited and localized production, arising from a specific
contextualized interaction between individuals, the experiences of these
individuals, the manner in which their life and work interacts, and the way
                                 APPENDIX                                 213

in which the archaeologist manages to arrive at a specific picture of the past
based on the scraps of contingent materials (texts, knowledges, artefacts)
and life experiences at his or her disposal.

6.3. No discourse on the past is neutral. The validity of a theory hinges on
intention and interest: it is to be assessed in terms of the ends and goals of
its archaeology, its politics and morality.

6.3.1. There can be no neutral algorithm (such as simplicity, comprehen-
siveness) for evaluating particular archaeologies.

6.4. Archaeology is a signifying practice, expressive and transformative.
The past is written. Past and present are mediated in the archaeological
text.

6.4.1. Self-reflection: it is necessary to consider archaeological discourse
in terms of systems of concepts, rules and conventions for the production
of knowledges.

6.4.2. What is needed is an archaeological topology, a rhetoric; an
archaeological tropology, a stylistics: an archaeological poetics concerned
with how the archaeological past may be written.

6.4.3. Established archaeologies need to be engaged in terms of a
dialogue with their always present, absent other - that which is
systematically suppressed or marginalized in the text.

6.5.   Archaeology is nothing if it is not critique.

6.5.1. We do not argue for truths about the past but argue through
the medium of the past to detach the power of truth from the present social
order.

6.5.2. A critical archaeology is value-committed, a willed personal act
with the aim of transforming the present in terms of its conceived
connection with the past.

6.5.3. The past is not to be dispossessed of its difference by erecting it as a
mirror reflecting the present. The difference, the tension between past and
present subverts the legitimacy of the present.
               Suggestions for
               Further Reading

We recommend a number of general works here for the reader who
is interested in following up in more detail some of the arguments
that we have put forward in this book. Articles and works of a
more specific nature are cited in full in the list of references.
   In archaeology it might be most useful to follow through
Hodder's work from the early strident advocacy of positivism in
Spatial Analysis in Archaeology (Hodder and Orton, 1976), to the
neo-structuralist orientation of Symbols in Action (1982) and The
Present Past (1982c), to the more hermeneutic historical and
contextualist positions reached in Reading the Past (1986).
Symbolic and Structural Archaeology (Hodder (ed.), 1982),
Ideology, Power and Prehistory (Miller and Tilley (eds), 1984) and
Re-constructing Archaeology (Shanks and Tilley 1987) elaborate
on some of the ideas we have discussed.
   The works which follow are best read as sources of ideas on the
key issues of a critical archaeology involving the conceptualization
of the place of material culture in society, archaeology as a
contemporary cultural practice, and ways in which we may begin to
understand the form and nature of social reproduction and
transformation.

The critical tradition in Marxist theory
Held's Introduction to Critical Theory (1980) is an excellent
starting point and should be considered in conjunction with Jay's
book, The Dialectical Imagination (1973), which places the ideas in
a more historical perspective. Buck-Morss in The Origin of
Negative Dialectics (1977) provides a detailed account of the work
of Adorno and Benjamin. Eagleton in Walter Benjamin or
Towards a Revolutionary Criticism (1981) provides a very
stimulating exposition of the possibility and form of a
                         FURTHER READING                         215

revolutionary critical practice. Gouldner's The Coming Crisis of
Western Sociology (1970) gives an excellent account of one of the
forms a self-reflexive critical approach to disciplinary practice
might take.

Structuralism, post-structuralism and Marxism
Two introductory books provide useful accounts of structuralism
and post-structuralism: Culler Structuralist Poetics (1975) and
Sturrock (ed.) Structuralism and Since (1979). Leitch's
Deconstructive Criticism (1983) gives an advanced and extensive
general introduction to many of the major issues in a post-
structuralist critical practice. Some of the most illuminating of
Barthes' work is collected together in two readers: Image, Music,
 Text (1977) and Barthes: Selected Writings (1982). An edited
selection of Foucault's writings are reproduced in The Foucault
Reader (1986). The most comprehensive discussion of Foucault's
work to have been published so far is by Dreyfus and Rabinow
(1982). Coward and Ellis's book Language and Materialism (1977)
links structuralist and post-structuralist thought to a Marxist
dialectical materialist position in an illuminating manner, while
Ryan in Marxism and Deconstruction (1982) attempts an
interesting synthesis of Marxism and aspects of Derrida's writings.
It is important to point out that one of the most valuable aspects of
post-structuralism is its attempt to critically undermine widely held
notions of neutral academic theory but much of this is lost in
American 'deconstruction'.

The social constitution of time and space
Works by Bourdieu, An Outline of a Theory of Practice (1977),
and Giddens, A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism
(1981), are essential starting points. Gregory and Urry (1985) in
their edited volume Social Relations and Spatial Structures collect
together a series of very useful papers on space, while Fabian's
Time and the Other (1983) and Berger's book And our Faces, my
Heart, brief as Photos (1984) discuss elegantly the social nature of
time.

Power, ideology and subjectivity
Some of Foucault's writings collected together by Gordon in
Power/Knowledge (1980) are stimulating. Wrong in Power (1979)
provides a very broad overview of various uses of the concept but
216                     FURTHER READING

does not discuss Foucault. There are excellent discussions of
theories of ideology in the volume On Ideology (1978) produced by
the Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies, and Larrain's The
Concept of Ideology (1979) gives an insightful historical perspec-
tive. Althusser's work is discussed extensively in a collection of
Hirst's writings On Law and Ideology (1979). A recent book, The
Category of the Person (1986), edited by Carrithers, Collins and
Lukes contains anthropological, philosophical and historical
perspectives on the constitution of subjectivity.

On the notion of social form, reproduction and transformation
The following general works on social theory provide a number of
contrasting and informative accounts: Keat and Urry, Social
Theory as Science (1982); Bernstein, The Restructuring of Social
and Political Theory (1976); and Jay, Marxism and Totality (1984).
Giddens has produced two major and important syntheses, Central
Problems in Social Theory (1979) and The Constitution of Society
(1984). Bourdieu's Outline of a Theory of Practice (1977) works
through in an extremely valuable fashion a parallel account to that
provided by Giddens in relation to non-industrial societies.
                       References


Adorno, T. W. (1973) Negative Dialectics, Routledge and Kegan Paul,
  London.
Allen, W. and Richardson, J. (1971) "The reconstruction of kinship from
  archaeological data: the concepts, the methods and the feasibility',
  American Antiquity 36: 41-53.
Althusser, L. (1971) 'Ideology and ideological state apparatuses', Lenin
  and Philosophy and other Essays, New Left Books, London.
Althusser, L. (1977) For Marx, Verso, London.
Althusser, L. and Balibar, E. (1970) Reading Capital, New Left Books,
  London.
Anderson, P. (1974) Passages from Antiquity to Feudalism, Verso, London.
Arnold, D. (1971) 'Ethnomineralogy of Ticul, Yucatan potters: ethics and
  emics', American Antiquity 36: 20-40.
Arnold, D, (1985) Ceramic Theory and Cultural Process, Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge.
Auel, J. (1981) The Clan of the Cave Bear, Coronet Books, London.
Bailey, G. (1981) 'Concepts, time-scales and explanations in economic
  prehistory', in A. Sheridan and G. Bailey (eds), Economic Archaeology,
  British Archaeological Reports (International Series) 96, Oxford.
Bailey, G. (1983) 'Concepts of time in Quaternary prehistory', Annual
  Review of Anthropology 12: 165-92.
Barker, P. (1977) Techniques of Archaeological Excavation, Batsford,
  London.
Barthes, R. (1967) Elements of Semiology, Jonathan Cape, London.
Barthes, R. (1973) Mythologies, Paladin, London.
Barthes, R. (1974) S/Z, Hill and Wang, New York.
Barthes, R. (1977) Image, Music, Text. Hill and Wang, New York.
Barthes, R. (1982) Selected Writings, ed. S. Sontag, Fontana, London.
Barthes, R. (1982a) 'The plates of the encyclopaedia', in Barthes, 1982.
Baudrillard, J. (1981) For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign,
  Telos Press, St. Louis, Mo.
Belgrave, R. (1986) 'Southampton's Caribbean heritage: an analysis of the
  Oral History Project carried out by Southampton Museums,
218                           REFERENCES
  1983-1984', Paper presented at the World Archaeological Congress
  1986.
Bender, B. (1978) 'Gatherer-hunter to farmer', World Archaeology 10:
  203-22.
Benjamin, W. (1970) 'The task of the translator', Illuminations, Fontana,
  London.
Benjamin W. (1979) 'Edward Fuchs, collector and historian', One Way
  Street, New Left Books, London.
Berger, J. (1984) And our Faces, my Heart, brief as Photos, Writers and
  Readers, London.
Bernstein, R. (1976) The Restructuring of Social and Political Theory,
  Methuen, London.
Binford, L. (1962) 'Archaeology as anthropology', American Antiquity
  28: 217-25.
Binford, L. (1964) 'A consideration of archaeological research design',
  American Antiquity 30: 425-51.
Binford, L. (1965) 'Archaeological systematics and the study of culture
  process', American Antiquity 31: 203-410.
Binford, L. (1972) An Archaeological Perspective, Seminar Press, London.
Binford, L. (1972a) 'Mortuary practices: their study and their potential',
  in Binford, 1972.
Binford, L. (1973) 'Interassemblage variability: the Mousterian and the
  "functional" argument', in C. Renfrew (ed.), The Explanation of
  Culture Change: Models in Prehistory, Duckworth, London.
Binford, L. (1977) 'General introduction', in L. Binford (ed.), For Theory
  Building in Archaeology, Academic Press, London.
Binford, L. (1978) Nunamiut Ethnoarchaeology, Academic Press, London.
Binford, L. (1979) 'Organization and formation processes: looking at
  curated technologies', Journal of Anthropological Research 35: 255-73.
Binford, L. (1981) Bones: Ancient Men and Modern Myths, Academie
  Press, London.
Binford, L. (1983) Working at Archaeology, Academic Press, London.
Binford, L. and Sabloff, J. (1982) 'Paradigms, systematics and
  archaeology', Journal of Anthropological Research 38: 137-53.
Bintliff, J. (ed.) (1984) European Social Evolution, Bradford University
  Press, Bradford,
Bintliff, J. (1984) 'Introduction', in J. Bintliff (ed.)
Bintliff, J. (1984a) 'Iron Age Europe in the context of social evolution
  from the Bronze Age through to historic times', in J. Bintliff (ed.)
Bordes, F. (1973) 'On the chronology and contemporaneity of different
  palaeolithic cultures in France', in C. Renfrew (ed.), The Explanation of
  Culture Change: Models in Prehistory, Duckworth, London.
Borges, J. L. (1981) 'Tlon, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius', Labyrinths, Penguin.
Bourdieu, P. (1963) "The attitude of the Algerian peasant toward time', in
  J. Pitt-Rivers (ed.), Mediterranean Countrymen, Mouton, The Hague.
Bourdieu, P. (1977) Outline of a Theory of Practice, Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge.
                                REFERENCES                              219
Bradley, R. (1981) '"Various styles of urn": cemeteries and settlement in
  southern England c. 1400-1000 B C , in R. Chapman, I. Kinnes and K.
  Randsborg (eds), The Archaeology of Death, Cambridge University
  Press, Cambridge.
Bradley, R. (1984) The Social Foundations of Prehistoric Britain,
  Longman, London.
Braithwaite, M. (1982) 'Decoration as ritual symbol: a theoretical proposal
  and an ethnographic study in southern Sudan', in I. Hodder (ed.)
Braun, D. (1983) 'Pots as tools', in J. Moore and A. Keene (eds),
  Archaeological Hammers and Theories, Academic Press, London.
Braun, D. and Plog, S. (1982) 'Evolution of tribal "social" networks:
  theory and prehistoric North American evidence', American Antiquity
  47: 504-25.
Buck-Morss, S. (1977) The Origin of Negative Dialectics: Theodor W.
  Adorno, Walter Benjamin, and the Frankfurt Institute, Harvester Press,
  Hassocks.
Buikstra, J. (1981) 'Mortuary practices, palaeodemography and palaeo-
  pathology: a case study from the Koster site (Illinois)', in R. Chapman,
  I. Kinnes and K. Randsborg (eds), The Archaeology of Death,
  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Burgess, C. (1980) The Age of Stonehenge, Dent, London.
Burke, K. (1969) A Rhetoric of Motives, University of California Press,
  Berkeley.
Burrow, J. (1966) Evolution and Society, Cambridge University Press,
  Cambridge.
Carrithers, M., Collins, S. and Lukes, S. (1986) The Category of the
  Person, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies (1978) On Ideology,
  Hutchinson, London.
Champion, T., Gamble, C, Shennan, S. and Whittle, A. (1984)
  Prehistoric Europe, Academic Press, London.
Chapman, R. and Randsborg, K. (1981) 'Approaches to the archaeology of
  death', in R. Chapman, I. Kinnes and K. Randsborg (eds).
Chapman, R., Kinnes, I. and Randsborg, K. (eds) (1981) The Archaeology
  of Death, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Chang, K. (1967) Rethinking Archaeology, Random House, New York.
Cherry, J., Gamble, C. and Shennan, S. (eds) (1978) Sampling in
  Contemporary British Archaeology, British Archaeological Reports,
  Oxford.
Childe, V. G. (1929) The Danube in Prehistory, Oxford University Press,
  Oxford.
Childe, V. G. (1936) Man Makes Himself, Watts, London.
Childe, V. G. (1944) Progress and Archaeology, Watts, London.
Childe, V. G. (1947) History, Cobbett, London.
Childe, V. G. (1949) 'Social worlds of knowledge', L. T. Hobhouse
  Memorial Trust Lecture No. 19, Oxford University Press, London.
Childe, V. G. (1951) Social Evolution, Watts, London.
220                           REFERENCES
Childe, V. G. (1979) 'Prehistory and Marxism', Antiquity LUI: 93-5.
Clark, J. G. D. (1969) 'Foreword', in D. Brothwell and E. Higgs (eds),
  Science in Archaeology, Thames and Hudson, London.
Clark, J. G. D. (1972) Archaeology and Society, Methuen, London.
Clarke, D. (1968) Analytical Archaeology, Methuen, London.
Clarke, D. (1972) 'Models and paradigms in contemporary archaeology',
  in D. Clarke (ed.), Models in Archaeology, Methuen, London.
Clarke, D. (1973) 'Archaeology: the loss of innocence', Antiquity XLVII:
  6-18.
Cleere, H. (ed.) (1984) Archaeological Approaches to our Heritage,
  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Cohen, G. (1978) Karl Marx's Theory of History: a Defence, Oxford
  University Press, Oxford.
Cohen, M. (1977) The Food Crisis in Prehistory, Yale University Press,
  New Haven.
Cohen, Y. (1983) 'A theory and model of social change and evolution',
  Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 2: 164-207.
Colletti, L. (1975) 'Marxism and the dialectic', New Left Review 93.
Collingwood, R. (1946) The Idea of History, Oxford University Press,
  Oxford.
Collis, J. (1984) The European Iron Age, Batsford, London.
Cooke, K. and Renfrew, C. (1979) 'An experiment on the simulation of
  culture changes', in C. Renfrew and K. Cooke (eds), Transformations:
  Mathematical Approaches to Culture Change, Academic Press, London.
Conkey, M. (1978) 'Style and information in cultural evolution: towards a
  predictive model for the palaeolithic', in C. Redman et al. (eds), Social
  Archaeology: Beyond Subsistence and Dating, Academic Press,
  London.
Conkey, M. and Spector, J. (1984) 'Archaeology and the study of gender',
  in M. Schiffer (ed.), Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory,
  vol. 7., Academic Press, London.
Coward, R. and Ellis, J. (1977) Language and Materialism, Routledge and
  Kegan Paul, London.
Culler, J. (1975) Structuralist Poetics, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
Dahrendorf, R. (1968) Essays in the Theory of Society, Routledge and
  Kegan Paul, London.
David, N. (1972) 'On the life span of pottery, type frequencies and
  archaeological inference', American Antiquity 37: 141-2.
Daniel, G. (1981) A Short History of Archaeology, Thames and Hudson,
  London.
Deetz, J. (1965) 'The dynamics of stylistic change in Ankara ceramics',
  Illinois Studies in Anthropology 4.
DeBoer, W. and Lathrap, D. (1979) "The making and breaking of Shipibo-
  Conibo ceramics', in C. Kramer (ed.), Ethnoarchaeology: implications
  of ethnography for archaeology, Columbia University Press, New York,
de Paor, L. (1967) Archaeology: an Illustrated Introduction, Penguin,
  Harmondsworth.
                                REFERENCES                              221
Derrida, J. (1976) Of Grammatology, Johns Hopkins University Press,
  Baltimore.
Derrida, J. (1978) 'Structure, sign, and play in the discourse of the human
  sciences', Writing and Difference, Routledge and Kegan Paul,
  London.
Derrida, J. (1981) 'Plato's pharmacy', Dissemination, Athlone Press,
  London,
de Ste. Croix, G. E. M. (1981) The Class Struggle in the Ancient Greek
   World, Duckworth, London.
Doran, J. and Hodson, R. (197S) Mathematics and Computers in
  Archaeology, Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh.
Douglas, M. (1970) Natural Symbols, Penguin, Harmondsworth.
Dolukhanov, P. (1986) 'The late mesolithic and the transition to food
  production in Eastern Europe', in M. Zvelebil (ed.), Hunters in
  Transition, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Dreyfus, H. and Rabinow, P. (1982) Michel Foucault: Beyond
  Structuralism and Hermeneutics, Harvester Press, Hassocks.
Dufrenne, M. (1967) 'La philosophie du neo-positivisme', Esprit 360.
Dunnell, R. (1971) Systematics in Prehistory, Free Press, New York.
Dunnell, R. (1978) 'Style and function: a fundamental dichotomy',
  American Antiquity 43: 192-202.
Dunnell, R. (1980) 'Evolutionary theory and archaeology', in M. Schiffer
  (ed.), Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, Vol. 3.,
  Academic Press, London.
Eagleton, T. (1981) Walter Benjamin or Towards a Revolutionary
  Criticism, Verso, London.
Earle, T. and Ericson, J. (1977) Exchange Systems in Prehistory, Academic
  Press, London.
Eggert, M. (1977) 'Prehistory, archaeology and the problem of ethno-
  cognition', Anthropos: 242-55.
Elster, J. (1978) Logic and Society, Wiley, Chichester.
Engelbrecht, W. (1978) 'Ceramic patterning between New York Iroquois
  sites', in I. Hodder (ed.), The Spatial Organization of Culture,
  Duckworth, London.
Ericson, J. and Earle, T. (eds) (1982) Contexts for Prehistoric Exchange,
  Academic Press, London.
Fabian, J. (1983) Time and the Other: how Anthropology makes its
  Object, Columbia University Press, New York.
Faris, J. (1986) 'Comments on the symposium "The past is the present*",
  Paper presented at the meetings of the Society for American
  Archaeology, New Orleans.
Fawcett, C. (1986) 'The politics of assimilation in Japanese archaeology',
  Archaeological Review from Cambridge 5: 43-57.
Firth, R. (1971) Elements of Social Organization, Tavistock, London.
Flannery, K. (1968) 'Archaeological systems theory and early
  Mesoamerica', in B. Meggers (ed.), Anthropological Archaeology in the
  Americas, Washington.
222                           REFERENCES
Flannery, K. (1972) "The cultural evolution of civilisations', Annual
  Review of Ecology and Systematics 3: 399-426.
Flannery, K. (1982) 'The golden marshalltown: a parable for the
  archaeology of the 1980s', American Anthropologist 84: 256-78.
Flannery, K. (1983) 'Divergent evolution', in K. Flannery and J. Marcus
  (eds).
Flannery, K. and Marcus, J. (eds) (1983) The Cloud People: Divergent
  Evolution of the Zapotec and Mixtec Civilisations, Academic Press,
  London.
Fletcher, R. (1977) 'Settlement studies (micro and semi-micro)', in D.
  Clarke (ed.), Spatial Archaeology, Academic Press, London.
Foley, R. (ed.) (1984) Hominid Evolution and Community Ecology,
  Academic Press, London.
Ford, J. (1954a) 'The type concept revisited', American Anthropologist 56:
  42-54.
Ford, J. (1954b) 'Comment on A. C. Spaulding, "statistical techniques for
  the discovery of artefact types'", American Antiquity 19: 390-1.
Foucault, M. (1974) The Order of Things, Tavistock, London.
Foucault, M. (1977) Discipline and Punish,,Vantage, New York.
Foucault, M. (1977a) 'Intellectuals and power', Language, Counter-
  Memory, Practice, ed. D. Bouchard, Cornell University Press, New
  York.
Foucault, M. (1977b) 'The political function of the intellectual', Radical
  Philosophy, Summer 1977: 12-14.
Foucault, M. (1980) 'Truth and power', Power/Knowledge, ed. C. Gordon,
  Harvester, Hassocks.
Foucault, M. (1981) "The order of discourse', in R. Young (ed.), Untying
  the Text, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
Foucault, M. (1986) The Foucault Reader, ed. P. Rabinow, Penguin,
  Harmondsworth.
Fowler, P. (1977) Approaches to Archaeology, Adam and Charles Black,
  London.
Frankenstein, S. and Rowlands, M. (1978) "The internal structure and
  regional context of early Iron Age society in south-western Germany',
  Bulletin of the Institute of Archaeology, London 15: 73-112.
Fried, M. (1967) The Evolution of Political Society, Random House,
  New York.
Friedman, J. (1974) 'Marxism, structuralism and vulgar materialism',
  Man 9: 444-69.
Friedman, J. (1975) 'Tribes, states and transformations', in M. Bloch (ed.),
  Marxist Analyses and Social Anthropology, Malaby, London.
Friedman, J. (1986) 'Culture, identity and world process', Paper presented
  at the World Archaeological Congress, 1986.
Friedman, J. and Rowlands, M. (1978) 'Notes towards an epigenetic model
  of the evolution of "civilisation"', in J. Friedman and M. Rowlands
  (eds), The Evolution of Social Systems, Duckworth, London.
Friedrich, M. (1970) 'Design structure and social interaction:
                               REFERENCES                               223
  archaeological implications of an ethnographic analysis', American
  Antiquity 35: 332-43.
Fritz, J. (1978) 'Palaeopsychology today: ideational systems and human
  adaptation in prehistory', in C. Redman et al. (eds), Social Archaeology:
  Beyond Dating and Subsistence, Academic Press, London.
Fritz, J. and Plog, F. (1970) 'The nature of archaeological explanation',
  American Antiquity 35: 405-12.
Gall, P. and Saxe, A. (1977) 'The ecological evolution of culture: the state
  as predator in succession theory', in T. Earle and J. Ericson (eds).
Geertz, C. (1979) 'From the native's point of view: on the nature of
  anthropological understanding', in P. Rabinow and W. Sullivan (eds),
  Interpretative Social Science: a Reader, University of California Press,
  Berkeley.
Gero, J. (1985) 'Socio-politics and the woman-at-home ideology',
  American Antiquity 50: 342-50.
Gero, J. and Root, D. (1986) 'Public presentations and private concerns:
  archaeology in the passages of National Geographic', Paper presented at
  the World Archaeological Congress, 1986.
Gibson, A. (1982) Beaker Domestic Sites: a Study of the Domestic Pottery
  of the Late Third and Early Second Millenia B.C. in the British Isles,
  British Archaeological Reports, Oxford.
Giddens, A. (1976) New Rules of Sociological Method, Hutchinson,
  London.
Giddens, A. (1979) Central Problems in Social Theory, Macmillan,
  London.
Giddens, A. (1981) A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism,
  Macmillan, London.
Giddens, A. (1984) The Constitution of Society, Polity Press, Cambridge.
Gifford, J. (1960) 'The type-variety method of ceramic classification as an
  indicator of cultural phenomena', American Antiquity 25: 341-7.
Gledhill, J. and Rowlands, M. (1982) 'Materialism and socio-economic
  process in multilinear evolution', in C. Renfrew and S. Shennan (eds).
Godelier, M. (1972) Rationality and Irrationality in Economics, New Left
  Books, London.
Godelier, M. (1977) Perspectives in Marxist Anthropology, Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge.
Godelier, M. (1978) 'Politics as infrastructure: an anthropologist's
  thoughts on the example of classical Greece', in J. Friedman and M.
  Rowlands (eds), The Evolution of Social Systems, Duckworth, London.
Goldmann, L. (1977) Lukacs and Heidegger, Routledge and Kegan Paul,
  London.
Goodfriend, D. (1978) 'Plus ca change, plus c'est la meme chose: the
 dilemma of the French structural Marxists', in S. Diamond (ed.),
  Toward a Marxist Anthropology, Mouton, The Hague.
Goodenough, W. (1965) 'Rethinking "status" and "role": toward a general
 model of the cultural organization of social relationships', in M. Banton
 (ed.), The Relevance of Models for Social Anthropology, Malaby, London.
224                           REFERENCES

Goody, J. (1978) The Domestication of the Savage Mind, Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge.
Gould, R. (ed.) (1978) Explorations in Ethnoarchaeology, University of
  New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Gould, R. (1980) Living Archaeology, Cambridge University Press,
  Cambridge.
Gould, R. and Schiffer, M. (eds) (1981) Modern Material Culture: the
 Archaeology of Us, Academic Press, London.
Gouldner, A. (1970) The Coming Crisis of Western Sociology, Heineman,
  London.
Gouldner, A. (1980) The Two Marxisms, Macmillan, London.
Gramsci, A. (1971) Selections from Prison Notebooks, Q. Hoare and G.
  Nowell Smith (eds and trans), Lawrence and Wishart, London.
Graves, M. (1982) 'Breaking down ceramic variation: testing models
  of White Mountain Redware design development', Journal of
  Anthropological Archaeology 1: 30S-S4.
Green, E. (ed.) (1984) Ethics and Values in Archaeology, The Free Press,
 New York.
Greene, K. (1983) Archaeology: an Introduction. The History, Principles
 and Methods of Modern Archaeology, Batsford, London.
Gregory, D. and Urry, J. (eds) (198S) Social Relations and Spatial
  Structures, Macmillan, London.
Grinsell, L., Rahtz, P. and Williams, D. (1974) The Preparation of
 Archaeological Reports, John Baker, London.
Gurvitch, G. (1964) The Spectrum of Social Time, D. Reidel, Dordrecht.
Habermas, J. (1979) 'Toward a reconstruction of historical materialism',
  Communication and the Evolution of Society, Heinemann, London.
Hall, M. (1984) "The burden of tribalism: the social context of southern
 African Iron Age Studies', American Antiquity 49: 455-67.
Hally, D. (1986) 'The identification of vessel function: a case study from
  northwest Georgia', American Antiquity 51: 267-95.
Haselgrove, C. (1982) 'Wealth, prestige and power: the dynamics of late
  Iron Age political centralisation in south-east England', in C. Renfrew
  and S. Shennan (eds).
Hardin, M. (1979) "The cognitive basis of productivity in a decorative art
  style: implications of an ethnographic study for archaeologists'
  taxonomies', in C. Kramer (ed.), Ethnoarchaeology: Implications of
  Ethnography for Archaeology, Columbia University Press, New York.
Hardin, M. (1983) 'The structure of Tarascan pottery painting', in D.
  Washburn (ed.), Structure and Cognition in Art, Cambridge University
  Press, Cambridge.
Hargrave, L. (1932) 'Guide to forty pottery types from the Hopi country
  and the San Francisco mountains', Museum of Northern Arizona
  Bulletin, No. 1., Arizona.
Hawkes, C. (1954) 'Archaeological theory and method: some suggestions
  from the old world', American Anthropologist LVI: 33-68.
Hayden, B. (ed.) (1979) Lithic Use-Wear Analysis, Academic Press, London.
                               REFERENCES                              225
Held, D. (1980) Introduction to Critical Theory: Horkheimer to
  Habermas, Hutchinson, London.
Hiedegger, M. (1972) 'Time and being', On Time and Being, Harper and
  Row, New York.
Hietala, H. (ed.) (1984) Intrasite Spatial Analysis in Archaeology,
  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Higgs, E. (ed.) (1972) Papers in Economic Prehistory, Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge.
Higgs, E. (ed.) (1975) Palaeoeconomy, Cambridge University Press,
  Cambridge.
Hill, J. (1970) Broken K Pueblo: Prehistoric Social Organization in the
 American South-West, Anthropological Papers of the University of
  Arizona 18, Tucson, Arizona.
Hill, J. (1972) 'The methodological debate in contemporary archaeology: a
  model', in D. Clarke (ed.), Models in Archaeology, Methuen, London.
Hill, J. (1977) 'Systems theory and the explanation of change', in J. Hill
  (ed.), The Explanation of Prehistoric Change, University of New
  Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Hill, J. and Evans, R. (1972) 'A model for classification and typology', in
  D. Clarke (ed.), Models in Archaeology, Methuen, London.
Hill, J. and Gunn, J. (eds) (1977) The Individual in Prehistory, Academic
  Press, London.
Hindess, B. and Hirst, P. (1975) Pre-Capitalist Modes of Production,
  Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
Hirst, P. (1979) On Law and Ideology, Macmillan, London.
Hirst, P. (1980) 'Law, socialism and rights', in P. Carlen and M. Collinson
  (eds), Radical Issues in Criminology, Martin Robertson, Oxford.
Hodder, I. (ed.) (1978) The Spatial Organization of Culture, Duckworth,
  London.
Hodder, I. (1982) Symbols in Action, Cambridge University Press,
  Cambridge.
Hodder, I. (ed.) (1982) Symbolic and Structural Archaeology, Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge.
Hodder, I. (1982a) "Theoretical archaeology: a reactionary view', in I.
  Hodder (ed.)
Hodder, I. (1982b) 'The identification and interpretation of ranking in
  prehistory: a contextual perspective', in C. Renfrew and S. Shennan
  (eds).
Hodder, I. (1982c) The Present Past, Batsford, London.
Hodder, I. (1982d) 'Sequences of structural change in the Dutch neolithic',
  in I. Hodder (ed.)
Hodder, I. (1984) 'Archaeology in 1984', Antiquity 58: 25-32.
Hodder, I. (198S) 'Post processual archaeology' in M. Schiffer (ed.)
  Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, vol. 8, Academic
  Press, London.
Hodder, I. (1986) Reading the Past, Cambridge University Press,
  Cambridge.
226                           REFERENCES

Hodder, I. (1986a) 'Politics and ideology in the World Archaeological
  Congress 1986', Archaeological Review from Cambridge 5: 113-18.
Hodder, I. and Orton, C. (1976) Spatial Analysis in Archaeology,
  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Horne, D. (1984) The Great Museum; the Re-Presentation of History,
  Pluto Press, London.
Howard, H. and Morris, E. (eds) (1981) Production and Distribution: a
  Ceramic Viewpoint, British Archaeological Reports 120, Oxford.
Jay, M. (1973) The Dialectical Imagination: a History of the Frankfurt
  School and the Institute of Social Research, 1923-1950, Little, Brown,
  Boston.
Jay, M. (1984) Marxism and Totality: the Adventures of a Concept from
  Lukacs to Habermas, Polity Press, Cambridge.
Jochim, M. (1983) 'Palaeolithic cave art in ecological perspective', in G.
  Bailey (ed.), Hunter-Gatherer Economy in Prehistory, Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge.
Johnson, G. (1978) 'Information sources and the development of decision-
  making organisations', in C. Redman et al. (eds), Social Archaeology:
  Beyond Dating and Subsistence, Academic Press, London.
Juteson, J. and Hampson, S. (1985) 'Closed models of open systems:
  boundary considerations', in S. Green and S. Perlman (eds), The
  Archaeology of Frontiers and Boundaries, Academic Press, London.
Keat, R. and Urry, J. (1982) Social Theory as Science, Routledge and
  Kegan Paul, London.
Kent, S. (1984) Analyzing Activity Areas, University of New Mexico Press,
  Albuquerque.
Kohl, P. (1981) 'Materialist approaches in prehistory', Annual Review of
  Anthropology 10: 89-118.
Kramer, C. (1985) 'Ceramic ethnoarchaeology', Annual Review of
  Anthropology 14: 77-102.
Kreiger, A. (1944) 'The typological concept', American Antiquity 9:
  271-88.
Kristiansen, K. (1984) 'Ideology and material culture: an archaeological
  perspective', in M. Spriggs (ed.), Perspectives in Marxist Archaeology,
  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Kroeber, A. (1948) Anthropology, Harcourt Brace, New York.
Lacan, J. (1973) Le Seminaire, Livre XI, Seuil, Paris.
Lacan, J. (1977) Ecrits. A Selection, Tavistock, London.
Laclau, E. and Mouffe, C. (1983) Hegemony and Socialist Strategy, Verso,
  London.
Langford, R. (1983) 'Our heritage - your playground', Australian
  Archaeology 16: 1-6,
Larrain, J. (1979) The Concept of Ideology, Hutchinson, London.
Larrain, J. (1983) Marxism and Ideology, Macmillan, London.
Leach, E. (1934) Political Systems of Highland Burma, Athlone, London.
Leitch, V. (1983) Deconstructive Criticism: an Advanced Introduction,
  Hutchinson, London.
                              REFERENCES                              227
Leone, M. (1981) 'Archaeology's relationship to the present and the past',
  in R. Gould and M. Schiffer (eds), Modern Material Culture: the
  Archaeology of Us, Academic Press, London.
Leone, M. (1981a) 'The relationship between artifacts and the public in
  outdoor history museums', Annals of the New York Academy of
  Sciences 376: 301-14.
Leroi-Gourhan, A. (1965) Prehistoire de I'art occidental, Mazenod, Paris.
Lentricchia, F. (1985) Criticism and Social Change, University of Chicago
  Press, Chicago.
Levi-Strauss, C. (1966) The Savage Mind, Weidenfeld and Nicolson,
  London.
Levi-Strauss, C. (1968) Structural Anthropology, Allen Lane, London.
Levi-Strauss, C. (1969) Totemism, Penguin, Harmondsworth.
Levi-Strauss, C. (1975) 'Race and history', Race, Science and Society,
  George Allen and Unwin, London.
Longacre, W. (1970) Archaeology as Anthropology: a Case Study,
  Anthropological Papers of the University of Arizona 17, University of
  Arizona Press.
Longacre, W. (1981) 'Kalinga pottery: an ethnoarchaeological study', in I.
  Hodder, G. Isaac and N. Hammond (eds), Pattern of the Past,
  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Lowe, D. (1982) History of Bourgeois Perception, University of Chicago
  Press, Chicago.
Lubbock, J. (1865) Prehistoric Times, Williams and Norgate, London.
Macleod, D. (1977) 'Peddle or perish: archaeological marketing from
  concept to product delivery', in M. Schiffer and G. Gummerman (eds),
  Conservation Archaeology, Academic Press, London.
Martin, P. (1971) 'The revolution in archaeology', American Antiquity 36:
  1-8.
Marx, K. (1936) The Poverty of Philosophy, Martin Lawrence, London.
Marx, K. (1968) 'Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political
  Economy' (1859) in Marx, K. and Engels, F. Selected Works, Lawrence
  and Wishart, London.
Marx, K. and Engels, F. (1970) The German Ideology, ed. C. Arthur,
  Lawrence and Wishart, London (Appendix includes 'Theses on
  Feuerbach').
Mauss, M. (1979) 'A category of the human mind: the notion of person,
  the notion of self, Sociology and Psychology, Routledge and Kegan
  Paul, London.
McGuire, R. (1983) 'Breaking down cultural complexity: inequality and
  heterogeneity', in M. Schiffer (ed.), Advances in Archaeological Method
 and Theory, vol. 6, Academic Press, London.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1982), trans C. Smith, Phenomenology of
 Perception, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
Meikle, S. (1979) 'Dialectical contradiction and necessity', in J. Mepham
  and D. Ruben (eds), Issues in Marxist Philosophy, vol. 1, Dialectics and
  Method, Harvester, Hassocks.
228                            REFERENCES

Meltzer, D. (1979) 'Paradigms and the nature of change in American
  archaeology', American Antiquity 44: 644-57.
Meltzer, D. (1981) 'Ideology and material culture', in R. Gould and M.
  Schiffer (eds), Modern Material Culture: the Archaeology of Us
  Academic Press, London.
Merton, R. (1957) Social Theory and Social Structure, Free Press, New
  York.
Miller, D. (1985) Artefacts as Categories, Cambridge University Press,
  Cambridge.
Miller, D. (1985a) 'Ideology and the Harappan civilisation', Journal of
  Anthropological Archaeology 4: 34-71.
Miller, D. and Tilley, C. (eds) (1984) Ideology, Power and Prehistory,
  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Miller, D. and Tilley, C. 'Ideology, power and prehistory: an
  introduction', in D. Miller and C. Tilley (eds).
Miller, D. and Tilley, C. 'Ideology, power and long-term social change', in
  D. Miller and C. Tilley (eds).
Morgan, L. (1963) Ancient Society, Meridan Books, Cleveland.
Mueller, J. (ed.) (1975) Sampling in Archaeology, University of Arizona
  Press, Tucson.
Nadel, S. (1957) The Theory of Social Structure, Cohen and West,
  London.
Olsen, B. (1986) 'Norwegian archaeology and the people without
  (pre-)history: or how to create a myth of a uniform past',
  Archaeological Review from Cambridge 5: 25-42.
Ong, W. (1967) The Presence of the Word, Yale University Press, New
  Haven.
Orton, C. (1980) Mathematics in Archaeology, Collins, London.
O'Shea, J. (1981) 'Social configurations and the archaeological study of
  mortuary practices: a case study', in R. Chapman, I. Kinnes and K.
  Randsborg (eds).
O'Shea, J. (1984) Mortuary Variability: an Archaeological Investigation,
  Academic Press, London.
Parker Pearson, M. (1984a) 'Social change, ideology and the
  archaeological-record', in M. Spriggs (ed.)
Parker Pearson, M. (1984b) 'Economic and ideological change: cyclical
  growth in the pre-state societies of Jutland', in D. Miller and C. Tilley
  (eds).
Parsons, T. (1952) The Social System, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
Parsons, T. (1964) 'Evolutionary universals in society', American
  Sociological Review 29: 329-57.
Peel, J. (1971) Herbert Spencer: the Evolution of a Sociologist,
  Heinemann, London.
Piggott, S. (1959) Approach to Archaeology, A. and C. Black, London.
Piggott, S. (1965) Ancient Europe, Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh.
Plog, F. (1974) The Study of Prehistoric Change, Academic Press,
  London.
                                REFERENCES                                 229
Plog, S. (1976) 'Measurement of prehistoric interaction between
  communities', in K. Flannery (ed.), The Early Mesoamerican Village,
  Academic Press, London.
Plog, S. (1978) 'Social interaction and stylistic similarity: a reanalysis', in
  M. Schiffer (ed.), Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory,
  Academic Press, London.
Plog, S. (1980) Stylistic Variation in Prehistoric Ceramics, Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge.
Popper, K. (1959) The Logic of Scientific Discovery, Hutchinson,
  London.
Pollock, S. (1983) 'Style and information: an analysis of Susiana ceramics',
  Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 2: 354-90.
Poulantzas, N. (1973) Political Power and Social Classes, New Left Books,
  London.
Pred, A. (1985) 'The social becomes the spatial, the spatial becomes the
  social: enclosures, social change and the becoming of places in the
  Swedish province of Skane', in D. Gregory and J. Urry (eds), Social
  Relations and Spatial Structures, Macmillan, London.
Preiswerk, R. and Perrot, D. (1978) Ethnocentrism and History, Nok,
  London.
Prigogine, L., Allen, P. and Herman, R. (1977) 'Long term trends and the
  evolution of complexity', in E. Laszlo and J. Bierman (eds), Goals in a
  Community: a Report to the Club of Rome, vol. 1, Studies on the
  Conceptual Foundations, Pergamon Press, New York.
Racevskis, K. (1983) Michel Foucault and the Subversion of Intellect,
  Cornell University Press, New York.
Radcliffe-Brown, A. (1952) Structure and Function in Primitive Society,
  Cohen and West, London.
Ray, K. (1986) 'Archaeological praxis in West African historic preservation:
  Senegambia 1981', Archaeological Review from Cambridge 5: 58-76.
Reason, D. (1979) 'Classification, time and the organization of
  production', in R. Ellen and D. Reason (eds), Classifications in their
  Social Context, Academic Press, London.
Renfrew, C. (1969) 'Trade and culture process in European prehistory',
  Current Anthropology 10: 151-69.
Renfrew, C. (1972) The Emergence of Civilisation: the Cyclades and the
  Aegean in the Third Millenium B.C., Methuen, London.
Renfrew, C. (1973) 'Monuments, mobilization and social organization in
  neolithic Wessex', in C. Renfrew (ed.), The Explanation of Culture
  Change: Models in Prehistory, Duckworth, London.
Renfrew, C. (1978) 'Space, time and polity', in J. Friedman and M.
  Rowlands (eds), The Evolution of Social Systems, Duckworth, London.
Renfrew, C. (1978a) 'Trajectory, discontinuity and morphogenesis: the
  implications of catastrophe theory for archaeology', American Antiquity
  43: 202-22.
Renfrew, C. (1979) 'Systems collapse as social transformation: catastrophe
  and anastrophe in early state societies', in C. Renfrew and K. Cooke
230                            REFERENCES

  (eds), Transformations: Mathematical Approaches to Culture Change,
  Academic Press, London.
Renfrew, C. (1982) 'Discussion: contrasting paradigms', in C. Renfrew and
  S. Shennan (eds).
Renfrew, C. (1983) 'Divided we stand: aspects of archaeology and
  information', American Antiquity 48: 3-16.
Renfrew, C. and Cherry, J. (eds) (1986) Peer Polity Interaction and
  Sociopolitical Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Renfrew, C, Rowlands, M. and Segraves, B. (eds) (1982) Theory and
  Explanation in Archaeology, Academic Press, London.
Renfrew, C. and Shennan, S. (eds) (1982) Ranking Resource and Exchange;
  Aspects of the Archaeology of Early European Society, Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge.
Richards, J. and Ryan, N. (198S) Data Processing in Archaeology,
  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Rossi-Landi, F. Linguistics and Economics, Mouton, The Hague.
Rouse, I. (1939) Prehistory in Haiti. A Study in Method, Yale University
  Publications in Anthropology No. 21, New Haven.
Rouse, I. (1960) 'The classification of artifacts in archaeology', American
  Antiquity 25: 313-23.
Rowlands, M. (1982) 'Processual archaeology as historical social science',
  in C. Renfrew, M. Rowlands and B. Segraves (eds).
Rowlands, M. (1984) 'Conceptualising the European Bronze and early Iron
  Ages', in J. Bintliff (ed.), European Social Evolution, Bradford
  University Press, Bradford.
Rowlands, M. (1984a) 'Objectivity and subjectivity in archaeology', in M.
  Spriggs (ed.), Marxist Perspectives in Archaeology, Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge.
Rowlands, M. (1986) 'From simple to complex: a modernist fantasy in
  prehistory', Paper presented at the World Archaeology Congress, 1986.
Rowlands, M. (1986a) 'Colonialism, archaeology and constituting the
  African peasantry', Paper presented at the World Archaeological
  Congress, 1986.
Rowley-Conwy, P. (1986) 'Between cave painters and crop planters:
  aspects of the temperate European mesolithic', in M. Zvelebil (ed.),
  Hunters in Transition, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Ryan, M. (1982) Marxism and Deconstruction: a Critical Articulation,
  Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Sabloff, J. and Lamberg-Karlovsky, C. (eds) (1975) Ancient Civilisation
  and Trade, University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Sackett, J. (1973) 'Style, function and artifact variability in palaeolithic
  assemblages', in C. Renfrew (ed.), The Explanation of Culture Change:
  Models in Prehistory, Duckworth, London.
Sackett, J. (1977) "The meaning of style; a general model', American
  Antiquity 42: 369-80.
Sackett, J. (1982) 'Approaches to style in lithic archaeology', Journal of
  Anthropological Archaeology 1; 59-112.
                                REFERENCES                               231
Sackett, J. (1985) 'Style and ethnicity in the Kalahari: a reply to Weissner',
   American Antiquity 50: 154-9.
Sahlins, M. (1968) Tribesmen, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs.
Sahlins, M. (1981) Historical Metaphors and Mythical Realities, University
   of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Sahlins, M. (1985) Islands of History, University of Chicago Press,
   Chicago.
Sahlins, M. and Service, E. (1960) Evolution and Culture, University of
   Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Sanders, W. and Webster, D. (1978) 'Unilinealism, multilinealism, and the
  evolution of complex societies', in C. Redman et al (eds)., Social
  Archaeology: Beyond Dating and Subsistence, Academic Press, London.
Sartre, J.-P. (1950) 'Writing for one's age', What is Literature?, Methuen,
  London.
Sartre, J.-P. (1983) 'A plea for intellectuals', Between Existentialism and
  Marxism, Verso, London.
Saussure, F. de (1978) Course in General Linguistics, Peter Owen, London.
Saxe, A. (1970) Social Dimensions of Mortuary Practices, doctoral
  dissertation, University Microfilms, Ann Arbor.
Schapiro, G. (1984) 'Ceramic vessels, site permanence and group size: a
  Mississippian example', American Antiquity 49: 696-712.
Schiffer, M. (1976) Behavioural Archaeology, Academic Press, London.
Schiffer, M. (1978) 'Taking the pulse of method and theory in American
  archaeology', American Antiquity 43: 153-8.
Schiffer, M. (1981) 'Some issues in the philosophy of archaeology',
  American Antiquity 46: 899-908.
Sears, W. (1960) 'Ceramic systems and eastern archaeology', American
  Antiquity 25: 324-9.
Segraves, B. (1982) 'Central elements in the construction of a general
  theory of the evolution of societal complexity', in C. Renfrew, M,
  Rowlands and B. Segraves (eds).
Semenov, S. (1964) Prehistoric Technology, Adams and Dart, Bath.
Service, E. (1962) Primitive Social Organization, Random House, New York.
Service, E. (1975) Origins of the State and Civilisation, Norton, New York.
Shanks, M. and Tilley, C. (1982) 'Ideology, symbolic power and ritual
  communication: a reinterpretation of neolithic mortuary practices', in I.
  Hodder (ed.)
Shanks, M. and Tilley, C. (1987) Re-Constructing Archaeology: Theory
  and Practice, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Shaw, T. (1986) 'Archaeology and the politics of academic freedom', .
  Archaeological Review from Cambridge 5: 5-24.
Shennan, S. E. (1975) "The social organisation at Branc', Antiquity 49:
  279-88.
Shennan, S. J. (1978) 'Archaeological "cultures": an empirical
  investigation', in I. Hodder (ed.)
Shennan, S. J. (1982) 'Ideology, change and the European early Bronze
  Age' in I. Hodder (ed.)
232                             REFERENCES
Shennan, S. J. (1986) 'Interaction and change in third millennium B.C.
  western and central Europe', in C. Renfrew and J. Cherry (eds).
Sherratt, A. (1981) 'Plough and pastoralism: aspects of the secondary
  products revolution', in I. Hodder, G. Isaac and N. Hammond (eds),
  Pattern of the Past, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Sherratt, A. (1982) 'Mobile resources: settlement and exchange in early
  agricultural Europe', in C. Renfrew and S. Shennan (eds).
Sinclair, P. (1986) 'Archaeology, ideology and development: Mozambican
  perspectives', Archaeological Review from Cambridge 5: 77-87.
Sklair, L. (1970) The Sociology of Progress, Routledge and Kegan Paul,
  London.
Smith, A. (1973) The Concept of Social Change, Routledge and Kegan
  Paul, London.
Soja, E. (1983) 'The spatiality of social life: towards a transformative
  retheorisation', in D. Gregory and J. Urry (eds), Social Relations and
  Spatial Structures, Macmillan, London.
Spaulding, A. (1953) 'Statistical techniques for the discovery of artifact
  types', American Antiquity 18: 305-13.
Spaulding, A. (1954) 'Reply to Ford', American Antiquity 19: 391-3.
Spencer, H. (1852) 'A theory of population deduced from the general laws
  of animal fertility', Westminster Review 57: 468-501.
Spencer, H. (1967) The Evolution of Society, University of Chicago
  Press, Chicago.
Spencer, H. (1972) On Social Evolution, ed. J. Peel, University of
  Chicago Press, Chicago.
Spriggs, M. (ed.) (1984) Perspectives in Marxist Archaeology, Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge.
Stanislawski, M. and Stanislawski, B. (1978) 'Hopi and Hopi-Tewa
  ceramic tradition networks', in I. Hodder (ed.)
Stephenson, R. (1977) 'A strategy for getting the job done', in S. South (ed.),
  Research Strategies in Historical Archaeology, Academic Press, London.
Steponaitis, V. (1983) Ceramics, Chronology, and Community Patterns:
  an Archaeological Study at Moundville, Academic Press, London.
Sterud, E. (1973) 'A paradigmatic view of prehistory', in C. Renfrew (ed.),
   The Explanation of Culture Change: Models in Prehistory, Duckworth,
  London.
Sterud, E. (1978) 'Changing aims of Americanist archaeology: a citations
  analysis of "American Antiquity" 1946-1975', American Antiquity
  43: 294-302.
Steward, J. (1955) Theory of Culture Change, University of Illinois Press,
  London.
Sturrock, J. (ed.) (1979) Structuralism and Since, Oxford University
  Press, Oxford.
Tainter, J. (1975) 'Social inferences and mortuary practices: an experiment
  in numerical classification', World Archaeology 7: 1-5.
Tainter, J. (1977) 'Modelling change in prehistoric social systems', in L.
   Binford (ed.), For Theory Building in Archaeology, Academic Press,
   London.
                                •REFERENCES                                233

Tainter, J. (1978) 'Mortuary practices and the study of prehistoric social
  systems', in M. Schiffer (ed.), Advances in Archaeological Method and
   Theory, vol. 1., Academic Press, London.
Thompson, E. P. (1978) The Poverty of Theory, Merlin, London.
Thorpe, I. and Richards, C. 'The decline of ritual authority and the
  introduction of beakers into Britain', in R. Bradley and J. Gardiner
  (eds), Neolithic Studies, British Archaeological Reports 133, Oxford.
Tilley, C. (1981a) 'Conceptual frameworks for the explanation of socio-
  cultural change', in I. Hodder, G. Isaac and N. Hammond (eds), Pattern
  of the Past, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Tilley, C. (1981b) 'Economy and society: what relationship?', in A.
  Sheridan and G. Bailey (eds), Economic Archaeology, British
  Archaeological Reports, Oxford.
Tilley, C. (1982) 'Social formation, social structures and social change', in
  I. Hodder (ed.)
Tilley, C. (1984) 'Ideology and the legitimation of power in the middle
  neolithic of southern Sweden', in D. Miller and C. Tilley (eds).
Tilley, C. (1985) 'Archaeology as sociopolitical action in the present', in V.
  Pinsky and A. Wylie (eds), Critical Traditions in Contemporary
  Archaeology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Trigger, B. (1978) Time and Traditions: Essays in Archaeological
  Interpretation, Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh.
Trigger, B. (1980) 'Archaeology and the image of the American indian',
  American Antiquity 45: 662-76.
Trigger, B. (1981) 'Anglo-American archaeology', World Archaeology
  13: 138-55.
Trigger, B. (1984) 'Alternative archaeologies: nationalist, colonialist,
  imperialist', Man 19: 355-70.
Tylor, E. (1958) Primitive Culture (1871), 2 vols, Harper Torchbooks,
  New York.
Tylor, E. (1881) Anthropology: an Introduction to the Study of Man, D.
  Appleton, New York.
Ucko, P. (1983) 'Australian academic archaeology: aboriginal transfor-
  mation of its aims and practices', Australian Archaeology 16: 11-26.
Van de Leeuw, S. (1976) Studies in the Technology of Ancient Pottery,
  doctoral dissertation, University of Amsterdam.
Van de Leeuw, S. (1981) 'Information flows, flow structures and the
  explanation of change in human institutions', in S. Van de Leeuw (ed.)
Van de Leeuw, S. (ed.) (1981) Archaeologica! Approaches to the Study of
  Complexity, University of Amsterdam Press, Amsterdam.
Wainwright, G. (1979) Gussage All Saints: an Iron Age Settlement in
  Dorset, Department of the Environment Archaeological Reports No. 10,
  Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London.
Washburn, D. (1978) 'A symmetry classification of pueblo ceramic design',
  in P. Grebinger (ed.), Discovering Past Behaviour, Gordon and Breach,
  New York.
Washburn, D. (1983) 'Symmetry analysis of ceramic design: two tests of
  the method on neolithic material from Greece and the Aegean', in D.
234                             REFERENCES

  Washburn (ed.). Structure and Cognition in Art, Cambridge University
  Press, Cambridge.
Watson, P., LeBlanc, S. and Redman, C. (1971) Explanation in
  Archaeology: an Explicitly Scientific Approach, Columbia University
  Press, New York.
Weissner, P. (1983) 'Style and social information in Kalahari San
  projectile points', American Antiquity 48: 253-76.
Wenke, R. (1981) 'Explaining the evolution of cultural complexity: a
  review', in M. Schiffer (ed.), Advances in Archaeological Method and
  Theory, vol. 5, Academic Press, London.
Whallon, R. (1968) 'Investigations of late prehistoric social organisation in
  New York state', in L. and S. Binford (eds), New Perspectives in
  Archaeology, Aldine, Chicago.
Whallon, R. (1982) 'Comments on "explanation", in C. Renfrew and S.
  Shennan (eds).
Wheeler, M. (1954) Archaeology from the Earth, Penguin,
  Harmondsworth.
White, H. (1978) Tropics of Discourse, Johns Hopkins University Press,
  Baltimore.
White, L. (1959) The Evolution of Culture, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Wilmsen, E. (1968) 'Functional analysis of flaked stone artifacts',
  American Antiquity 33: 156-61.
Wobst, M. (1977) 'Stylistic behaviour and information exchange',
  University of Michigan, Museum of Anthropology Anthropological
  Papers 61: 317-42.
Wrong, D. (1979) Power: its Forms, Bases and Uses, Basil Blackwell,
  Oxford.
Yoffee, N. (1979) 'The decline and rise of Mesopotamian civilisation: an
  ethnoarchaeological perspective on the evolution of societal complexity',
 American Antiquity 44: 5-34.
Zubrow, E. (1972) 'Environment, subsistence and society: the changing
  archaeological perspective', Annual Review of Anthropology 1:
  179-206.
                                     Index

adaptation, 121, 122, 123, 163,                 economic, 56
     168                                        environmental, 3, 56
  and biological evolution, 151-3,              excavation and fieldwork, 2, 10,
     154, 155                                      12-13, 15-17, 22, 25, 119,
  and culture, 87, 91, 112, 141,                   132, 133
     159                                        feminist, 191, 193
  and society, 2, 34, 38, 39, 48,               history of, 22-3
     119, 141, 143, 146, 162, 164               marxist, 5, 6, 45-7, 52, 56,
Adorno, T., 134                                    167-8, 194, 200
agency, 35, 64, 68, 104-5, 177,                 mathematical, 11, 35, 51, 120
     178, 196                                   new, 1-2, 4, 5, 10, 13, 22, 79,
  see also social practice                         86-94, 106, 119, 135, 143-4,
alcoholic drink, 113                               163, 187, 188, 200
Algerian peasants, 127-8                        and non-western countries, 187,
Althusser, L., 46, 75, 98, 127,                    188-9, 190, 200
     168-70, 184                                palaeoeconomy, 6, 21, 56, 122,
American archaeology                               123
  the American south-west, 89,                  processual, 21, 42, 45, 48, 51-4
     100                                        rescue and cultural resource
  Hopewell, 41                                    management, 15, 16, 189
  Mesoamerica, 41, 85, 163                      as science, 4-5, 6-7, 18, 135,
ancient city-state, 41, 122                        141, 160, 194
anthropology, 2, 3, 5, 44, 48, 49,              social, 5, 29-60
     5 5 , 8 4 , 8 5 , 8 9 , 115, 137, 139,     structuralist and post-
     153, 161, 164, 168, 194, 199                  structuralist, 5, 122, 123
archaeology                                     traditional, 3-5, 13, 22, 29-30,
  as academic discipline, 13, 23,                  33, 37, 38, 46, 51, 79-83,
     58-60, 77, 121-4, 135, 138,                   86-7, 89, 94, 106, 119, 135,
     144, 186-93                                   171, 178, 193, 195-6, 200
  antiquarianism, 11, 29, 196                 Arnold, D., 84-5, 90
  behavioural, 2                              Azande, 105-6
  contextual, 5, 191-4
  critical, 186-91, 194-6, 199,               Bailey, G., 120-6, 127
     200,204-7                                Balibar, E., 98
236                                 INDEX
Baringo, Kenya, 107                       see also culture, material
Barthes, R., 68, 99, 101, 207          Champion, S., 38
Baudrillard, J., 105                   Champion, T., 38, 39
Benjamin, W., 133, 195                 Chapman, R., 43, 44
Binford, L., 2, 42, 52, 82, 86-8,      Childe, G., 151-3, 159, 160-1,
     141, 143                                167-8
Bintliff, J., 145-6, 149, 153          Clarke, D., 1, 3-4, 31, 56, 86,
Bordes, F., 86                              90-1
Borges, J-L., 12-13                    classification, 107, 112, 129
Bourdieu, P., 108, 113                    and analysis, 17, 51, 54, 109,
Bradley, R., 55-6, 58                        147, 149, 164
Braithwaite, M., 105-6, 107               and disciplinary power, 69
bricolage, 104                            and progress, 157
Brown, J., 43                             and taxonomy, 79-85
Burgess, C, 31                            and time, 119
                                       Cohen, M., 154
capitalism, 166, 168, 183-4, 195,      Cohen, Y., 146
     197                               Collingwood, R., 193
  and archaeology, 5, 11, 188,         colonialism, 5, 187, 188
     189, 193, 194, 205, 206           common sense, 5, 7, 19, 29, 31, 62
  and evolution, 158, 160, 162         consciousness, 166,177, 197, 202
  and material culture, 97, 113           and analysis, 113, 116, 134
  and museums, 14, 190                    consciousness raising, 191, 203,
  and subjectivity, 66-7, 75-6, 77,          204
     78                                   historical, 189
  and time, 118, 125-6, 129               and ideology, 75, 181
catastrophe theory, 11, 35                and the subject, 62-5, 71, 138
categorization, 26, 47, 107-8, 109,       and time, 125
     112                               contradiction
   abstraction, 54                        existential, 182
   and action, 177                        and ideology, 181, 187, 194, 205
   analysis and application of            primary and secondary, 170,
     categories, 36, 81, 87, 115,            183-4
     179, 186                            and signification, 76
  and classification, 129                social, 5, 47, 48, 77, 108-9, 113,
  and data, 50                               158, 166, 169, 171, 174, 179,
  and essentialism, 55                       182-4, 187, 195, 205
   meaning and political status          and social practice, 86
        of, 21, 35, 74                 core-periphery relations, 37, 38,
  neutrality, 17-18, 19                     46,56
  of the person, 61-2, 71              critique, 27, 59, 134, 179, 191-6,
  and reification, 187                       198, 200, 202
  social categorization, 37, 51-3,        critical theory, 194, 195
     149, 164                            see also archaeology, critical
  see also social typology             cross-cultural generalization, 5, 36,
ceramic design, 18-19, 89-93,                5 2 , 5 3 , 7 7 , 8 9 , 9 5 , 113, 116,
     100-13                                  121, 124, 187, 191, 200
                                  INDEX                                   237

culture, 112, 141, 147, 153, 159,         and archaeology, 198
     160, 161, 167, 172, 174-5,           capitalist, 70, 188, 189, 195, 203
     180, 182, 201                        complex, 162
  archaeological 'cultures', 1, 11,       economic determinism, 50, 59,
     80, 81, 83, 86-7, 119, 152              166-7, 168-70, 173, 197
  culture systems, 2, 29, 34, 119         homo oeconomicus, 36, 205
  and hegemony, 197, 198, 201             organization and practice, 21,
  material, 2, 5, 29, 31, 33, 41,            30, 46, 47,49-52, 68, 83,
     42, 48, 52, 54, 60, 78, 79-117,         100, 122, 127, 148, 154, 178,
     118, 154, 177, 198,208                  183
  modern material culture studies,        prestige goods, 36, 38, 56,
     2, 113                                  106
  non-western, 189                        redistributive, 33, 37, 38
  process, 11-12, 33, 119                 resource control, 38, 51
  western, 66                             and social organization, 166-7,
                                             168-75
Dangwara, India, 109-11                   'social storage', 38
data, 23, 30, 61, 121,123, 124,           socio-economic process, 21, 46
     172, 189, 193                        subsistence, 32, 33, 35, 38, 39,
  acquisition, 4                            40,54
  and analysis, 16-19, 48, 54-6,       Eggert, M., 84-5
     115, 151, 160, 192, 193,          ego, 64-5, 160
    see also theory, and data          empathy, 113, 133
  and paradigms, 3                     empiricism, 4, 5, 7, 10, 12, 15, 19,
  processing, 2-3                           23
  and systems theory, 53               environment, 1, 2, 21, 32, 33, 34,
Derrida, J., 8, 101, 102, 174               48, 52, 59, 87, 91, 94, 95, 96,
discourse, 58, 62, 64-71, 202                103, 116, 171
  archaeology as, 59,186,189,204          and academic disciplines, 121-2
  archaeological writing, 7, 12-25,      analysis, 3
     58-9, 119, 133-6, 175, 199,         and change, 120, 138, 140-3,
     207-8                                   152,177-8
  informational report, 13, 15-18,       determinism, 90, 166-8
     207                               essentialism, 55, 59, 138, 146,
  introductory texts, 6, 22-3                147-8, 149, 151, 170, 172,
  material culture as, 96-7, 98-9,           176, 177, 183
     102, 104                          ethnicity, 83, 86, 93, 94
  publication, 15-16                   ethnoarchaeology, 2, 84, 88, 105,
  synoptic text, 19, 21-2, 58                107
  synthetic text, 18-19, 20            ethnocentrism, 138, 146, 147,
  writing, 131-2                             155-63, 175
Dunnell, R., 91, 154                   ethology, 6
                                       evolution
ecology, 3, 95, 121, 122, 131, 141       biological, 6,146,151-5,157,161
  ecosystem, 21, 56, 170, 173            social, 2, 23, 39, 49, 53, 54, 56,
economy                                      119, 120, 138-65, 167, 170,
  agriculture, 38, 55                        171, 175, 188, 195
238                                INDEX

exchange and trade, 3, 33, 36, 38,     Haselgrove, C, 38
     39, 40, 41, 46, 51, 82, 87, 100, hegemony, 197-8, 201, 203, 204,
     103, 140, 168                         208
explanation                           history, 9, 30, 54, 57, 68, 73, 120,
   and archaeology, 2, 21 22, 33,           123-4, 125-6, 127, 133, 136,
     39, 56, 106-7                          175-6, 179
   and correlation, 44                   as an academic discipline, 118,121,
   and evolution, 145-6, 153-4,             123, 135, 137
      157, 164                          and biology, 152
   functionalist, 34, 141               culture history, 3, 33, 35, 81
   and generalization, 113              and discourse, 58, 132
   and the natural sciences, 121        and essentialism, 55, 59, 172,
   prime movers, 142                        183
   and role theory, 45                  and evolution, 144, 147, 148-9,
   systemic, 36, 53, 140                    157-8, 159-61, 167-8
   and taxonomy, 85                     historical contingency, 184, 188
   and time, 127                        historical mediation, 26, 60,
                                            126, 192
feedback, 32-6, 90, 139                 historicism, 21, 132, 161
  see also systems, theory              historicity, 126, 134, 189, 195,
Flannery, K., 141-3, 153                    196,208
Fletcher, R., 100                       and ideology, 188, 190
Foucault, M., 66-7, 69, 71, 101,        as information, 14
     109, 202-3                         and Marxism, 46, 47, 160,168,
Fowler, P., 10                              172
Friedman, J., 48-9, 170-4, 187          and material culture, 114
Fritz, J., 100                          narrative, 29, 39, 135, 187
function, 45, 49, 53, 153, 171          particularity, 52, 53, 185, 191
  functionalism, 5, 34-6, 37, 39,       plot, 133-4, 135
     44, 46, 47, 48, 50, 53, 54, 77,    and structuralism, 100
     116, 120, 139, 141, 143, 171       and the subject, 67, 71
                                        and totemic society, 130
Geertz, C, 63                           universal history, 54-5, 60, 123,
Gero, J., 190                               133-4, 145, 148-9, 185
Gibson, A., 18-19                     Hodder, I., 51-4, 77, 100-1,
Giddens, A., 45, 57, 72, 153-4,             107-8, 122, 188, 190, 191-4,
     183-4                                  195-6, 199
Gledhill, J., 46, 174-5               homoeostasis, 5, 32, 34, 53,
Godelier, M., 169-70                        138-40
Goodenough, W., 42, 44
Gouldner, A., 162, 194-5, 206         idealism, 12, 13, 24, 25, 47, 123,
Gramsci, A., 197, 203                       124, 151
Greene, K., 22-3                        subjective, 18, 23
Gurvitch, G., 130-1                   ideographic and nomothetic, 135
                                      ideology, 31, 44, 46-52, 98, 102,
Habermas, J., 160                           108-9, 113, 116, 127, 168,
Halstead, P., 38                            169, 172, 175, 179, 180-4
                                   INDEX                                239
   of archaeology, 5, 164, 176,          of the social actor, 64, 71, 77,
      187-91                                191-3, 196-8
   capitalist, 126                     Kohl, P., 187
   as false consciousness, 75, 77,     Kristiansen, K., 49-51,
      181, 187, 191-2, 194                  56, 194
   and hegemony, 197, 203
   ideology critique, 191-3, 194,      Lacan, J., 63-6, 71, 76
      201 see also critique;           language
      archaeology, critical              archaeological writing, 14
   and subjectivity, 71, 75-7            and discourse, 66
the imaginary, 63-6, 75                  and evolution, 162
the individual                           and material culture, 84, 85, 91,
   absence from archaeology, 29,             96-7,99, 102, 103, 104, 117
     57, 61, 113, 121                    and society, 68
   decentred subject, 65, 71, 77,        and structuralism, 99-100,
     98                                      101-2
   intellectual, 201-3, 204, 208         and subjectivity, 64-5, 71, 76,
   and material culture, 87, 89, 91,         77,98
     97-8, 102, 113                    langue and parole, 99-100
   and perception, 95-6                Leone, M., 190-1
   social actor, 59, 61-78, 117,       Leroi-Gourhan, A., 101
      138-9, 155, 177-82, 191-2,       Levi-Strauss, C, 100, 104, 129-30,
      197, 201                               164-5
   and socialization, 205-6            logic
   and systems theory, 53                of contingency, 57-8
induction, 9                             of necessity, 54-7
Indus civilization, 109                Lowe, D., 96
internal relations, 26, 57-60, 134,    Lozi kingdom, 107
  183
interpretation, 9, 10, 16, 21, 26-7, Malthus, T. R., 145, 146
     59, 60, 112, 114, 115-16, 117, Marcus, J., 163
     133, 192, 205                   Marxism, 138, 160, 165-8, 177,
  as translation, 115-16, 117             183, 194-5, 197
                                      structural, 5, 21, 49, 138, 165,
Kachin, Burma, 48                         168-76, 195
knowledge                            Mauss, M., 61-2
   archaeological epistemology, 8,   mediation, 25-6, 61, 134, 175-7,
     23, 133, 164, 179, 190, 191-3,       179-80, 182, 186, 196, 201,
     195-8, 207                           208
   and change, 166, 177               see also internal relations
  and discourse, 14, 23, 38-59,      Merleau-Ponty, M., 95-6
     60, 66-7, 69                    method, 22-3, 27, 60, 95, 176,
  and evolution, 152, 157, 160,           193, 194, 204
     167                               rational, 6, 7-9, 17, 23, 56, 67
  and material culture, 96            see also theory, and method
  and power, 58-9, 60, 69-70, 73, middle-range theory, 2, 52
     164, 197-8, 200-3               Miller, D., 109-13
240                               INDEX

Morgan, L., 144, 157-8, 159            population, 21, 32, 33, 38, 40, 43,
mortuary practices, 3, 31, 36, 38,          47, 48, 52, 53, 59, 82, 91, 95,
    42-4, 48, 49, 51, 54, 55, 105,          140, 145, 151, 177
     108, 161                            population pressure, 119, 140,
multiplier effect, 32-4, 36                 143, 145-6
 see also systems, theory              positivism, 4, 7, 9, 10, 23, 70, 158
museums, 13-14, 70, 76, 187,           post-structuralism and
     190-1, 198, 204                        deconstruction, 99, 101-2
                                       Poulantzas, N., 168
National Geographic Magazine,          power
     190                                 and archaeology, 186, 191-4,
naturalization, 112, 113, 181, 187,         198, 201, 206
     188, 205                            as an aspect of social practice,
Nuba, 100, 107                              59, 70, 71, 72-3, 109
                                         disciplinary, 69-70, 113, 132
objectivity, 6, 7-9, 12, 13, 15, 17,     and ideology, 75-6, 180-1, 192
     18, 23, 27, 66, 123, 160, 192,      and material culture, 98, 102,
     193, 199                               103, 105, 167, 208
  see also subjectivity, and             and politics, 46, 100, 139,
     objectivity                            172-3
Ong, W., %                               and ranking, 11, 38, 51, 72
O'Shea, J., 38                           and social change, 73, 175, 179,
overdetermination, 58, 59, 169,             180-1, 185, 203
      184                                and subjectivity, 68-71, 77
                                         and time, 131-2
paradigms, 3, 4, 9                       see also knowledge, and power
Parker Pearson, M., 48-9, 51           pragmatics, 112
Parsons, T., 162-3                     prehistory, 12
peer polity interaction, 2, 41-2, 53     Aegean, 31-3, 36, 38, 41
perception, 9, 95-7, 134                 Beakers, 2nd millennial, 18-19,
Piggott, S., 29-30                         20, 106-7
Plog, F., 140-1                          Britain, 31, 55-6
pluralism, 12, 56, 200                   Celts, 16, 30, 31
  repressive, 23, 200                    Denmark, 48-51
politics, 66, 100                        Europe, 19, 21-2, 29-30, 38,
  and archaeological discourse,             39, 145, 149
     23, 26, 60, 136, 186, 188,          Gussage All Saints, 15-17
     191-207                             megaliths, 49, 50, 108, 114
  political relations, 48, 68, 127,      neolithic, 11, 101
     166, 168, 169, 172-3, 174-5         neolithic Sweden, 108-9
  primacy of the political, 58, 59       Skara Brae, 118
  and social practice, 71, 72, 74,       Upper palaeolithic art, 101
     75                                  Wessex, southern England, 30,
  of theory, 36, 164, 185, 187              37, 61, 106-7, 108
polysemy, 74, 102, 112, 115, 116,      professionalism, 23
      117, 175                         progress, 119, 155, 159-62, 167,
Popper, K., 9                               205
                                       INDEX                             241
Radcliffe-Brown, A., 45                   Shennan, S. E., 38
Randsborg, K., 43, 44                     Shennan, S. J., 106
ranking, stratification, hierarchy        Sherratt, A., 38, 40
   and evolution, 145, 162                Sinclair, P., 189
   and material culture, 91, 106,         social change, 2, 73, 77, 82, 109,
      109                                      137-85, 203, 208
   and social archaeology, 11,              and artefact change, 31
      30-43, 49, 54                         conjunctures', 176, 177, 179,
   see also power, and ranking                 180, 181, 184-5
Reason, D., 129                             and critical archaeology, 192,
reification, 52, 53, 72, 102, 103,             195, 203t 208
      104, 139, 187, 208                    dynamic equilibrium model,
relations of production, 21, 50,               140-1
      52, 108, 158, 166-8, 170-4,           epigenesis, 2, 170-5
      183                                   and ideology, 76, 77, 180-1
  see also economy                          and Marxism, 46-7, 48, 49,
relativism, 158, 191, 192, 193                 165-75
religion and ritual, 30, 31, 37, 38,        and peer polity interaction, 41
     39, 41, 48, 49, 51, 52, 59, 66,        and social typology, 37, 148-51
     70, 82, 91, 106, 108-9, 132,           and systems theory, 34, 35, 53,
      162, 172, 197                            138-43
Renfrew, C, 5, 31-7, 86                     and time, 118, 119, 120, 125-6,
rhetoric, 13, 59, 135, 205, 207                130, 136, 184-5
Richards, J., 106-7                         see also contradiction; evolution
role theory, 42, 43, 44-5                 social persona, 42-3, 44, 45
Root, D., 190                               see also role theory
Rossi-Landi, F., 101                      social practice, 5, 54, 71-7, 138
Rowlands, M., 21, 45-8, 164,                archaeology as social practice,
     170-5, 187-8, 189, 200                    133, 196, 197, 199, 200, 203,
                                               205
Sackett, J., 92-4                           and behaviour, 52-3
Sahlins, M., 37, 74, 161                    and change, 176-85
sampling, 2                                 and evolution, 148
Sanders, W., 143                            and material culture, 85, 86, 95,
Sartre, J-P., 201, 207                         102-5, 114
Saussure, F. de, 99-100, 101,               and 'society', 57
     102, 129                               and subjectivity, 61, 63, 64, 68,
scale, temporal, 118, 119, 121-4,              70-1,77
     127, 130, 135, 205                     and time, 121, 123, 127, 129,
scepticism, 4, 5, 10, 23, 27                   147, 178-9
  sceptical empiricism, 5, 10               see also power; structure, and
Segraves, B., 146                              social practice
semiotics, 99                             social typology, 6, 36, 37, 41, 51,
  see also symbolism                           59, 120, 147, 148-51, 159,
Service, E., 37, 159, 161                      164, 167, 168, 169, 171
Shakers, 190-1                            spatial and locational analysis, 3,
Shaw, T., 188                                  51, 119
242                              INDEX

Spencer, H., 144-6, 157, 159             and material culture, 101, 102,
Spriggs, M., 194                           105, 107, 109
statistics, 2, 43, 51                    social organization, 2, 49, 87,
Steward, J., 159, 161                      108, 147, 154, 171
stratigraphy, 119                        and structure, 51-4
structure                                theory, 2, 5, 6, 31-41, 47, 52,
   and change, 176                         56, 90-1, 138-46, 187
   and contradiction, 182-4
   and evolution, 153, 162             theory
   and ideology, 180-1, 192               and data, 5, 8-10, 22, 25, 27,
   and material culture, 98, 99,            3 6 , 4 1 , 5 0 , 8 3 - 4 , 116, 186,
      102-5, 107, 114, 117                   187, 193
   social organization, 30, 31,           fragmentation of, 52, 56, 123
      44-5, 51-4, 131, 143, 166,          and method, 5-12
      168, 170-1                          and practice, 10-11, 19, 24-8,
   and social practice, 71-4, 97-8,          177, 192, 194, 195, 203
      118, 127, 178, 179, 180             theoretical archaeology, 1-12,
   structural (formal) analysis,         ! 14, 15, 22, 52, 56, 186-8
      100-1                            technology, 2, 32, 33, 35, 42, 48,
   structuralism, 99-101, 168             51, 52, 82, 83, 87-8, 89, 93, 94,
   structuration, 72, 177, 180, 184       105, 152, 159, 160, 162, 166,
   and symbolism, 125                     167-8, 169, 171, 174, 175, 205
style, 19, 30, 42, 53                  teleology, 24, 55, 139, 141, 176
   and function, 86-95, 112, 154       testing, 2, 4, 10, 23, 55, 100
   isochrestic variation, 93-4            and hypothetico-deductive
subjectivity                                method, 10, 115
   formation and constitution of       Thorpe, I., 106-7
      the subject, 62, 66-71, 76,      time, 69, 82,83, 118-36, 137,
      77,192, 199                           164-5, 171, 178-9, 183,
   and objectivity, 7-8, 13, 24, 26,        184-5, 200, 205
      27, 47, 192, 199                   the event, 126, 130, 133-5, 148,
   subjective experience, 13, 23,            175, 176, 179, 180, 182,
       123, 125, 172                         184-5
symbolism                                 past and present, 24-8, 58, 59,
   and archaeology, 3, 5, 41, 42, 43        77, 115-16, 118, 121, 124-5,
  and material culture, 94-105,              128, 130-2, 133-6, 137, 138,
      107, 109-12, 114, 116, 117             148, 181, 186, 190, 195-6,
  metacritical sign, 102, 116, 117          198, 199, 204-8;
  signs and signification, 99-100,          see also ideology,
      125, 131, 177-80, 182                 of archaeology
  and the subject, 63-5, 68, 71-6,        presencing, 126-7, 196
      77-8, 98                            spatial time, chronology, 13-14,
   'the symbolic', 63-5, 71, 73,             118-29, 130-3, 135, 136,
      75-8                                   146-8, 178, 184
systems, 49, 51-4, 87, 101, 102,          substantial, subjective, 114, 120,
      105, 107-9, 147, 154, 171              121, 125, 126-31, 132, 133,
   artefact systems, 3                       136, 147, 178-9
                                   INDEX                                 243
  synchrony and diachrony, 35,          verification and falsification
     41, 47, 120, 129-30, 132, 137           procedures, 9
  traditional, 128-30, 131
totality, social, 29, 33, 46-7, 53-7,   Wainwright, G., 15-18
     59-60, 67-8, 76, 114, 141,         war of position, 203, 204, 208
     145, 147, 148, 154, 155, 166,      Washburn, D., 100
     168-9, 171, 172, 183               Webster, D., 143
Trigger, B., 135, 186-7                 Wheeler, M., 61
truth, 26, 58, 70, 130, 192, 195,       White, H., 196
     198, 199, 201, 202, 204, 207       White, L., 159, 161, 175
Tylor, E., 144, 157-8, 159              Wobst, M., 91, 94
type-variety concept, 81-2              World Archaeology Congress
  see also classification                   1986, 188-9
typology, 79-83, 115, 119, 125,         world systems theory, 2, 46, 53, 57
     130-1
                                        Zeno, 132
