              Material Culture


We wish to address two basic questions in this chapter. First, how
do we interpret material culture; what meaning, if any, does it
possess? Secondly, how does material culture patterning relate to
the social? As a way of approaching these questions we wish to
briefly examine some of the answers provided by both traditional
and 'new' archaeology.


            TYPES, CULTURE AND COGNITION
In traditional archaeology the question of the relationship between
material culture and society was addressed in a fairly limited
fashion and was very closely bound up with considerations of
artefact classification and the establishment of typological
sequences. The attempt to establish a spatio-temporal systematics
for the pigeon-holing of artefacts formed the backbone of research
in Anglo-American archaeology until the relatively recent rise of
the new archaeology.
   Given that artefacts exhibited demonstrable variation across
both time and space, one of the primary aims of traditional
archaeology was to bring order to this variability by stipulating
redundancies in the form of classificatory schemes often explicitly
modelled on the basis of biological analogies in which artefacts
were to be sorted and 'identified' in a manner equivalent to plants,
animals, or mushrooms and toadstools. For example, the 1930
Pecos Conference concerned with the formulation of procedures
for classifying American south-western ceramics adopted the
following scheme: 'Kingdom: artefacts; Phylum: ceramics; Class:
pottery; Order: basic combination of paste and temper; Ware:
basic surface colour after firing; Genus: surface treatment; Type or

80                            MATERIAL CULTURE

Subtype . . .' (Hargrave, 1932, p. 8, cited in Hill and Evans, 1972,
p. 237). Clark notes that 'the fact that industrial and art forms are
subject to evolutionary processes is a great aid when it comes to
arranging them in sequence . . . [The problem is] to determine the
direction in which the development has proceeded, to determine in
other words whether one is dealing with progressive evolution or
with a series of degeneration' (Clark, 1972, pp. 134-6, cf. Kreiger,
 1944, p. 273). One task of the archaeologist was to determine types,
usually descriptively labelled according to the locality where first
identified (e.g. Flagstaff red pottery; Folsom point; Peterborough
Ware), or presumed function, or a mixture of the two (e.g. La Tene
fibulae). Artefacts could then, ideally, be assigned to these type
groupings on the basis of perceived similarities and differences.
Different groups of artefacts, associated together in hoards,
burials, settlements, votive deposits etc., could be grouped together
in more inclusive entities, 'cultures'. But what did the 'types' and
the 'cultures' mean in social terms?


                        Meaning and artefact types
Traditional archaeology provided three main answers to this
question. The first largely evaded the question of social meaning
altogether. Types were developed as purely classificatory devices to
bring order to the immense range of archaeological materials
discovered and to facilitate comparison of specimens and expedite
field recording and cataloguing (Kreiger, 1944, p. 275).
   The second answer was that the types defined by the archae-
ologist were expressions of the 'mental templates' of their makers:

     It may be said that, ideally, an archaeological type should represent a
     unit of cultural practice equivalent to the 'culture trait' of ethno-
     graphy. Each type should approximate as closely as possible that
     combination of mechanical and aesthetic executions which formed a
     definite structural pattern in the minds of a number of workers, who
     attained this pattern with varying degrees of . success . and
     interpretation.
                                                  (Kreiger, 1944, pp. 272,278).

Rouse makes a similar point when he writes: 'Types are stylistic
patterns, to which the artisan tries to make his completed artefacts
conform'(1939, p. 15). Compare Gifford:

     When entire cultural configurations are, taken into account, certain
     regularities are discernible that are due to the interaction of

                           MATERIALCULTURE                                   81
   individuals and small social groups within a society, and these are
   observed as types. Types in this sense are material manifestations of
   the regularities of human behaviour. . . The basic attributes involved
   in any type come together in the combination of a mental image plus
   the motor habits of the prehistoric artisans of a culture in such a way
   that when executed in clay, they fulfilled the requirements of the
   ceramic and stylistic values of that culture.
                                                         19 6 0 , pp. 341-2)

And Chang:

  The 'right' categories are those that reflect or approximate the
  natives' own thinking about how their physical world is to be
  classified, consciously or unconsciously, explicitly or implicitly,
  within which framework they accordingly act.
                                                         (1967, p. 78)

  The third answer, very closely related to the second, was that
types and cultures primarily had meaning as historical indicators of
temporal and spatial relationships between human groups:

   We find certain types of remains - pots, implements, burial rites,
   house forms - constantly recurring together. Such a complex of
   regularly associated traits we shall term a 'cultural group' or a
   'culture'. We assume that such a complex is the material expression
   of what today would be called a people.
                                                (Childe, 1929, pp. v-vi).

The ideas of artefacts as Hypes' reflecting basic ideas, mental
images, preferences or culturally prescribed ways to do things, and
of regularly occurring patterns of different material items as
representing peoples or ethnic groups, formed the interpretative
basis for assigning meaning to material culture and the
archaeological record. It is represented perhaps most succinctly in
the 'type-variety' concept developed in,the US, initially for classify-
ing ceramics (figure 4.1).
  European and American prehistory was, in essentials, written as
the history of cultural continuity and change of types and cultures.
A number of assumptions underpinned such an approach.Learn-
ing formed the basic means for cultural transmission between
generations in any particular cultural group, while; diffusion of
ideas between discrete non-breeding' populations accounted for
cultural similarities and differences. This cultural transmission of
ideas took place in inverse proportion to the degree of physical or
social distance between them. Concomitantly spatial discontinuities

82                                         MATERIAL CULTURE

                                             THEORETlCAl
                                             CONCEPTIONS
                                         UNITS OF INTEGRATION
                                         (COMPLEXES, CERAMIC
                                   /SEQUENCES, CERAMIC COMPLEXES\
                                        WARES. HORIZON STYLES)

                                                  •
                              /                                   TYPES \
                                                                            \

                  /
                          /       INCLUDING ONE OR MORE VARIETIES
                                                      A
                                                                            \
              /                               VARIETIES                         \
     /                        ATTRIBUTES              -THE DATA

          •           •                                    \
                                                                                    \
 F I G U R E 4.1 The Type-variety method of ceramic classification, after
                                 Gifford
Source: From 1. Gifford (I960).



in culture resulted from either natural boundaries to interaction or
social value systems inhibiting the acceptance or adoption of new
ideas. Internal cultural change was deemed to be essentially slow
and incremental resulting either from an inbuilt dynamic or 'drift'
away from previously accepted norms governing artefact
production, vagaries of fashion, or technological innovation.
Alternatively, obvious discontinuities in the archaeological record
were explained as resulting from the development of exchange net-
works with other groups; migration or invasion of populations; or
diffusion of radically new and powerful ideas, for example
religious cults. Binford termed such an interpretative framework
the 'aquatic view' of culture:

     Culture is viewed as a vast flowing stream with minor variations in
     ideational norms concerning appropriate ways of making pots,
     getting married, treating one's mother-in-law, building houses,
     temples . . . a n d even dying. These ideational variations are
     periodically 'crystallized' at different points in time and space,
     resulting in distinctive and sometimes striking cultural climaxes
     which allow us to break up the continuum of culture into cultural
     phases.

                         MATERIAL CULTURE                           83

                       Artefact classification
One idea underlying the development and refinement of the
classificatory schemes was that the act of classification was usually
held to be a neutral device and independent of theory.
Classification followed data collection and once carried out could
lead to inferences being made from the materials thus sorted.
Material culture had a meaning or significance inherent in itself and
the task of the archaeologist was to extract this meaning which was
restricted, i.e. each artefact retained within itself one or a few
meanings. Much debate centred on how artefacts might be best
classified (e.g. Rouse, 1960; Sears, 1960) and whether these
classifications were 'real' or 'ideal', i.e. whether they actually
reflected the ideas of prehistoric artisans which were then
discovered, or were imposed by the archaeologist (Ford, 1954a,
  1954b; Spaulding, 1953, 1954). Because many of the typologies
obviously worked, at least as limited temporal indicators, they were
assumed to be in essentials correct and the 'types' and 'cultures'
became canonized in the literature as the types and the cultures:
 'pottery types are not primarily descriptive devices but are refined
tools for the elucidation of space-time problems' (Sears, 1960,
p. 326).
   As we have mentioned above, the meaning of archaeological
data was its supposed direct relationship to cognitive structures
collectively held by peoples or ethnic groups; but despite this
interest traditional archaeology never really developed such
concerns because to identify types, cultures and spatio-temporal
relationships between them became ends in themselves. This was
coupled with a pessimism in which it was claimed that little could
be known beyond the realms of technology and the economy
(Hawkes, 1954; Piggott, 1959, pp. 9-12).
   The cognitive and social reality of artefact taxonomies and
cultures have been much disputed during the last 25 years. As
regards artefact classification, it has begun to be recognized that
classification is not independent of theory (Dunnell, 1971; Hill and
Evans, 1972) and that there is no such thing as a 'best' classifi-
cation. All classifications are partial and select from observed
features of the data set. Attempts to create some kind of 'natural'
classification, good for all purposes, and dealing with; all possible
variation within the data set studied is simply unattainable. Any
form of classification involves the definition of significant criteria
(significant to the classifier) to be used in the process of forming
classes. This may involve the arrangement of these criteria in some

84                      MATERIAL CULTURE

order of importance which depends on theory or what we know or
want to know. The link between classificatory systems and
theoretical knowledge of the data universe to be studied is
insoluble. Classifications are dependent on and derived from
theory; they are not in some sense independent formal schemes
which may be considered to be more or less convenient or useful.
An infinite number of different classificatory systems may be
developed for the same data set and there is no automatic
obligation for the archaeologist to model, or attempt to model, his
or her taxonomic systems on the basis of those utilized by
prehistoric artisans.

                      Cognition and the past
Archaeological taxonomies and descriptions of the past may tell us
a great deal about the manner in which the archaeologist thinks
about past socio-cultural systems, but is there any reason to think
that they tell us anything about the manner in which prehistoric
social actors thought about their culture? Is this irrelevant anyway?
One answer is provided by Eggert (1977) who makes four points:

1   A native people's way of thinking about and explaining their
   world should represent a starting rather than an end point for
   inquiry and this inquiry has to be undertaken from another
   (scientific) frame of reference.
2 Material forms not explicitly devised for communicative pur-
   poses, unlike language, are too ambiguous to reflect in an
   unequivocal manner the ideas embodied in them.
3 Cognitive systems are abstractions of the anthropologist. They
   are idealized and tend to subsume or ignore the considerable'
   degree of individual variability in action sequences and thought.
4 People's conceptions of what they do and how they should act
   may differ markedly from their actual practices.
Eggert concludes that any attempt on the part of the archaeologist
to study or infer or attempt to model taxonomic systems in terms of
prehistoric cognitive systems is fundamentally misguided.
   Some ethnoarchaeological studies, on the other hand, have
attempted to demonstrate; that cognitive systems are embodied in
material culture and cannot be ignored by the archaeologist if he or
she wishes to arrive at an adequate understanding of that being
investigated (eg. Arnold, 1971; Friedrich, 1970; Hardin, 1979,1983;
and see the discussion below pp. 148-58). Arnold suggests that

                            MATERIAL CULTURE                                   85

   Since artifacts are the result of what people actually do and not what
   they say they do, it seems more reasonable to attempt to reconstruct
   non-verbal behaviour from ancient artifacts rather than from
   anything else. But, if it can be demonstrated from an analysis of
   verbal behaviour, non-verbal behaviour, and from the material
   aspects of culture that a cognitive system common to a particular
   group is really conditioning all of these factors, then, it seems
   reasonable to suggest that cognitive systems should warrant some
   attention as a significant factor in the production of artifacts.
                                                       (Arnold, 1971, p. 22)

Arnold's study attempts to demonstrate a clear relationship
between the cognitive ethnomineralogical system used by potters in
Ticul, Yucatan, and verbal, non-verbal and material aspects of
processes involved in selecting and using raw materials for making
pottery. He finds a correlation between certain emic
ethnomineralogical categories of raw materials used to make
pottery (clays, temper etc.) and actual (etic) composition as deter-
mined by X-ray diffraction studies. However, studies such as those
by Arnold and Hardin seem to fall rather short of mapping a
cognitive system in terms of material culture patterning - a point
we wish to elaborate by returning to consider Eggert's strictures.
   Even if an archaeologist were able to reproduce an exact replica
of a prehistoric taxonomic system how much would this tell us? It
appears to be insufficient to regard such an attempt at a
reconstruction of the 'templates' of prehistoric artisans as
providing an explanation of material culture patterning. An
archaeologist duplicating a prehistoric taxonomic system would be
arriving at a description of that system, but such a description of
the manner of ordering and thinking about artefacts is itself in need
of explanation or further description in relation to social strategies
and practices. Material culture should be regarded as not merely a
reflection of cognitive systems and social practices but actively
involved in the formation and structuring of those practices. So,
we are never likely to be dealing with a simple correspondence
relationship between idea and/or action and material culture form
but a situation in which material culture actively mediates ideas and
practices. The fact that material culture differs from language in its
communicative form and effect does hot require that we evaluate
the communicative intent of material culture negatively, in terms of
its difference from language, and conclude that material culture as
a communicative form is too ambiguous to repay study. Cognitive
systems are, of course, attributed by the anthropologist or the
archaeologist to ethnic groups and material culture: patterning.

86                        MATERIAL CULTURE

Such systems are constructs; but this in no way implies that they do
not exist or that the actions of individuals might be contradictory
or variable. In fact, as we argue in chapter 6, societies are inherently
contradictory entities. The idea of society as being constituted in
terms of a normative (and cognitive) set of beliefs held and
subscribed to by all social actors cannot be sustained. The problem
with the studies by Arnold, Hardin and others is that while they do
usefully point out the significance of cognitive bases for social
action and their manifestation in material culture, in common with
the work of traditional archaeologists the assumption is made that
all social actors in a society share an undifferentiated and
normative set of beliefs. There is little consideration of the
negotiation and renegotiation of meaning frames within the context
of social strategies which may very well be oppositional and con-
tradictory. An emphasis on contradiction and conflict of interest
goes some way to explain why social practices, as often as not, con-
flict with idealized models of these practices.


                     STYLE AND FUNCTION

In much of the literature post-dating the mid-1960s the notion of
material culture as more or less directly relating to cognition or
peoples was challenged or abandoned by many. A realization
developed that archaeological cultures could simply not be
correlated in any direct or immediate manner with ethnicity and
there were in fact multiple factors affecting the nature of
distributions of material culture items perceived in the
archaeological record (e.g. Hodder (ed.), 1978). The types used to
define cultures were as often as not atypical features of the
archaeological record in any particular region (e.g. Clarke, 1968,
pp. 29-31). What traditional archaeologists took as representing
ethnicity might instead refer to functional variability in the types of
activities carried out on different sites. This point provided the
essence of the debate between Binford (1973) and Bordes (1973)
regarding the meaning of assemblage variability in Mousterian sites
in south-western France: Bordes arguing that the differences
reflected ethnic identity, and Binford claiming they related to
functional variability between different activity sets. Clarice (1968)
argued that cultures were to be polythetically rather than
monothetically defined and that such cultures were distinct
analytical entities in themselves with no necessary relationship with
ethnicity. Renfrew (1978) questioned the existence of homogeneous

                           MATERIALCULTURE                                  87

assemblages, suggesting that cultures were little more than
arbitrary taxonomic categories imposed on a continuum of change.
   In short, the interpretative basis of the meaning of material
culture provided by traditional archaeology was undermined.
Instead, material culture was granted a fresh significance which
became grafted in terms of the opposition between two
dichotomous terms: style and function. Much of the debate which
has taken place during the last 15 years about the relationship
between material culture and the social hinges on the definition and
use of these terms and whether primacy can (or should) be granted
to one or the other in an understanding of the past.


             Material culture: system and adaptation
Two major developments in thinking occurred. Firstly, culture
became redefined as a system composed of distinct subsystems. It
became fashionable to talk about the interaction between sub-
systems rather than people, the latter being effectively screened out
of the analysis (see chapter 2). Secondly, Binford (1962), following
White (1959), redefined culture as an extrasomatic means of
adaptation. Consequently the primary meaning of material culture
was its role as an interface between people, the environment, and
interactions of individuals regarded as components of social
systems. Culture was no longer to be regarded as something shared
by people but as participated in differentially:

  A basic characteristic of cultural systems is the integration of
  individuals and social units performing different tasks, frequently at
  different locations. .. Within any one cultural system, the degree to
  which the participants share the same ideational basis should vary
  with the degree of cultural complexity of the system as a whole. '
                                                  (Binford, 1972, p. 199)

  As Binford regarded material culture as an extrasomatic means
of adaptation it was entirely consistent that he should regard it in
wholly functional terms. It either had a direct utilitarian function
or a social function. In an early paper Binford (1962) defined three
distinct classes of artefacts: technomic, sociotechnic and
ideotechnic, functioning respectively in coping with the environ-
ment, social and ideological relations. Residually cross-cutting
these three functionally defined artefact classes was style: 'formal
qualities that are not directly explicable in terms of the nature of
the raw materials, technology of production, or variability in the

88                      MATERIAL CULTURE

structure of the technological and social subsystems of the total
cultural system' (1972, p. 25). Style functioned in terms of
promoting group solidarity, awareness and identity. Later
recognizing that it was impossible to sustain any meaningful
distinction between functional classes of artefacts operating in
different social subsystems, Binford (1965) redefined artefacts as
possessing primary (utilitarian) and secondary (stylistic) functions
cross-cutting morphological and decorative variation (in the case of
ceramics). Primary functional variation referred to utilitarian use
(e.g. the difference between a drinking vessel and a plate). Secon-
dary functional variation referred to the social context of the
production and use of material culture: 'this variation may arise
from a traditional way of doing things within a family or a larger
social unit, or it may serve as a conscious expression of between-
group solidarity' Binford, 1972, p. 200).
   The examination of what Binford teamed primary and secondary
functional variability in the archaeological record has played a
major role in the recent development of archaeology. In prehistoric
and ethnoarchaeological studies much attention has focused on
technologies of artefact production (e.g. Semenov, 1964; Van de
Leeuw, 1976; Kramer, 1985, pp. 78-83; Howard and Morris (eds),
 1981; Steponaitis, 1983). A second area that has been investigated
is the determination of the utilization of particular artefacts (e.g.
Hayden (ed.), 1979; Wilmsen, 1968; Braun, 1983; Hally, 1986). In
such studies attention has focused on the suitability of particular
artefact types for different purposes which are supposedly strictly
delimited by the physical properties of the artefacts themselves.
Characterization studies of sources of raw materials have been used
to suggest the existence of exchange networks or social interaction
spheres (e.g. Earle and Ericson (eds), 1977; Ericson and Earle (eds),
 1982; Sabloff and Lamberg-Karlovsky (eds), 1975), and attention
has been paid to the rate of breakage of artefacts, discard and reuse
patterns (e.g. DeBoer and Lathrap, 1979; David, 1972; Kramer,
 1985, pp. 89-92; Schiffer, 1976; Binford, 1979). Other studies have
investigated sites in terms of the relationship between artefact
patterning and different activities such as tool manufacturing, food
processing and group size (e.g. Binford, 1978, 1981; Schapiro,
 1984; Kent, 1984; Hietala, 1984). Such work has certainly alerted
archaeologists to the complexities of the formation processes of the
archaeological record but the symbolic and social meaning of
artefact production and usage has been neglected. Meaning tends
to be only investigated insofar as it can be reduced to an effect of
various technologies or utilitarian considerations.

                         MATERIAL CULTURE                          89

                         Ceramic sociology
Some innovative research in the 1960s and 1970s on ceramics was
based on the assumption that degrees of stylistic similarity in
material culture patterning might reflect social interaction. In cases
where it could be assumed on the basis of ethnographic evidence, as
in the American South-West, that residence was uxorial and
women made the pottery intended for household use and traditions
of pottery manufacture and, decoration were passed down from
mother to daughter, the spatial concentration of micro traditions in
design style would be expected to indicate distinct clan or residence
groupings within a settlement (for synchronic studies see e.g.
Longacre, 1970; Hill, 1970; and for a diachronic perspective Deetz,
 1965; Whallon, 1968).
   On a broader regional scale, degrees of social interaction
resulting in the borrowing of designs or design fields would be
reflected in the degree of stylistic similarity between sites
(Engelbrecht, 1978; S. Plog, 1976; Washburn,. 1983). Such studies
have been subjected to much critical assessment (Allen and
Richardson, 1971; Hodder, 1982; Stanislawski and Stanislawski,
 1978; Longacre, 1981; S. Plog, 1978), focusing on the feasibility (or
necessity) of reconstructing kinship patterns from archaeological
data given that concepts such as matrilocal kinship are often
second or third order anthropological abstractions themselves.
Ceramics may also often be produced by groups rather than
individuals and learning networks may differ considerably from a
simple transmission from mother to daughter within a social unit
essentially conceived as isolated. Nor is there any necessary
correlation between interaction and stylistic similarity because style
may be actively used to mark put boundaries of different social
groups where there is intense interaction between them. The theory
assumes that style is a passive reflection of group or social identity
and the cross-cultural generalizing perspective, in terms of which
this research has often been framed, denies the specificity of
cultural context, that in some situations style may relate to learning
networks while in others it clearly does not. We need to know why
this is the case. In one sense the idea that decorative style reflects
the composition of social groups in space arid time bears a very close
resemblance to traditional archaeology, but at a fine-grained level.

                Choice, function and information
Many archaeologists, however, have always realized that given
consideration of technological and utilitarian parameters there still

90                           MATERIAL CULTURE

exists a latitude for choice in the manner in which artefacts may be
produced and the meanings which they may carry. But how much
choice and what are these social meanings?
  Choice is predominantly regarded as strictly delimited by
environment and function:
     If our interest resides in ancient artefacts and our aims in the most
     powerful interpretation of these artefacts, then we must realise that
     archaeological artefact systems express the individually modified
     imprints of environmental constraint on particularly valued cultural
     matrices.
                                                        (Clarke, 1968, p. 83)

According to Braun,

     Where pottery making is a domestic craft, we can then assume a
     selective process. Pottery techniques that produce vessels that are in-
     efficient as tools, require relatively high labour or material costs, or
     require relatively frequent placement, will tend to be avoided in
     favour of techniques that produce more efficient results, at lower
     costs . . . The mechanical uses of ceramic vessels directly constrain
     the kinds of decoration they receive and hence the kinds of social
     information they carry.
                                                           (1983, pp. 112-13)

And Arnold:

     Viewed from the perspective of cybernetics, weather and climate can
     provide either deviation counteracting feedback or deviation
     amplifying feedback for pottery production depending on the
     character of the climate . . . In areas where a wet, cold and foggy •
     climate persists for the entire year, the negative feedback is totally
     effective in preventing the development of pottery making, even if
     the craft is introduced by innovation or diffusion.
                                                          (1985, pp. 76, 83)

Such statements are so widespread in the literature that they require
no further documentation. While rigid environmental and
functional constraint on the choice of the form and nature of
material culture is usually emphasized, meaning is sometimes
addressed in a purely abstract manner as 'information' and in
terms of information flow structures (e.g. Johnson, 1978; Van de
Leeuw, 1981).
   Clarke (1968) defined material culture as a separate subsystem of
society providing information, the messages being 'accumulated
survival information plus miscellaneous and random noise peculiar

                             MATERIAL CULTURE                                      91

to each system and its past trajectory' (1968, p. 85) and this general
approach to meaning as survival information has been frequently
advocated in debates about the significance of style and function in
material culture. Dunnell regards style as denoting 'those forms
 that do not have detectable selective values. Function is manifest as
those forms that directly affect the Darwinian fitness of the
populations in which they occur' (1978, p. 199 emphasis in original).
A priority of function is asserted in purely adaptive terms with the
 significance of style marginalized in terms of stochastic processes
 - trivial socio-cultural variation. On the other hand, style may be
regarded as important but only insofar as it can be explained away
 as just another form of adaptation to the natural and social
environment (e.g. Conkey, 1978; Fritz, 1978; Jochim, 1983).
   Wobst regards style as a strategy of information exchange with
both functional and adaptive significance. Artefacts convey
messages and Wobst conceives the content of such messages as
being more or less isomorphic with spoken language. Consequently
he suggests that because it is relatively costly to produce messages
in the stylistic mode of artefacts as opposed to conveying
information through language, only a relatively narrow range of
information will be expressed in the form of simple invariant and
recurrent messages - messages of emotional state, social identifi-
cation, group affiliation, rank, authorship and ownership,
behavioural norms, religious and political belief (Wobst, 1977, p.
323). Stylistic messaging will usually be 'targeted' at individuals
beyond the immediate household or residence group but loses its
usefulness in relation to socially distant populations because they
will either be unable to encounter or decode the messages. This
leads Wobst to claim that

   the majority of functions of stylistic behaviour should relate to
   processes of social integration and social differentiation. Stylistic
   messages of identification, ownership, and authorship link efficiently
   those members of a community who are not in constant verbal
   contact and who have little opportunity to observe each others'
   behaviour p a t t e r n s . . . it makes social intercourse more predictable.
                                                                 (Ibid., p. 327)

So style transmits information about social group membership and
internal differentiation, functioning to keep a society running
smoothly by reducing stress or conflict, and may be used to main-
tain social boundaries. This general perspective has been frequently
adopted in the subsequent literature (e.g. Weissner, 1983; Pollock,
 1983; Graves, 1982; S. Plog, 1980, pp. 126-39; Braun and S. Plog,

92                        MATERIAL CULTURE
1982). All such a perspective purports to explain is the existence or
non-existence of style; it is incapable of telling us anything at all
with regard to its specific form and nature, such as why pots might
have one set of designs rather than another.

                         Style and meaning
Whether explicitly stated or implicitly assumed, in most studies
style is regarded as something left over in material culture after
utilitarian function has been taken into account. It is generally
regarded as having social significance which may or may not be
regarded as important and possible or impossible to study with any
degree of 'rigour'.
   Underlying much of this discussion are two assumptions: (1)
style can be separated out from utilitarian aspects of artefacts; (2) it
'functions' in social rather than utilitarian areas of life. In a series
of papers Sackett (1973, 1977, 1982, 1985) has been specifically
concerned to stress the inseparability.. of style and function,
challenging the idea that stylistic aspects of artefacts merely
constitute a residue, something left over when function has been
taken into account. He argues that style does not constitute a
distinct domain but is to be encountered in all formal variability in
individual artefacts and that style and function share equal
responsibility for the finished product, a view which we wish to
fully endorse. It is impossible, for example, to separate out the style
and the function in either vessel shape or projectile point
morphology. There is no way in which we can meaningfully
measure and determine what proportion of a vessel's shape
performs some utilitarian end, the remainder being assigned to the
domain of style. To take a chair - what proportion of this is
functional as opposed to stylistic? No answer can be given; the style
inheres in the function and vice versa. Furthermore, ascribing any
specific or strictly delimited function to an object is in many,if not
all cases, an extremely dubious exercise. A chair may be to sit on, it
nominally fulfils this; function,. but chairs can also be used for
standing on, or for knocking people over the head with, as pen-
dulums, rulers, or almost anything else. This is not to deny the
banal point that objects have uses and may normally be used in just
one way, but it is to suggest that such a position represents, at best,
a starting point rather than an end point for archaeological
a n a l y s i s . ,

  The second point is far more crucial, and we will consider it in
relation to Sackett's work. What is at issue here is the socialmean-

                           MATERIAL CULTURE                                    93

ing of style. Sackett argues that 'any artifact has an active voice
which connotes function . . . [and] a passive voice which connotes
style' (1977, p. 370; our emphasis). The implication here is that
function is something dynamic and active depending on the use of
artefacts and the roles they play as technology or in social terms,
while style merely reflects aspects of the social world, playing no
significant role in either creating or transforming it. Sackett
distinguishes between two domains of artefacts: those which may
be taken to be utilitarian in function; and those which are primarily
non-utilitarian, for example a crown or a head-dress. Both may be
cross-cut by adjunct form, for example pottery decoration. Stone
tools, by contrast, have no obvious adjunct form. Sackett's non-
utilitarian class of artefacts clearly embraces both Binford's
sociotechnic and ideotechnic classes, while adjunct form is that
which is normally taken to be stylistic in the archaeological
literature. Sackett's further and most important argument is worth
quoting at some length:

   Although the form of any given object may be entirely appropriate
   to its function . . . there exists nevertheless a great range of
   alternative forms that would be more or less equally appropriate. In
   other words, there usually is a variety of functionally equivalent
   means of achieving a given end, whether these concern the design
   of a weapon with which to kill reindeer, the execution of pot
   decoration that symbolically identifies a specific residence group, or
   the manufacture of a chisel-ended burin. The seemingly equally valid
   and feasible options we may regard as functional equivalents with
   respect to a given end constitute a spectrum of what I choose to term
   isochrestic form . . . The artisans in any given society tend to
    'choose' but one, or at most but a very few, of the isochrestic options
   that at least in theory are potentially available to them from this
   spectrum . . . Given the large number of options that are at least
   potentially available, chance alone dictates that any single one is
   unlikely to be chosen by two societies which are not ethnically related
   in some fashion; and chance would appear to exclude altogether the
   possibility that the same combination of several such choices in
   different spectra of isochrestic form could be made by two unrelated
   societies. . . Since material culture is largely the product of learned
   behaviours that are socially transmitted, there exists a strong and
   direct correlation between the specific choices a society makes and its
   specific position in the stream of culture history.
                                                   (Sackett, 1982, pp. 72-3)
In this formulation style, viewed as isochrestic variation, has no
social meaning whatsoever other than being a habitualized
expression of ethnicity and, apparently, neither suggests nor

94                       MATERIAL CULTURE
requires any further explanation (Sackett, 1985, p. 157). Sackett's
position, while being sensitive to the detection of style in all
artefacts, at the same time explicitly avoids any consideration of its
meaning and significance because in his view style just happens as a
product of habit and socialization processes; hence the claim which
he makes that style is function writ small.
   To summarize: while in traditional archaeology the meaning of
material culture was its supposedly direct reflection of ethnicity and
(unspecified) ideas, the new archaeology reduced its meaning to
function - as an adaptive interface between people and the
environment (as technology) or as a means of cementing together
social groups or symbolizing group identity (as style). In the case of
Sackett's work this is a purely passive process, while for Wobst and
others it has a more active dimension as a form of social signalling.
In all accounts, function has either been privileged in relation to
style or style has been explained away as existing because of an
inherent social function. However, specifying a social function for
stylistic aspects of material culture patterning tells us virtually
nothing about its specificity, for example all the multitudes of
different chair forms, past or present, their shapes, decorative
features, arrangements in different rooms or types of rooms. The
general conclusion that may be drawn is that the term function is
virtually redundant.
   When we are dealing with material culture we are analysing a
world of stylistic form and conceptual choice, creating things in
one way rather than another. The corollary is that the
archaeological record is a record of form according to specific
cognitive orientations toward the world. The first stage in trying to
understand material culture is to accept it as a stylistic cultural
production. The second stage is to make full use of the range of
variability in the material culture patterning apparent to us and not
to subsume this variability under high-level generalizations.
Exploiting the variability in material culture patterning is of vital
importance: it gives us clues on which to hinge our statements and
ensures we realize the full potential of the archaeological record.
   Place a brick somewhere in London. Imagine that London
represents the totality of the social relations and practices existing
in a prehistoric society. The brick represents the archaeological
evidence from which we have to extrapolate to come to an
understanding of that past social totality. Obviously the variability
in the brick is of vital importance if we are going to understand
anything at all. However, for many archaeologists, it appears as if
even our solitary brick in the centre of London is too variable and

                         MATERIALCULTURE                           95

complicated, so much so that high-level generalizations must be
employed to further reduce the brick to a few fragments via the
operation of certain methodological hammers. One of the most
powerful of these hammers - the hammer of function - has already
been discussed above, and is often combined with another even
more powerful tool, the sledge hammer of cross-cultural
generalization (e.g. Arnold, 1985; and see the discussion above),
which finally manages to reduce our brick to fine particles of dust.
London appears to be lost.


   HISTORY,.STRUCTURE AND MATERIAL CULTURE

Most of contemporary archaeological discourse concerns itself with
the delimitation and analysis of constraints, usually of an asocial
nature, impinging upon societies - environment, ecology,
population pressure, economic resource availability - presupposing
that human potentialities are strictly bounded and limited.
However, in most of the substantive analyses, such a position is
simply assumed rather than demonstrated, and there is little, if any,
evidence to support it. Rather than thinking in terms of asocial
constraints, perhaps we should think in terms of human potentialities
and possibilities for action. In any given determinate social field
societies to a greater or lesser extent constrain themselves, rather
than being constrained by external forces or purely utilitarian
considerations. Such amove parallels a shift from viewing material
culture as primarily functional to regarding it as constituting a
symbolic, active communicative field. How then do we conceive of
material culture and its relation to the social?


             Perception, history and material culture
Very broadly, a history of perception or the manner in which
people regard the world provides one link between the content of
thought and the structuring of society (Lowe, 1982). Merleau-
Ponty, in The Phenomenology of Perception (1962), emphasizes
three main features of perception together creating a perceptive
field: the subject as perceiver; the action of perceiving; and the
content of that perceived. The perceiving subject from an
embodied spatial location always approaches and conceives of the
world as a lived, dynamic, open, horizontal field. The act of
perceiving unifies the subject with that perceived and the content of
the perceived resulting from the act of perception affects the

96                       MATERIAL CULTURE

subject's actions and relationship with the world. Perception is
bounded by three fundamental factors: (1) common media framing
and facilitating the act of perception; (2) the senses themselves -
hearing, touching, smelling, tasting, seeing - structuring the
subject as embodied receiver; (3) epistemic or cognitive
presuppositions ordering the content of that perceived. Together
these constitute a field of perception within which knowledge of the
world becomes possible. From such a perspective we can view
material culture as being involved actively in a process of
perception and as media framing and facilitating the act of
perception and gaining knowledge of the world. The question we
next have to ask is: how important is material culture as framing
and communicative media in society; and, historically, has it had a
differential importance?
   All communicative media from the patterns on a pot to television
and video not only transmit information but also form, package
and filter it. If the medium doesn't actually constitute the message
it certainly alters it. Historically, media for communication have
changed dramatically, from oral cultures in which there was no
written language, script or text, to cultures where writing was the
preserve of an elite minority, to the introduction of print and an
increase in literacy, to the mass media electronic communicative
forms of today. These changes have been additive rather than
substitutive. Ong (1967) and Lowe (1982) have claimed that such
changes from oral to chirographic to typographic to electronic
cultures are correlated with a changing hierarchy of the senses. In
oral cultures speech has to fulfil the role of both preserving know-
ledge and framing communication, for only in the act of speaking
can knowledge be preserved. Speech, memory and a primacy of hear-
ing as perception go together: oral communication is primarily aural
communication. A priority of hearing over seeing is implied. It is
only with the advent of a typographic culture that sight assumes
priority.
   This perspective, while privileging language, overlooks the role
of material culture as a perceptive medium and as a framework for
communicating knowledge and information. In an oral culture it
would seem to be quite plausible to regard material culture as a
communicative medium of considerable importance for transmit-
ting, storing and preserving social knowledge and as a symbolic
medium for orientating people in their natural and social environ-
ment because of the relative permanence of material culture vis a
vis speech acts. So material culture can be regarded in oral societies
as a form of writing and discourse inscribed in a material medium

                         MATERIAL CULTURE                           97

in just the same way as words in chirographic and typographic
cultures are inscribed on a page. It is then possible to go on to
suggest that as a communicative discourse material culture becomes
successively transformed in importance with the advent and spread
of communicative media directly related to spoken language -
writing, printing and the mass media of today, which do not
transcribe speech but actually transmit it.
   With the development of mass industrial production as opposed
to craft production the role of material culture as an active
symbolic transformative intervention in the social world is certainly
altered. In a world capitalist economy we may be wearing jeans at
the same time as a Lebanese gunman. The material form - in this
case jeans - remains the same but its meaning will alter according
to the context. Jeans will be consumed in different ways,
appropriated and incorporated into various symbolic structures
according to historical tradition and social context. In a prehistoric
situation not only will the meanings differ, but so will the par-
ticularity of the material form. Consequently it is possible to argue
that there is likely to be a closer relationship between material form
and meaning content than exists today.

         . Material culture, the individual and society
In considering the nature of material culture as communication, as
a form of writing and silent discourse, we need some perspective on
the relationship between the individual subject and society. In other
words, we need to consider to what extent material culture
production is simply a product of individuals and to be related to
their intentions, individual psychology and personal make-up, or to
what extent it can be considered a social production. How
important is the individual as individual in cultural production? Is
material culture to be regarded as a largely autonomous expression
of individual personality, or as indelibly structured in relation to
social processes which themselves encompass, define, create and
articulate the individual? We have already provided answers to
these questions in the previous chapter. It does not seem to be at all
theoretically acceptable to pursue a view of the human subject as
endowed with specific capacities and attributes, as the source of
social relations, font of meaning, knowledge and action. We
should insist, therefore, on the logical priority of the social and the
structuring of social relations in accounting for all social practices
including material culture production. Material culture is. in no
sense to be regarded as a product of unmediated individual inten-

     98                       MATERIAL CULTURE

    tionality but as a production of the intersubjective social
    construction of reality. Individuals are structured in terms of the
    social and, concomitantly, material culture is socially rather than
    individually structured.
       The intention here is not to uphold a radically anti-humanist
    position in the manner of Althusser and Balibar (1970) but, as we
    argued in chapter 3, to regard individuality as created and
    constructed in a social and symbolic field over which the subject
    has no immediate or direct degree of control or possibility for
    radical intervention. This is to decentre the subject and to regard
    material culture as a social production created in terms of a socially
    mediated symbolic field. We are placing emphasis on the
    constructedness of human meaning and that meaning is not a
    private experience but a product of shared systems of signification.
    Language and material culture pre-date the individual. The agent
    does not so much construct language or material culture but is,
    rather, constructed through them. Meaning is by no means a
    natural extension of personality but a product of linguistic and
    material culture systems. Reality is not reflected by language or
    material culture as much as actively produced by it. The meaning
    an individual is able to articulate in relation to the world is depen-
    dent on the construction of that world through language and
    material culture.

                       Material culture and structure
   We now want to explore the relationship between material culture
   and structure. The central proposition that follows from a position
   in which the subject is decentred vis a vis material culture
   production is that the archaeological record must be regarded not
   in terms of just a random collection of artefacts or attributes of
   individual artefacts but as a structured record, structured in
   relation to the social construction of reality and in relation to social
   strategies of interest and power and ideology as a form of power.
   The position we are taking is that material culture as
   communication is a structured sign system. The point has: already
   been made that material culture can be considered as a form of
   writing and in the absence of writing as we know it today as a
X. textual production it can be considered to play a much more power-
   ful role as a signifier in the comparatively less complex oral cultures
   archaeologists typically investigate. If we take up this notion of
   material culture as a form of writing does this imply that it can be
   considered in just the same manner as language - as a form of non-

                         MATERIAL CULTURE                           99
verbal discourse with grammars, codes and specific units of
signification? In other words does material culture act as a struc-
tured series of signs which signify something in social reality, or
does material culture form a kind of discourse signifying itself
rather than something external to it? If material culture signifies
the social or aspects of social reality in what manner is this
effected? Is material culture a supplement to language acting in a
similar way with an equivalent pattern of meaning structure? These
questions take us into the realm of structuralism, semiotics, post-
structuralism and deconstruction.
   Saussure, the father of contemporary structuralism, in his
Course in General Linguistics (1978), regarded the study of
linguistics as one day forming part of a general science of signs.
This would seem to suggest that language forms one sign system
among many and that there might be a relative autonomy among
different semiotic systems. Barthes, in his Elements of Semiology
(1967), strongly criticized such a view regarding all sign systems
as part of language. For him there could be no non-linguistic
semiotic system. Rather than adhering either to Saussure
or Barthes' position it would seem best to regard material culture as
forming a system of discourse which has a relative degree of
autonomy from a language, a second order type of writing which
shares some essential features with linguistic systems while at the
same time not being directly assimilable t o , or reducible t o ,
language. So, in what manner does material culture as a signifying
system have a relative autonomy from language and what features
does it share with language? T h e answer to this question depends,
of course, on how we regard language as a signifying system.
   Saussure in his Course viewed language as a system of signs
which must be studied synchronically rather than diachronically.
Each sign is made up of a signifier (sound-image or graphic
equivalent) and a signified (a concept or meaning). According to
Saussure the relationship between the signifier and that signified
was entirely arbitrary, a matter of cultural or historical convention.
Each sign in a system only had meaning by virtue of its difference
from other signs. For example, badger has meaning because it is
not rat, dog or pig; but its relationship with the four legged, black
and white striped creature is entirely arbitrary, a matter of
convention. In Saussure's conception of a linguistic system
emphasis is placed therefore on relational difference. Meaning does
not inhere in a sign in itself but by virtue of its difference from
other signs. Saussure was not particularly interested in actual
speech (parole) but with objective structures making speech

100                       MATERIAL CULTURE
possible (langue), i.e. the rules underlying and structuring any par-
ticular real speech act in the world. The nature of langue as a
system of rules lies underneath and governs the relative superficiality
of day-to-day speech. If language is an exchange of messages
constituted in their difference, governed by an underlying system of
grammatical rules and is taken as a paradigm for social and cultural
analysis, then the move made by Levi-Strauss (1968) to view
kinship as a structured exchange of mates within the confines of an
abstract system of underlying unconscious rules, the economy an
exchange of goods and services, politics an exchange of power and
so on, is quite easy to understand. But what of material culture? If
language is an exchange of messages, then material culture might
be thought to act as a kind of second level back-up, mirroring in
some sense this message exchange and reinforcing it by virtue of its
very materiality and relative permanence.
    There are two major problems with this structuralist perspective.
First it systematically diverts attention from history, the manner in
which people have altered and do alter their objectifications of the
social. A structuralist perspective concentrates on the synchronic
investigation of order, the codes underlying the order, and the
significance of the experience of the order.
    In archaeology formal analysis of pattern in material culture is
now well established. The aim has been to investigate pattern, to
establish the logic behind the patterning and establish rules for
constructing the patterns. Washburn (1978, 1983) has used
symmetry (repetition, rotation, reflection of a design element) as a
logic lying beneath pottery decoration. Hodder (1982, pp. 174-81)
has claimed a generative grammar for the decoration of calabashes
among the Sudanese Nuba, a system of rules operating on an
originary cross motif, which can generate a wide variety of actually
occurring calabash designs. His analysis included computer
simulation - 'testing' the rules he isolates as generating the designs
to see whether they fitted observed patterns. Fritz (1978) has iden-
tified symmetrical relationships in the organization of the direc-
tional orientation of settlement space in the Chaco Canyon in the
American south-west. Fletcher's (1977) work on the formal
arrangement of settlement space can be mentioned here - an
analysis aimed at identifying a syntax of space.
    In addition to attempts to identify rules of symmetry and design
combination and space syntax, analysis of pattern or structure
in archaeology has employed the use of binary oppositions
 such as bounded/unbounded, horizontal/vertical, left/right,
hierarchical/sequential. Hodder (1982d) has described a transfer-

                          MATERIAL CULTURE                             101

mation of the structure of designs on Dutch neolithic pottery
according to a horizontal/vertical distinction: from bounded
designs hierarchically organized, to later horizontally zoned
sequential designs. As in orthodox structuralism the meaning of
such patterning remains a problem. Hodder links the changes in
pottery design in the Dutch neolithic to a change from strongly
bounded to incorporative social groups; so designs are held to
directly mirror social entities. Another way of assigning meaning
is to invoke oppositions or distinctions such as male/female
(as in Leroi-Gourhan's early work (1965) oh upper paleolithic
cave painting), culture/nature, domestic/wild, living/dead, settle-
ment/burial, and these may be held to be cognitive universals as
implied by Hodder (1982, p. 215f).
   Secondly, a structuralist position privileges language and this
may hinder the recognition of the importance of non-verbal
signifying systems. Granting priority to the verbal, and suggesting
that non-verbal forms of communication merely directly mirror
(inadequately) linguistic structures and forms of signification is, as
Rossi-Landi points out, rather like

  asserting the priority of digestion upon breathing, or of rivers upon
  seas, or worse, of downhill roads upon uphill roads. Since language
  and all other sign systems of a community are in reciprocal relations
  in reality, we don't understand in what possible way one can
  attribute to any one of these sign systems a real priority.
                                           (Rossi-Landi, 1975, pp. 20-1)

Material culture as a coded sign system constitutes its own 'material
language', tied to production and consumption. It does not simply
reflect the significative structures of language in another form.
Like language it is itself a practice, a symbolic practice with its own
determinate meaning product which needs to be situated and
understood in relation to the overall structuration of the social.
   If for Saussure the relationship between the signifier and that
signified is entirely arbitrary within the context of an overall system
of difference, then for Derrida (1976, 1978), the later work of
Barthes (1977) and for Foucault (1981) this difference can be
extended infinitely. If meaning is a matter of difference and not
identity, taken to its logical conclusion language cannot be held to
constitute a stable closed system. Meanings of signs are always
elusive, for if a sign is constituted by what it is not, by difference
from other signs, there can be no final relationship between one
signifier and something that is signified, as the signified is always
already the signifier of another signified. Meaning is then the result

102                     MATERIAL CULTURE
of a never-ending play of signifiers rather than something that can
be firmly related to a particular referent. The meaning of one sign
depends on that of another; signifieds keep on changing into
signifiers and vice versa. Signs confer value as much by virtue of
what they are not as what they are. The concomitant of this
position is that meaning in language is floating rather than fixed -
dispersed along whole chains of signifiers, as each becomes in
effect a residue of others, a trace of language. For signs
to have any capacity for meaning they must be repeatable or
reproducible: something that occurs only once cannot count as a
sign. The reproduction of signs constitutes part of their identity
and difference but the very fact of their reproduction entails a Jack
of any unitary meaning or self-identity because they can always be
reproduced in different contexts, changing their meaning.
Signifieds always become altered by the chains of signified-
signifiers in which they become embroiled through usage.

             Materialculture, language and practice
We want to suggest that material culture can be considered to be an
articulated and structured silent material discourse forming a
channel of reified expression and being linked and bound up with
social practices and social strategies involving power, interests and
ideology. As a communicative signifying medium material culture
is quite literally a reification when compared with the relatively
free-flowing rhythms of actions of individuals in the world and the
spontaneity of spoken language. If we take up Saussure's notion of
the diacritical sign - i.e. the sign whose value is independent of
denoted objects and rests upon its insertion in a system of signs,
and Derrida's deconstruction of the notion of the sign as possessing
a plenitude of meaning by virtue of its relation to other signs - we
arrive at what might be termed the metacritical sign: the sign whose
meaning remains radically dispersed through an essentially open
chain of signifieds-signifiers. If we conceive of material culture as
embodying a series of metacritical signs then we must regard the
meaning of the archaeological record as being always already
irreducible to the elements which go to make up and compose that
record, characterized as a system of points or units. What we will
be involved with will be a search for the structures, and the prin-
ciples composing those structures, underlying the visible tangibility
of the material culture patterning. Our analysis must try to uncover
what lies beneath the observable presences, to take account of the
absences, the co-presences and co-absences, the similarities and the

                          MATERIAL CULTURE                           103

differences which constitute the patterning of material culture in a
particular spatial and temporal context. The principles governing
the form, nature and content of material culture patterning are to
be found at both the level of micro-relations (e.g. a set of designs
on a pot) and macro-relations (e.g. relationships between settle-
ment and burial), but they are irreducibly linked, each forming a
part of the other; hence any analysis which restricts itself to just
considering one feature of the archaeological record such as an
isolated study of pot design is bound to be inadequate.
   Material culture can be considered to be constituted in terms of a
 spiralling matrix of associative (paradigmatic) and syntagmatic
relations involving parallelism, opposition, linearity, equivalence
and inversion between its elements. Each individual act of material
culture production is at the same time a contextualized social act
involving the relocation of signs along axes which define the
relationships between signs and other signs. The meaning of these
signs is constituted in their lateral or spatial and horizontal or
temporal relations. The signs reach out beyond themselves and
toward others and become amplified in specific contexts or sub-
dued in others. Material culture does not so much signify a rela-
tionship between people and nature, since the environment is itself
socially constituted, but relationships between groups, relation-
ships of power. The form of social relations provides a grid into
which the signifying force of materialculture becomes inserted to
extend, define, redefine, bolster up or transform that grid. The
social relations are themselves articulated into a field of meaning
partially articulated through thought and language and capable of
reinforcement through the objectified and reified meanings inscribed
in material culture. The material logic of the relationships involved
in the contextual patterning of material culture may run parallel to,
subvert or invert the social logic or practices involved at the sites of
the production, use, exchange or destruction of artefacts. Material
culture as constituted by chains of signifiers-signifieds should not
be treated in a simplistic fashion as necessarily representing
anything in particular, such as red ochre or use of red as
symbolizing blood or pots of shape X as signifying male and pots
of shape Y as signifying female, on its own. The signifying force of
material culture depends on the structure of its interrelations, and
the signification of any particular artefact or item can be seen as
being intersected by the meanings of other items. So, particular
objects form nodes in a grid of other objects. This follows
from a view of material culture as being constituted in an open
Held rather than as a closed system of signs. The material culture

104                       MATERIAL CULTURE

record is a set of conjunctions, repetitions and differences, and
meaning shifts across from context to context, level to level,
association to association. Despite that, material culture forms part
of the encoding and decoding strategies involved in the active social
construction of reality helping to constitute a common cultural
field and tradition along with action and speech. It would be naive
to suppose that material culture expresses exactly that which might
be expressed in language but in a different form. The importance of
material-culture as a signifying force is precisely its difference from
language while at the same time being involved in a communication
of meanings. Material culture forms part of the social construction
of reality in which the precise status of meaning becomes
conceptually and physically shifted from one register to another:
from action to speech to the material. Meaning can be
communicated in all these areas but the medium alters the nature
and effectivity of the message. The depth of social meaning in the
world derives partly from the use of multiple channels for its
transmission. Material culture constitutes an external field to the
intersubjectivity of social relations and is dialectically related to
them, its signifying relations affecting the constitution and
transformation of the social.
   Material culture may be regarded as revealing its structure and
the principles which underlie it through its repetition. This is why,
as has long been recognized, consistent patterning in the
archaeological record is so important for understanding its nature.
Material culture as a communicative discourse solidifies, encodes
and reifies the social relations in which it is embedded and from
which it is derived. Social action is the product of discourse and
from this discourse both action and material culture arise. Material
culture plays less the role of signifying social relations than acting
in terms of established and fixed relations.
   We can argue, therefore, that artefacts constitute a code of signs
that exchange among themselves. The production, utilization and
consumption of material culture on the part of the individual agent
can be regarded as an act of bricolage. Material culture is used to
organize the existence of agents and invest this existence with
meaning and significance. The bricoleur, or handyman (L6vi-
Strauss, 1966, 1969), who uses odd scraps of wood, a bent saw or
whatever, to do a reasonable patching up job, cannot by the nature
of his or her situation create something entirely new, but is trapped
by the 'constitutive sets' from which the elements came. The
bricoleur is never fully in control or master of the situation with
which he or she is confronted. Similarly, the agent produces and

                          MATERIAL CULTURE                                   105
uses material culture, but is never aware of the entire system of
material significations. The agent lives through the world
metonymically. That which is being utilized, produced and con-
sumed is never the individual artefact or object (although it may
appear as such), but rather the entire symbolic structured system of
objects or artefacts of which it forms a part; the use and production
of artefacts is simultaneously the use and reproduction of the
system of which they form a part.
   The primary significance of material culture is not pragmatic, its
utilitarian or technological use-value, but its significative exchange
value. In our argument, we agree with Baudrillard (1981) in
suggesting that a theory of material culture simply cannot be
established in terms of biological needs and their satisfaction, but
must be based on a theory of signification and regarded as a
symbolic production, part of the social constitution of reality:

  the empirical 'object,' given in its contingency of form, colour,
  material, function and discourse . . . . is a myth. How often it has
  been wished away! But the object is nothing. It is nothing but the
  different types of relations and significations that converge,
  contradict themselves, and twist around it, as such - the hidden logic
  that not only arranges this bundle of relations, but directs the
  manifest discourse that overlays and occludes it.
                                                (Baudrillard, 1981, p. 63)

We need to analyse artefacts in terms that go entirely beyond them,
in relation to meaning structures and the social strategies to which
they are related, to determine what specific place in the social is
occupied by material culture as part of an overall pattern of
significations.


               STUDYING MATERIAL CULTURE

               Material culture and social practices
A growing number of recent archaeological studies are beginning to
work towards the position we have been proposing. Braithwaite's.
(1982) ethnoarchaeological study among the Azande (southern
Sudan) brings out the active use of material culture in processes of
definition and maintenance of social categories and boundaries.
Male/female differentiation and asymmetrical power relations
related to this differentiation form a fundamental feature of the
Azande social world. Power relations between the sexes are played

106                       MATERIAL CULTURE
out in terms of the sexual division of labour and its articulation
with the timing and spacing of productive activities. While men are
in a position of social domination, and greater prestige is associated
with their activities and labour product, this domination is never-
theless dependent on their relationship with and competition for
women who possess a more muted but nevertheless important
strength and influence. The male-female relationship is one of
considerable tension and ambiguity. Clay pots are made by the men
 and used and owned almost exclusively by women in the domestic
sphere of labour. The male/female opposition involving the
negotiation and renegotiation of social position is related to the use
of decorated and undecorated pottery: Pots only used by a single
sex are not decorated while the decorated pots are those used in the
transfer of foods or drink from one sex to another, e.g. a woman
serving a man food from a cooking vessel. So, pottery decoration is
associated with and serves to mark put situations in which there is
transfer of food across fundamental social boundaries; it serves to
mark out areas of concern and importance in Azande society.
   In the Wessex area of south England a new type of pottery, finely
decorated beakers, appears in the late neolithic at a time when the
social landscape is dominated by the use of large-scale ceremonial
monuments in what appears to have been a dispersed and
acephalous society with legitimation of authority being ritually
based in the activities taking place at the henge monuments.
Although the building of these monuments must have required
considerable labour input and co-ordination, contemporary burials
show little evidence of hierarchy or status differentiation (Shennan,
 1986, p. 145). Thorpe and Richards (1984) and Shennan (1986) note
that the new material culture form - the finely decorated beakers -
occur in graves on the peripheries of the assumed areas of ritual
influence of the henge monuments and moreover in graves in which
we have the first evidence of status differentiation. They suggest
that these beakers were actively adopted and used by those excluded
from the traditional power structures associated with the use of the
henges and mark the beginning of the development of an
alternative and competing structure of authority and power. This is
a markedly different kind of explanation for the adoption of
beakers than those previously proposed in the literature where their
introduction was discussed in terms of the appearance of new
peoples in the framework of traditional archaeology, or as a
prestige good in the new archaeology. Thorpe and Richards and
Shennan display sensitivity as to the particular context in which
beakers occur in Wessex and argue for their active use in competing

                          MATERIALCULTURE                              107

power strategies; however, neither explanation Is able to cope with
the specificity of the local context in which finely decorated beakers
first occur in large areas of Europe: these frameworks were unable
to explain why beakers appear in some areas in a particular context
(in graves or settlements or ritual structures) and not in others.
   These studies are also unable to explain within the framework
adopted the specificity of pot decoration, For example all that
Braithwaite's explanation does is to tell us why decoration might
occur - but what of its form? Similarly, why use beakers in Wessex
rather than decorated ox bones?
   Hodder's ethnoarchaeological studies, reported in Symbols in
Action (1982), usefully emphasize two important features of
material culture. First, and again, that material culture plays an
active symbolic role in social relations. Interacting groups
manipulate and negotiate, consciously and unconsciously, material
symbols according to their strategies and intentions. For example,
particular types of body decoration worn,, by young men and
women in the Baringo area of Kenya are a means by which the
authority of older men is contradicted. In the Lozi kingdom
material culture is used by status groups to legitimate authority. In
both these cases it is clear that material culture does not simply
reflect social relations but actively mediates intentions, strategies,
attitudes and ideologies.
   Secondly, material culture is meaningfully constituted; it is
produced in relation to symbolic schemes, structured according to
the system of meanings of particular social groups. These
structured meanings mediate social practices and material culture.
Hodder argues that all aspects of Nuba materialculture, from
burial to settlement to decoration to refuse disposal are related to
the same symbolic scheme. Among the Nuba there are well-
developed local groups, while roles and networks of individual
relationships are only weakly defined, Following Douglas (1970),
Hodder associates these features with an emphasis on the purity of
the group, the distinction insider/outsider, and on classification
and categorization:        .

   AH these aspects of ritual and world view are present in Nuba society,
   and particularly in Mesakin society. . . from the emphasis on spatial
   group seclusion to the pollution taboos, to the concern with body,
   home and granary boundaries, to the ritual surrounding the
   boundary between life and death and the breaking of items-
  : associated with a dead man, to the regular placing of items in
   particular places in the huts, to detailed classification and

108                        MATERIAL CULTURE
   categorisation of form and design, to, the: logically consistent set of
   generational rules in the art.
                                                    (Hodder, 1982, p. 183)

As indicated here, however, Hodder emphasizes a single unitary
logic within a social system which may nevertheless contain
tensions:

   Each material item has significance in terms of its place in the whole.
   This is not to say that the patterns in the different types of data are
   always direct mirror images of each other. Rather the identifiable
   patterns are transformations, often contrasting, disrupting, or
   commenting oh basic dichotomies and tensions within the social
   system and within the distribution of power.
                                                             (Ibid, p. 212)

The concomitant of such a position is that any unitary logic must
be argued to be historically specific and not a universal principle of
analysis.
  We have suggested (Shanks and Tilley, 1982) a series of
principles generating the patterning of human remains from
communal tombs (long barrows and chambered passage graves) in
neolithic Wessex and Skane, Sweden, based on the distinctions
individual/group, bounded/unbounded, male/female, right/left,
culture/nature and basic body symmetries such as body/limbs,
upper/lower in respect of disarticulated/articulated remains. Such
distinctions were argued to be part of what Bourdieu has termed
habitus (1977), aspects of lineage-based social systems, involving
social strategies arising from opposed structuring principles of
social control by individual lineage heads or elders in contradiction
with collective production, and direct, unmediated reciprocity and
exchange relations between kin groups. In such a social context we
argued that communal burial asserts the collective rather than the
individual.' • The regrouping of disarticulated remains, which we
identified, incorporates in the expression of symmetry between
body parts a denial of asymmetrical relationships in relations of
production. In this manner we focused on the possible ideological
dimension of the form and nature of material culture, how it may
act to naturalize and misrepresent other social practices.
   Tilley (1984) has extended the analysis to cover all aspects of
material culture patterning in the middle neolithic of southern
Sweden, identifying structural homologies running through the
directional orientation of tombs in the landscape, to burial
practices, ceramic designs and uses of settlement and mortuary

                           MATERIALCULTURE                                   109
space. These homologies are related to social strategies of group
competition in the context of status display and ritual elaboration.
Incorporating the distinctions ancestors/living, spiritual/social,
material culture is analysed as an ideological comment on other
social practices. Related transformations in diverse aspects of
material culture patterning are traced through to the emergence of
the Battle Axe/Corded W a r e tradition. It is proposed that the
manipulation of material culture in the sphere of ritual activities
was part of an ideological order which eventually failed to
misrepresent structural contradictions and justify asymmetries in
social relations, leading to a legitimation crisis and wholesale social
change: the emergence of the more egalitarian Battle Axe tradition.
   Miller (1985a) has similarly used concepts of ideology and a
legitimation crisis in the context of the Indus or Harappan
civilization. He articulates the material remains around a
culture/nature distinction and in relation to an emphasis on order,
standardization and purity. He invokes Foucault's notion of power
as relating not merely to coercive social processes manifested by
particular individuals, institutions or groups but as an overarching
and pervasive principle which generates as well as constrains social
forms. Arguing against notions of priest-kings and redistributive
temple bureaucracies, he suggests that power resides in a multiplicity
of organizational forms, this very dispersal of power ensuring the
reproduction of the social order.
   Miller's (1985) analysis of Indian Dangwara pottery is a
sophisticated elucidation of some of the principles we have been
emphasizing in this chapter. He represents a formal symbolic
framework summarizing the variability of pottery in Dangwara
society established by relating the pot forms, colours and uses to
cultural categories and codes such as food, gender and caste (figure
4.2). Having noted different classifications of the pottery
categories (e.g. according to colour, semantic label and function)
and related the pottery code to other codes or category systems,
Miller stresses that this formal order is his objectified postulation
which is to be superseded:

   rather there is a se{ of individual and transient realisations in
   particular contexts and strategies, which treats these alignments as
   generalised potentials rather than rules of meaning . . . the formal is
   constantly qualified as category (to the different actual pots of the
   same form), code (to the variety of classifications) and grid (to the
   variety of 'evocations') into the informal and realised, which
   produces an array of different and sometimes inconsistent patterns.
                                                                  (P. 175)

                        MATERIAL CULTURE
no                                       POT             STATUS     GENDER

                                         Kalash


                                         Dhupana.        Divine

                                         Divali matka

                                        Akhartij gagra



                                     — Marnette          Ritual


                                        Goli

                                        Matka                       Male

                                        Gagra


                                        Chuklya


                                        Batloi


                                         Brahman dohni


                                        Patya

                                        Wariya

                                        Kunda
                                                         Human
                                        Bhartiya


                                        Kareta

                                        Dohni


                                        Kareli                      Female

                                        Dhatrl

                                        Chayra dohni

                                        Jhawaliya


                                        Harawla          Polluted

FIGURE 4.2 The associations between pottery and major social variables
           in Dangwara society, India, according to Miller
    Source: From D. Miller (1985). Reprinted by permission of Cambridge
                             University Press.

                              MATERIALCULTURE                                111
COLOUR    CASTE          CONNOTATION    CONTENT   EXCHANGE   HEAT   RIGHTS




          Brahman




                                                  Jajman
Red                                               system
painted
                                                                    Contractual


                         Auspicious

                                        Water

                                                  Embedded          Proprietorial
          High                                    exchange
          castes




Red
and
buff

          Middle
          castes


                                                  Market
                                                  system
                         Inauspicious


                                                                    Non-contractual
          Low
          castes
                                        Sorghum                     Non-proprietorial

                                        Pulse     Monetary
                                                  economy



          Untouchables                                       Hot

112                       MATERIALCULTURE

The variability apparent in the interpretation of the meaning(s) of
the same pot depends on the particular context in which the
interpretation takes place. Miller adopts the term 'pragmatics' to
refer to this relationship of conceptualization and context. Two
important concepts of pragmatics are 'cue' and 'frame'. Cues and
frames divide off various contexts in which interpretation may
occur. Pots themselves may act as framing devices (see above),
providing cues as to the significance and meaning of events taking
place, controlling spheres of evocation. The notion of pragmatics
introduces substantial multivalency with regard to pottery, and
through pots acting as frames, into other categories.
   Context implies not only other category sets but also human
practice: the production and use of pots. Miller also considers the
relation of pot categories to social strategies - in particular
'emulation', a process in which attempts are made to raise status
through utilizing particular pot forms associated with dominant
groups; and 'naturalization', in which the socially contingent
appears natural. He rightly emphasizes this as an important feature
of material culture. Its frequency, apparent triviality and practicality
or simple functionality lend themselves to naturalization. Arbitrary
cultural distinctions may be superimposed on apparently natural
(functional) associations, without becoming a discursive focus of
attention.
   We may note several conclusions from Miller's work:

1  The notion of a formal set of discrete categories as forming the
  basis of classification systems is to be extended. Categories
  include non-incidental variability. Such variability involves the
  heterogeneity of social context and practice and does not
  involve a denial of structure (p. 202). The material artefact is
  polysemous.
2 Material variability is not a simple symbolic reflection of a prior
  social classification. Categories of social relationship such as
  caste or class are like the material dimension - 'constructs
  which capture and in turn constitute elements of culture, but
  within an array of alternative, sometimes complementary and
  sometimes conflicting representations. There is no privileged
  real "society" that is being represented: there is nothing else
  behind these mirrors. The term "representation" refers to a
  circle of form and understanding, and culture is exhausted by
  the same constructs through which it is understood' (pp. 202-3).
3 This means that different social dimensions are not reducible,
  one to the other (such as stylistic form to adaptive function).

                        MATERIALCULTURE                          113

   Consequently archaeologists are not in a weak position with
   regard to social analysis in the sense of having no direct access
   to the understanding of social actors which may he linguistically
   articulated. We have analogously argued above that
   archaeological analysis is not a recovery of a lost life-world
   through empathetic reconstruction of the consciousness of an
   ancient potter: 'a society studied through its material rather
   than its linguistic manifestation is in no sense less immediate or
   less real' (p. 198).
   This requires a theorization of material culture not readily
   available in contemporary sociologies. This will not be a
   specifically archaeological theory but theory directed at
   material culture and its particular properties: as an important
   aspect of Bourdieu's doxa, a representation of the given order
   of the world that constitutes an environment for living
   (Bourdieu, 1977, pp. 164-71); as an effective frame for social
   action; as ideologically informed due to its perceived simple
   functionality, concreteness and triviality which facilitate
   naturalization and misrepresentation.


   Our work (Shanks and Tilley, 1987) with the design of contem-
porary beer cans in Britain and Sweden also exemplifies some of
the features of material culture analysis we have been proposing.
Involving detailed analysis of the material culture of alcoholic
drink, both packaging and advertising, we located the design of
beer cans within a social context of brewing, commercial
marketing, consumerism, consumption and the relation of drinking
to images of health and the body. Eschewing cross-cultural
generalization with its resultant problems of lack of explanation of
specific features of material culture, we compared the two capitalist
nation-states Britain and Sweden, analysing the historical develop-
ment of brewing, drinking, the welfare state and technologies of
disciplinary power. We argued there was a contradiction embodied
in the material culture of drink in Britain and Sweden, between
alcohol as commercial product and alcohol as drug. The
differences between British and Swedish can design can be
understood as different ideological mediations of the contra-
diction between promoted consumption and disciplinary control
of drink. So design can hardly be conceived as reflecting a
separate social reality but is a structured mediation inscribed in
commercial, institutional and individual social practices and
strategies.

114                        MATERIALCULTURE


           Material culture and the archaeological record

 We have argued for a view of material culture as a constructed net-
 work of significations, linking this position with some recent
 studies. Considered in terms of the archaeological record material
 culture obviously has boundaries and thresholds in terms of its
 content and internal structure. It is not reducible t o , nor deducible
 from, a universal code because material culture is intimately linked
with social praxis and it is through praxis that it comes into being as
 an objectification and in an objectified form. Material culture is
 structured in relation to a specific social totality and is historically
 and spatially constituted                             • ,•       .
     Individual material culture items are concrete and particular.
 They are, after all, empirical objects. At the same time material
 culture items in the archaeological record are meaningfully
 constituted and linked in • structural relationships underlying their
 physical presence, forming a network of cross-references. The
 individual item forms part of the totality and the totality in part
 serves to constitute the nature of the individual artefact, its value
 and significance. The interrelatedness of the meaning of material
 culture in the archaeological record refers to the intersubjectivity of
 h u m a n actions. Material culture production, in any particular
context, is not an isolated act but is always already established as a
j u n c t u r e : a relation to the material culture which already exists in a
cultural tradition both spatially and temporally. Any fresh or novel
 material culture production is always a response to an established
tradition. The space and time of material culture patterning is
charged through with the space and time of the social relations to
which it refers and relates. This is not quantitative space and time
but lived h u m a n space and time (see chapter 6). Meaning is
 distributed across space and time through repetition and
 difference, contextualized parallels, associations, inversions and so
on. While the meaning of material culture is relatively fixed as
compared with the nuances of speech, i.e. it is likely to possess
fewer syntactic links, and differences between right and w r o n g are.
likely to be more clear cut t h a n in speech, the meaning of material
culture can by no means be regarded as stable. It can possess
 different meanings at different times and in different locations. A
large t o m b such as a megalith is unlikely to possess exactly the same
meaning 1,000 years after it was first constructed and this point
leads us on to a consideration of how we, as archaeologists, go
about interpreting material culture.

                         MATERIAL CULTURE                           115


                     Translating material culture
 The past is not an eternally open site in which the archaeologist
 rambles around conferring meaning and significance at will.
 Regarding material culture as meaningfully constituted forming a
 signifying field inevitably involves the archaeologist in a complex
process of interpretation, decoding or translation. The single most
important feature of material culture is that while it is irreducibly
 polysemous with an indeterminate range of meanings we can't just
 ascribe any old meaning to it. Material culture patterning is not a
 reality to be questioned in the way in which a hypothethico-
 deductive analysis might suggest but a reality that has to be
constructed in the process of translative, interpretative analysis.
 Gaining a representation of the significance of material culture
forms a process in which the significance is achieved by making
visible or drawing out certain features of the data rather than
others.                                        \ .
   In translating from the past to the present we are not trying to
convey exactly the form and meaning of artefacts in terms of their
significance for prehistoric social actors. They had their point,of
view; we have ours. Is one any better than the other? Are our
categories their categories? Much archaeological discussion,
particularly that concerned with erecting typologies, has concerned
itself, as we discussed earlier in this chapter, with this distinction.
Our present analysis of the archaeological record provides one
perspective on that record, and as all material objects have to be
interpreted, whether they exist in the present or the past, we cannot
restrict ourselves to some arcane attempt at a recovery of original
meaning for there is no such thing as original meaning given the
intersubjective context of the production and use of material
culture. In this the position of the archaeologist is no different
from an anthropologist faced with an essentially alien culture. So
we are not trying to convey form and meaning from an original,
somehow untainted past context into a present-day context as
accurately as possible. Such a perspective would find it hard to
define the nature of its own accuracy and, therefore, could shed no
light on what actually is important in the process of translating the
past. In the act of translating the past we change it just as we
change a text in translation from one language into another. No
translation or conceptually mediated intervention would, be
possible if it strove for an absolute degree of identity with the
original (see Benjamin, 1970). Translation is always active, it
changes the past while being constrained by that being translated,

116                     MATERIALCULTURE

the foreignness, the otherness. Translation is a mode of recovering
the meaning in the past, an active remembering on the part of the
archaeologist. The past does not somehow form a slate which we
can wipe clean since materiality is inscribed or written into it. No
interpretation can ever be complete or whole or exhaust the
meaning of the past because of the polysemous nature of the
structured series of metacritical signs that compose it. Content and
form in the past form a whole, like a banana in its skin. Our
interpretations can either envelop the past like a gigantic octopus
with ample tentacles to suck it in or,alternatively, can try to come
to terms with the otherness through a theory-data dialectic in
which we allow the data to challenge our presuppositions while at
the same time not privileging that data as in standard empiricist
approaches. This is in part a realization that all archaeology is
essentially derivative, derived from that which it studies.
   The artefact constitutes both a point of departure and a point of
return. The point of return is a translation of the archaeological
record into a fresh constellation. Truth does not reside in a
recovery or reproduction of some supposed original meaning but in
the process of the transformation of the past. The difference
between a translation of the past and the empirically perceived past
indicates the similarities and not vice versa. Because material
Culture relates to and was produced in a past social context we
should not think of it as being mute and enclosed in an isolation
which can only be broken by an infusion of our present
consciousness. The past still speaks in its traces, in the signifying
residues of the texture of the social world in which it was once
located. It is up to us to articulate that past in our own speech, to
come to terms with it as a vast network of signifying residues, to
trace the connections down the signifying axes and place them back'
in our present.


                          C O N C L U S I O N



In this chapter we have argued that to try and explain material
culture in functionalist terms or subsume it under cross-cultural
generalizations is entirely unsatisfactory. Instead we should be
thinking in terms of human potentialities linked with social con-
straints rather than the asocial and the environmental. Material
culture forms a set of resources, a symbolic order in practice,
something drawn on in political relations, activated and
manipulated in ideological systems. In other words, material

                        MATERIAL CULTURE                           117

culture is actively involved in the social world. We have suggested
that material culture should be regarded as a social production
rather than an individual creation. Conceived as a form of
communication it constitutes a form of 'writing' and is located
along structured axes of signification. We are not attempting to
argue that material culture, in a manner analagous to language,
directly represents things, features or concepts in the social world,
but that it is ordered in relation to the social. The structure of this
ordering is of vital significance. Material culture is polysemous,
located along open systems of signified-signifiers or metacritical
signs. This means that we can never exhaust or pin down its
meaning once and for all. Material culture in the archaeological
record consists of a set of conjunctions and repetitions with
meaning shifting between different levels and contexts. Interpreting
material culture might be regarded as a kind of translation which is
essentially transformative and does not aim at a recovery of
original meaning. Given the intersubjective context of the
production and use of material culture there is no original meaning
to be recovered as the meaning depends on the structured and
positioned social situation of the individual.
