Archaeologists for the first time in the history of the discipline are
beginning to be faced with a wide variety of different theoretical
perspectives on the past. The majority of these have only emerged
during the last seven years and are currently having a major impact
in breaking down the theoretical hegemony of positivism and
functionalism which formed the twin pillars of 'new' archaeology.
Despite the growing plethora of theories, archaeology still remains
today a deeply empiricist and antitheoretical discipline. Yet it is
quite clear that after 150 years of empiricism in one form or
another we still have little more than a rudimentary understanding
of the archaeological past. No amount of excavation, survey,
ethnoarchaeological work or so-called 'middle-range' empiricism
will cure the perceived fundamental isolation of past from present.
This gap can only be dealt with adequately if we develop conceptual
tools and theoretical structures with which to reinscribe the past
into the present, to realize their interaction. This book is intended
as an advanced introduction to some current debates which may
help to achieve that goal.
   The impetus to the development of fresh theoretical perspectives
in archaeology has come almost entirely from outside the discipline
and has brought archaeology into increasingly closer contact with
wider debates in social theory. In the format of a single book we
have neither attempted, nor do we claim, any degree of compre-
hensive coverage. Instead we have chosen to discuss a limited
number of key areas for the reconstruction of archaeological
theory. In the first chapter we discuss what theory in archaeology
should be about, criticize the reduction of theory to methodology,
and consider the dominant forms of textual production in contem-
porary archaeology. Chapters 2 and 3 consider the competing
theoretical discourses of recent social archaeology, and the

Viii                          PREFACE

relationship of the individual to society. Chapters 4, 5 and 6 focus
on key areas that have been quintessentially archaeological
concerns: the relationship of material culture to the social and the
study of change over long time spans. Here the relative lack of
theorization in the discipline has been quite striking - we might
expect a discipline whose primary data base is material culture to
have a developed theory of its meaning and significance. Similarly,
archaeologists, although dealing with long time spans, have little
questioned the concept of time, and reductionist, essentialist and
ethnocentric notions of social evolution have long been dominant.
If we achieve little more in this book we hope at least to initiate
further conceptualization and debate in these vital areas. Chapter 7
situates archaeology as a cultural practice firmly in the present and
argues that it needs to become fully self-reflexive, aware of itself as
political practice. We do not think it either possible or desirable to
attempt to achieve a fresh unification of archaeological theory
within one all-encompassing framework. The only essential unity
we propose is that all archaeology ought to be cultural critique, a
practice both produced in the present and contributing to the
present. Archaeological discourse is a form of power while at the
same time being the study of power. The final chapter sets out in a
formal way a number of theses which we regard as essential to the
development of a fresh problematic for the discipline.
   The book is partly based on two joint undergraduate and graduate
seminar courses given in the Department of Archaeology, University
of Cambridge, during the spring and autumn of 1986. We would like
to thank those people who kindly agreed to chair the seminars:
 Robin Boast, Grant Chambers, Ian Hodder, Matthew Johnson,
Sandar van de Leeuw, Olivier de Montmillon, Ajay Pratrap, Colin
 Renfrew; and all those who participated in them and contributed to
the debate. Parts of chapters 6 and 7 were also presented and
discussed at the University of Tromso. Michael Shanks would like
to thank his history class of 1986-7 for their support. Grant
Chambers, Tony Giddens, Ian Hodder and Mike Rowlands all
 kindly provided detailed comments on the text and suggested
 valuable improvements.

                                 1

       Theory and Method in
           Archaeology

THEORETICAL ARCHAEOLOGY: A PRELIMINARY AND
           CONVENTIONAL OUTLINE

Theory has been an important issue in archaeology since the 1960s
and has taken the form of a contentious field of polemical
manoeuvring within the discipline and between archaeology and
other social sciences. In his essay, 'Archaeology: the loss of
innocence' (1973), David Clarke, a seminal figure in British
theoretical archaeology, specified different aspects of theory. He
distinguished a theory of concepts from a theory of information
and a theory of reasoning, terming these respectively archae-
ological metaphysics, epistemology and archaeological logic
and explanation. For Clarke these three aspects are overlain and
permeated by a series of other levels of archaeological theory; these
are steps in archaeological interpretation. Predepositional and
depositional theory considers the relationships between activities,
social patterning, and environmental factors and the traces
deposited in the archaeological record. Postdepositional theory
considers what happens to the deposited traces: processes such as
destruction, erosion and disturbance. Retrieval theory is predomi-
nantly a theory of the sampling of the surviving deposited traces in
excavation and fieldwork. Analytical theory is concerned with
retrieved information and its processing; interpretative theory
considers how the traces relate to their ancient social and
environmental sources which are not now open to direct observation
and experience.
   The literature on most of these aspects of theoretical archaeology
is quite sizeable. Most of the concepts of traditional archaeology,
such as 'culture' and 'diffusion', have been challenged, found
wanting and replaced (e.g. Shennan, 1978; Renfrew, 1978). New

2              THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY
archaeology in America favoured an explicitly systemic conceptu-
alization of the archaeological past focusing on culture systems
adapting to environmental factors (e.g. Binford, 1965; Flannery,
 1968). In Britain the new conceptual framework of the 1970s
mirrored more functionalist anthropology with organically con-
ceived social systems functioning within environmental milieux (see
chapter 2). Since the late 1970s attention has been channelled to the
boundaries of such systems. The idea of interaction between social
units has developed into theories of peer polity interaction
(Renfrew and Cherry (eds), 1986) and world systems theory
(Gledhill and Rowlands, 1982). Varieties of neo-evolutionary
theory have been the most influential frameworks utilized to
account for mechanisms of social change, from simple unilineal
and stadial positions to more complex multilinear or epigenetic
theories (see chapter 6).
   In regard to the information that archaeology might reveal about
the past, the new archaeology initiated a new optimism that
archaeology was not confined to description of materials and
technologies with the social and ideological increasingly removed
from the reach of archaeological speculation: new archaeology was
constituted as a new theory of archaeological information whereby
it was to become anthropology (Binford, 1962).
   The theory of archaeological logic and explanatory structure has
been dominated by the consideration of hypothesis-based deductive
reasoning processes (involving subsuming particular occurrences
under generalizations) with an equivalence of prediction and explan-
ation (Fritz and Plog, 1970; Watson, LeBlanc and Redman, 1971).
The most influential aspect of such theory has been procedures of
rigorous and explicit testing of clearly formulated hypotheses,
known as problem-oriented research (Hill, 1972; Plog, 1974).
   In retrieval theory sampling procedures have been applied to
excavation and fieldwork (Cherry, Gamble and Shennan (eds),
1978; Mueller (ed.), 1975). Binford's middle-range theory aspires
to a statistical correlation of material culture patterning and social
behaviour (Binford, 1977; 1981). Schiffer's behavioural archaeology
(1976) aims at an analogous general theory, a science of material
culture patterning. Ethnoarchaeological and modern material
culture studies have investigated the relation of social patterning to
material culture and its deposition (e.g. Hodder, 1982; Gould (ed.),
1978; Gould, 1980; Gould and Schiffer (eds), 1981; Binford, 1978).
   New ways of processing data, in particular computer based, have
been developed in line with the developing range of new concepts,
aiming at extracting more subtle and precisely documented pat-

               THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                     3
terning in archaeological data (Doran and Hodson, 1975; Orton,
1980; Richards and Ryan, 1985).
   Two particular fields of interpretative theory can be briefly
mentioned here: theories of artefact exchange and prehistoric
exchange networks; and theories of the relation of mortuary
practices to the society which practised them. In the former,
different artefact distributions are interpreted in terms of changing
patterns of exchange between individuals and/or groups (Earle and
Ericson, 1977; Ericson and Earle, 1982); the latter considers the
traces of mortuary practices and the ritual deposition of artefacts in
terms of symbolic dimensions of social relations (see Chapman,
Kinnes and Randsborg (eds), 1981; and chapter 2 below).
   Clarke reckoned that the introspective fervour in archaeology of
the late 1960s and 1970s amounted to 'a precipitate, unplanned and
unfinished exploration of new disciplinary fieldspace .. . profound
practical, theoretical and philosophical problems to which the new
archaeologies have responded with diverse new methods, new
observations, new paradigms and new theory' (1973, p. 17).
Adapting Kuhn's notion Clarke identified four new paradigms
(1972, p. 5) (characterized as being systems of assumptions,
conventions, fields of concepts which specify data, significant
problems and exemplary solutions for a 'community' of
archaeologists): the morphological, anthropological, ecological
and geographical. So, according to Clarke, some archaeologists
focus on artefact systems, their specification and quantitative
derivation. Anthropological archaeologists consider the relation of
data to social patterning. Ecological archaeologists aim to delineate
palaeoenvironments and the place of human communities within
them. And archaeology's geographical paradigm is dominated by
locational and spatial analysis of settlement and artefact
distributions.
   These 'paradigms' have developed in criticism of, and in
addition to, archaeology's traditional paradigm - an artefact-
based, particularizing and qualitative archaeology aiming at a
culture history expressed in literary narrative cliches. The
theoretical developments have also been inextricably coupled with
technical advances forming the basis for, or arising in response to,
new theoretical orientations: lithic and ceramic analyses (including
trace element analysis); analysis of botanical, faunal, skeletal and
environmental material. All of these have refined and augmented
archaeological data quite considerably.
   Clarke conceived a unity or a logic behind this proliferation of
new archaeologies, approaches, theories, paradigms. It all

4                 THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY

amounted to the transformation from a self-conscious to a critically
self-conscious discipline. (See table 1.1.)
  Clarke's Analytical Archaeology (1968) was meant to provide a
general theory:

    Archaeology, is, after all, one discipline and that unity largely resides
    in the latent theory of archaeology - that disconnected bundle of
    inadequate subtheories which we must .seek to formulate and struc-
    ture within an articulated and comprehensive system; a common
    theoretical hat-rack for all our parochical hats.
                                                                (1973, p. 18)

Clarke's was essentially a positivist vision of a unified archaeology,
scientific progress precipitating the emergence of a scientific
archaeology from its pre-scientific anterior. This fundamentalist
vision of a scientific archaeology has been predominant in the
United States. There the emergence of the theoretically introspec-
tive new archaeology has been interpreted as a Kuhnian paradigm
shift; a major disciplinary change; the inauguration of a new period
of normal science; a new scientific hegemony (Martin, 1971;
Sterud, 1973, 1978; Zubrow, 1972).
   In Britain the positivism of the new archaeology has not achieved
anything like the acceptance it has had in the United States.
Traditional archaeology has successfully met the challenge. Its
empiricism has incorporated the methodology of explicit problem
posing and rigorous testing and came to appreciate the possibility
of archaeology acquiring a far wider range and a higher refinement
of data, while its scepticism has eschewed ideas of scientific objec-

       TABLE 1.1 Clarke's summary of the traditionalist and the
                         new archaeology

                                  Traditionalist              New
Philosophy                       Historical                   Experimental
Approach                        Qualitative                  Quantitative
                                Particularizing              Generalizing
Mode of expression              Literary                     Symbolic
                                Narrative                    Jargon
Attitude                        Isolationist                 Condisciplinary
                                Authoritarian                Anarchic

Source: Clark 1972, p. 54. Reprinted by permission of Methuen & Co.

               THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                     5
tivity and theoretical elaboration. So theory is still most frequently
conceived as abstract and secondary to data acquisition, different
fashions explaining the same data, while traditional archaeology's
explanations are based on common sense and natural language.
There has been work within an explicit systemic framework, most
notably by Colin Renfrew (1972), but social archaeology in Britain
has emerged predominantly as a soft functionalism, the offspring
of a colonialist anthropology.
   This hegemony of hard scientific fundamentalism, sceptical
empiricism and soft functionalism has received serious theoretical
challenges since the late 1970s. Some archaeologists have drawn on
structural Marxist anthropology and emphasized a conception of the
social which differs from functionalist models in stressing internal
contradiction rather than states of social equilibrium (see Spriggs
(ed.), 1984). Structuralist and contextual archaeologists have
emphasized the meaning and symbolic dimensions of social
practices, stressing the culturally specific and variable meanings
of material culture rather than simply concentrating on its pattern-
ing supposedly 'explained' within a framework of reductionist
cross-cultural generalization (e.g. Hodder (ed.), 1982; Hodder,
1986). Other archaeologists have begun to examine archaeological
work and explanations in the context of contemporary capitalism,
critically assessing the ideology of archaeology (Shanks and Tilley,
1987; Miller and Tilley (eds), 1984). However, these challenges are
only beginning to be widely acknowledged.
   Fragmentation, specialization, divergent approaches, 'para-
digms', theories of the social: different archaeologies. Rather
than enter this labyrinth and perhaps identify the most likely
archaeological exit, we intend instead to take a different line. We
aim to ask the meaning of the fragmentation, the significance of
the theoretical hegemony; to ask what theory itself might be; to
assess the questions 'theoretical' archaeology has been posing; to ask
what questions should be posed. So, in this chapter we wish to
begin with some Metatheoretical questions, questions about theory
itself.


          ARCHAEOLOGICAL THEORY: METHOD
The developments that have taken place in archaeology since the
1960s amount to a process of rationalization of the discipline, a
reaction to fact collection, the literary narrative, and unexamined
common-sense categories and concepts of traditional archaeology.

6              THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY
But this rationalization has, for the most part, taken the form of
methodological inquiry, a search for methods or approaches to the
data, which will give a better, more complete, more objective view
or account of the past. A valid method is conceived as being as
objective as possible (some would equate this with being scientific),
eliminating subjective bias. Approaches may vary as to what
aspects of the archaeological record they concentrate on, what
different patterns in the data they isolate and claim to explain, but
all must be objective, reasonable, realistic, based on the primacy of
the object of investigation. Concomitantly, the primary questions
of theory have been:

1  How to extract the maximum information from what is left of
  the past.
2 Which concepts are the most efficient at achieving the aim of
  establishing an objective past.
3 How to bring the archaeologist • into the closest possible
  accordance with the object of investigation; that is, with the
  artefact and its depositional context.

Discussions of social theory in archaeology have, until recently,
been very much undertaken in the context of these questions:
reference has been made to other social sciences for concepts which
might be applied to archaeological data in order to gain access to a
fuller and more reliable account of the past. The aim has been to
establish which social (or indeed other) concepts might be most
efficiently applied to archaeological data. For example, palaeo-
economy (Higgs (ed.), 1972, 1975) draws on biological and etho-
logical theories of evolution, conceiving these as more applicable to
archaeological data than social theory. Marxist archaeologists con-
ceive their conceptualization of the social context of artefacts as
more accurate than systems theory and social typologies of bands,
tribes etc. (e.g. Friedman and Rowlands, 1978; Bender, 1978).

                   Images of the archaeologist
Within this conceptualization of theory we can sketch two
dominant underlying images of the archaeologist: the archaeologist
as detective and the archaeologist as therapist.

The archaeologist as detective
The simile of archaeologist as detective is one not infrequently
employed in introductory texts and prefaces (e.g. de Paor, 1967;

                THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                       7
Clark, 1969) and is undoubtedly part of the popular mythology of
archaeology. The archaeologist pieces together clues in order to
reconstruct the past; the archaeologist is a Sherlock Holmes. The
major theme underlying Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes stories is
the expulsion of magic and mystery. Holmes, through the rigorous
application of his method, makes everything explicit, accountable,
subject to scientific analysis. Holmes, an obvious genius and man
of science, always manages somehow to stumble upon the
deduction which unravels the subtle connections between the clues.
The stories usually end with Holmes recounting with devastating
simplicity how the code of the clues was broken, how he eventually
arrived at his final and all-encapsulating deduction. What was
initially enigma, mystery, fascination, impossibility, becomes
dispelled by a simple explanation. The application of pure method
renders all the mysteries and the enigmas accountable in the burning
light of reason. Once the deductions are revealed the solution to the
mystery always appears absurdly simple, open to the commonest
common sense. Holmes' logic is applicable to all areas of human
experience: his ability to predict or 'read' even Dr Watson's
somewhat illogical trains of thought are repeatedly displayed.
Conan Doyle's books are a celebration of the power of empiricist
or positivist science - cold, calculating reason dispelling illusion,
eliminating subjectivity. They are also, of course, works of literary
fiction.
   The parallels with archaeology are readily apparent. The past,
initially mysterious and seemingly impossible to adequately grasp
or comprehend from mere fragments, can be reached, probed,
ultimately known, through the operation of scientific method.
Archaeologists are detectives travelling in the rattling carriages of
scientific logic, boarding the Flying Scotsman, steaming back to
discover the past to shatter the illusion, to tell everyone else, all the
non-archaeologists, how it really was: what happened and why,
what and who created the past leading to our present. But we all
know that it is really not that simple. If it was, we would already
have reached the past. We could stop writing archaeology books
and write science fiction instead - dream of the future. One great
problem with the future is that it has an annoying tendency to
always create new pasts. What has gone wrong with our logical
train of positivist science, of rationalized inquiry? Rather than
moving back into the past is it, in fact, shunting back and forth in a
siding? Do the rails, that we are sometimes told represent the logic
of a truly scientific methodology, represent a viable and coherent
route back to the past?

8              THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY


The archaeologist as therapist
Doing archaeology, the process of acquiring knowledge of the
archaeological object, has now become, with the advent of the new
archaeology, a therapeutic process. Various methods represent
various remedies, cures for pathological thinking, for contradiction
within the process of acquiring knowledge. Most theory in
archaeology today acts as a pharmacopoeia. The goal is to avoid
subjectivity, the pathology. Archaeological method instills health,
a healthy regard to the objective artefact. Each new approach,
systems theory to middle-range theory, is an implicit or explicit
remedy for the failings of the others.
   It is relevant and significant to consider the roots of
pharmacopoeia in the Greek Pharmakon meaning drug, cure,
remedy and poison. Pharmakon is related to pharmakeus and
pharmakos which mean, respectively, sorcerer or magician and one
sacrificed or executed as atonement or purification for others, a
scapegoat (cf. Derrida, 1981). Archaeological method consists of
shamanistic cures, exorcisms resulting in the expulsion of a
scapegoat, itself also poison, pollution, and remedy. Method aims
at an expulsion of the subjective whose absence supposedly
guarantees epistemological security. Yet method's curative powers
simultaneously poison the study of the past, riddling our practice
with dualisms - subject becomes split from object, fact from value,
past from present. Method is to provide psychological security that
we have eliminated ourselves in the present in order to return to the
past. By immersing us in the object world, method tries to alleviate
us from the burden of choice: choice of alternative meanings,
alternative pasts. Ultimately method wants to place the
archaeologist in the image of god, or alternatively as mindless
automaton: god because the archaeologist is supposedly able to
determine how the past was for once and all; automaton because all
that is required is an application of method - the archaeologist
becomes spiritual medium on earth, magical representative of the
absent creator of the past.


                      Method and objectivity
Methods are operations on the artefact, the object, the basis for
providing explanations. Ultimately everything becomes reduced to
the object. The data, the material traces, stand supreme. Ideas,
theories, hypotheses (call them what you will), are all refracted
from that great solid bedrock of archaeological data we all know
exists. Kick a megalith and it hurts! However, typologists know

                THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                     9
their megaliths in just the same sense as witch hunters know their
witches: both are social creations. Archaeology today amounts to
excavating and processing artefacts according to positivist rational
method. It does not matter which facts are subjected to
archaeology because what matters is the quality the objects
supposedly possess - objectivity. This is what the archaeologist is
after: objectivity conceived as abstract, in itself. The quality of the
object is considered not in concrete terms but abstractly or quanti-
tatively. Objectivity is abstract, uniform, neutral, because it exists
separately from the archaeologist, the observing subject. Objective
'facts' count and archaeological knowledge is thought to be entirely
dependent on them. They are, after all, hard physical reality. So
archaeological method (rational and objective) produces its object
in advance. Artefacts have meaning primarily as objectivity and
this is claimed to be the basis or origin of good archaeology.
   On most accounts archaeology becomes the perception and
experience of objectivity, the artefacts of the past. Such objectivity
is regarded as sacred, disembodied, essential, as constituting an
essence. The archaeological object is present to our senses, real,
with immediate proximity. Furthermore, the object as object is
regarded as being theory and value-free, in-itself, identical to
itself, transcendent. Objects become, in such a conception, archai
(originals), outward manifestations of implicit historical essence.
History is supposedly to be found in the archaeological object. The
artefact is a punctum, a punctual presence, piercing time; it is the
mark of history, the historical moment. Possess in consciousness
this absolute spiritual plenitude, this property, the past immediately
present with us, and you have history. This is a deference, a
deferment of meaning to the object. Write up this experience and
interpretation and theory can supposedly follow.

                       Theory, data, practice
Few archaeologists believe in induction any more. Some, following
a reading of Popper (1959), have suggested that an earlier advocacy
of verification procedures must now give way to falsification (see
Renfrew, Rowlands and Segraves (eds), 1982, section I). Most
realize that facts are selected and that research must be problem
orientated; facts only answer the questions the archaeologist asks
of them. Paradigms have been discussed at length (Meltzer, 1979;
Binford and Sabloff, 1982) and there is a growing realization that
data are theory-laden. However, this has made very little difference
to archaeology. There is still a wide consensus in the belief in
'objective reality' or the archaeological record.

10             THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY
   Consider Fowler's Approaches to Archaeology (1977), a relatively
sophisticated introduction to 1970s British sceptical empiricism. In
a chapter entitled 'Theoretical archaeology' he claims that 'all
archaeology is theoretical' (p. 131). He argues that theory is involved
from the beginning of the archaeological process, emphasizing
'models', defined as conscious and unconscious mental frame-
works applied to the data: 'archaeological evidence does not mean
anything' (p. 132), because it is dependent on the models applied by
the archaeologist. The corollary is that 'there is no ultimate, finite
truth revealed by archaeological evidence... all interpretation of it
is relative' (p. 138). What remains in Fowler's text is an assertion of
the primacy of the data, archaeological information to which
theory and models are merely 'applied': 'whatever the theory, in
the last resort quality of interpretation depends on the quality of
the evidence' (p. 152). Fowler goes further in relating quality of the
evidence to the 'quality of the archaeologist' (p. 152). Data are,
after all, retrieved in the practice of excavation and theory can,
perhaps, be quietly forgotten.
   This position regards concrete practical method as operating on
the archaeological record. In such a framework methods,
approaches, are the means of doing archaeology, and
archaeological theory has all too often come to refer to this 'real
world' of archaeological practice. A hierarchy is implied:

         Excavation
         Data processing         Technique; method
         Synthesis
         Interpretation
         Theory

Such a common-sense conception of 'theory' is of a system of
ideas, concepts or statements, abstract rather than empirical, held
to constitute an explanation or account of archaeological
phenomena and essentially separate from those phenomena.
Traditional archaeology has frequently taken an attitude that
theory detracts from the real business of archaeology. Its quietude
on matters of theory results not so much from a rejection of
philosophical underpinnings but rather from a largely silent
consensus around empiricist norms. A general characteristic of
empiricism, whether the 'straight empiricism' of fact collection and
subsequent description and interpretation, or in the positivist shape
of hypothetico-deductive testing procedures advocated in the new
archaeology, is that theoretical reflection is always systematically

               THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                     11
discouraged in favour of the primacy of facts or methodologies
geared to producing such facts. However, this suspicion of theory is
ultimately itself a philosophical statement of priorities emerging in
the guise of a supposedly common-sense embargo on useless
speculation regarded as being a diversion from day-to-day practical
work (see e.g. Flannery, 1982). This is a non-sense. Any argument
that theory is irrelevant to archaeology is itself theoretical, as is
another 'common-sense' proposition that the world consists of a
series of observable facts whose regularities and interrelationships
can only be known through observation - that the external visible
aspects of artefacts exhaust their meaning.
   In the new archaeology theory is similarly regarded as abstract
and parasitic on method. It can sometimes be useful, but any
theory which relates to the real practice of archaeology in any other
way than by strengthening and perfecting the possibilities for
technique and method is considered dogmatic, irrelevant or mere
fantasy (Schiffer, 1981). Theory can have only one relevance to
practice: perfecting method. Does it work? The question asked of
us all will be: 'but what does this look like in practice?' Theory
must be 'applied' to archaeological 'reality'. But this very notion of
'application' presupposes the gap between theory and practice as
always already a problem. Ultimately the relation can only be
conceived as arbitrary, contingent or incidental. Social theory, for
example, is relevant to archaeology: it provides new models and
categories which may be applied to the archaeological object world.
We find patterning of structures of power and hierarchy in the
neolithic where before there were tribal chiefdoms, where there
were cultures and before that druids. After all, we know that we are
not simply digging up objects: they must be related to their social
context - eventually - or otherwise we regress into antiquarianism.
However, the real practice of archaeology always tends to be
separated from theory. This split is one homologous with that
between mental and manual labour, decision and execution, ends
and means. It is a split running throughout the capitalist division of
labour. An emphasis on methodology is one on logistics,
administration, management, surveillance: defining that which is
'reasonable', asserting realistic limits and goals to archaeological
practice.
   The effects of this relationship of theory to practice are familiar:
isolated empirical, 'expert' studies; intensive empirical special-
ization accompanying efforts to divest concepts of empirical
content; mathematical operations; use of catastrophe theory
(Renfrew, 1978a); emphasis on the formulation of laws of culture

12                  THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY

process or high-level generalization. All aim to provide an intuition
of the essence of prehistory - its objectivity, its essential meaning,
order and logic. But the essence so arrived at is not that different
from the mythical essence of prehistory implied by ley-lines and
megalith builders arriving from outer space. A rabid empiricism
accompanies idealism and fantasy because empiricism is little more
than an idealism of the object. Furthermore, all choice between
competing archaeologies, alternative pasts, is suspended in a
proliferation of archaeologies, a pluralism allowing comparison
only on the terms of a conception of method which decides means
of application, of execution, but not ends: there can be no
comment on the social, political and philosophical meaning of
particular archaeologies, particular pasts.

                           Idealism, fantasy, text
As a way forward into further specifying and investigating these
effects of a coupling of empiricism and idealism found in
contemporary archaeology, it is interesting to consider a fantasy by
Jorge Luis Borges. In 'Tlon, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius' (1981) he re-
counts his (fictional) discovery of an encyclopaedia which
catalogues the planet Tlon, a reality of complete idealism.

     Centuries and centuries of idealism have not failed to influence reality.
     In the most ancient regions of Tlon, the duplication of lost objects is
     not infrequent. Two persons look for a pencil; the first finds it and
     says nothing; the second finds a second pencil, no less real, but closer
     to his expectations. These secondary objects are called hronir and
     are, though awkward in form, somewhat longer. Until recently, the
     hronir were the accidental products of distraction and forgetfulness.
     It seems unbelievable that their methodological production dates
     back scarcely a hundred years, but this is what the Eleventh Volume
     tells us. The first efforts were unsuccessful. However, the modus
     operandi merits description. The director of one of the state prisons
     told his inmates that there were certain tombs in an ancient river bed
     and promised freedom to whoever might make an important
     discovery. During the months preceding the excavation the inmates
     were shown photographs of what they were to find. This first effort
     proved that expectation and anxiety can be inhibitory; a week's work
     with pick and shovel did not manage to unearth anything in the way
     of a hron except a rusty wheel of a period posterior to the
     experiment. But this was kept secret and the process was repeated
     later in four schools. In three of them the failure was almost
     complete; in the fourth (whose director died accidentally during the
     first excavations) the students unearthed - or produced - a gold

                THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                        13
  mask, an archaic sword, two or three clay urns and the mouldy and
  mutilated torso of a king whose chest bore an inscription which it has
  not yet been possible to decipher . . . The methodical fabrication of
  hr&nir (says the Eleventh Volume) has performed prodigious services
  for archaeologists. It has made possible the interrogation and even
  the modification of the past, which is now no less plastic and docile
  than the future.
                                                 (Borges, 1981, pp. 37-8)

Peeling back the layers of text in this fantasy, we might say the
following about archaeology. Traditional and new archaeology
represent a desire for the past in itself and for itself; a desire for an
objective past, for primary originary objectivity, the essence of the
past, the essential meaning, an ideal presence of the past. The past
is to be perceived by the autonomous archaeologist whose subjec-
tivity is to be marginalized in a simple immediate experience and
expression of the past.
   This is an idealist fiction. The past cannot be exactly reproduced.
Exact reproduction is repetition, tautology, silence. The
archaeological past is not re-created as it was or in whatever
approximation. It is, of course, excavated away. As such, the
archaeological past must be written. We argue that it is vital to
realize the specific form and nature of this act of writing, this form
of the material production of the past. Objects are recovered in
excavation. They may be lodged and displayed in museums and
made to stand for the past of which they are a part (metonymy).
They also need to be enshrined in books (the exhortation to publish
excavations is common). The archaeological object and its context
are both described and represented in the informational report
(metaphor). Museum and text represent metonymy and metaphor.
These are not neutral vehicles for an ideal presence of the past;
equally, they are not simply rhetorical detours to a picture of the
past. We have argued elsewhere (Shanks and Tilley, 1987,
pp. 22-3) that fieldwork and excavation are not neutral instru-
ments for recovering the past. Their supposed passive observation
and conceptual detachment with regard to the past, equated with
objectivity, is rooted in a particular vision of time, a spatial time
(see chapter 5) which is treated as an independent variable
separating past (conceived as a problem) from a voyeuristic
present. This temporality has no way of coping with the personal,
active and productive (or destructive) experience of fieldwork and
excavation since 'what is historic in thought - the practice of
archaeology, our experience of digging - is equated with
irrelevance' (Shanks and Tilley, 1987, p. 23). We have also focused

14              THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY
(ibid., ch. 4) on the museum's aesthetic, its way of representing the
past, and have argued the way the past is presented is profoundly
part of what is represented. Forms of display, such as free-standing
sculpture and 'realistic' period settings, make statements about the
relation of artefacts to their social context and the manner in which
space, time and history are themselves conceived. So, we have
located the temporality of museum cases - where date, (an abstract
dimensional co-ordinate) is represented as the time of an artefact
- in the spatial and quantified time of capitalism where the factory
clock organizes routine and discipline of an alienated workforce.
The period room, essentially a visual inventory, represents history
as information and indicates that a meaningful understanding of
history may be gained through a window on the past where the
social meaning of artefacts is to be seen in their 'naturalistic' spatial
juxtaposition. We have questioned these and other meanings of the
museum's aesthetic. Analogous arguments can be presented
concerning archaeological writing, archaeological texts.
   The archaeological text is a medium for the inscription of
representations of artefacts and their meanings. The artefact and
its context, the subject matter of archaeology, must necessarily be
given metaphorical expression, be signified in a text. This textual
production means archaeology is fundamentally expressive, a signi-
fying practice which confers meaning on the past. Language and
writing are not neutral, objective instruments. Rather than
representing the world, they are a means of coping with it. In this
way a purely objective representation of the past is a textual
impossibility. Now archaeologists conceive writing ideally as a
neutral and technical resource rather than a transformative
medium, a medium arising from the relationship of the
archaeologist to the artefact and its context, and from the relation
of an archaeologist to an audience. Writing and language may
intrude on the representation of the past, but they should not: this
is the conventional position in archaeological discourse which
remains largely silent on such issues. But instead we stress that
language is a social phenomenon and as a corollary archaeological
writing, as part of archaeological work more generally, has to be
seen and theorized as social production. We need to consider
archaeology as discourse - a structured system of rules, conventions
and meanings for the production of knowledges, texts.
   Despite the concern with theory that developed in the new
archaeology there are still comparatively few works of general
theory in archaeology. Textual production in archaeology is still
overwhelmingly dominated by texts which describe specific sites,

                THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                    15
types of data, regions or time periods. In the section which follows
we present a series of comments on four archaeological texts: a site
report, a pottery study, a general synopsis and an introduction to
archaeology. Texts of these kinds still account for the vast majority
of the world's output of archaeological textual production. We will
focus on what these texts reveal about our arguments concerning
the nature of theory in archaeology.

                        Archaeological texts
An excavation report: archival logistics
 Wainwright's Gussage All Saints (1979) is a report on a total
 excavation of a settlement of the second half of the first millenium
 BC. The excavation is described as a 'problem orientated project
 within a rescue framework, designed to look back at Dr. Gerhardt
 Bersu's excavation of the site of Little Woodbury which, although
 a partial excavation, had for many years provided the pattern for
 Iron Age economy in southern Britain' (Wainwright, 1979, p. vii).
 The project, then, is clearly supposed to be in keeping with advanced
 (problem-orientated) principles of excavation. Such volumes as
 this, published by Her Majesty's Stationery Office have also been
 considered almost exemplary (e.g. Barker, 1977, p. 224).
     In a standard work on archaeological publication, Grinsell,
 Rahtz and Williams remark that site reports for the most part
 remain unread (1974, p. 19). The site report is not meant to be read:
this implies too much of an involvement of the reader; they are to
be 'consulted'. The report is a textual archive and catalogue, a
spectacular text making visible and textual the reality of the past.
Measured drawings, tables, measurements, lists of numbered finds,
scaled photographs and third person narrative - all represent a
rhetoric of neutrality, of objectivity, from which subjective
experience and impressions have been purged. Of the 205 pages
only 23 discuss what was found. Setting; structural sequence;
chronology; summary comments on artefacts, trade and external
contacts; basic details of economy, environment and population:
the discussion climbs Hawkes' (1954) empiricist ladder of inference
culminating in the now cliched expression of caution and wariness
regarding the difficulty of moving from the 'facts' to 'highly
speculative matters' (Bowen, in Wainwright, p. 182) such as, in this
case, settlement status. This would certainly seem to be the case
judging from Bowen's and Wainwright's own inferences. Taking
into account debris from a bronze foundry which produced
'prestige chariot fittings', they reckon the entrance to the settlement

16                THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY
was wide enough for a chariot and 'indicative of an assured
position in the social order for a member or members of the
community' (p. 193). They tentatively propose, referring to
classical authors, the Mabinogion and song of Culwich and Olwen,
that Gussage All Saints is a settlement 'quite high up a settlement
hierarchy', perhaps even an Ilys - the residence of a Celtic lord.
Wainwright also comments:

     the arthritic fanners of Gussage should also be reviewed within the
     more general theme of Celtic society in which the traits of frankness,
     spirited temperament, bravery, boastfulness, personal vanity,
     feasting and love of eulogistic verse combine to produce a type which
     Professor Cunliffe has bleakly castigated as combining a 'furious
     impetus . . . and a total lack of forward planning' . . . It is in this
     context, imbued with tradition and personal example, that one
     should view the status of the Gussage farmers.
                                                  (Wainwright, 1979, p. 193)

But to criticize this essentially empty and sterile speculation is to miss
the point. Such comments and 'interpretation' are consciously
superfluous: 'Comment, interpretation, or synthesis are repeatable
experiments which vary with whatever archaeological model
happens to be fashionable at the time' (Grinsell, Rahtz and
Williams, 1974, p. 20). Informational reports are, then, meant to
avoid interpretation. 'The ideal report would enable a reader to
reconstruct the whole site layer by layer, feature by feature, each
with its constituents such as clay, gravel and charcoal flecks in due
proportion' (ibid., p. 58). Barker, in Principles of Archaeological
Excavation, recommends that the core of an excavation report be
the illustrations, forming a 'planned guided tour' (1977, p. 228), a
tour free from interpretation. In the spectacular text interpretation
is superfluous.
   Writing becomes the issue of publication, of record and
description, what and how, and relative time and financial cost: an
archival logistics. The issue is one of rescue and preservation of
data. This has been a major issue especially since the advent of
Rescue Archaeology in the early 1970s. Consequently, a report by a
working party of the Ancient Monuments Board for England
specifies four levels of data (see table 1.2). Levels I and II are
considered appropriate to an archive or museum in the site's
locality. Wainwright's Gussage All Saints is publication at level III.
The issue at stake in publication is how much and how to publish.
It is in this context that the extraordinary redundancy of empirical
detail to be found in a site report should be considered. What really

                  THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                     17

TABLE 1.2 Levels of data according to site descriptions and loose material
              (Ancient Monuments Board for England)

Level     Site Descriptions               Loose Material

I         Site itself                     Excavated finds
          General Notes
II        Site note books                 Finds records
          Recording forms                 Photographs
          Drawings                        Negatives
III       Full illustration and           Classified find lists
          description of all structural   and drawings and all specialist
          and stratigraphical             analyses
          relationships
IV        Synthesized description and     Selected finds and reports
          data                            relevant to synthesis

Source: P. Barker (1977), p. 230.



is to be made of the 52 drawn sections (detailing layering and type
of infill) of pits found within the settlement? Of the tables of
measurements of bones? The authors presumably assume that such
things are self-explanatory and may be of interest or use. But is this
the case?
   An archival logistics is, then, a logic of neutrality, literally of
objectivity. The site report as archival catalogue names the object
world of the archaeological site, identifying, specifying, classifying
each and everything. The mark of the informational report is the
category. Categories reduce the heterogeneity of the object world.
The conventional sequence of categories in Wainwright is:

1 Structures: enclosures; pits; settlement phases.
2 Artefact finds: pottery; stone; metal; other.
3 Organic finds: animal; human; plant.

The sequence includes 'everything' found at Gussage All Saints.
The sequence of categories effects closure. But what is the origin
of the categories and their social meaning? Conventionally,
categories are points of method, part of reducing the data to
manageable units, securing a place for everything. They are part of
the law of neutral archaeological reason; categories are meant to
be neutral. But why should this 'neutral' categorization be used
rather than another?

18            THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY
   And is such categorization really neutral? It in no ways cures the
fundamental isolation of each self-present object in the report, the
assumed basic units of empirical science. The objects remain
detached from a historically located materiality, from the question
of their meaning other than that of objectivity (a meaning which
belongs to the historical present): the objects are simply
manipulated by neutral reason. So the past is, in effect, presented
with identity papers and locked up. There is a place for everything
and, apparently, everything is in its place. The tendency, ideal or
telos is a total administration of the past. No ambiguity is to be
allowed, no heterogeneity. Such deviance is to be banished to the
margins or eliminated.
   Categories gather together, but each category is not classifiable
according to itself. Categories gather but prevent closure. They are
both inside and outside the object world. Archaeology cannot be
absorbed into its object. Categories imply a signifying practice, a
material practice in the present. The theorization of categories
requires their relation to archaeology as a material and political
practice in the present.

A work of synthesis
The two volumes of Gibson's Beaker Domestic Sites (1982) are
aimed at filling a gap: drawing together and examining a neglected
category of data - non-ritual pottery and sites from the second
millenium BC in Britain. Gibson's study is a display of
archaeological reality: objects, archai - original sources, an
originary archaeological reality, objects through which access may
be gained to the past. While presenting a history of the study of
beaker domestic pottery, examining typologies, chronology, tra-
ditional problems of diffusion and influence of beaker style on
other ceramic design, and considering the possibility of a category
'Beaker domestic assemblage', the bulk of Gibson's book is a
catalogue of 167 pages, plus 210 pages of half scale drawings
of some 5,000 pot fragments of which all but 24 are 2.5 cm2 or
smaller.
   Such work encapsulates empiricism's subjective idealism: that
the archaeological object is identified with the conventional and
contemporary experience of it. Here we have a fetishism of the
object, a blindness towards the genesis of an object, its material
and conceptual production in past and present. As such, the text,
the drawings, utterly fail reality. The archaeologist becomes
museum scribe, copying and copying the past: ritualistic scrutiny,
display and repetition. And there is also the same redundancy of

               THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                    19
detail as we noted in the site report - the detail of 5,000 diminutive
pot sherds and . . . sites to be studied in the future?
   The aim of such works is primarily synthesis, to draw together a
body of data conceived as related according to archaeological
categorization, to classify and reclassify. But the issue of
categorization is again seriously abbreviated. Gibson's problem is
that of beaker domestic pottery. We might ask the meaning of a
study, a catalogue with commentary, devoted to such a category.
He talks of the problem of distinguishing 'ritual from domestic'
and defines domestic pottery as 'all finds not directly associated
with a burial' and presents a diagram labelled as a 'Model for
beaker context possibilities' (figure 1.1). All the categories he
adopts - fabric, fine, coarse, burial, ritual, domestic - are
categories of common sense, assumed as meaningful and self-
evident. They remain unexamined, their definition regarded as
essentially transparent. That there are variations in the meanings
attached to different linguistic expressions of the same phenomena
and differences in the meanings attached to the same words or
phrases, according to who interprets them and according to their
context of appearance, according that is to their inscription in
textual and social practices, is forgotten. Nor are the categories of
material culture, the social, ceramic production, critically
theorized. The consequence is statements such as the following,
taken from the conclusion to 92 pages of discussion: 'Domestic
sites act as a type of cauldron for interaction between contem-
porary pottery styles. This interaction is, however, natural, and to
be expected where individual potters are at work and producing
goods which they regard as aesthetically pleasing' (Gibson, 1982,
p. 92). Nowhere has Gibson considered the concept of interaction
(of pottery styles?), style, the 'natural', the individual, work,
goods, or the aesthetic. All are taken from common sense, all
remain untheorized.
   Gibson's study is certainly not exceptional in the archaeological
literature, not even in the single-minded devotion to empiricism, to
the aura of the archaeological find, required to produce measured
drawings of 5,000 sherds 2.5 cm2. Whatever the supposed value of
such studies, gathering and making accessible arrays of data, they
only serve to reveal the effects of the lack of critical theoretical
reflection on conventional archaeological practice.

A work of synopsis
Smooth, 'readable', well-illustrated, comprehensive and relatively
progressive, Prehistoric Europe by Champion et al. (1984) is an

20             THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY




     FIGURE 1.1      Gibson's 'Model for beaker context possibilities'
Source: A Gibson (1982).

               THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                     21
excellent textbook covering all of Europe from earliest times to
the Roman Empire. It is a synoptic text, a general summarizing
view from a detached viewpoint. Abridging and crystallizing, this is
a withdrawal from practical engagements with the archaeological
object into interpretation. It represents reason's claim to legislate a
truth as synoptic, rational and conceptual, with heterogeneity
marginalized in a strategy of comparison, compilation and
coherence.
   In this book, a sophisticated example of British processual
archaeology about which we will have much to say later, prehistory
is brought to coherence as a kaleidoscopic interaction of the same
'essential' categories of economy, environment, population and the
social: this is conceived as socio-economic process. So each chapter
is an application of this conceptual scheme to stretches of
prehistory, comparing different regions, compiling patterns,
trends, discontinuities. The overall result is the establishment of a
pattern of 'development'.
   The text attempts to produce a 'balanced' account using
different archaeological approaches, from palaeoeconomy to
structural Marxism, different investments in the archaeological
data bearing returns in the form of synoptic width. But we argue
that the width, the academic neutrality, the attempted balance of
different views within an all-embracing atemporal, aspatial 'socio-
economic' process is ultimately incoherent. 'Materialist'
explanations of material culture-patterning according to a logic of
the ecosystem do not simply stress different aspects of the same
socio-economic process to those theorized in structural Marxist
archaeologies which give primacy to the structuring of social
relations of production; they do not simply represent different
interpretations of the same data (see, for example, pp. 149-51).
This narrative line, subsuming fundamentally incompatible
approaches, reveals such processual archaeology as an old
historicism glossed with new jargon and methods. We argue instead
that it is essential to question the political status and meaning of
categories and theory. This applies equally to the book's theme
of European prehistory. As Rowlands has argued: 'a prehistory of
Europe cannot be assumed (except ideologically) . . . it does not
exist except as the presentist projection into prehistory of current
interest in establishing a unified sense of a "European" past'
(1984, p. 154). Indeed much evidence could be extracted from this
work that 'Europe' is a coherent archaeological concept only in the
terms of university courses in prehistory. The explicit intention
behind the book - the authors would probably agree - is to fill a

22                THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY
particular gap in archaeological discourse and provide an elemen-
tary student text. Yet a text which does not appear to be critically
aware of its own insertion within an established socio-economic
political structure and smoothes over the social and political
implications of choosing alternative frameworks for the inter-
pretation of the 'European' or any other past, can hardly be
expected to provide a stimulus for critical thought.

An introductory text
Attractively packaged and cleanly written, Greene's Archaeology:
an Introduction (1983) is designed for an undergraduate course
introducing archaeology. As with all introductions to archaeology,
we find an overwhelming emphasis on method and technique
- excavation, fieldwork and techniques of artefact analysis
- involving the recovery and scrutiny of basic evidence (114 out of
175 pages). The unfortunate effect of such texts is to identify the
discipline of archaeology with its technical instrumentation. Some
primers may supplement this with a precis of archaeological
achievements - discoveries - or, as in Greene's book, a history of
archaeology, presented as the histories of the archaeological
achievements of imaginative individuals (30 out of 175 pages).
   In the final chapter, entitled 'Making sense of the past', Greene
gives his account and assessment of recent developments: 'the
hottest area of debate in contemporary archaeology is between
traditional and new archaeology, and the applicability of various
theoretical approaches and their resultant frameworks'
(pp. 154-5). Different theories for Greene produce different
frameworks which may be applied to the data. He comments that
this is the excitement of contemporary archaeology, the fervent
debate. But archaeology's fundamental unity is apparently not
challenged. In the first place, theory is identified as essentially
heuristic, as providing different ways of looking at the same data.
So Greene comments;

     the new archaeology has greatly improved the quality of information
     in some areas of archaeology, and has produced a better framework
     for seeking explanations for that very reason. It is in many ways
     similar to the demands made by Edward de Bono in the general field
     of problem solving by lateral thinking.
                                                                 (p. 162)

   Second, Greene follows Daniel in seeing a coherence in the
history of archaeology as a discipline - not much has really changed
since the eighteenth century! The history of archaeology apparently

                THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                    23
shows that 'the terminology and preoccupations do of course
change, but the objectives and attitudes to the evidence . . . have a
familiar ring' (p. 174). Daniel makes almost identical assertions:
'archaeologists have always been talking about evolutionary
change and cultural process' (1981, p. 191). The underlying
argument is, of course, that all that really matters are the data
'sources', nothing else really changes in its fundamentals. Greene,
'liberal' and detached, is sceptical of any final answers, any
certainty. There are no wholly right or wrong answers, no final
truths. The only certainty we are left with is the objectivity of the
past, its 'facticity'. Hence the emphasis in such introductions to
archaeology on methods and techniques, and the corollary that
archaeology is detached from its historical reality as academic
disciplinary practice. Its history becomes, as mentioned, a succession
of individual imaginative consciousnesses.


              Contemporary archaeological discourse
At the moment archaeological discourse is seriously abbreviated. It
doesn't matter what you say as long as you say it in the right way;
as long as you conform to the rules of empiricist/positivist
discourse, rational method; as long as what you say is reasonable,
not fantasy or extreme, is open to 'testing' against the data, is not
overtly political, is not subjective. And if you transgress these laws
of discourse, the epistemology and ontology police are waiting.
   A repressive pluralism holds sway; we can only decide between
different archaeologies according to prescribed laws of method and
discourse. Different archaeologies are conceived as simply different
approaches to the same past. Consequently, decision becomes
paralysed. Contemporary archaeology has no way of coping with
the perceived crisis of information, the large amount of
archaeological information now being amassed, and what we
identify as a redundancy of detail, other than by management and
archival strategies.
   Archaeological discourse is practised and dominated by experts,
detached academic specialists for the most part ignoring or blind to
the social conditions of their practice, conceiving these and their
personal subjective experiences of archaeology as theoretically
irrelevant. A subjective idealism privileges essential objectivity, the
transcendental origin of knowledge, identifying the object and
archaeological experiences of it. This is the only manner in which
subjective experience is theoretically acceptable.

24            THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY

   A teleology specifies the transcendental goal of archaeology as
the past in itself and for itself. This goal is beyond question and
decision, overriding and regulating the process and method of
attaining the goal. The past is the aim; the task is to follow method,
keep to the laws of discourse. Generally, contemporary archae-
ology can be characterized as being pervaded by a set of categorical
oppositions.

           Practice                     Theory
           Object                       Subject
           Past                         Present
           Presence                     Absence
           Substance                    Re-presentation
           Reality                      Rhetoric, text

           SECURITY                     SUSPICION

Underlying and giving meaning to these oppositions are the two
other terms: security and suspicion. 'Practice' through to 'reality'
imply a nexus of security and, accordingly, these are considered
primary in contrast to the questionability and suspicion underlying
their opposites. Practice or doing archaeology via the application
of method is given primacy over ideas and conceptualization. Hard
facts are deemed to expel and annihilate soft ideas. The interpreting
subject always becomes something to be regretted - all archae-
ologists ought to be suspicious of themselves and others, and
the past shouldn't become infected with the present. Consequently,
the past becomes conceived as a set of presences (artefacts and their
associations) contrasted with the present, absented and distanced
from the past. The past is felt to reside in an objective substance of
its own - the reality, the presence, of the hand axe. However, the
past clearly does not possess objective substance when described or
re-presented in a text. The admittance of the relevance of theory,
subjectivity, the present, writing, makes us feel suspicious,
insecure, on weak ground. Essentially, it becomes problematic that
people who write archaeology have different aspirations, live in the
present and write texts.
   The solution of the aporiai of these oppositions appears an
impossible one. If we could go back in a time capsule would we not
produce better archaeology? Ultimately on this line of reasoning,
all archaeology must be suspicious, dangerous. But this is, as we
have said, idealist fantasy.

               THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                    25

      ARCHAEOLOGY AS THEORETICAL PRACTICE

It is time to subvert these oppositions. Each opposed term in fact
defines the other. No single term can be considered to stand on its
own, self-referring. Each term is defined by what it excludes, what
it denies. Consequently, subverting these oppositions requires their
mediation. This is not simply to say, for example, that theory and
data are equal and paired, each affecting the other, each as
important as the other in archaeological practice (Renfrew, 1982).
It is to contend that all the terms are aspects of the same material
process, the same material practice. It is to accept our experience as
archaeologists of producing the past now. Accordingly, theory is
not something mental as opposed to practical, not an abstraction
(distraction), which can be applied to objective data if so wished.
Consider theory's metaphorical roots in the Greek:

Theaomai: to gaze at, spectate (with a sense of wonder).
Theoreo: spectate, review, inspect, contemplate, consider, to
  consult an oracle.
Theoros: a spectator at the theatre or the games.
Theorema: object of contemplation, subject of investigation.
Theatron: place for seeing, for assembly.
Theoria: mission to an oracle, contemplation, consideration.

Theory is not separate from practice. Theory is reflection, critique,
performance, a theatre for action, an act and object of
contemplation: these are aspects of the same material process, the
theoretical practice of archaeology. So knowing the past means
producing it in the present. Past and present are mediated in the
practice of archaeology, in excavation and the writing of
archaeological texts.
   The archaeological text represents the necessary inscription of
the artefact. Inscription is signifying practice which cannot be
absorbed into the archaeological object. The object and its context
(the subject of archaeology) must necessarily be given metaphorical
expression, be signified in the text. As we have argued, simple,
unmediated, immediate experience and expression of the past is an
idealist fiction. No text is a transparent medium expressing an
essential meaning of the past. Writing occurs in the present, it is a
material means of production. As a social practice it is a threading
together of the social, historical, linguistic and personal. There is
no escape from this nexus. Archaeology is, then, immediately

26              THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY
theoretical, social, political and autobiographical. Subjectivity, in
the sense of autobiography, relating practice to the living of which
it is an aspect, is not a deviation from real archaeology; it is the
gesture which defuses the power of the public law of archaeological
reason or discourse. To express it another way: to contend that we
can only know the mediated object requires the mediation of the
object world and the archaeologist's subjectivity. The subjective
becomes the form of the objective because both are aspects of the
same material process.
   To return to categorization: a materialist emphasis on theory as
practice requires a redefinition of the object world, a reconcep-
tualizing centred on mediation. Instead of self-contained objects
possessing identity, there are fields of relations. Identity
presupposes difference from something else. There are no
conclusive categories which can incorporate the differential and
relational complexity of material reality and production. No
concept or category is ever adequate to that which it signifies; the
world cannot be compartmentalized according to categories of
consciousness. There are, then, flaws in every concept and these
make it necessary to refer to other concepts. Each category,
apparently self-referring and inside itself, is in reality defined by
what it excludes, by its chronic relation of difference to other
categories. The result is a texture of webs of meaning. Meaning is
never fully present, never fully disclosed, never final or conclusive;
it is always deferred, in some ways absent, subject to redefinition
and negotiation.
   Categories are never adequate to the past. Interpretation does
not produce stability nor effect closure. In the same way there are
no universal truths to be found in the past. We, as archaeologists,
are not gradually piecing together a better and better or more
complete account of the past. Truths apply to the historical
conjuncture and are wrapped up in the historical, social and
personal mediation of subject and object, theory and practice, past
and present. Interpretation, rather than effecting closure, opens up
or discloses, creating discontinuity, difference.
   The past, then, is gone; it can't be recaptured in itself, relived as
object. It only exists now in its connection with the present, in the
present's practice of interpretation. So it is not the objects of the
past and their preservation which matter so much as the relations
revealed and created between them in the historical act of inter-
pretation. Instead of a past whose meaning is transparent to
enlightened reason, or lost in mystery, we emphasize the act of
interpretation. Indeed, according to our contention of the

               THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY                     27
mediation of past and present, subjectivity and objectivity, theory
and data, the past like an oracle requires interpretation.
   Interpretation cannot be reduced to a methodology. We decry
method as a way back to an absent past and refuse a rigorous
method-ology. Method must instead be understood to arise out of
a practical confrontation with the object. It is the affective as
opposed to the effective. To argue that the past is chronically
subject to interpretation and reinterpretation does not imply that
all pasts are equally valid. Nor can it be accommodated in a shrug
of the shoulders or a scepticism which would doubt the ultimate
validity of any archaeology. It means the past forms an expansive
space for intellectual struggle in the present and that we must
accept the necessity for self-reflection and critique, situating
archaeology in the present. Critique involves evaluation and makes
taking sides a necessity, accepting responsibility for a decision as to
why and how to write the past, and for whom. This responsibility
belongs to us however much we might try to privilege the objectivity
of the artefact or the neutrality of academic discourse.
   What is the substance of this theoretical practice? What should
be the focus of archaeology? There are the following unavoidable
and crucial questions.

1 How is social reality created and structured?
2 What is the place of material culture, archaeology's object,
  within social reality?
3 How is social reality related to time; how and why does social
  reality change?
4 What is the meaning and form of gaining knowledge of past
  social reality?
There is no question of whether or not a consideration of social
theory is needed in archaeology. The question to be asked is what
kind of theory it should be - a strategic question. The questions
posed above can receive no simple answers prior to being worked
out in practice. So we are not proposing to replace a bad theory
with a better theory, of archaeology, society, or whatever. To
propose another theory to be applied, a theory reckoned to be
better in some way, is to reproduce the split between theory and
practice and to add to the proliferation of archaeological
'approaches' to the past. We are not going to argue that any
particular method or approach or concept is automatically and
wholly to be rejected. To do so abstractly would be to commit
the error of theoreticism. What we shall do in the following

28             THEORY AND METHOD IN ARCHAEOLOGY

chapters is to consider each of the above questions and examine
and emphasize theory as a practice which cannot be separated from
the object of archaeology, itself indelibly social, and the present
socio-political context of this practice, this mediation of past and
present.
