            Social Archaeology


Archaeologists have long realized the necessity of going beyond
antiquarianism, the collection and study of artefacts for their own
sake, and have attempted various forms of historical narrative and
social reconstruction, setting artefacts in their context. This has
predominantly involved relating material culture to units which
subsume the individual - cultures, societies, culture systems: social
totalities. This is because archaeology's data have been thought to
require a conceptual occlusion of the agents who were originally
responsible for producing the past. Before considering this striking
absence of the individual social actor in archaeological theory we
will examine the project of a social archaeology as it has developed
in Britain by examining a series of texts.


    SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY: A TEXTUAL CRITIQUE

          The social narrative of traditional archaeology
A synopsis of prehistory from the first farmers to the Roman
empire, Piggott's Ancient Europe (1965) is a chronological
narrative of archaeological material, selected as outstanding or
exemplary. For Piggott the narrative is one of a contrast to Western
civilization: aggression and violence, barbarism and brutality, the
less endearing attributes of humanity (p. 14ff). And the narrative is
the traditional one of change explained by invasions, folk
movements, cultural diffusion and warfare.
   Piggott's account of the societies acting out this narrative is
entirely descriptive, rooted in common-sense categories of the
social. He proclaims (p. 7) that prehistorians 'move in a world of
anonymous societies, defined by their distinctive traditions in the

30                           SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

style and manufacture of everyday objects'. So the book outlines
the ways of life: early farmers' house design (invariably peasant),
economy, and when evidence is available, clothing and hairstyles.
Examples are given of craft skills and workmanship, and artistic
achievement is suitably appreciated:

     In Celtic art, 'man is a stranger'. . . attractive and repellent; it is far
     from primitiveness and simplicity . . . is refined in thought and
     technique; elaborate and clever: full of paradoxes, restless,
     puzzlingly ambiguous.
                                                                       (P. 243)

Temples, henges, cursus monuments, ritual accoutrements - all
attest to the limitations of archaeological inference: 'we have no
information on the beliefs which prompted the construction of
these sacred places, nor of the rites performed within them'
(p. 116). Such material expressions of religious or ritual
phenomena are shrouded in mystery; they can only be described
Occasionally, however, from evidence such as 'the presumed cult-
figures of obese women' in Malta (p. 115), a guess may be made of
the existence of some divinity.
   In the terms of Piggott's empiricism the structure of society can-
not be directly perceived, although inference from a diversity in the
quality and richness of artefacts and burials may lead to a
conception of a ranked society. Social hierarchy is consistently and
simply seen in terms of princes or chieftains: this is the extent of
Piggott's analyses of social ranking. For example, the rich round
barrow burials in Wessex, England are described in terms of princely
panoply: ' "they are assuredly the single sepulchres of kings and
great personages . . . " wrote William Stukeley in the eighteenth
century of the barrows on Salisbury plain, and he was right'
(P. 129).
   A repeated stress on the limitations of archaeological evidence is
accompanied by its literary elaboration and enlivenment. Here is
Piggott on the Celtic chieftain:

     The panoply and equipment of the battle-drunk, screaming tribal
     chieftain, in his chariot hung with the decapitated heads of his foes,
     the air raucous with the sound of the baritus and the carnyx . . .
                                                                       (p. 243)

   The values, aspirations and theoretical outlook of such works
(for Hawkes (1968) the distillation of history from disparate facts,
'writing of quality and humanity' (p. 256)) are still held today by

                       SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

many archaeologists. Burgess's work, The Age of Stonehenge
(1980), aspires to such an example. The first 130 pages of this 330
page book are an artefact-centred chronicle of British prehistory
(3200 - 1200 BC) interspersed with rudimentary social sketching,
again rooted in common-sense categories. So Burgess comments
that far-reaching social, ideological and spiritual upheavals are
indicated by important changes in material Culture, in burial
practices, and in the fate of the great public centres of the third
millennium (p. 79). Artefact change means social change. And,
somewhat earlier, 'the bewildering variety of burial customs which
emerged in the Meldon Bridge period in part reflects the very
complex structure of society at that time' (p. 61). After the
chronicle, Burgess presents a description of society in this 'Age of
Stonehenge': what the people were like, what they wore, what sort
of settlements they lived in, the agriculture, crafts and industries
they practised, their means of transport and communication, their
burial ritual and ceremony are all featured. For Burgess, such
description represents society as available to the archaeologist.
Simple statements about social stratification (chiefdoms,
paramount chiefs and superchiefs) are elaborated by reference to
later literary sources (particularly Irish sagas). This, along with
discussion of Celtic origins, amounts to the full extent of Burgess's
social analysis.
   In this index card (already a floppy disc?) archaeology, the
particularity of the past is preserved in descriptive detail:
description of hair styles, inventories of cinerary urns, discussions
of post hole patterning. The sort of speculation as to the meaning
of such variety is, perhaps, encapsulated in Burgess's comments
on the reason for increasing deposition of bronzes in rivers, lakes
and springs at the end of his period: 'with the increased precipi-
tation and waterlogging after 1500 BC a development of water-
cults makes good sense' (p. 351). People were fed up with the


                         Systems theory
Renfrew's Emergence of Civilisation (1972) was the first major
application of systems theory in British archaeology. Following
Clarke's general programmatic statement of a systems-based
archaeology (1968), Renfrew set out to explicitly theorize the
workings of Aegean society in the third millennium BC and trace
an explanation for the emergence of the 'civilized' palace
economies of Crete and mainland Greece.

                           SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

   Society is conceived as a system, 'an intercommunicating network
of attributes or entities forming a complex whole' (Clarke, 1968,
p. 42). These entities are subsystems which amount to regularized
patterns of social behaviours (figure 2.1). The interconnections are
mechanisms of negative feedback maintaining balance or
equilibrium. Each subsystem, and the system itself, are kept within
assigned limits or maintained in a stable state by homoeostatic
mechanisms which counteract any disturbance. So, for example,
poor fishing means less fish to eat; negative feedback results in
more fishing or use of food other than fish. Relations of positive
feedback involve the amplification of an initial deviation,
extending and increasing processes already present. Renfrew
defines a particular variant of positive feedback as the 'multiplier


                               POPULATION


               SUBSISTENCE                     METALLURGY




 COMMUNI-                                                          CRAFTS
  CATION




                 PROJECTIVE                        SOCIAL
                 SUBSYSTEM                       SUBSYSTEM


                                POPULATION


                FIGURE 2.1 Renfrew's'Culture system'
 Notes: All the subsystems are linked with each other and the external system
          environment with relations of positive or negative feedback.
Source: From C. Renfrew (1972). Reprinted by permission of Methuen & Co.

                         SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

effect, where a deviation in one subsystem has the effect of
bringing about innovation in another:
  Changes or innovations occurring in one field of human activity (in
  one subsystem of a culture) sometimes act so as to favour changes in
  other fields (in other subsystems). The multiplier effect is said to
  operate when these induced changes in one or more subsystems them-
  selves act so as to enhance the original changes in the first subsystem.
                                                                   (p. 37)

The multiplier effect is Renfrew's explanation of the emergence of
Aegean civilization. In what he claims as a 'necessary preliminary'
(p. 17) Renfrew produces 160 pages of traditional archaeological
discourse specifying and describing details of cultural sequences.
This is followed by a description of 'culture process' - a chapter is
devoted to the parameters of his system (environment, population
and settlement pattern), and individual chapters to the various
subsystems (subsistence, metallurgy, crafts, social, the symbolic,
trade and communication). For each he summarizes the general
patterns and trends: for example, the development of craft
specialization and metal working enabling new tools and new
weapons and new forms of wealth; transformation of tribe into
chiefdom, into principality or state. In the final chapter Renfrew
presents two multiplier effects: 'the decisive factor for the
development of Aegean civilization was the development of a
redistributive system for subsistence commodities. This emerged as
a consequence of the intensive exploitation of a new spectrum of
food plants/notably tree crops, yielding a new diversity in produce'
(p. 480). The second: 'the decisive factor . . . is the emergence of a
stratified society, where high status correlates with material wealth
and military prowess. These features arose largely as a consequence
of the development of metallurgy and of maritime trade' (p. 483).
Both are taken as models offering explanation for the emergence of
civilization.
   Renfrew's systems framework offered many advantages over
traditional archaeologies:
1 it required explicit theorization of the social.
2 It directed attention to social process as lying behind material
  culture patterning.
3 In focusing on social process it involved considering
  explanation and causality rather than simple documentation of
  variety in space and time.
4 It involved a stress on complex causality: 'no single factor,
  however striking its growth, can of itself produce changes in the
  structure of culture' (p. 39).

34                         SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

.    It necessitated a consideration of subsystem interaction within a
     cultural whole, rather than permitting concentration on any
     single cultural phenomenon, such as subsistence or ceramic
     design.

However, in common with other uses of systems theory in
archaeology, culture is conceived as man's extrasomatic means
of adaptation (p. 13). The social logic of Renfrew's systems theory
is that of function. Each subsystem is 'explained' in terms of its
function in maintaining the existence of the whole cultural system,
while the system itself is conceived as a mediatory entity,
biologically adapting a population to its natural environment.
Civilization, Renfrew's ultimate theme, thus becomes a socio-
cultural form of adaptation to nature: 'civilisation is the complex
artificial environment of man; it is the insulation created by man,
an artefact which mediates between himself and the world of
nature. Since man's environment is multi-dimensional so too is
civilisation' (p. 13). This logic of adaptation and functionalist
explanation has long been questioned in the social sciences, and
criticism within archaeology is also well established (e.g. Hodder,
1982; Tilley, 1981a, 1981b). Theorizing a cultural entity as adaptive
or functional simply affirms its existence and provides little
comprehension of its specific form of articulation. To say that
institutions and regularized customs of society are artefacts and can
be regarded to fulfil functions broadly analogous to those of
material artefacts which mediate between people and the natural
environment, as Renfrew does, is to say nothing about why the
institutions and customs take the specific form they do.
  To conceive culture as adaptive means that societies are regarded
as primarily conservative - maintaining equilibrium within their
environment through homoeostatic negative feedback devices.
Change becomes a problem:

     This conservative nature of culture cannot too strongly be stressed.
     In terms of our model it is the natural tendency of culture to persist
     unchanged... it is change, any change, which demands explanation.
                                                                   (p. 487)

Stability, apparently, just happens - it does not require explanation.
For Renfrew the multiplier effect is 'needed to overcome this innate
conservative homoeostasis of culture' (p. 487). The problem of
change is solved by reference to a mechanistic relation between
subsystems, and the notion of 'relation' becomes reified. The
mechanism is conceptualized as existing separately from the entities

                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

it unites: subsystems can be defined independently of their relations
with other subsystems. This begs the question of the ontology of
both subsystem and relation: what is negative feedback? what
exactly is a subsystem? do subsystems and systems exist? how are
they to be defined? Patterns of interactions, activities and artefacts
would seem to be Renfrew's answer (pp. 19-23). Renfrew accepts
that these regularized patterns are arbitrary categories imposed in
analysis (p. 20). This throws the burden of their specification on to
theory but Renfrew gives no justification for specifying sub-
systems as 'subsistence', 'technological', 'social', 'symbolic' and
'communicative', other than convenience. Why are they convenient,
and for what purpose? Renfrew does not confront the meaning or
significance of such categories. He accepts that boundaries are
difficult to define: 'Criteria of different degrees of uniformity will
lead to the definition of larger or smaller units' (p. 21). But what is
to specify the application of different criteria? Intuition?
Usefulness? Obviousness? Again, this is not theorized. In
Renfrew's book the categories of system and subsystem are
descriptive, referring to empirical patterning. The entire procedure
of systems analysis is heuristic, its usefulness being its stress on
complexity and interaction. Renfrew has realized this (p. 495) and
his later work with catastrophe theory (1978, 1979) may be seen as
an attempted solution, a solution involving the quantification of
culture and the specification of a mathematized social process.
   The interactions of negative and positive feedback are, as we
have said, reified mechanisms between arbitrary analytical
categories, mechanisms derived from cybernetic theory. They are
not a social logic but based on analogies with machines, analogies
which take no account of human agency and praxis (cf. below).
   In that subsystems and interactions are defined independently,
the synchronic is separated from the diachronic, static analysis
from the explanation of change. This relates to society being
conceived as naturally conservative, denying change, being
naturally timeless, and change being problematic, that which is to
be explained (see chapter 5 below).
   Renfrew's systems analysis proceeds by successive reduction of
empirical detail to categories, a process of simplification. So
culture sequence is transformed into systemic categories, sub-
systems, whose general patterning and trends are isolated. These
general trends are then encapsulated in a dual model of emergence
of complex society - 'civilization'. The result is an extraordinary
redundancy of detail (the redundancy already noted in chapter 1).
The relation between the culture sequence of part I and the

                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

processual analyses in part II of Renfrew's book seems to be that
the first is chronicle - neutral exposition - while part II is theory
applied to this data as an explanation. Archaeological remains
from over a thousand years of Aegean prehistory are reduced to
some 24 pages of multiplier effect (pp. 480-504). Now, of course,
simplification and generalization are essential to any analytical or
theoretical practice but it is as essential to pose the question of the
meaning, significance and character of this generalization. We
argue that Renfrew's study is an application, an imposition of pre-
defined categories of system and subsystem on to the 'data'. It
lacks self-reflexiveness. The categories of system, subsystem, feed-
back, exist in no 'real' or 'theoretical' relation to the object of
study. The only relation is that of application (p. 18); it is purely
methodological - theory is held to exist separately from data. This
is the corollary to the arbitrary definition of subsystem and the non-
social cybernetic logic of the mechanisms of interaction. The con-
comitant of this is that any complexity claimed for the explanation is
entirely a function (sic) of the model of system (the applied theory)
and does not necessarily apply to the data which are meant to be
explained. This imposition throws into focus the politics of
Renfrew's theory - the stress on the conservative nature of society,
and the adopted model of homo oeconomicus (see esp. pp. 497ff).
   Renfrew's Emergence of Civilisation prefigures many of the
major aspects and developments in the social archaeology of the
1970s and early 1980s:
1 Procedures of applying social theories to archaeological data.
2 Processual explanation based on an identification of patterned
   behaviours from archaeological remains and specification of
   their complex interaction.
3 Theoretical use of social typologies: evolutionary sequences of
   bands, tribes, chiefdoms, etc.
4 A related focus on the identification of social ranking.
5 An emphasis, often economistic, on the general importance of
   social control of material resources.
6 A focus on the analysis of mortuary remains from a structural-
   functionalist and role-model perspective.
 ' The development of models of trade and exchange.
8 Use of the notion of prestige goods economies.
9 Use of cross-cultural generalizations.

In the following sections we analyse some of these developments in
archaeological theorizations of the social.

                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY                         37

                          Social typologies
The social typology, band, tribe, chiefdom and state (Sahlins,
 1968; Service, 1962) has had tremendous influence on social
archaeology. While forming the basis of various forms of
evolutionary thinking in archaeology it has also, more generally,
provided a vocabulary for social archaeology. The static and
descriptive nature of the categories has meant that change from one
category to another is problematical and has led to the claim that
identification of a particular 'type' of society somehow constitutes
an explanation. This is clear from Renfrew's 'recognition' of
chiefdoms in neolithic Wessex, southern England (1973). He first
specifies 20 features of chiefdoms (following Sahlins and Service),
including ranking, the distribution of surplus by chiefs, 'clearly
defined territorial boundaries', 'frequent ceremonies and rituals
serving wide social purposes' (p. 543). There is no discussion of
social process, of the working of a chiefdom social system.
Renfrew proceeds to identify territorial divisions on the basis of
ceremonial monuments - causewayed camps - in the earlier
neolithic. He thinks these were emerging chiefdoms coalescing in
the later neolithic into one greater chiefdom with constituent tribes.
The archaeological evidence is considered to fit into this social
categorization: mobilization of humanpower; craft specialization;
religious specialization. For example, the Stonehenge area with
major ceremonial monuments is considered evidence of the
existence of a paramount chief. This checklist archaeology, and the
social typologies on which it is based, although much criticized
(e.g. Tainter, 1978) for its reductive subsumption of variability,
nevertheless remains in use (e.g. Collis, 1984; and see chapter 6
below).


                 Ranking, resource and exchange
The volume Ranking, Resource and Exchange (Renfrew and
Shennan (eds), 1982) in many respects represents the culmination
of the programme of functionalist social archaeology in Britain,
covering almost all of the elements of what is now a virtual
theoretical hegemony standing opposed to traditional archaeology.
The fifteen essays exemplify three routes for exploring ranking:
settlement ranking and political structures involving ideas of co-
ordinating political centres and core-periphery relations; the
mobilization and organization of surplus labour especially in
ceremonial monument construction; ranking and status of

                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

individual social personae identified particularly in the analysis of
mortuary remains.
   The predominant focus is on resources and their control and
management. Sherratt considers agricultural wealth in the
Carpathian basin from the sixth millennium BC, proposing
regional exchange networks linking nodal lowland areas and
highland hinterlands involving domestic cattle. He argues this is a
primary feature in emerging social hierarchy. Shennan and S.
Champion consider the role of rare exchanged items, amber and
coral respectively, in the earlier Bronze and Iron Ages of central and
western Europe. Both propose prestige goods ranking systems,
hierarchical societies where social position depended on
consumption of prestige goods. Haselgrove has an elaborated
prestige goods system in the late pre-Roman Iron Age centralized
polities of south-east England, elaborated in its incorporation at
the periphery of an expansive Roman empire, the core polity and
source of prestige goods. Thus one process in social hierarchization
is identified as relating to trade, exchange and societal interaction.
Another process relates to the intensification and specialization of
production of agriculture and crafts and subsequent management
and control. Chapman considers control of critical resources -
land, water, copper and interregional traded items - as a deter-
minant factor in the development of social ranking in Iberia,
4000-1000 BC. The Rhine Main basin, 1500-500 BC, is con-
sidered by T. Champion who derives the pattern of settlement
relocation, subsistence innovation, enhanced social ranking,
technological development and ritual activities ('Urnfield'
phenomena) from an imbalance between subsistence resources
and population.
   This social logic of giving priority to relations between
population, subsistence and environment is frequent in such
'processual' studies. So Halstead and O'Shea present a self-styled
'adaptive model' for the emergence of redistributive economies and
apply it to the 'palaces' of Bronze Age Crete. Accumulation of
tokens of value which may be exchanged for foodstuffs in times of
shortage is termed social storage - an adaptive response to periodic
failure in food supply. The tokens used in social storage -craft
items, durable and convertible - 'would have permitted the sustained
accumulation and manipulation of wealth and power and so have
facilitated the emergence of institutionalised social inequality'
(p. 98) - the Cretan palace civilization. Gamble relates settlement
nucleation and political developments in the Bronze Age Aegean
(Melos) to agricultural intensification and control.

                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY                                39

   There is no doubt that this volume of studies represents a
considerable advance over traditional archaeology in its concen-
tration on the patterning of social process. But this is conceived in
purely descriptive terms (cf. Whallon, 1982). The relations between
a limited number of cross-cultural variables are described in their
various combinations (figure 2.2). These variables amount to
resources and the mechanisms of their control as is indicated by the
reduction of social ranking to the effects of two processes: those of
exchange and societal interaction, and intensification of
production.
   The functionalist logic of such processes is very apparent in
many of the studies. So, for example, T. Champion talks of the
strain on subsistence resources in late second-millennium BC
Germany:

  The particular strategy adopted to meet this strain was to minimise
  risk and provide a buffer against subsistence failure. This required
  increased levels of managerial control internally and of exchange
  relations externally, and had an inbuilt predisposition towards
  growth.
                                                                (P. 65)


So the different parts of the system - production, ranking,
exchange, ritual - interact coherently in a whole adapted to its
particular environment. The task of archaeological explanation has
become that of describing the workings of such systems which are
held to account for patterning in the archaeological record.
Analysis of ranking is reduced to tracing the development of
complexity.
   This emphasis on descriptive process is in accordance with the
structure of the whole book - the attempt to develop a coherent
narrative of the emergence of hierarchical structure: appearance of
salient ranking; discussion of the resource base of early states and
post-collapse resurgence, the first millennium BC and post-Roman
dark ages. This background narrative to the individual studies is
foregrounded in the editorial introductions to each section. The
relations of this project to neo-evolutionary theory are also clear in
the functionalist frame of reference adopted and the use of cross-
cultural comparison associated with the identification of particular
instances of general processes claimed to have universal relevance
(Halstead and O'Shea, p. 98; Renfrew, p. 91). Hence it is possible
to reduce several thousand years of prehistory essentially to the
particular manifestations of the two processes outlined above.

                       SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY




FIGURE 2.2 Sherratt's social model for the Great Hungarian Plain
                            6OOO-35OOBC
              Notes: Rectangles represent external factors.
Source: From Renfrew and Shennan (eds), (1982). Reprinted by permission of
                      Cambridge University Press.

                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY                          41

   The separation of process and its manifestation in the.
archaeological record relates to the separation of theory and data,
the general and the particular, a separation which is frequently
duplicated in the structure of the essays themselves: general points
followed by empirical illustration. However, a more serious
criticism must be the lack of theorization of archaeology's primary
data - material culture. Identified patterning in material culture is
conceived as an immediate expression of social process; it is not
(see chapter 4).

                      Peer Polity Interaction
The effects of the simple descriptive basis of much processual
archaeology are very evident in the recent volume, Peer Polity
Interaction and Socio-Political Change (Renfrew and Cherry (eds),
1986). The concept of peer polity interaction refers to a series of
empirical observations which have been noted to occur together in
several instances. They are: (1) polities occur in regional clusters;
(2) organizational changes occur not singly within these clusters but
in more than one polity at about the same time; (3) changes in, for
example, conceptual systems for the communication of
information in artefacts associated with high status and in ritual
activities occur together and seem to be attributable to no single
locus of innovation (Renfrew, pp. 7-8). It is proposed that the
changes are the result of interaction between autonomous polities
within a single geographical region. These interactions include
competition; warfare and competitive emulation; symbolic entrain-
ment (adoption of a more developed symbolic system upon contact
with a less developed one); transmission of information; and
exchange of goods. The book consists of a series of illustrations of
these generalizations and processes in Aegean city-states, Minoan
palaces, complex chiefdoms in the European Iron age, Classic
Mayan centres, the Midwestern Hopewell, USA.
   The concept of peer polity interaction usefully emphasizes
societal interaction and complex processes of transformation rather
than synchronic analyses of the workings of a single polity.
Attention is also drawn to interactions which might be termed
symbolic or stylistic. However, as with the systems approach, there
is the very real problem of defining the units of interest - here peer
polities. Such a concept is clearly much easier to apply to early
civilizations with literary evidence available (Cherry and Renfrew,
pp. 150-1; Champion and Champion, p. 63). Elsewhere there is the
usual reliance on social typologies. Again the descriptive nature of

                          SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

the concept is evident, leaving untheorized so much of the social
logic of the phenomenon, in particular the role of material culture.
Renfrew and Cherry clearly think that peer polity interaction
allows consideration of the symbolic and the stylistic as well as the
economic and technological in a processual rather than an 'idealist'
context (p. viii). But the recurring assumption is that symbolic
entrainment, symbolic interaction, would be manifested as stylistic
similarity or homogeneity. We have already commented that the
relation of material culture to the social is not such a simple matter.
We might agree with Sabloff: 'we must be able to tie the
interactions of the hypothesized peers to specific features of the
archaeological record' (p. 116).

                   Analysis of mortuary practices
The pioneering work of Saxe (1970) and Binford (1972a) opened up
the analysis of mortuary practices as a primary means of
investigating past social systems. They developed the general
argument that mortuary practices need to be analysed in the
context of variations in types of society and social complexity. In
his paper Binford argued that:

  We would expect that other things being equal, the heterogeneity in
  mortuary practice which is characteristic of a single sociocultural
  unit would vary directly with the complexity of the status hierarchy,
  as well as with the complexity of the overall organization of the
  society with regard to membership units and other forms of
  sodalities.
                                                         (1972a, pp. 221-2)




  It is proposed that there are two general components of the social
  situation to be evaluated . . . First is what we may call, with
  Goodenough (1965, p. 7) the social persona of the deceased. This is a
  composite of the social identities maintained in life and recognized as
  appropriate for consideration at death. Second is the composition
  and size of the social unit recognizing status responsibilities to the
  deceased. We would expect direct correlations between the relative
  rank of the social position held by the deceased and the number of
  persons having duty-status relationships vis-a-vis the deceased.
                                                         (Ibid., pp. 225-6)

According to Binford, the main features which archaeologists may
be able to detect with regard to prehistoric social organization from

                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY                         43

an analysis of mortuary practices are: (1) the type of organization
present, whether or not it was essentially egalitarian or stratified,
whether or not the presence of distinct and/or competing corporate
groups is indicated; (2) the complexity of past social systems or, in
other words, how much structural differentiation there appears to
be. The main dimensions of social persona or roles which might be
recognized are age, sex, social affiliation and position as well as, in
certain cases, the conditions and locations of death.
   The volume, The Archaeology of Death (Chapman, Kinnes and
Randsborg (eds), 1981), fleshes out this position and succinctly
summarizes the theoretical position developed in the archaeological
literature at the outset of the 1980s. As Chapman, Randsborg and
Brown comment, effort has predominantly gone into analysing the
variety within the mortuary practices of a particular social unit in
attempting to identify social ranking. Attention has thus focused
on the range of artefacts deposited with the dead, assuming that
certain artefacts will symbolize social status (e.g. S. E. Shennan,
1975). Effort expenditure on the treatment of the deceased has also
been proposed as a key variable: greater expenditure correlating
with higher rank (e.g. Tainter, 1975, 1977, 1978). Other analyses
have considered the demographic structure of skeletal populations
searching for physical indications of social difference (e.g.
Buikstra, 1981). Analyses of mortuary practices have relied heavily
on the utilization of a range of statistical techniques, many
computer based, ranging from simple tests of statistical
significance to multivariate techniques such as cluster analysis and
principal components analysis.
   The general strategy in such studies is the identification of
pattern and its correlation with social complexity. Questions asked
of the data include: do certain artefacts regularly occur with others
in individual graves, or with sex or a particular age set of the
burial population; are certain burials orientated in a particular
direction as opposed to others; to what extent is the arrangement of
burials in a cemetery random or regularly patterned; how does the
spatial organization of burials differ within and between cemeteries;
what are the demographic parameters of deceased populations and
what symbolic dimensions (e.g. use of burial monuments as
territorial markers) might be inferred. Attention has also centred
on the arrangement of artefacts in graves and attempts to calculate
measures of effort expenditure. Such work has drawn heavily on
cross-cultural ethnographic 'tests' or surveys, with attempts being
made to set up more or less directly deterministic links, or
'behavioural correlates' between people, resources, and mortuary

                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

practices. These surveys are of dubious value and can hardly be
considered to vindicate the overall approach. A correlation is a very
different thing from an explanation, and there is no reason to
suppose that ethnographically documented cases of mortuary
practices provide a representative sample of forms of prehistoric
social organization.
   There has been increasing awareness of the complexity that
might be encountered and a call has been made for investigation of
processes of the formation of the archaeological record, processes
which may complicate the expression of social organization in
mortuary practices (O'Shea, 1981, 1984). In his study of 5 Plains
Indian cemeteries O'Shea reaffirms the direct expression of social
organization in burial practices but focuses on the additional
relationship between the practices and their archaeological
observation. It has also been noted that status need not be directly
reflected in burial but may be suppressed as a form of ideology
(Chapman and Randsborg, 1981, p. 14). However, rather than
directing attention to the need to theorize such aspects of material
culture they have been conceived primarily as just adding further
complexity, distortion to be counteracted in the derivation of social
pattern from the patterning of mortuary practices: 'what matters
here is that the archaeologist evaluates the degree to which the
mortuary data do reflect the social structure by means of
complementary data (e.g. settlements and settlement patterns,
metal hoards etc.)' (Chapman and Randsborg, 1981, p. 14).
   The entire theoretical perspective on which this work is based
draws heavily on structural-functionalist and role theory, as
developed in anthropology and sociology (Firth, 1971;
Dahrendorf, 1968; Merton, 1957; Nadel, 1957; Radcliffe-Brown,
1952). However, the theoretical basis of this work remains scantily
discussed. In the Archaeology of Death volume discussion of the
theoretical basis underlying the archaeological approaches and
analyses is virtually absent, apart from a few passing references to
the work of Goodenough. Within the perspective offered in this
book the notion of social structure implicitly employed is more or
less equivalent to pattern. Significantly, the concept does not even
appear in the index. Social structure (referred to in processual
archaeology predominantly in terms of ranking) is considered to
reside in the network of patterns of interactions between individual
agents, arising either from an analysis of empirically given realities
in social life, or abstractions based on these, such as the notion of
social persona or role. Such a conception is directly analogous to
that of anatomical pattern in biology, where the skeleton and

                       SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY                        45

organs may be held to provide a physical support for the body.
Radcliffe-Brown considered social structures in terms of three basic
problems: What kinds of structures are there and how best may we
categorize them? How do they function and maintain themselves?
How are the structures of different form constituted? For him, the
basic unit of structure was the 'elementary family' from which other
structural relations or kin ties could be deduced (1952, pp. 178-80).
In role theory a number of different roles forming an actor's
social persona are held to be enacted in different situations,
with the roles changing according to whether they have been
ascribed or achieved, and in terms of temporal enactment and
context. Various roles may be acted out by any one person (e.g. a bank
manager may also be a father and a Conservative Party official).
   In any role system there may be various degrees of role
summation, coherence, dependence or independence, within
society or with regard to other roles. Such a theory provides an
implausible and deterministic model of the relationships between
individuals and groups. As Giddens notes, 'the actors only perform
according to scripts which have already been written out for them'
(1976, p. 16). A person's role is regarded as given rather than
negotiated and renegotiated in practice. Actors merely slot into a
number of prescribed roles and act in conformity with them. But it
is people and not roles that actually constitute society. A serious
debilitating effect of this conception of social structure adopted in
processual archaeology is that it lacks any explanatory significance.
Conceptions of role, social persona, or social structure only have
significance as redescriptions of the archaeological evidence, they
are not explanatory. Function, rather than structure, plays the
explanatory role as human society can exist only in its activity; but
as we have argued, the specification of function is yet another form
of redescription of social practices and similarly remains non-
explanatory. The possibility that underlying principles of social
conduct exist in social forms, not directly discernible in terms of
perceived social relationships or roles, does not exist within the
framework of processual archaeology (cf. the consideration of
social structure below and in chapter 3). This lack may go some
way to affording an understanding of its predominantly descriptive
emphasis and lack of explanatory content.


                       Marxist archaeologies
From an explicitly Marxist outlook, Rowlands in his later work
(1982, 1984a) has outlined an alternative programme for a social

  46             SOCIAL            ARCHAEOLOGY

archaeology. With Gledhill (Gledhill and Rowlands, 1982, pp.
162-4) he has proposed a conception of the social totality which
differs markedly from the mechanical interactions of a systemic
perspective, or the largely untheorized concepts of 'society' used in
traditional archaeological narrative. Avoiding the formalism of
Althusser's conception of the social formation with its determinate
levels of economic base and superstructure and ultimate economic
determinism and functionalism (see chapter 6), Rowlands has
emphasized the necessity of theorizing total social systems with no
implied hierarchy of determination:

   theorising about long term socio-economic change in prehistory
   involves us in the construction of models of total social systems in
   which ideological, political and economic processes are linked to
   each other in a dialectical interplay rather than as determinate levels
   in a social formation.
                                       (Gledhill and Rowlands, 1982, p. 145)

But rather than an indeterminate interplay of relations Rowlands
gives weight to the political:

  History, in a concrete sense, emerges as the resolution of continuous
  antagonisms existing between social subjects. What defines the social
  whole, therefore, is the form of political articulation that constitutes
  the totality of social relations . . . it has no particular locus (in the
  state, for example)... It follows that politics is not definable in any
  institutional form but refers more generally to power struggle and to
  the idioms, symbols, and other means used to define relative status
  and position.
                                                   (Rowlands, 1982, p. 167)

We shall take up these points in more detail below (pp. 57-60;
7 2 - 8 ) . Rowlands has also raised the issue of the boundaries of
units of analysis. First, in advocating world systems analysis, inter-
societal exchange and interdependency, involving especially the
development of core and periphery areas (e.g. Frankenstein and
Rowlands, 1978). So,

  The distinction between 'internal' and 'external' relationships is
  therefore only a viable one in a limited sense. At given moments of
  time, existing societies can be linked together in new ways, and the
  results of this linking are not predictable without understanding how
  this change in external conditions of reproduction bears on internal
  structures.
                                      (Gledhill and Rowlands, 1982, p. 148)

                          SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

Secondly, Rowlands points to the analytical process of
classification and categorization. So the notion of society 'forms a
category only because archaeologists classify it as such, as part of
the taxonomic space within which they operate and as part of the
definition of their own discipline' (Rowlands, 1982, p. 164).
Ultimately notions of society relate to the emergence of nation-
states in Western Europe in recent times (ibid.) He also emphasizes
the importance of analysis of contradiction within social forms or
totalities - the internal generation of processes of transformation.
This is associated with a call for a genuine theory of history
'centred on social dynamics and transformation processes'
(Gledhill and Rowlands, 1982, p. 14S), a denial of the opposition
between the synchronic and the diachronic found in systems theory
and functionalist archaeology more generally.
   Rowlands stresses the materiality of the political and the
ideological and, therefore, that both are written into the archae-
ological record. The dialectical conception of social relations and
social totalities advanced (as opposed to mechanical articulation)
means, for example, that the economic and socio-political cannot
be separated. It also means that the conception of totality is
inseparable from its place in analysis. In Rowlands' words:

  Analysis proceeds from the abstraction of the whole to that of its
  parts and back to the whole again and from the abstract to the
  concrete at each of these levels. Such a view is always partial in the
  sense that some things are always left out, and the whole may or may
  not correspond to what may be isolated empirically as a concrete
  'society'. The totality is therefore a conceptual entity that has reality
  only in the sense that it forms a mental appropriation of a real world
  that exists separate from thought process. In this sense, population,
  society, or a mode of subsistence could all be totalities and
  abstractions at the same moment, the validity of their application
  depending on how they relate to each other in the analysis of
  concrete situations.
                                                  (Rowlands, 1982, p. 163)

This forms part of Rowlands' rejection of the categorical
opposition between materialism and idealism, facts and values, the
objective and the subjective, and the concept of reality (Rowlands,
1984a), replacing these with a recognition of the active intellectual
production of the past, with a critical awareness of the insertion of
archaeological categorization and theorization within a Western
political and intellectual context. This is, of course, in accordance
with his conception of the political.

                       SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

   It will be clear from the discussions which follow in this book,
and elsewhere (Tilley, 1982; Shanks and Tilley, 1982; Miller and
Tilley, 1984a, 1984b; Tilley, 1984, 1985; Shanks and Tilley, 1987),
that we fully endorse Rowlands' programmatic statements
concerning a true 'social archaeology'. However, we must reserve
criticism for the specific form of the development of models of
general processes of social transformation (Friedman and
Rowlands, 1978) (see chapter 6).
   Those archaeologists drawing inspiration in particular from
recent Marxist anthropology (see Spriggs (ed.), 1984, for a
bibliography) have made significant advances over competing
social archaeologies. They have produced more sophisticated
conceptualization of social totalities, extending consideration of
the political and ideological issues of legitimation from a narrower
focus on subsistence adaptation and interactions between
technologies, environment and population found in processual
functionalist archaeology (see above). However, most of
Rowlands' aims for a Marxist social archaeology have unfortu-
nately not yet been achieved.
   Consider, for example, Parker Pearson's work on the early Iron
Age of Denmark (1984a, 1984b); He makes a series of reasonable
abstract statements about the implications of a Marxist
archaeology:

1 Marxist theory has practical (political) implications.
2 Central to social analysis are conceptions of contradiction and
   conflict.
3 The role of ideology of articulating action and belief is another
   key concept requiring theorization and analysis (1984,
   pp. 60-3).
4 This last point implies that artefacts cannot simply be categorized
   according to economic, social or ideological criteria: a hoe may
   be as ideological as a law code.
5 Institutions may embody the social, economic and ideological;
   the economy conversely may be considered religious or ideo-
   logical practice. (1984b, p. 71)

However, this theorizing appears quite separate from its
application to the Iron Age of Denmark. In fact, what is 'applied'
to the data is Friedman's model of social change among the Kachin
of Burma (Friedman, 1975, based on Leach, 1954). Parker Pearson
correlates and compares patterning in conventional classes of data
in prehistoric Denmark (burial, votive and settlement evidence),

                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

tracing the supposed expressions of Friedman's transformational
cycles leading to the emergence of states. He claims that his study
has attempted to outline one way of transforming material remains
into social insights (1984a, p. 69). This involves a consideration
of legitimation - conspicuous consumption, manipulation of
ancestors and consciousness of social identity in ritual practices. So
Parker Pearson produces some interesting comments on the
possible relations between the living, the dead, ancestors, gods,
tradition and spiritual sanctioning (1984a, p. 64). But the relation
of material culture to practice is predominantly, for him, one of
exemplification or expression. The particularity and detail of votive
deposits, grave goods, bronze forms, pot designs, are simply
absorbed into the general model.
   Parker Pearson fits together a coherent social logic of transform-
ation, one of competitive aristocracies, inflationary spirals,
appropriation of surplus production and its legitimation (1984,
p. 89). The only significant difference between this and the
processual archaeologies outlined above is its emphasis on relations
of production, their structuring effects on the social totality, and
their ideological legitimation. However, this consideration of
ideology needs to be taken much further (see chapter 3 below).
   The reduction of vital insights and principles of Marxist theory
to the status, of just another approach to be applied to
archaeological data is even more clear in Kristiansen's work on
prehistoric Denmark (1984). Marxist theory is to supply an
evolutionary and systemic explanatory superstructure able to cope
with all forms of archaeological data (1984, pp. 74-5). For
Kristiansen, in effect, Marxism simply provides different boxes and
connecting arrows (figure 2.3). The real strength of approaches
derived from structural Marxist anthropology lies in the attempt to
overcome a functionalist separation and reification of religion,
politics, economics etc. as separate interacting subsystems.
However, in practice, in the process of writing an account of the
past, this seems to have made very little difference, hence the
frequently adopted economistic models and 'applications'.
Kristiansen places great emphasis On the distinction between
cultural form and material function. Basically this amounts to say-
ing that it is necessary to consider the material function of cultural
manifestations: so Kristiansen regards megalithic monuments as an
extension of the organization of production; this is their material
function (pp. 80-1). Religion may have an economic role (p. 76).
This highlights ideological legitimation: cultural form may have a
legitimating (ideological) material function. This, of course, gives

FIGURE 2.3 Kristiansen's 'Basic theoretical concepts' for the analysis of
                        the social formation
  Notes: The solid lines represent selective pressure; the broken lines represent
                                adaptive response.
 Source: From K. Kristiansen (1984). Reprinted by permission of Cambridge
                               University Press.


primacy to the social relations of production - that which needs
legitimation. For Kristiansen ideology thus becomes a 'subjective'
representation of the 'objective' - that which pertains to the social
relations of production (settlement, subsistence, technology) (p. 78).
  A functionalist logic and economism are quite evident here.
Kristiansen proceeds to apply his general social model to the data,
assuming the well-worn distinction between territorial megalithic
chiefdoms and segmentary tribes of the Battle-Axe culture (social
typologies again) (p. 77). It turns out that these represent an
'agricultural' as opposed to a 'pastoral' tribal economy (p. 85).
This, apparently, is the essence of 1,200 years of Danish prehistory.
The different categories of data are mobilized around this
distinction, described as 'very different cultural manifestations of

                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

rather similar material functions of production' (p. 77); that is both
belong to the category of tribal economy.
  As with the processual social archaeologies, Parker Pearson and
Kristiansen present us with a complex and often ingenious and
imaginative interplay of social process involving more or fewer
institutional categories such as economy, ritual, technology,
ideology. This interplay is held to account for patterning identified
in the archaeological record.


           SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY: A SUMMARY

While we acknowledge that the developments in conceptions of the
social advances in archaeology since the early 1960s represent an
immense theoretical improvement vis a vis traditional archaeology,
we wish to follow Hodder (1982a, 1982b, 1985, 1986) in his
summary critique of social archaeology. Hodder draws the
fundamental distinction between social system and structure.
System refers to the patterning and organization of social relation-
ships; structure refers to the rules and concepts which give meaning
to system. He argues that social archaeologies have been almost
entirely concerned with the workings of social systems. This focus
on system has several aspects and implications:

   1 The concept of system emphasizes relations of power
(dependence and authority and hierarchy, the movement and
control of resources), exchange and trade, the character and
control of subsistence, and in Marxist-influenced work strategies of
ideological legitimation.
  2 This conception of the social has been mobilized in archaeology
as research strategies of the recognition and description of pattern.
This has involved classification and ordering of artefacts according
to their attributes, definition of types and styles, and correlation
with other features of system; analysis of artefact distributions for
possible correlations with social groups, activities, exchange
networks; site locational analysis, searching for site hierarchies;
analysis of the patterning of mortuary remains for correlation with
original social context; societal categorization - the description of
the past in terms of bands, tribes etc., its degrees of complexity; the
description of subsistence strategies. These research aims have
provided justification for the utilization of a wide range of
statistical and mathematical techniques (e.g. Hodder and Orton,
1976; Doran and Hodson, 1975).

  .                     SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

   3 In its descriptive emphasis the focus is on what people do
(although Marxist archaeologists may also focus on the structuring
effects of social relations of production). The recognition of system
(not necessarily implying the explicit adoption of a systems theory
framework) is the recognition of regularized patterns of
behaviours. There is little or no theorizing of social action, the
intentional and meaningful practice of knowledgeable social
actors.
   4 The focus on behaviour rather than social action reduces
material culture to an epiphenomenon of the social relations within
which it is inserted - a product of social behaviour; a material
resource to be controlled, exchanged; a sign of social interaction or
difference; or a technology mediating population and environment.
Hence the relative lack of theorization of material culture.
   5 The descriptive emphasis involving behaviours rather than
social action and reduction of material culture to epiphenomenon
allows the fragmentation of theory. Economy may be theorized
separately from ritual because it refers to different sets of
behaviours (compare the outline of archaeological theory at the
beginning of chapter 1).
   6 The reduction of material culture to epiphenomenon also
allows the development of levels of theory. Binford's 'middle-range
theory' (1977, 1983, chs 17, 23-5, 28), as opposed to high-level
social theory, depends on it being possible to predict artefact
deposition without reference to social process.
   7 The aim of processual archaeology is the specification of
relations between variables such as subsistence, environment,
technology, social ranking. These variables are the regularized
patterns of behaviours just mentioned. Hence such social
archaeologies can often be reduced to synoptic diagrams of social
process: boxes and arrows, flow diagrams such as those illustrated
above. A function of the emphasis on description, this reifies the
variables and relations. There is little questioning of the meaning of
the variables which remain essentially arbitrary: why subsistence,
technology, ideology, rather than another categorization? There is
a lack of theorization of the location of these variables in the
practice of archaeological analysis. Usually their choice depends
simply On the acceptance that the variables are analytical.
   8 These variables are defined prior to analysis and, as just
mentioned, are reified categories. This permits and encourages
cross-cultural comparison and generalization. But historical
particularity then becomes a problem: why any particular
subsistence strategy?

                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY                         53

   9 The emphasis on description of system as relations between
variables of patterned behaviours results in a radical occlusion
of the individual. The individual social actor is reduced to a
support (theoretically absent) for the patterns of behaviours or
becomes aggregated into just another variable - population.
   10 A specification of the relations between variables, the
working of the system, and its correlation with, or identification in,
archaeological data is held to constitute an explanation. This is
often implicitly or explicitly functionalist: a variable is held to be
explained if it functions in the working of a whole. But this
singularly fails to explain anything about the particularity of any
variable. Again: why this subsistence strategy, this form of burial
rather than another? Function is not an explanatory concept when
applied to the social; it remains descriptive. Function also tends to
be separated out from style which then becomes a problem: why
this pot design rather than another? (See chapter 4.)
   11 The other problems of functionalism are also present; concepts
such as homoeostatis or adaptation mean that change becomes a
problem originating necessarily in dysfunction or alteration of
parameters external to the system, in the society-environment
relation. This separates statics and dynamics: specification of the
workings of a system is separated from processes of change.
   12 Processual social archaeologies have treated the theorization
of social totality as an issue of definition or specification. The
problem of social units and their boundaries and interaction has
been recognized with the development of concepts of world system
and peer polity interaction. However, there has been little
theorization of the structuring of the totality: what structures the
whole; what is the meaning of the particular relations between the
constituent variables and the wider question of the meaning of
categories such as band, chiefdom; and theorization of societal
boundaries.
   13 Social change tends to be conceived purely descriptively as
the empirical rearrangement of the variables of patterned
behaviours. In that these variables are reified and defined prior to
analysis, neo-evolutionary cross-cultural frameworks of cultural
change are facilitated. These are extensively criticized in chapter 6.
We simply comment here that the particularity of the historical
event and context becomes a problem, occluded in the description
of social process.
   Hodder has stressed the necessity of considering social structure
- the context of meanings of any social act; the generative rules

                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

which form structured sets. A question such as why one subsistence
strategy existed in a particular social totality rather than another,
equally 'adaptive', can only be answered by considering the
meaningful context of the subsistence strategy, the rules which
generate any particular social action - this is the question of
structure (cf. the notion of structure adopted in processual
archaeology in the analysis of mortuary practices discussed above).
It is necessary to consider the meaning context and structure of, for
example, a particular system of ranking or a particular subsistence
strategy, not least because 'behind the social system is a structure of
meaning which determines the relationship between material
culture and society' (Hodder, 1982b, p. 153). As archaeologists we
are concerned with how social system extends into material culture;
this requires a theorization of material culture which must take
structure into account. We take up the concept of structure in more
detail in chapter 3 and consider it in relation to material culture in
chapter 4.



 SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY AND A LOGIC OF NECESSITY

In extending our critique of social archaeology we now take up
some ideas developed by Laclau and Mouffe (1985) and consider
two assumptions which lie behind most social archaeology:

1 That the social constitutes an intelligible totality, conceptually
  explicable and definable (in whatever senses).
2 That the history of society has a rational substratum (this is, of
  course, the rationale for evolutionary archaeology of whatever
  sort).
We argue that both of these assumptions involve a logic of
necessity. Key elements of 'society' or the social totality are defined
in the abstract and related by some form of social logic: descriptive,
cybernetic, economistic, functionalist etc. These elements become
the metasubject of History. The concrete, the particular is subsumed
beneath the abstract categories; the mass of data is brought to
order, classified, reduced to its essentials.
   There are two basic arguments in this process:

1    An argument from appearance: surface appearances, differ-
    ences can be reduced to identity.

                         SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

2 An argument from contingency: if surface data or differences
  cannot be easily incorporated into a category, they do not
  matter, or at the very least are irrelevant, contingent to the
  social model being used.

   A logic of necessity defines the necessary categories, the
necessary character and relations of elements of the social. It
specifies which things are necessary for society to be society. A
logic of necessity involves a research strategy of recognition
- recognizing pattern in the data which relates to elements or
categories or concepts defined and related in the assumed social
model. Pattern becomes an emanation of the pre-defined and
eternal essential: what necessarily constitutes the social totality.
History and the social totality are conceived as having essences,
essential features, which operate as their principle of unity. They
have something in common: the essential, the necessary. History
itself is ordered according to processes of selection (of that which
supposedly pertains to its essential meaning), incorporation into
general abstract and necessary categories, and exclusion of that
which is deemed irrelevant. History is brought to order. Everything
is to be accounted for, whether in terms of incorporation or
exclusion, conceived as representing the necessary or the
contingent. So the telos of a logic of necessity is totality: everything
in its place. Selection, incorporation and exclusion thus become a
legal system behind the order; they represent reason's pretension to
legislate and control history, bringing order to an anarchy of
dispersed particularity and difference.
   Consider Bradley's book, The Social Foundations of Prehistoric
Britain (1984). This is a thematic synopsis. It brings the mass of
data to order through the literal application of models drawn from
anthropology and anthropologically informed archaeology. Each
chapter takes a theme as a means of explaining a particular stretch
of chronology. Hence in chapter 2, entitled 'Constructions of the
dead', scenarios are sketched for the period 3500-2500 BC
involving the possible relation of farming communities to economic
resources and ancestors and focusing on the construction of
communal tombs. Test implications are drawn (how to recognize
each scenario or model); then the patterning in the data is assessed
against the model. It is, again, a search for empirical patterning
directly representing social process. But there is a remainder to
Bradley's effort: variety. He comments: 'within the general
framework suggested here [chapter 7: a general synthesis], there are
numerous variants... I doubt whether this book has come to terms

  •                     SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

with the sheer complexity of the evidence' (p. 166). The range of
explanatory models appearing in the book are very limited: prestige
goods economies (some with core/periphery distinction); ritual in
agricultural society; conspicuous consumption. Bradley ends up
with three cycles of prestige goods economies explaining 4,500
years of prehistory in Britain.
   But what happens to all the detail? It is all subsumed? Does it
simply support the models? Will there always be this remainder?
This contingency? The irrelevancy of so much detail? One answer
offered to this problem is that of pluralism. It is accepted that
different archaeological approaches emphasize or select different
aspects of the data base. So subsistence studies supplement social
evolutionary work supplemented by palaeoenvironmental studies
(e.g. Rowley-Conwy, 1986, p. 28). Such pluralism is considered
healthy, fostering debate, adding to the richness of archaeology as
a discipline (Renfrew, 1982, 1983) and covering a wide variety of
aspects of the archaeological past.
   However, the different approaches may well imply different
totalities conceived as explanatory context for archaeological data:
for example, the ecosystem for palaeoeconomy as opposed to social
formation for Marxist archaeologists. How are these different
totalities to be reconciled? One answer has been the search for a
metasystem, a totality, theoretical or substantive, which can
incorporate all approaches. Clarke's project of an analytical
archaeology (1968; cf. 1973) can be viewed as such a totalizing
systematics. More recently, Kristiansen (1984, p. 74) has claimed
that Marxism (or, at least, his version of it) provides an integrative
framework which supposedly incorporates all archaeological
aspirations (for him a systemic and evolutionary outlook). On the
other hand, we have already argued that any approach may be
deemed to be acceptable so long as it conforms to the canons of
what is presupposed to be rational method (see chapter 1). Hence
different approaches are simply irreconcilable; their sole unity is
simply that they have been used by those individuals who label
themselves archaeologists.
   None of these answers challenge a logic of necessity. The result is
as we described in chapter 1: archaeology labouring under an
extraordinary redundancy of detail, so much apparently irrelevant
particularity, theoretically fragmented, a labyrinth of borrowed
approaches and levels of theory.
   We have described a logic of necessity as involving a set of
categorical oppositions:

                          SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

             Totality                        Fragment
             Necessity                       Contingency
             Essence                         Appearance
             General                         Particular
             Abstract                        Concrete
             Identity                        Difference
             Incorporation                   Dispersal
             Legality                        Anarchy

The left hand column is given priority over the right. Ultimately
this relates to the general conception of the archaeological record
(mentioned at the beginning of this chapter) which involves an
occlusion of the individual; social actors are conceived as
essentially lost in comparison to the social unit or whole of which
they were a part. The social whole is thus split, theoretically and
substantively, from the individual. As in chapter 1, we shall use the
strategy of mediation as a way forward. First, we shall outline a
logic of contingency, and then in the next chapter present a theory
of the individual and social practice.


                  A LOGIC OF CONTINGENCY

We argue that 'Society', in the sense of the social totality of a logic
of necessity, doesn't exist. There can be no general and abstract
categories nor systems of logic which coherently represent social
totalities or history. Nothing exists in itself, self-identical, a full
presence to itself in a relationship of total interiority. Such
existence is by definition transcendental; so involving a
metaphysical assumption, an appeal to foundational legislative
authority, substantia, the Cartesian cogito, a legal system (such as
rational method), a logic of essences. There is no ultimate literality,
literal existence, objective substance, 'society', from which
artefacts, social relations etc. can be derived; there are no identities
fixed for all time. It is therefore not possible to specify society as the
object of archaeology (Rowlands had made this point in advocating
'world systems', stressing the problem of the edges of 'society'; cf.
also Giddens, 1981, pp, 23, 82-3, on societal space-time edges).
Instead, we wish to stress internal relations (relations which have no
existence separate from the entities they relate, being part of those
entities). On the question of identity - the identity of anything does
not consist of a list of attributes (to what would they belong?), but

                        SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

must be referred to a relational order. As we argued in chapter 1,
identity presupposes a relation of difference to something else.
Identity is differential, depending on systems of difference,
relational sequences. Identity is always incomplete, never final
because of the potential infinity of relations of difference. There is
always a surplus of meaning because the presence or trace of some
things in others (their internal relations) prevents total fixation,
prevents meaning being pinned precisely down. And that identity is
regularity in a relational system presupposes a practice of
establishing order. Identities are established in practice. All this
means that every identity - social, conceptual or material - is
negotiated in practice. This act of negotiation is a political practice.
   To adopt such a position is to assert that the social is open. Social
order is an achievement of practice, it is a domestication of
difference, a political project of creating order, fixing identity,
cutting down the surplus of meaning. 'Society' is not a datum, an
abstract given, but a construction. Hence 'necessity', as we have
used the term, doesn't refer to underlying principles or essences
(that which is necessary for 'society' to be 'society'), but refers to a
practice of fixing contingency. This is also to accept over-
determination (Althusser's use of the term) of entities - the
'economic' may be overdetermined by the 'religious' because the
economic has no essential identity, no automatic necessity, its
meaning is established in social practice.
   At this point it is instructive to consider another 'remainder' in
Bradley's book (1984): the series of epigraphs heading the chapters.
What is their purpose? Entertainment? They appear unnecessary,
contingent; some seem to be held to convey eternal truths about the
human lot, but none are discussed or taken up in detail. The
epigraphs punctuate the text, punctuate history. As literary devices,
they are a presence of textuality. They draw attention to the book
as text; but textuality, discourse, is an absent theoretical presence in
Bradley's synopsis. Bradley's discourse is one of plenitude
- compilation, the filling out of a theme, a position. The text fills a
gap. Its presence presents the past; it conveys the past more or less
transparently; language is conceived as a neutral vehicle to present
the past. That discourse itself is an event is eclipsed (existing only in
the gaps, at the margins - in Bradley's epigraphs). But, as we have
stressed, we write archaeology now. Discourse is not identical with
the past; concepts are not identical with the past. It is essential to
realize this. There is no necessity about doing archaeology or
writing archaeological texts; archaeological discourse is a contem-
porary event, not abstract plenitude. Knowledge is not a

                         SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY                          59

recognition of the eternal (as implied in a logic of necessity) but is
fundamentally part of contemporary social practice, rooted
therefore in political relations of power.
  We can now draw some points together:

   1 We argue against social archaeologies which are reductionist
or essentialist, reducing the particular to an abstract social logic, to
a priori categories, defining and searching for essential features of
society and history.
   2 This means there can be no hierarchy of determination: for
example, that the economic, or more general relations between
population and environment, determine the general form and
trajectory of society as opposed to other institutional forms such as
the 'political' or the 'religious'.
   3 Concomitantly, there are no universal series of social units,
such as band, tribe, lineage, mode of production, available for use
in archaeological analysis. Such over-generalised concepts need to
be abandoned.
   4 We wish to stress not a better definition of 'society' as a layer
cake or flow diagram, but rather the construction and constitution
of social order in social practice. The social is an overdetermined
relational whole, an open field of relations, an indeterminate
articulation. Social order is constituted in the practice of individual
social actors which relates to historical context, not an abstract
universal pattern. This is to stress the primacy of the political:
practical negotiation, strategy and power in the structuring of
social reality.
   5 A corollary of the fourth point is the need to stress the prac-
tical constitution of the past in the discipline of archaeology.
Archaeology is a discursive event; its practice is a mediation of
archaeological subject and object, present and past. Neither can be
reduced to the other. The archaeological object cannot be precisely
and conceptually captured. Past and present can only be held
together in their difference, in their non-identity in the event of
interpretation. Rather than a totalizing systematics of precise self-
contained concepts, this requires a different and critical set of con-
cepts themselves rooted in the event of interpretation. For example,
'totality' is not to be regarded as an affirmative, but as a critical
category - the idea of critique finds its roots in the Greek krinein:
to separate, distinguish, judge, condemn, contend, struggle. This is
to affirm the importance of polemic; only polemically, we might
also say politically and rhetorically, does reason present itself as a
total reality. Hence a total system is a political project of fixing

 60            SOCIAL          ARCHAEOLOGY
everything in place, a legal system of control. In this sense we need
to convict totality of non-identity with itself, to deny a totalizing
systematics, the final solution to all archaeological ills. But at the
same time material culture can only be understood through teasing
out its relations with other entities, setting it within a relational
whole, tracing its dispersal, its meaning within social practice.
   6 We need also to appreciate the materiality of'the archaeological
object. The artefact is a material fragment, a riddle neither directly
revealing nor concealing 'the past', 'society' or whatever category.
Artefacts do not represent the past, they are not a property of
the past. Artefacts signify. Signification requires reading, inter-
pretation, not an application of 'method' which produces its
object in advance. Consequently, there are no progressive stages
through which analysis must pass, for example moving from the
more general to the particular, or incorporating data in wider and
wider scales of categories. We conceive interpretation as an act
renouncing finality, as a denial of universal history, the idea of
coherent unity and completed development. Interpretation is
associated with a strategic knowledge (Shanks and Tilley, 1987,
ch. 5), not abstracted from its social conditions of production, but
polemically responding to specific conditions, attending to historical
and political circumstances, a knowledge rooted in contemporary
structures of power.
   In the chapter that follows we present a set of concepts which we
intend as a contribution to this programme of a critical social
archaeology, beginning with the concept of the individual or the