      be explored historically in order to address the degree of similarity
      and difference that provides us with an understanding on their
      contemporary unique forms . . . A universal monologue on the
      nature of social complexity has . . . been successfully disseminated
      from its original European power base.
                                                     (Rowlands 1986 pp. 1-2)

Such a perspective permits a situation in which the 'simple' or the
'savage' is not only temporally distant in evolutionary frameworks
from the West but is also transposed spatially in contemporary
anthropological discourse which has a persistent tendency to place
the societies that anthropologists study in a time other than the
present of the anthropological researcher (figure 6.3; see Fabian,
1983, pp. 3Iff). Temporal and spatial distanciation reinforce each
other.
   The schemes of 'explanation' in evolutionary theories easily slip
into ideologies of self-justification or assert the priorities of the
West in relation to other cultures whose primary importance
is precisely to act as offsets for our contemporary 'civilization'.
Genuine difference and radical incompatibility of social
forms become relegated in terms of schemes which permit the
evaluation of social life and the celebration of one social form vis a
vis others. This 'knowledge' is a political act, a form of power.
Societies become classified in an evaluative hierarchy judged
implicitly or explicitly by their degree of deviation from ours.
Hence complexity is elevated in relation to simplicity,
differentiation in relation to homogeneity, the urban form in
relation to the rural and so on. Levi-Strauss has cogently noted that

               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE              165
                            CIVILIZATION
                              BRITAIN
                                NOW
                                HERE




        THEN                                            THERE




                              SAVAGE
                              SOCIETY

FIGURE 6.3 Contemporary time/space distanciation and the constitution
                  of the primitive, after Fabian
              Source: From J. Fabian (1983), pp. 3Iff.



'if the criterion chosen had been the degree of ability to overcome
even the most inhospitable geographical conditions, there can be
scarcely any doubt that the Eskimos, on the one hand and the
Bedouins, on the other would carry off the palm' (Levi-Strauss,
1975, p. 113).


         MARXISM, STRUCTURAL MARXISM AND
              EVOLUTIONARY CHANGE

Marx's materialist conception of the historical process has been
subject to a very large number of specific interpretations both by
writers favourable to his work and by those deeply critical of it.
Here we shall not be concerned to attempt to review in any detail
Marx's vast corpus of writings and subsequent developments but
wish, rather, to draw out a few key features of Marx's conception
of social change and that employed more recently in structural
Marxist literature while analysing, in particular, the manner in
which this work has influenced archaeological theorizations of
change.

166            SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

               Technology: between Marx and Childe
Neither Marx nor Engels attempted to outline at length a systematic
exposition of their theory of historical change. There can however
be little doubt that Marx's account of social change asserted the
primacy of the economic within a general developmental
evolutionary framework. The major area of debate has been, and
is, to exactly what extent the economy 'determines' and/or
'dominates' the social. Some passages in Marx support very clearly
a reductionist form of simple techno-environmental determinism,
for example his comments in The Poverty of Philosophy: 'the hand
mill gives you society with the feudal lord; the steam mill, society
with the industrial capitalist (Marx, 1936, p. 92).' Marx's most
explicit comments on change occur in the 1859 'Preface to A
Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy' in which
contradiction between the productive forces and the social relations
of production is viewed as being the general mechanism of societal
change. This is based on an assertion of a privileged economic
causality determining the entire structure of society:

  In the social production of their existence, men inevitably enter into
  definite relations, which are independent of their will, namely re-
  lations of production appropriate to a given stage in the development
  of their material forces of production. The totality of these relations
  of production constitutes the economic structure of society, the real
  foundation, on which arises a legal and political superstructure and
  to which correspond definite forms of social consciousness . . . At a
  certain stage of development, the material productive forces of
  society come into conflict with the existing relations of production
  . . . From forms of development of the productive forces these
  relations turn into their fetters. Then begins an era of social
  revolution. The changes in the economic foundation lead sooner or
  later to the transformation of the whole immense superstructure.
                                                         (1968, pp. 20-1)

   In Marx's conception, the economic base of society provides 'the
real foundation on which arises a legal and political
superstructure'. If this economic base changes, then the superstruc-
ture will also. In other words the base is assigned a privileged
causality in relation to the superstructure, and the base and
superstructure correspond to each other. The actual dynamics
promoting change are located in a contradictory relation between
the forces of production (labour power, land, tools, raw materials,
technical knowledge and organization of production) and the social

               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                        167

relations of production (relations between people in the production
process which result from working on and with materials using
specific technologies). Beyond a certain conjuncture the social re-
lations of production act so as to restrict the further development
of the forces of production and this will ultimately result in
conflict between classes composing the relations of production
becoming social revolution. This specific conception of historical
change (at least partially contradicted elsewhere in Marx's writings)
was coupled by Marx and Engels to an evolutionary conception of
the historical process in which various stages or 'epochs' in the
development of human society are outlined as specific modes of
production: tribal, ancient or slave, feudal, capitalist and socialist
(Marx and Engels, 1970, pp. 43-56), with an asiatic form being
added later to the list.
   Childe's interpretation of Marxism was in terms of the provision
of a technological model for the understanding of social evolution,
a model which he reiterated over and over again:

  The way people get their living should be expected in the long run to
  'determine' their beliefs and institutions. But the way people get their
  living is determined on the one hand by environment . . . on the
  other by science and technology.
                                                       (Childe, 1979, p. 93)

Although Childe indicates by his use of the term 'determine' that
social change may not be rigidly determined by technology and the
environment in any immediate and automatic fashion,
technological development did amount to firmly conditioning
possible courses of social trajectories.

  The environments to which societies are adjusted are worlds of ideas,
  collective representations . . . these worlds of knowledge must each
  have been, and be, conditioned by the whole of society's culture and
  particularly its technologies.
                                                    (Childe, 1949, pp. 22-3)

Here Childe is clearly willing to allow some room for the social con-
struction of reality, but in the last analysis, archaeology reveals:

  the progressive extension of humanity's control over external nature
  by the invention and discovery of more efficient tools and processes.
  Marx and Engels were the first to remark that this technological
  development is the foundation for the whole of history, conditioning
  and limiting all other human activities. . . If science and technology

168             SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANCE
    are to progress, the relations of production must be adjusted
    accordingly.
                                             (Childe, 1947, pp. 69, 73)

Technological determinism and the requirement for environmental
adaptation become the essential motors of the historical process.

    Structural Marxism and the economic/non-economic relation
It can be argued that when Marx, in the 1859 'Preface' (cited
above), writes about the economic as a foundation on which arises
a juridico-political superstructure, to which definite forms of social
consciousness correspond, no unmediated and direct economic
causation is, in fact, implied (Hindness and Hirst, 1975, p. 16). The
manner in which the economic/non-economic relation may be
theorized in relation to processes of social change constitutes a
major part of what has been termed a 'structural Marxist'
problematic. Comparatively recent work within Marxism and
anthropology has attempted to build open and extend basic
Marxian concepts and elucidate Marx's conception of social
structure with reference to contemporary structuralist thought
(Althusser, 1977; Althusser and Balibar, 1970; Godelier, 1972,
1977, 1978; Poulantzas, 1973; among others). Poulantzas outlines
a threefold classification of Marxist concepts:

1  Marxism provides a theory of history and historical change
  insofar as its concepts can be considered to be transhistorical,
  i.e. applicable to all historically documented social forms such
  as mode of production, social relations of production, forces of
  production, labour or praxis, social formation and different
  structural levels within any particular social formation
  (economic, political, ideological).
2 Marxism utilizes specific sets of concepts in order to analyse
  each particular mode of production (tribal, ancient, asiatic,
  feudal, capitalist, socialist) as theoretically constituted in
  general theory; for example commodity relations, exchange and
  use value in the capitalist mode of production.
3 Marxism analyses particular structures or structural levels or
  regions within each mode of production; for example the
  ideological and political structures constituting the feudal or
  ancient mode. (Poulantzas, 1973, pp. 11-23)

For Althusser, the social totality or social formation is conceived as:

                 SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                           169
1  A complex unity of specific levels or 'instances', minimally the
  economic, ideological and political, constituting a 'structure in
  dominance'. It is not to be conceived in terms of a radical
  distinction between an economic base, conceived as an
  'essence', and an ethereal superstructure that simply reflects the
  base and is ultimately reducible to it.
2 The levels or instances are relatively autonomous of each other.
  The economic instance is made up of a mode or modes of
  production constituted by an articulation between the social
  relations and forces of production. The former are always
  dominant hence a simple techno-economic determinism is
  avoided.
3 The totality is asymmetric. It may be dominated by one of its
  elements but the economy is always 'determinant in the last
  instance'.
4 Change is not a simple matter of a contradiction between the
  social relations and forces of production "but is metonymic and
  overdetermined. All instances condition each other, and the
  structure of the whole totality affects the internal and external
  relations of the instances.

   Godelier's conception of the social totality is similar in many
respects, but rather than to consider specific points of similarity or
difference in the overall conception, we wish to concentrate on the
notion of change and the specific theorization of the
economic/non-economic relation with reference to pre-capitalist
social formations. In small-scale 'tribal' societies institutions and
social practices are thoroughly embedded in each other. There
simply is no apparent economic 'level' to be distinguished from
'superstructural levels'. In other words, it is difficult to
characterize the economy as being either dominant or determinant.
However, Godelier argues that kin relations are both infrastructure
and superstructure:

    the determining role of the economy, apparently contradicted by the
    dominant role of kinship, is rediscovered in this dominant role, since
    kinship functions as, inter alia, production-relations. Here the
    relationship between economy and kinship appears as an internal re-
    lationship without the economic relationships of the kinsfolk
    merging for all that, with their political, sexual, etc., relationships.
                                                      (Godelier, 1972, p. 95)

  For Godelier, as for Althusser, the economic 'level' is an in-
dependent domain and yet forms an aspect of other areas of social

170           SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE
life at the same time. Both Althusser and Godelier assert the
ultimately determining role of the economic which raises the
question as to how the 'relative autonomy' of other levels, areas or
aspects of the social can be maintained if the economic ultimately
holds sway. Both distinguish between primary contradictions pro-
viding the motility for structural change and secondary contra-
dictions developing around the primary contradictions. The
specific theorizations are different (for a detailed analysis see
Goodfriend, 1978) and need not concern us here. The important
point is that the primary motor of change is still situated in the
economic domain between the productive forces and social re-
lations. For Godelier this is a contradiction between structures
composing the forces and relations; for Althusser it resides in a
single structure composed of the productive forces and relations.


                       Epigenesis and change
The work of Godelier and, to a lesser extent, of Althusser has had
some considerable impact upon archaeological analyses of change,
especially through the influence of Friedman (1974, 1975) and
Friedman and Rowlands (1978), and we will now examine this
specific framework. Situating their work within an evolutionary
frame of reference, Friedman and Rowlands adopt a dynamic
model of change. Evolution is conceived as a set of 'homoeorhetic'
processes in which there is a structurally determined order. The
model is epigenetic in that the scheme that they present has no static
stages and at any one moment the seeds of future change are con-
tained within the social order. They present an abstract outline of
certain 'evolutionary' processes with examples of varied concrete
appearances in the archaeological and ethnographic record. As for
Godelier, this abstract outline is based on a logic of social relations
of production - a designation of the essential. The model is an
attempt to reveal basic transformational processes forming both
necessary and sufficient determinants of social evolution.
   The specific model adopted owes much to Althusser and
Godelier and is, of course, a variant of Marx's base/superstructure
conception with the social formation being divided into a number
of structurally autonomous functional levels. The properties of one
level cannot be derived from those of the others. The levels are
integrated in a single structure of material reproduction by two
types of relations. From the ecosystem upwards there is a hierarchy
of constraints determining the limits of functional compatibility
between the levels. Such constraints are characterized as being

               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                171

negative, i.e. they determine what cannot occur rather than
everything that does occur. Friedman and Rowlands note that
'positive determination would only exist where we could find
necessary and sufficient conditions for the occurrence of a given
structure, i.e. where only one set of productive relations could
dominate the process of reproduction' (1978, p. 203). Relations of
production are the dominant aspects of the social formation. They
determine the use to be made of the environment within the limits
of the available technology, the division of productive labour and
the form of the appropriation and distribution of the social product
of labour. In short, they define the rationality of the economic
system. The forces of production form the basic techno-ecological
conditions of production. These are the objective energy costs of
reproduction and the rate of potential surplus. The manner in
which the social relations of production relate to the objective con-
ditions of the forces of production determines the long-term
behaviour of the system and limits the conditions of its existence.
Friedman and Rowlands stress that social formations cannot be
conceived as isolated units because social reproduction is a spatial
as well as temporal process. Social formations are always linked
and 'production for exchange seems to be a constant factor in
social evolution' (1978, p. 204). Social evolution becomes a
multifaceted and multilineal set of interlinked spatial and temporal
transformations between individual social formations. Change
comes about because 'dominant relations of production determine
a given developmental pathway and functional incompatibilities in
the larger totality generate divergent transformations over time'
(1978, p. 204). In such a framework traditional archaeological
stadial typologies become no more than arbitrary cross-sections
through a continuously operating complex of processes.
  This framework remains one of the most attractive and
sophisticated conceptualizations of societal change to have been
used in archaeology, generating many specific studies (e.g.
Frankenstein and Rowlands, 1978; Haselgrove, 1982). However, it
has a number of shortcomings shared with both functionalist and
other evolutionary theories of change which detract from its
usefulness. Firstly, the notion of contradiction is simply reduced to
functional incompatibility between the levels of the social for-
mation; but as we argued in chapter 2, the idea of function and
functionality provides, at best, a low-level description of aspects of
the social and in no way provides an adequate explanation. Secondly,
the characterization of the social formation artificially separates the
organizational function of kinship systems in small-scale societies

172           SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

in organizing production (as the social relations of production)
from their ideational and juridico-political components which take
place in the sphere of the superstructure. This results in a damaging
theoretical barrier being imposed to understanding the relationship
between the economic and the non-economic.
   Thirdly, the totalizing framework of the model requires a
reductionist essentialism. It is proposed that history, the social, the
relations of production have essences or essential features which
operate as their principle of unity irrespective of any particular
society. But the timeless universality of this logos (economic
process) is dependent on that which it systematically excludes: the
contingent, social difference, particularity. The primary essence of
history is the dominance accredited to the social relations of pro-
duction in relation to both the superstructure and the forces of
production. While the latter may constrain the social relations, the
superstructure appears to have no primary role whatsoever in social
transformation. It becomes a pure effect of the dominance of the
social relations of production. What does this superstructure con-
sist of? The levels of the social formation in the model (see figure
6.4) clearly boil down to the economic - productive forces and re-
lations - and the rest. What is the remainder, this apparently
inessential and contingent left-over? The superstructure, of course,
includes law, politics, religion, philosophy, ideology, art, etc., and
it is this 'etc.' that is of importance because the 'etc.' implies that
we can simply substitute the terms 'society' and 'culture', the social
totality as a lived totality apart from abstract economic process.
Now this 'etc' would seem to be of fundamental importance for
explaining and understanding the nature of social transformations
but in the model provided the entire superstructure becomes an
unreal set of data, of appearances projected from an underlying
economic reality. It is secondary, derivative and ultimately an
accidental effect of the economic.
   The opposition economy/superstructure requires that the
economic be conceived as something natural and prior to the
superstructure, to power, ideology and political force. Such, a
model would seem to systematically evade or efface the role of sub-
jective labour in constituting the social world and it tends to have
the effect of neutralizing the coercive nature of political or
superstructural relations. There can be no clear boundary between
the economic and the superstructure. The economic cannot occur
independently of political force and such force is never likely to be
exercised purely for its own sake but for economic reasons. The
economic can not be free of the superstructure as an independently

                SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                          173




FIGURE 6.4 The 'Local population model' of Friedman and Rowlands
Notes: The solid line represents dominance; the broken line represents constraints.
  Source: i. Friedman and M. Rowlands (1978). Reprinted by permission of
                                Duckworth & Co.



structuring dominant entity. The nature of labour, the work form
itself is inextricably bound up with coercive power and politics. To
isolate the economic and present it as dominant is to ignore the
composition of the economic itself with politics.
   Although the constraints of the productive forces and the
ecosystem in the model are proposed as purely negative, in practice
this 'negativity' seems to have considerable selective power:

   The developmental situation of the chiefdom depends very much on
   techno-ecological conditions . . . In montane areas, for example,
   where soils are shallow and runoff a major problem, chiefdoms

174                SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE
      based on swiddening technology will tend to collapse in the course of
      their expansion due to decreasing productivity in an economy
      accelerating surpluses. . . The conditions of local production are a
      crucial factor permitting [the development of the asiatic state]. Thus,
      in fertile valleys and riverine plains the evolutionary tendencies of the
      tribal system are able to work themselves out to their fullest. . . We
      suggest that the emergence of urban territorial states will occur in
      techno-economic conditions where there is a combination of
      effective land scarcity plus the possibility of extreme agricultural in-
      tensification . . . Both Cuicuilco and Teotihuacan shared excep-
      tionally good conditions for urban growth, since they were sited on
      good water sources for irrigation and near obsidian deposits.
                          (Friedman and Rowlands, 1978, pp. 213, 216, 234, 260)

   Friedman and Rowlands appear to want to argue that the
economy is both determinant and non-determinant at the same
time. While there are vast areas of social life which are dominated
by the economy (i.e. in the superstructure) they are still supposedly
structurally autonomous. However, positing the social relations of
production as necessarily dominant clearly sets the limits of the
possibility for variation in the relatively non-determined
superstructure. Consequently the indeterminacy of this relation-
ships becomes reduced to a mere supplement (to use Derrida's term
as an exterior addition to what ought to be self-sufficient but is
deficient) of that which is dominant. The relationship between the
relations of production and the social formation are not
contingent, products of specific historical conditions but instead
become an a priori necessity in which the conditions for social
transformation are known in advance. If the social relations of
production are dominant or determinant in every type of social
formation then their conditions of existence must be deduced
independently from any concrete manifestation of social relations.
However, in this case, the only reality they would have would be to
assure in tautological fashion the existence of the economy as a
separate entity with a determining or dominant role.
   While the notion of contradiction between levels or instances of
the social formation is not explicitly introduced in Friedman and
Rowlands's paper, Gledhill and Rowlands (1982) do usefully
elevate the concept to an important causative role in social
transformation while stating that 'economic and socio-political
conditions cannot . . . be separated, and both are equally
"material": we cannot understand economic processes in the
narrowest sense in isolation, but neither can we argue that real
developmental trajectories are determined by purely "cultural" or

              SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                175

"political" processes' (Gledhill and Rowlands, 1982, p. 145). We
entirely agree with such a position and the implicit criticism of the
earlier model that it makes. What is required is a truly dialectical
theorization in which the economic, the political and the cultural
are viewed as being linked together in a relation of mutual
mediation without any a priori hierarchy of dominance or
determination.


             BEYOND EVOLUTION: THE SOCIAL
                 TEXTURE OF CHANGE

When considering social change in archaeology over either the long
or the short term, evolutionary frameworks appear to be inade-
quate. The prospect before us is not to invent a new or a better
evolutionary framework or model but to abandon the notion of
evolution altogether. There is no difficulty in sustaining the reality
of a conception, such as White's, that there is a fundamental
difference between microlith technology and microchip technology
or that energy capture has increased through time, so long as this is
devoid of ethnocentric valorization. However, such observations
do not take us very far in explaining the social and they certainly do
not merit being placed within a totalizing evolutionary framework.
It is far better to employ a simpler and far less loaded and conten-
tious concept - 'change'. What we should be thinking in terms of
are: social strategies, social transformation, power, ideology,
altereity, plurality, relationality, displacement, substitution,
difference - all terms that cannot be properly compressed or
integrated into an evolutionary framework. Ultimately we may say
that history is another term for undecidability.' What this means is
that we must regard social change as being an open, polysemous
text, a text to be written and interpreted, not something that
decides in any degree of finality what we write. Archaeology as a
historical science is fundamentally open-ended. Evolutionary
theories suggest that history is essentially closed in on itself,
residing in a basic set of processes; but there are no such basic pro-
cesses to be found. Processes exist but they are always different,
singular, non-identical with each other. It is this non-identity, this
singularity that we should be stressing. Rather than attempting to
formulate positions which would once and for all explain the past
in an absolute sense, we should be emphasizing that there are no
absolutes, no fundamentals to dig down to in order to ground our
analyses. The attempt to isolate series of events or essential

176           SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

elements and processes results in a turning away from history which
becomes overlooked. It results in the production of a reductionist
and ideological History.
   In discussing an alternative theoretical position all we can hope
to do is to outline a conceptual strategy for understanding social
change in general. The level of generality involved will mean that
such a perspective will only serve any useful purpose insofar as it is
worked through, mediated, modified, and transformed in practice,
in the act of trying to understand a particular case of social change.

                   Contingency and conjuncture
We start from two basic premises: (I) all social life is contingent;
(2) all episodes of social change are conjunctural. By stressing the
contingent and conjunctural nature of change we hope to avoid the
pitfalls of essentialism and reductionism discussed earlier in
this chapter. To say that social change is contingent is to adopt the
position that history is indelibly a social creation: it has no
predetermined teleological essence and there is no deterministic
necessity to the working through of the historical process - history
could have happened otherwise. Social change is conjunctural in
that any particular episode of change depends on the convergence
of overlapping sets of circumstances, actions and events which
differ in form and nature from case to case according to differences
in social context. By social change we specifically refer to the
structural transformation rather than the reproduction of the social
order. Such episodes of transformation are always endogenously
mediated processes resulting in ruptures or structural disjunctions.
This means that we conceive history as a series of ruptures and
discontinuities separated by periods of social reproduction of
variable duration. However, both stability and change are part and
parcel of structural transformation and reproduction.
   We are not dealing with a simplistic either/or distinction in
which structural reproduction is conceived in some sense as
absolute stability and structural transformation as a totalized set of
changes. The difference between one situation and another is a
matter of degree. Discontinuities depend on underlying continuities
and vice versa. So history is a dialectic of continuity-discontinuity
mediated by structural contingency and conjunctural events and
circumstances. There is nothing in the archaeological or historical
record which suggests that we should privilege or give
methodological priority to change, or its conceptual polar
opposite, stability. Indeed a radical opposition between the two

               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                  177

terms would seem to be unhelpful because in an obvious manner
societies are changing all the time in terms of the actual physical
and bodily composition of the population, interactions between
individuals, losses and gains in the transmission of knowledge and
information, use of specific artefacts, etc. On the other hand, basic
structural features of society, values and principles for conduct,
may remain unaltered. No society can be absolutely stable, nor will
social changes of even the most drastic sort alter every aspect of
action, thought and feeling. Stability and change are both relative
terms, neither can be conceptualized except in terms of the other,
and both reside in all social forms.
   It is important to stress that societies do not just exist in motion
or action, in human praxis, but also in thought, either at a level of
discursive or practical consciousness. In other words social actors
always draw on stocks of knowledge and may know to a greater or
lesser extent why they are acting in any particular manner and be
able to justify or rationalize their actions; or, alternatively, they
may know how to act without being able to verbalize the principles
on which they are acting. Hence actions may have intended or
unintended consequences and in any particular situation one or the
other, or both, may provide an important motor for change.
Thought and action are thoroughly interwoven and to avoid essen-
tialism we must posit a dialectic between thought and action such
that neither stands in relation to the other in a situation of
dominance or determination. Social being does not determine
consciousness nor can we reverse this Marxian formula. At any
particular conjuncture and with reference to a particular set of
contingent circumstances one may dominate the other but the
nature of this domination, always remaining partial in scope, is a
matter of practical demonstration rather than a priori theoretical
determination.
   The social world while being a practical world of situated action
is also a conceptualized world consisting of codes, signs and
symbols which are in a constant process of production and
reproduction, structuration and destruction. It is always ordered in
different societies according to a meaningful scheme and sets of
values. Agents act in terms of socially constituted categories
involving other persons, institutions and material culture.
   Societies do not, of course, exist in isolation - social life involves
interaction with and mediation of an environmental field and a
social field of other individuals and groups. This 'external' natural
and social field exerts influence. It may promote social
transformation but such radical change is not automatic; it always

178            SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

involves an internalization of external factors. The 'risk' of
carrying out various possible subsistence strategies and the effects
of natural disasters are conceived and transformed within the
structures of the social. That usually termed 'economic' has a style
- it is itself part of a symbolic referential field. Similarly, contact
between qualitatively different kinds of societies, such as hunter-
gatherer band groups and socially stratified agrarian groups, or
Captain Cook's arrival in Polynesia (Sahlins, 1981, 1985), is
mediated by internal structure and signification. Acculturation is
never a passive, but always an active and transformative process.


                   Social change: space and time
Space and time do not merely form containers within which social
life is played out but constitute a medium through which social
relations are produced and reproduced. Both are social productions
and in turn are actively involved in social reproduction and
transformation. As we argued in chapter 5 traditional
archaeological practices resulting in the formulation of
chronologies and periodizations of materials depend upon1 and
presuppose a linear and abstract time. We argue instead that social
practice and event have their own rhythms and their own time.
Such a perspective questions the validity of traditional
archaeological conceptions of time and the implicit identification
of time with change which results in the 'problem' of the reality of
archaeological periodizations (e.g. Halstatt and La Tene of the
European Iron Age) and how transitions might develop between
them.
   Regarding time as a medium in which social action and change is
played out means that societal transformation cannot be conceived
as chaotic, as structureless - a point to which we will return below.
Social change is not a single movement pervading the entire social
totality but is articulated in time and space forming a medium for
the restructuring of social relations. Spatiality and temporality
form a component of social life in a situational social context in
which purposeful human agency is structurally positioned and this
positioning serves to shape day-to-day activities and alterations in
their form and nature. Space and time are socially produced as
concrete material spatialities and temporalities (e.g. the time-space
of architectural forms) and as a set of relations between individuals
and groups. Such space-time is not abstract and apart from human
social existence but dense - filled up with the contents of social
existence related dialectically to physical space and physiological

              SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANCE                179

ageing and society's cognitive image of itself as a continuing form.
The spaces and times of the natural world (physical geography,
passage of the seasons, lunar cycles etc.) and those related to the
way the social field is conceptualized are incorporated into the
social production of temporality and spatiality and transformed in
the process. Social spatio-temporal production incorporates nature
and the physical world into a 'second nature' and this socially
constituted second nature may be redefined, reinforced,
reinterpreted, reproduced or transformed into something
qualitatively new. So, the historical sequence is one of contingent
and conjunctural spatiality and temporality. Space and time form a
medium serving to structure social life and are in turn structured by
social relations in a recursive manner (Giddens, 1981; Soja, 1985;
Pred, 1985).
  But this spatio-temporal medium for social reproduction and
transformation is not an indifferent one. The social constitution of
time-space is not just a routinized process but one pregnant with
contradictions, conflicts and struggles. Space and time form a
medium for the networking of power and ideology in relation to
competing interests and social strategies of individuals and groups.
Power, ideology, contradiction, conflict, space and time can only
be understood relationally. Each is infused with and partially
encompassed by the others. Furthermore, all these concepts are not
neutral but critical categories which can be turned in on themselves
and in relation to an analysis of the social production of
archaeological knowledge.


               Signification, interests and structure
In discussing the nature of change we must make reference to the
social-world

1  As constituted a conceptual scheme of signs and codes for the
  ordering and reordering of human existence.
2 As a determinate patterning of actions and event sequences.
3 As mediated by structures dialectically related to strategies of
  individual and/or group interest.

In other words we are concerned with the linkage between signs,
actions and constellations of actions or events, structures and
power. People are always inseparable from meaning and from the
world. The relationship between subject and object or thought and
action is not one of radical opposition, nor of identity, but rather

180            SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE
one of dialectical mediation. Subjects and objects form part of
each other, help to constitute each other, but do not collapse into a
single unitary entity.
   The cultural schemes by means of which the social order is con-
stituted are always arbitrary, never the only possibility for the
realization of action. As we argued in chapter 3 the individual agent
is always positioned in accordance with structure or relational sets
of signs providing principles for conduct. Although positioned in
the social field individuals do act and the consequences of these
actions are just as likely to be unintended as intended. Such action
is historically situated. It draws upon existing structured; sign
systems or conceptual schemes for the ordering of experiences but
every manifestation of structure in an action event is a
concretization of structure through its effects on social practice.
This concretization of structure through action contains within
itself the possibility of the reordering or structuration of structures
because meanings and principles for conduct become re-evaluated
in practice, in the contingent and conjunctural social circumstances
of human practical activities. The practical projects of people take
place within a context of received structured meanings and
signification. However, this meaning and signification becoming
concretized in and through action is at one and the same time re-
evaluated through the course of this action and may be reproduced
or transformed. Action, in other words, is in dialectical relation to
structure and situational social context. It begins in structure is
mediated by structure, and ends in structure but its realization in the
world may result in the rearticulation or transformation of structure.


                    Power, ideology and change
Power and ideology are integrally linked to the reproduction and
transformation of the social order and to structure. While power
is intimately involved in both social reproduction and trans-
formation, ideology as a limited material practice and form of
power is to be fundamentally linked with societal reproduction (see
chapter 3). Power may take on a directly coercive form bolstering
social domination in terms of direct physical control of subjects
(e.g. military regimes). In social situations in which social control
and exploitation are regularized features of life, the maintenance of
this control by sheer force alone is likely to be both unstable and in-
efficient in the long run. In such cases repressive power may rest far
more efficiently on some basis of perceived and maintained
legitimacy, however achieved.

               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                181

   This form of power not directly involving physical coercion is
ideological power which may (1) naturalize the social order through
the manipulation of the past making what is mutable appear to be
immutable; (2) represent as coherent aspects of the social order
which are contradictory; (3) represent that which is partial as
universal; (4) represent the social as being a pre-ordained natural
order; (5) represent the ideas and modes of organization operating
in terms of the specific interests of individuals or groups as being in
the interests of everyone. So, in various ways, ideology relates the
contingency of the present (social inequality) to a natural and
timeless order or to a mythical past. Ideology is the presentation of
antithesis, a strategy of social containment. Its structural effect in
society is to disperse, conceal, dilute, displace or deny
contradictions. Such a structural effect serves the interests of those
in positions of social dominance and justifies or provides apologies
for the social order. Hence ideology is a specific and limited
material form of social practice with structural effects. It is not
simply generalizable to 'world view' or to be conceived as 'false
consciousness' or as a 'pre-scientific' form of knowledge. Instead it
may be regarded as a solution at the level of social consciousness to
structural contradictions that cannot be dissipated or resolved in
practice.
 - Ideology is neither true nor false. It is a misrepresentation or
denial of contradiction. To claim that ideology is a 'solution in
consciousness' is not to suggest it merely operates in the realm of
consciousness or ideas. Ideology, insofar as it is conceived as a set
of ideas embodied in social action, is a real material force in the
social contributing to the maintenance or reproduction of society.
Although ideological relations may misrepresent contradictions
and the concrete social practices operating in terms of these con-
tradictions, at the same time they designate a real relation, both
material and necessary, rather than purely illusory. As a material
form ideology is bound up with, works through, and has definite
effects on social practices. It does not appear as some kind of purely
gratuitous invention of consciousness intentionally manipulating
reality, nor is it the result of a conspiracy on the part of those
whose interests it serves. However, the effects of the operation of
ideology as a form of power are the concealment of contradictions
obviously playing a powerful role in the reproduction of structure
mediating social practices. So ideology operates in such a manner
as to block the translation of structural contradiction into conjunc-
tural struggle between social actors.

182                SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANCE

                                 Contradiction
Structure, conceived as a set of signs and categories, principles and
resources, resulting from and making possible human social
experience and action, should not be conceived simplistically as a
dovetailing of a harmoniously ordered entity. To the contrary, the
principles embodied in structure exist in a relation of contradiction;
one may deny or oppose another. Difference and contrast required
in any sign system invites contradiction but this contradictory
relationship between signs and meanings only realizes itself in the
social through the practical effects of structure in action and
situated event. Signs have, of course, conceptual value by virtue of
their contrast to other signs, but in action signs become articulated
with respect to the referential meaning of what may be, in any
particular instance, the opposing interests of different social
strategies. Contradiction may be conceived as a component of the
social world giving rise to a potentiality for change in at least two
major senses. First, contradiction is an existential part of social
being. It is always and will always be present because it is part of
what it is to be human. Individual persons may consider themselves
to have a continuing identity, irrespective of any particular action
or action sequence, and yet can only be to others what they are at a
particular time and place. The activities of individuals and groups
result in the production of social conditions which, in some
respects, constrain and set limits to the possibilities of future
actions. These conditions are produced by individuals but become
independent of their wills and hence social reality is a contradictory
reality. Material production in most cases requires a division of
labour, and this must be seen as a result of productive activity and
by no means a consciously intended outcome.
  A second source of existential contradiction is in the contrast
between the 'natural' and the 'cultural' orders:

      the human being as Dasein, originates and disappears into the world
      of Being, the world of nature, yet as a conscious, reflective agent is
      the negation of the inorganic. The mediator of the contradictory
      character of human existence is society itself, for only in and through
      membership of a society does the human being acquire 'second
      nature'.
                           (Giddens, 1981, p. 236; cf. Goldmann, 1977, p. 101)


This notion of contradiction as residing in the very nature of social
being has to be complemented by a second sense of the term, if we

              SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                183

are to claim that contradiction provides the root of motility in the
social order.
   Earlier in this chapter we rejected the position that the social
order can adequately be conceived as a definite series of structural
levels or instances. Such a view is intimately linked with the exten-
sive debate over the concept of contradiction: whether it refers to
real or logical opposition; whether logical contradictions can be
real (see e.g. Colletti, 1975; Meikle, 1979; Elster, 1978; Larrain,
1983, ch. 4). In accordance with our arguments in other chapters
contradiction is not a logical concept nor does it refer to real
opposition or conflict. Furthermore, the notion of contradiction
does not suggest functional incompatibility between structures,
levels or instances of a social formation but refers to opposing prin-
ciples, drawn on in social action, but which are nevertheless depen-
dent on each other for their existence in any particular type of
society (cf. Giddens, 1979, ch. 4).
   Contradiction is an opposition between elements of structures
residing in practices which presuppose one another and constitute
conditions of existence for each other. It is to be conceived not as
an opposition between fixed identities but as an internal relation
where the identities of each contradictory element depend on each
other. These contradictions will differ in nature and form from one
society to another. In other words we avoid any essentialist notion
of contradiction such as the classic Marxist formula in the 1859
'Preface' where contradiction arises between the forces and
relations of production with primacy being given to the former in
the determination and working-out of the historical process.
We argue, instead, that contradiction is constitutive of the social
field as a whole and is never likely to be a simple matter of an
opposition between different areas of the economic or between
economic and social processes. Contradiction is to be conceived as
a reality lying within the very structuring of the social order
itself. Adopting such a position it is possible to argue that all
societies are contradictory totalities with the contradictions
differing temporally between different forms of society. Such
contradictions can never by dispelled except in terms of the
transformation of the principles structuring the social field as a
whole. Following from such an argument it is possible to argue that
we can distinguish between primary and secondary contradictions,
the former giving rise to and promoting the development of the
latter. A primary contradiction is one that presages a new social
system. Giddens, for example, argues that the primary
contradiction of capitalism is that between private appropriation of

184           SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANCE

wealth by the few, and a structural principle it presumes which
negates it, socialized production (1979, p. 142). However, the
ranking of contradictions in an evaluative hierarchy of importance
appears to us as a rather dubious and contentious exercise and in
itself may provide little insight into an understanding of why struc-
tural transformations occur. Following Althusser (1977, pp.
106-16) we will suggest that contradictions are always
overdetermined. For example, the contradiction between private
appropriation of wealth and socialized production in capitalist
society is always dependent on the historically contingent and
concrete forms and circumstances in which it takes place. In other
words, the contradiction is inseparable from the overall
structuration of the social order, and from its concrete realization
in human practices.
   Structural transformation is likely to occur when there is a
multiplicity of contradictions between structuring principles, each
affecting the other, which may give rise to further contradictions.
However, structural contradiction can only be realized in human
social practices, in situated action. So contradictions in structure,
between structural principles drawn upon by actors in their day-to-
day conduct, result in competing beliefs, evaluations and
rationalizations for socially situated actions. These ultimately alter
the conditions of existence for the form and nature of social
relations, and concomitantly the nature of these relations
themselves change. In other words, contradiction at the level of
structure becomes translated into a conflict of interests between
social actors which ultimately may become transcribed into the
entire social body at any particular historical conjuncture produc-
ing a radical 'break' or rupture in the social process. The outcome
of such a conflictual rupture will be a transformation of the
structures underlying social action. Contradictions, then, are the
precondition for social change, but they do not bring it about.
Change, as discussed above, depends on episodes, conjunctures of
events and conditions which build on each other around
contradiction producing conflicts which may be resolved by social
change.
   The accumulation of time in such conjunctures may or may not
involve a standard conception of chronology (see chapter 5). It may
not be chronology which is important but the intersection of
contradiction and event. In other words, meaningful connections
may transcend chronology. Chronology may be crucial to social
change, at points of sudden discontinuity, but for the most part we
may expect it to be irrelevant in pre-capitalist social forms because

               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                 185

of the absence of events which build on each other. Conjunctures,
clusterings of events, must be understood in terms of their
determinate temporality. The time of the events may overlap, but
the time in common between the events may not extend beyond the
clustering, the episode.


        CONCLUSION: SPECIFICITY AND CHANGE

In considering the nature of social change it is vital to avoid
theoretical frameworks which produce a totalizing history, a
history of the whole of humanity which does not recognize rupture,
difference, non-correspondence between social forms. Any
adequate analysis of change must take into account the subjective
constitution of the social as an active and differentiated set of
strategies involving power, group and individual interest and
signification. These cannot be simply reduced to a set of unitary
processes.
   We must take into consideration that the tempos, times, spaces,
nature and form of change in contemporary Western society are
fundamentally different from the prehistoric past. Furthermore,
societies constitute their own spaces and their own times. Change
has to be analysed in all the detail of its specificity. The concepts we
have outlined in the final part of this chapter are of necessity
general, but their purpose is to allow us to think historical and
contextual specificity in attempting to understand social
reproduction and transformation.
   In attempting to understand change we are always faced with
issues as to what type and degree of alteration in what is being
considered, and why this is thought to be of interest or importance
anyway. Ultimately these are practical questions that always
presuppose a politics. This issue of the politics of theory is one we
address in the next chapter.

          Archaeology and the
           Politics of Theory

              It is not my fault if reality is Marxist
                                 Sartre quoting Che Guevara
              Humanity is by nature political being.
                                     Aristotle, Politics 12533

Throughout this book we have been concerned to stress that
archaeology is an active production of the past, an intellectual and
cultural labour. Archaeology is to be situated in the present as
discourse in a political field, and as a practice located in relation to
structures of power. This has involved reference to the mediation
of present and past, theory and data, abstract and concrete,
epistemological subject and object in the practice of archaeology.
By the term mediation we mean that there can be no radical
separation and conclusive definition of these categories in
themselves, nor can they be conceived as separate but interacting in
some way; the categories are instead held together in a tension in
determinate practices. In this chapter we wish to draw out the
implications for archaeology of the proceeding discussions, and
explore the major issues further. These concern the development of
a critical archaeology.


            THE EMERGENCE OF A CRITICALLY
             SELF-CONSCIOUS ARCHAEOLOGY

It has been argued that particular archaeologies reflect contem-
porary cultural concerns or categories. For example, Trigger has
related theoretical changes in Anglo-American archaeology to the
changing fortunes (according to him, 1960s optimism and 1970s
pessimism) of the middle classes:

              ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                       187

  a sense of helplessness is . . . emphasized by framing much of the
  discussion of evolutionary change in terms of general systems theory
  . . . disillusionment about present day affairs has led many
  archaeologists to reject the view that cultural progress is inevitable or
  even desirable . . . What emerges is an eschatological materialism in
  which human consciousness plays no significant role.
                                                     (Trigger, 1981, p. 151)

   In another paper Trigger (1984) has described archaeologies as
being nationalist, colonialist or imperalist. Archaeology has been,
and is still, important in the establishment of national identities.
Colonial archaeologies denigrate non-Western societies to the
status of static yet living museums from which the nature of the
past might be inferred. Imperialist archaeologies (largely those
developed in Britain and America) exert theoretical hegemony over
research in the rest of the world through extensively engaging in
research abroad, playing a major role in training either foreign
students or those who subsequently obtain employment abroad,
and in the dissemination of texts. The American expression of the
new archaeology, advocating high-level generalization and a cross-
cultural comparative perspective, 'asserts the unimportance of
national traditions . . . and of anything that stands in the way of
American economic activity and political influence' (Trigger, 1984,
p. 366). At an even more general level, Friedman (1986) has
inserted archaeology into what he claims to be world cycles
of 'traditionalist-culturalist', 'modernist' and 'post-modernist'
cultural identities or cosmologies.
  There has been criticism of particular archaeologies as vulgar
ideology: that they are distorted fabrications lending support to a
system of 'false consciousness'. Kohl (1981, p. 92) has remarked on
the connection between ideas of hyperdiffusionism (spread of the
Aryan race) and fascism in the 1920s, while other work has focused
on ideological distortion in museum presentations of the past (see
below). More sophisticated ideology critique has focused on the
philosophical and methodological assumptions that lie behind many
archaeologies and that work ideologically. This may involve
representing particular social or political interests as universal,
misrepresenting crucial contradictions in society or theory, or
reifying particular categories (assuming that they are natural,
objective and concrete, rather than relating them to their social
conditions of production). As we. mentioned in chapter 1,
Rowlands has questioned the validity of the idea of a prehistory of
Europe (1984, p. 154) and criticized a prehistoric metanarrative of
development of societies from 'simple' to 'complex' forms:

188         ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

  the meta-narrative of simple to complex is a dominant ideology that
  organises the writing of contemporary world pre-history in favour of
  a modernising ethos and the primacy of the West. That the political
  context of colonialism is its natural progenitor. That for these
  reasons, such constructions of history have formed the dominant
  ideologies of the metropolitan centres, although changing their
  content from British imperialism to American neo-evolutionary,
  multi-lineal trajectories of the Modernisation kind . . . claims to
  autonomy and independence have taken the form of cognitive
  apartheid. If the West isn't the only area that has states, cities,
  writing, rationality etc. you show that you have something similar
  that is either equivalent or better. A universal dialogue about the
  nature of universal humanity is sustained but now with a radical em-
  phasis on difference and comparison.
                                              (Rowlands, 1986, pp. 3-4)

Elsewhere (Shanks and Tilley, 1987, ch. 3; Tilley, 1985) we have
extensively criticized theoretical perspectives advanced in the new
archaeology as lending explicit or implicit support to the value
systems of a capitalist society. For example, the projection of
present-day economic values such as maximizing returns and
minimizing costs to 'explain' resource utilization among prehistoric
hunter-gatherers naturalizes what are historically and culturally
specific values as universal features of humanity.
   The notion that archaeology can be separated from current
political events has been challenged: strongly held conceptions of
academic freedom have recently come into question. This question-
ing of a virtually dominant ideology - that archaeology constitutes
a neutral academic discipline and its practitioners should have
scholarly freedom and disciplinary autonomy - has been
precipitated by events surrounding the World Archaeological
Congress of 1986. As a result of a ban on South African and
Namibian participants by the British organizers, the UISPP
(International Union of Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences)
withdrew its official recognition of the Congress, and set up an
alternative congress. Many archaeologists from the West withdrew
as a result of the ban. This withdrawal, both of official recognition
and of discontented individuals, was justified in the cause of
academic freedom, the claimed infringement of the freedom of
South African archaeologists to attend the Congress, and in the
cause of keeping the pollution of politics out of archaeology. Shaw
(1986) and Hodder (1986a) have drawn attention to the complexity
of the issues and have effectively criticized a position which would
uphold an abstracted, detached and reified value of 'academic
freedom', however strong and evocative its connotations.

             ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                    189

  The domination of the UISPP, a supposedly internationally
representative body, by unelected authority figures of European
archaeology, brings up the issue of the relationships between an
academic West and non-Western 'developing' countries in a post-
colonial world capitalist economy. Rowlands (1986a), Sinclair
(1986) and Ray (1986) have considered the issues of a decolonialized
archaeology in non-Western countries. This was also a feature of
many papers at the World Archaeology Congress. Sinclair notes
that:

  Differences between development strategies which attempt to
  reproduce capitalist relations of production in the Third World and
  those which attempt to support economic and cultural disassociation
  from the capitalist system directly influence the context in which
  archaeological research is carried out. On the one hand, forms of
  archaeological practice based on neo-colonial dualistic conceptions
  of 'traditional' and 'modern' society can often result in a preser-
  vationist and academically exclusionist attitude to the remnants of
  'traditional' society. On the other hand, the focus on the 'tradi-
  tional' can also lead to biases emerging against the 'modern'. This
  differs markedly from a programme of research which seeks to
  recover and present archaeological data in a form relevant to the
  widespread extension of an historical consciousness as part of a non-
  capitalist development strategy.
                                                           (1986, p. 81)

  Another focus for discussion has been the relationship between
archaeological research and minority interests. The distortions and
political implications of archaeologies of the Native Americans
(Trigger, 1980), Australian Aborigines (Langford, 1983; Ucko,
1983), Norwegian Saami (Olsen, 1986) and the black community in
Britain (Belgrave, 1986), have been discussed. This, and other
work, (e.g. Hall, 1984; Fawcett, 1986) has involved a consideration
of the politics of ethnicity and the issue of nationalist
archaeologies. Academic archaeology, as often as not, operates as
part of a wider cultural discourse serving to reproduce the relation-
ship between the dominant and the dominated.
  The controversy surrounding the World Archaeology Congress
highlighted the conventional relationship between archaeology and
politics as entirely exterior, concerning government and
educational policy, administration and funding, public
archaeology and the 'rescue' and 'preservation' of the past, and
what has come to be termed cultural resource management. Here
again the dominant ideology emphasizes neutrality, consensus with
regard to conservation goals, and the disinterested pursuit of

190          ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY
knowledge in the hands of professional administrators and
academics: archaeology as a public service (cf. Cleere (ed.), 1984;
Green (ed.), 1984). There has been a notable lack of critical
reflection resulting in calls for archaeology to be explicitly
marketed to an uneducated public (Macleod, 1977), and the
specification of administrative and management strategies for max-
imizing archaeological productivity (Stephenson, 1977). Such a
perspective turns the past into the cultural capital of a supposedly
enlightened elite, who then may disseminate it at will to a passive,
and ultimately alienated, public (see Shanks and Tilley, 1987, Chs 1
and 3).
  The relationship of archaeology to the present necessarily
involves that between archaeology as an academic discipline and its
wider societal context. Hodder has reported preliminary results of
an attitude survey of what people think about archaeology. The
results are not surprising: 'certain groups of people in contem-
porary Britain know more about the past than others . . . these
people have often had more education . . . often have higher
valued jobs with more control over people and resources . . . are
more likely to be male' (1986, p. 162). Popular representations of
archaeology in books and magazines have also come under
scrutiny. Gero and Root (1986), in an analysis of the National
Geographic Magazine, illustrate the manner in which the past of
'exotic' countries becomes systematically incorporated into the
American imperialist present, a conception involving an utterly
materialistic and commodified conception of the past. The past is
frequently enlivened by reference to contemporary categories and
social relations, ultimately becoming homogenized and connected
to the 'rise' of Western 'civilization'. Photographs of modern
natives humanize the archaeological landscapes depicted,
connecting past with present and offsetting the present-past of
exotic countries with contemporary America. In the pages of the
National     Geographic,     'archaeology contributes       to   the
rationalisation of imperialism, legitimating these activities with a
congruent view of the past' (Gero and Root, 1986, p. 9).
   Investigations have also been made of the major institutional
relationship between the public and the discipline, the museum.
Many criticisms have been made of distorted representations of the
past (e.g. Leone, 1981,1981a; Horne, 1984). Leone shows how the
representation of Shaker society at the outdoor 'living-history'
museum at Pleasant Hill, Lexington, Kentucky imposes the values
of contemporary American capitalism. Efficiency, calculating
rationality, industry, export, profit, innovation and inventive

             ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY              191

ingenuity comprise the major organizing themes in the displays.
That Shaker society was based on an utterly different set of values
in which they laboured to avoid sin, rather than for profit and 'the
only efficiency they knew was the kind. created between self-
mortification and a hair shirt' (Leone, 1981a, p. 312) is almost
entirely 'forgotten'. We have produced an extended ideology
critique of the museum's aesthetic (see chapter 1; and Shanks and
Tilley, 1987), concentrating on the way it produces its message in a
number of individual museum exhibitions in Britain.
   Finally, an important but surprisingly undeveloped focus in the
emergence of a critically self-conscious archaeology is feminist
archaeology, work that has raised the consciousness of the absence
of women in archaeology, both conceptually in archaeological
discourses and substantively in terms of a male-dominated pro-
fession (Conkey and Spector, 1984; Gero, 1985).
   Despite growing awareness of the relationship between
archaeology and present-day national and global structures of
power and social domination, a great deal of critical work in
archaeology remains political but without any politics. For so many
the relation between present context and archaeology as
disciplinary practice is neutral. The purpose of critique is thus
regarded as one of consciousness raising and the correction of bias.
Ideology, a concept central to so much of this work, is often
regarded as false consciousness to be expelled by enlightened
reason. A view of ideology as false consciousness depends on the
classical empiricist conception of knowledge. In such a view
knowledge is to be derived from the subject's experience of an
external object. The telos is a better version of the past, the
inculcation of critical judgements. Another view underlying some
of the studies is a notion of ideology as related to class or social
position. This raises the question of why critique should be
accepted. Might not the critique also be socially determined? If the
epistemological issues are not considered the prospect is of infinite
regress and relativism, each group having its own legitimate past.


               Critique and contextual archaeology
Hodder has presented a critique of the concept ideology in
proposing a 'contextual' archaeology. He objects to the cross-
cultural connotations of the concept, that it may be taken to be a
historical universal and consequently fail to account for historical
particularity. He regards the concept as being incompatible with a
view of social actors as knowledgeable, who are not necessarily

192               ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

fooled by ideologies into a relation of false consciousness with
regard to their social conditions of existence. He backs up this
argument with the findings of public opinion surveys showing that
people do not believe everything they are told about the past.
Instead, Hodder argues all ideologies both mask and reveal:
'ideology can be socially active, revealing rather than masking,
enabling rather than repressing' (1986a, p. 117). Here the concept
of ideology is neutralized and depoliticized. It is simply regarded by
Hodder as a 'world view' or conceptual structure, linked to
knowledgeability on the part of social actors and power. This
knowledgeability, according to him, allows the possibility of
critical debate, and social change through social debate (ibid., p.
113). For Hodder, the solution to the problem of the verification of
a critical theory which would criticize on the basis of the social and
historical determination of truth and meaning is to abandon both
the project and a conception of ideology as tied to the reproduction
rather than the transformation of the social order.
   As an alternative Hodder stresses a particular and determinant
historical context within a structured cultural field produced by
knowledgeable social actors. There remains the problem of
relativism: if archaeological knowledges are contextual, with a sub-
jective dimension, and tied to the negotiation of power, how are
different archaeologies to be evaluated? Hodder's answer seems to
be to refer to a project of self-knowledge and debate. Debate
operates on a real, but not objective past. This allows critical
evaluation, but no right answers, no certainty:

      There is no finishing position since there can never be any way of
      evaluating whether the 'right' interpretation has been arrived a t . . .
      But better and better accommodations and new insights can be
      achieved in a continuing process of interpretation.
                                                      (Hodder, 1986, p. 155)

  Hodder has faced issues vital to the emergence of a post-processual
archaeology of the 1980s and 1990s, but there are problems. He
states that 'since the past cannot be known with certainty, we do
not have the right to impose our own universals on the data and to
present them as truth' (1986, p. 102). But this argument appears to
come close to a disabling relativism. Hodder argues in the same
context that universals deny people freedom, but such a statement
has no epistemological relevance. Hodder's only resistance to
relativism is the material reality of the past and a faith in the
effectivity of liberal and critical debate.

             ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                  193

   All archaeology is contextual and archaeologies in opposition to
mainstream academic archaeology are possible: non-Western
indigenous archaeologies, feminist archaeologies, 'fringe'
archaeologies. Hodder's answer to the compatibility or
incompatibility of these different archaeologies is rightly to resist
methodology - the specification of a universal method. Instead he
relies on epistemology, the manner in which we can hope to know
the past. He takes some points from a reading of Collingwood
(1946): data are not objective but they are nevertheless real and are
constituted in theory; they are activated by questions involving a
historical imagination giving insight into particular historical cir-
cumstances. This is a process of thinking ourselves into the past,
reliving the past (Hodder, 1986, p. 94). Such insights can be
evaluated according to the internal coherence of an argument and
the manner in which they correspond to evidence.
   The result of such a position is a vision of an ideal of a discipline
of archaeology characterized by open debate and operating in a
pluralistic society; archaeologists creating better and better accom-
modations to the past in a continuous process of interpretation,
aiming at self-knowledge of the present. Hodder's references
(almost nostalgic) to the value of traditional archaeologies and his
affirmation of the personal roots of his approach to archaeology
(1986a, p. 171) become simply symptoms of his desire for civilized
academic debate, the right to choose one's own past (within
reason), an affirmation of the particularity of the lived past. But
such a position seems all too readily to embrace a regressive
liberalism and a fragmentary relativism - consequences of a shaky
epistemology. Here we must ask whether a contextual archaeology
will really change anything; can it act as social critique as Hodder
seems to believe (1984,1986a, p. 113)? He has admitted that critical
debate seems, in the context of the events surrounding the World
Archaeological Congress, to have had little effect on established
ideologies and views even among supposedly enlightened
intellectuals (1986a, pp. 118-19).
   The vital question to be faced is the real implications of power to
the discipline of archaeology. Here we need to consider the power
relations between the academic community and the power interests
of educational and governmental state apparatuses, and their
linkage with a capitalist economy. These decide which educated
and creative individuals are allowed to exercise and publicize their
historical 'imaginations' in pursuit of their 'self-knowledge'. The
corollary is that no matter how many subordinated individuals,
minorities, classes or groups may realize, for example, the nonsense

194          ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

of a museum's representation of the past, it makes no difference. A
contextual archaeology, as Hodder conceives it, runs the very real
danger of disguising the reality of contemporary relations of
repressive power and social domination behind a spurious plurality
of archaeologies, neutralizing social objection, transforming it
into a point of liberal and critical debate. Such a position also
overlooks the contradictory relation of critical debate to
contemporary society. Critique may be highly valued and yet
matters little in reality as a feature of capitalism's hypocritical
acknowledgement of 'civilized' values.

            Marxist archaeology and political critique
Most Marxist approaches in archaeology have remained just that
-alternative approaches to the past. They have a strong tendency to
scientism. They may introduce different perspectives on the data
which are claimed to be truer or better representations of society or
the past than those produced by conventional archaeologies. This
also applies to those predominantly Marxist inspired critical
archaeologies which depend on a distinction between science and
ideology: Marxist science dispelling the false consciousness of
ideology, correcting the bias of those archaeologies remaining
rooted in present ideologies.
   There has been little serious consideration of what may be
termed Marxism's critical tradition which does not emphasize a
science/ideology distinction. Kristiansen explicitly discounts the
critical theory of the Frankfurt school as being irrelevant to
archaeology (1984, p. 96); Hodder's discussion of it, condensed
into a few pages (1986, pp. 164-6), is inevitably somewhat lacking.
We consider this critical tradition of Marxism as one of the most
important and essential sources for reconstructing archaeological
theory and practice (Shanks and Tilley, 1987). It would be a serious
matter if archaeology remained content to simply borrow from
alternative definitions of the social, as found for example in
Marxist anthropology, while making the odd rhetorical gesture to
critical radicalism. Spriggs astonishingly claims the French
'situationists' Vaneigem and Debord and the black leader Marcus
Garvey as precursors of the contributors to Marxist Perspectives in
Archaeology (1984, p. v: dedication)!


      CRITICISM AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL PRACTICE

Gouldner (1980) has discussed at length the dual aspects of
Marxism we mentioned above which stand in a relation of

              ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY               195

considerable tension: Marxism as science and Marxism as cultural
critique. For scientific Marxism in traditional or structural Marxist
form, the emergence of socialism depends on a prior set of
objective economic conditions produced through an accumulation
of antagonistic contradictions in the capitalist mode of production.
In aspects of Marx's own formulations impersonal and necessary
laws supposedly guarantee the organic evolution of socialism. Such
a position is subject to the criticisms made of evolutionary theories
discussed in chapter 6. However, the critical side of Marxism has
never been content to sit back and permit blind historical forces to
come to fruition but has been concerned to actively incite people
to change the course of their history. If capitalism really is doomed
to suffer a cultural demise there would seem to be little point in
preparing its graveyard.
   In situating archaeology as a social production taking place in
the present we wish to draw on the Marxist critical tradition and
stress the practice of critique. The past is a reconstruction, a
cultural product, an artefact. And as Benjamin remarked, every
document of civilization is at the same time a document of
barbarism (1979, p. 359). Critique is essential but it is not to be
conceived as the criticism of a theory we don't like. It is not simply
open debate. Critique does not arise from method but from
objection (Faris, 1986, p. 4), political and social objection. Critique
breaks with established epistemologies, abstractions and totalities
in the service of present social change.
   Marx's eleventh thesis on Feuerbach states that 'the philosophers
have only interpreted the world, in various ways; the point is to
change it' (Marx and Engels, 1970, p. 123). We will elaborate
several aspects we may take from this. The point of archaeology is
not merely to interpret the past but to change the manner in which
the past is interpreted in the service of social reconstruction in the
present. There is no way of choosing between alternative pasts
except on essentially political grounds, in terms of a definite value
system, a morality. So, criteria for truth and falsity are not to be
understood purely in terms of the logic and rationality, or other-
wise, of discourses but require judgements in terms of the practical
consequences of archaeological theory and practice for
contemporary social change.


                   Critique: past, present, future
Hodder has talked of the aim of archaeology being self-knowledge,
knowledge of the present. Such a view is not very different from the
traditional justification of archaeology as forming part of the

196           ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

human pursuit of knowledge. We will clarify some important
points.
   The study of the past as an end in itself seems to amount to an
antiquarian desire to escape from the burden of living in the
present, perhaps for personal self-gratification; it may also amount
to a nostalgic yearning for values, social structures and social
relations that are, and can be, no more. The historian, or the
archaeologist, becomes a kind of 'cultural necrophile', as White
puts it (1978, p. 41). We challenge this traditional view of the
discipline which would represent it as a disinterested study of the
past for the sake of 'knowledge'. Such a position has the effect of
concealing the work of archaeology as a contemporary cultural
practice. Hodder's notion of archaeology as self-knowledge in-
cludes an awareness of archaeology's location in the present (see
above); but we go further in arguing for a mediation of past and
present, held in tension in the practice of archaeology, involving a
temporality of 'presencing' (see chapters 1 and 5).
   A critical archaeology involves us in a reading of the past which
at the same time invites us to shape a different future. The study of
the past is a means of providing a medium for a critical challenge to
the present. It becomes an operation to change the world as we
know and experience it. The study of archaeology is not something
done to 'remind' men and women of the past but is a form of
cultural action that attempts to forge a transition from our present
to a different future. This involves an awareness of history as the
outcome of human agency. Humanity creates its own history and
so can change, or alter, the consequences of this historical develop-
ment through specific forms of social action and intervention. This
does not imply that the course of history is solely to be regarded as
an intentional production, a function of the desires of individual
agents, but such a perspective does stress the sociality of that
history and that no future is assured or inevitable. The future is
always open to construction and reconstruction in the present.
There is no iron cage of historical inevitability. The only inevitability
is that people make history with an awareness of history, and may
extend or rupture it through their day-to-day praxis in the world. A
critical archaeology is an invitation to live this awareness of our
historicity, this potentiality.

                    Knowledge, hegemony, truth
The knowledge derived from archaeology can be regarded as a
means and an instrument for carrying out work in and on the

               ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                     197

world. Such a position regards knowledge as being a form of
power, being constituted in definite material circumstances, and
having specific material effects. Archaeological knowledge has
material effects by virtue of the fact that it arises from the situated
practices of individuals living and working in society. In this sense
we can say that all archaeologists live a dialectic between their life
and work and the social order in which they find themselves.
Knowledge, characterized by a particular material mode of
production is always a production of positioned agents situated                 X'
within classes, institutions and disciplines.
   This relation of power and knowledge can be refined by con-
sidering the concept of hegemony. From a classical Marxist
perspective consciousness was always determined by social being
and this was conceived in terms of determinance by the economic
base. In other words, consciousness of social reality was deemed to
be a more or less automatic reflection of deeper socio-economic
processes. In elevating the role of consciousness in the constitution
of the social Gramsci stressed the key role of hegemony or
ideological ascendancy, arguing that class-bound social control is
not simply dependent on brute force but that another vital and
equally material element for the dominant class to exercise power
was the establishment of its own political, moral and social values
as supposedly self-evident and conventional norms for living. For
Gramsci, a hegemonic order is one in which a common coded value
system is expressed in which one conception of social reality is
dominant, affecting other modes of thought and action. Hegemony
is quintessentially ideological power, or power over others achieved
through consent rather than brute force. The coercive power of the
capitalist state is derived in part from intellectual and moral leader-
ship enforced through 'civil society' or the entire ensemble of
educational, religious and cultural institutions. Gramsci cogently
notes that

  One of the commonest totems is the belief about everything that
  exists, that it is 'natural' that it should exist, that it could not do
  otherwise than exist, and that however badly one's attempts at
  reform may go they will not stop life going on, since the traditional
  forces will continue to operate and precisely will keep life going on.
                                                    (Gramsci, 1971, p. 157)

  We stress the working of hegemony as a nexus (not necessarily
coherent or singular) of encoded value systems, working through
institutions and the day-to-day practices of individuals and groups,

198          ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

involving the acceptance (not necessarily in its entirety) of the social
and political order as being right, just, or at the very least
legitimate. So, yes, people are knowledgeable and may not be fooled
by ideology - no one may be fooled by that museum exhibit - but
the important feature is that people 'know' it doesn't matter: it is
only a museum, or a television programme, a book. The 'working
classes' do not generally go to museums, and anyway museums are
places you visit on rainy days, just one leisure activity among
others. But, precisely, this is the working of hegemony. The point is
that the past does matter; that story of the past or that museum
exhibit does matter. This is not because it educates the public,
teaches them critical awareness or whatever, but because it forms
part of our present, part of our conception of the present which
always involves the past. We are not born free of this connection
between past and present.
   There are no essential and obligatory foundations for making
truth claims which are not themselves the product of a politics of
truth. We must be concerned to investigate what kinds of power
and determinate social conditions make the truth of a text or a
museum's representation of the past appear plausible. Truth in
archaeology is always to be related to the kinds of vision of
material culture that are relevant to us, that respond to our social
need. So a critical archaeology is an invitation to engage in a
transformative practice. We must aim to detach the power of truth
from all repressive forms of class-bound social hegemony.
   Archaeologists, for example, have established a hegemony over
the distant past, a hegemony currently being reinforced by a
populist discourse of heritage, of communal tradition: a past that
'belongs' equally to everyone and yet at the .same time is to be
ordered and preserved by the trained professional, applying his or
her knowledge. We must investigate the meaning and significance
of such discourses, their power effects, whom they serve and to
what end. In terms of society as a whole archaeology obviously has
very little economic or political significance, but it does constitute a
cultural practice, integrated in the general hegemonic regime of
power in society. As such, archaeology is nothing if it is not
cultural critique.
   Any notion that academic archaeology has its own sectional
apolitical concerns and interests by and large irrelevant to, and
untainted by, contemporary social processes is impossible and
dangerous to attempt to sustain. Such a position amounts to
containing whatever might be deemed 'archaeological' within its
own limited academic space. But any attempt to artificially

              ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                         199

separate archaeology from politics only serves to benefit existing
power structures. A 'neutral' archaeology serves to sustain the
existing social order by its failure to engage actively with it and
criticize it. Thus any advocacy of an apolitical archaeology remains
itself a form of political action.
   The position we are taking involves the inscription of a fresh
politics of truth, itself a form of power. This is a struggle waged in
terms of the production of alternative regimes of truth. Truth is to
be conceived as a series of coded rules which permit divisions to be
drawn between various types of discourses in terms of a polar
truth/falsity opposition. We should not do battle 'in favour of
truth' but, rather, situate truths in relation to the social, economic
and political roles they play in society. Our aim is not so much to
change people's consciousness as to change the manner in which
truth is produced and becomes accepted. Power can never be
detached from truth; but we can work to subvert the power of truth
being attached to the existing social order and instead link truth to
a political future.

                        Critique and pluralism
This emphasis on the relation of truth and power, on the location
of the truth of the past in the contemporary cultural practice of
archaeology, an emphasis on the politics of theory, does not open
the way for an anarchic play with meaning, a profusion of
archaeologies each rooted in their own politics. Hodder is right to
stress the material resistance of the past: not just anything can be
said about it. But a simple reference to the materiality of the past
does not explain its facticity, that it is fact in the present. Such an
ontology requires a mediation of subject and object, a subjectivity
and objectivity constituted in social practice. Fabian, in another
context, notes:

  The object's present is founded in the writer's past. In that sense,
  facticity itself, that cornerstone of scientific thought, is
  autobiographic. This, incidentally, is why in anthropology objectivity
  can never be defined in opposition to subjectivity.
                                                     (Fabian, 1983, p. 89)

And social practice always implies a politics (where the political
refers to debate as to how social relations should be arranged). This
begins in the present and ends in a future. It must form the arena of
any critical debate concerning the archaeological past. It goes far

200         ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY
beyond the narrow forum of archaeology as academic discipline. A
critique of traditional, 'new' or standard 'Marxist' archaeologies in
terms of their deficient understanding of the past may be necessary,
but is by no means sufficient. Such archaeologies require not just
intellectual challenge but active displacement. This displacement,
we suggest, is a matter of condemning or supporting particular
archaeologies according to social and political values. Here it is
important to note that value is not something inherently residing in
archaeology as a whole or in some forms of archaeology as
opposed to others. It is, rather, something produced for
archaeology and in the practice of doing archaeology.
   We have already discussed the notion of a radical pluralism in
archaeology and counterposed this to a repressive pluralism (see
chapter 1). A realization of the social conditions underlying
archaeological practice must shatter the illusion, fostered in the
new archaeology with its emphasis on cross-cultural generalization,
that the results of archaeological research are applicable to the
whole of humanity. Archaeology, as the product of social
conditions and forms of social existence, is always produced in
terms of specific interests and values. There is not, and cannot be,
one correct archaeological view of the past, one indivisible
archaeology. There are instead many archaeologies, and
frameworks for understanding them must become sites of struggle.
Hence archaeology is always dependent on the political and social
position of the investigator and his or her awareness of the social
conditions in which archaeological production takes place. But we
must reassert that this is an issue itself with no necessary or final
solution. Rowlands has warned against the vitalism that might be
involved in supporting local knowledges, 'authentic' knowledges
deriving from a life-world organic and specific to those it
encompasses. He also remarks that a fragmented past may
discourage collective identity and reinforce hierarchization in that
while 'the subordinated and the powerless may have identity, the
powerful will have science' (1986a, p. 4). Rowlands is arguing
in the context of relations between the developed West and the
third world: 'a stress on radical heterogeneity and cultural dif-
ference would . . . be more compatible with the aims of dominant
elites in an industrialising third world seeking autonomy and
identity in order to obscure and mystify the sources of their own
power' (ibid., p. 4). This serves again to emphasize the import-
ance of the politics of theory and the manner in which such a
politics need to be situated in relation to a determinate social
context.

             ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                           201
 INTELLECTUAL LABOUR AND THE SOCIO-POLITICAL
          ROLE OF THE ARCHAEOLOGIST

                    Il faut etre absolument moderne.
                                              Baudelaire


                        Intellectuals and power
What is to be done? What is the role of the individual
archaeologist? We have defined archaeology as a cultural practice
and referred to the mediation of the individual and the social in
practice. The question that follows from this is the nature of what
actually is involved in the production of cultural or intellectual
work.
  Traditionally, in Marxist thought, the intellectual has been
regarded as being a bearer of universal truths, acting in the role of
the political consciousness of the masses. The intellectual spoke in
the name of freedom, equality and social justice. For Sartre, the role
of the thinker was, in the last analysis, a class situation with the
mode of production providing a horizon for thought undermining
the pretence that reason alone could somehow be in itself the final
arbiter of knowledge: reason is historical and class-bound. Sartre's
definition of the intellectual is provocative:

  someone who attends to what concerns him (in exteriority - the
  principles which guide the conduct of his life; and in interiority - his
  lived experience in society) and to whom others refer to a man who
  interferes in what does not concern him.
                                                     (Sartre, 1983, p. 244)

The relationship of the intellectual to the powers that be in society
is an oppositional one. The role of the intellectual is to call into
question the established socio-political order. The intellectual must
ceaselessly combat his or her own class (usually petty bourgeois),
itself moulded by hegemonic culture, thought and sentiment.
Reason must be related to the life and situation of the researcher,
and it is only in this manner that the limits that ideology pose on
knowledge may be questioned. It is at the level of concrete
situations in which the intellectual finds himself or herself that
Sartre's dialectic of exteriority and interiority operates. So the
radical intellectual combines life and work, seeking
  to produce, both in himself and in others, a true unity of the
  personality, a recuperation by each agent of the ends imposed on his

202           ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

   activity, a suppression of alienations, a real freedom for thought - by
   defeating external social prohibitions dictated by the class structure,
   and internal inhibitions and self-censorship.
                                                     (Sartre, 1983, pp. 250-1)

The intellectual must be entirely modern, of his or her own time,
constantly aware of and concerned about events in the society in
which he or she lives.
   Radical and intellectual commitment are vital components of
critique. Here we can say that those archaeologists who seek simply
to preserve and transmit information about the past are forced to
adopt a conservative position. If other archaeologists step out of
line and relinquish this role by criticizing the relationship of the
discipline to society they will probably be accused of mistaking
their proper role and purpose. Conceiving of archaeology as, in
part, an act of socio-political intellectual struggle will, no doubt, be
denounced as scandalous or denigrated as misrepresenting the true
goals of the discipline. Another means of coping with such a
perspective may be to attempt to neutralize it by integrating it with
mainstream archaeology as yet another facet. A third strategy may
be a conspiracy of silence; time will tell.
   For Foucault, intellectual knowledge is itself inserted within a
system of power and may serve either explicitly or inadvertently to
block or invalidate lay discourse and knowledge. Consequently, the
intellectual's role is

  no longer to place himself 'somewhat ahead and to the side' in order
  to express the stifled truth of the collectivity; rather, it is to struggle
  against the forms of power that transform him into its object and
  instrument in the sphere of 'knowledge,' 'truth,' 'consciousness,'
  and 'discourse.'
                                                    (Foucault, 1977a, p. 208)

The universalizing intellectual has, in such a perspective, to be
replaced by the specific intellectual. The specific intellectual fights
against repression and carries this work on in the determinate social
situations in which he or she is located in society and on the terms
of his or her expertise in a certain field. The specific intellectual,
then, is one who works at a particular node within society in-
evitably involved in what can only be a localized and regionalized
struggle. The work of the specific intellectual is intimately related
to class position, the conditions of his or her personal life and work
and particular area of research and expertise. The intellectual fights
and struggles in all areas of society against prevailing power-

               ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                      203

knowledge-truth strategies, and engages in concrete and real every-
day struggles. This is a process of undermining or burrowing away
in the midst of a multitude of different sectors, points and
intersections within the social system (Foucault, 1977b, 1980).
  This conception of the specific intellectual corresponds with
Foucault's view of theory:

   theory does not express, translate, or serve to apply practice: it is
   practice. But it is local and regional. . . and not totalizing. This is a
   struggle against power, a struggle aimed at revealing and under-
   mining power where it is most invisible and insidious. It is not to
   'awaken consciousness' that we struggle . . . but to sap power, to
   take power; it is an activity conducted alongside those who struggle
   for power, and not for their illumination from a safe distance. A
   'theory' is the regional system of this struggle.
                                                   (Foucault, 1977a, p. 208)

Power is not simply coercion and social order is not just a creation
of force. Hegemony is vital to maintaining order. Hence any
attempt to transform society cannot just concentrate on altering
that which appears to be most obviously economic and political:
the economic and the political are not at all to be considered as
strictly delimited 'subsystems', 'spheres', 'levels' or 'instances' but
pervade and permeate every aspect of living from the micro-context
of familial relations to the macro-institutional context and affect
everything from poetry and plays to sport and patterns of food
consumption, and not least the work of the archaeologist.
   Gramsci distinguishes two fundamental dimensions of social
change, the organic and the conjunctural (1971, pp. 210-76). The
organic component is a 'war of position', the establishment of a
counter-hegemony. The conjunctural component involves the
physical contestation for state power. A war of position on the
cultural front necessitates the penetration and subversion of
the complex and multifarious channels of ideological diffusion
through which hegemony becomes sustained and is bolstered, but
hegemony is never total but riddled with inconsistencies and
fissures. This means that we need to question educational objec-
tives, archaeological, courses and archaeological practices so as to
challenge the relation of the archaeologist to society.
   A 'radical' archaeologist might become involved in a trade
union, a party political organization, in demonstrations in the
streets or organize extra-curricula discussions about, say, radical
discrimination, or the violation of human rights. These may be, of
course, genuine and important political acts. The problem is that

204          ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

they have no necessary relationship to the archaeologist's day-to-
day work. The most powerful political work the archaeologist is
able to produce will be likely to be in that field he or she knows best
- archaeological theory and practice. It is vital not to forget that
archaeology forms part of contemporary culture. It works and acts
upon, influences and informs opinion in the present. Hegemony
has to be constantly reproduced, and one of the main sites of this
reproduction is located in educational institutions. As Lentricchia
puts it:

   struggles for hegemony are sometimes fought out in (certainly
   relayed through) colleges and universities; fought undramatically,
   yard for yard, and sometimes over minor texts of Balzac: no epic
   heroes, no epic acts.
                                               (Lentricchia, 198S, p. 10)

It might be suggested that a critical archaeology must, firstly, take
up an oppositional role to contemporary society; secondly,
embrace a conception of the archaeologist as specific, or at times
universal, intellectual fighting at his or her institutional site against
the prevailing regime of the production of truth; this involves,
thirdly, taking up a notion of archaeological discourse as being part
of a war of position. This will be a value-committed archaeology.

                    Value-committed archaeology
Contemporary academic archaeology determines effectively both
what archaeology is and how it should be taught and learnt; i.e.
what archaeological questions, problems, means, methods and
modes of analysis are. This certainly has a profound effect on the
entire gamut of secondary and tertiary education and the teaching
of archaeology in these sectors of the educational system; on
fictional writing about the past (e.g. Auel, 1981); and on
presentations in museums and the media - areas of hegemonic
culture. Unless its challenges extend this far, a critical archaeology
is likely to amount to little more than a self-congratulatory stance
that we are aware of biases and distortions in our work and that
this heightened consciousness will lead to better work being done in
the future.
   Discussions about the form and nature of archaeology in
academia inevitably filter back in one form or another to affect the
manner in which millions of people make sense of, or have sense
made for them, of their past, and its connection with the present. It

               ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                        205

is quite evident that the past may be used for expressing a wide
variety of supportive ideas and values for a capitalist society,
naturalized and legitimized through an emphasis on tradition and
long-term time scales: myths of genius; individuality; patriarchy;
humanity's essential economic nature; the universality and
inevitability of technological development as progressive; the
naturalness of social stability as opposed to contradiction; the
inferiority or superiority of certain forms of social organization,
etc. Such views may be strongly supported by archaeological texts
(they usually are), or they may be challenged.
   There is no possibility of a neutral and autonomous 'middle
way'. The effect of archaeology in socio-political terms depends on
the place that it chooses to occupy within a wider socio-cultural
field. A value-committed archaeology is one rejecting any position
which would suggest that research merely mirrors the past. Instead
it insists that research forms part of a process in which the
archaeologist actively decides upon one past rather than another.
Interpretation in archaeology constructs a socio-political position
in the process of engagement with the artefactual traces of the past.
Anything 'discovered' about the past is not a passive reflection of
what the 'facts' may or may not tell us. Archaeological texts which
re-present the past have an expressive, rhetorical and persuasive
purpose. They are not, and cannot be, neutral expositions of the
facticity of the past (see chapter 1). What is their influence on those
who read them?


  Any specialized activity participates in a larger unit of action.
  'Identification' is a word for the . . . activity's place in this wider
  context, a place with which the agent may be unconcerned. The
  shepherd qua shepherd, acts for the good of the sheep to protect
  them from discomfiture and harm. But he may be 'identified' with a
  project that is raising the sheep for market.
                       (Burke, 1969, p. 27, cited in Lentricchia, 1985, p. 88)


The shepherd's concern for the sheep, although it may appear
genuine enough, when set in its. wider context is hardly
disinterested. Placing academic archaeology firmly within its social
context as a cultural practice in late capitalist society in the West
brings into focus the inadequacy of a 'disinterested' concern with
the past. Such an educational role for archaeology may go quite
some way towards fulfilling the goal of socializing individuals both
to accept and wish to participate in the reproduction of the

206          ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

capitalist market. By contrast a value-committed archaeology is
one that situates disciplinary practice critically within its present
social context. There is no disinterested interpretation of the past
because it always makes a difference in what manner it is re-
presented.
  A value-committed archaeology inevitably demands personal
commitment on the part of the archaeologist who must be wary of
being incorporated into upholding the established institutional
framework. Such an archaeology would require a reorientation of
power structures within archaeological institutions. At present the
academic world all too faithfully mirrors wider social processes
in capitalist society with its emphasis on competition between
individuals for academic prestige and power in the framework of a
hierarchical professorial structure; the 'ownership' of ideas as if
they were equivalent to television sets; pressures to publish; the
maintenance of strict disciplinary boundaries hindering
understanding; and the often ritualized paying of homage to
authority figures in acknowledgements, prefaces, citations and
references. Here we can do no better than to refer to Gouldner's
passionate denouncement of the petty personal aspirations held by
many self-styled radicals:

  The man who can voice support for Black Power or who can
  denounce American imperialism in Latin America or Vietnam, but
  who plays the sycophant to the most petty authorities in his
  university, is no radical; the man who mouths phrases about the need
  for revolution abroad, but who is a coiled spring ready to punish
  the rebels among his own graduate students, is no radical; the
  academician who with mighty oaths denounces the President of the
  United States, but subserviently fawns upon his Department Chair-
  man, is no radical; the man who denounces opportunistic power
  politics, but practices it daily among his university colleagues, is no
  radical. Such men are playing one of the oldest games in personal
  politics; they are seeking to maintain a creditable image of
  themselves, while accommodating to the most vulgar careerism. Such
  men are seeking neither to change nor to know the world; their aim is
  to grab a piece of it for themselves.
                                     ,           (Gouldner, 1970, p. 503)

A radical value-committed archaeology involves a way of living
that requires that intellectual struggle be carried into the heart of
the discipline, on a daily basis as a willed personal act, and
irrespective of the possible personal consequences of the reactions
of those in authority.

             ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY                    207

                           Writing the past
How is the past to be written? It may be dominated by a style of
textuality that either claims it has arrived at some truth in the past
or is groping towards this ultimate aim. This is almost exclusively
the position taken in archaeology at present, irrespective of
differences in the specific frameworks advanced. The object of
archaeology, then, is the production of knowledge about some
aspect of the past. However, this knowledge is generally conceived
in purely informational terms. 'Knowing' the past is to collect
together more and more bits of information about it by inductive
or deductive research strategies, or whatever. The information so
derived is pieced together into what basically amounts to a pictorial
statement. Such a knowledge of the past is at the same time a form
of domination and control. It is ill-suited to an increase in self-
awareness on the part of the investigator, the discipline, or society
at large. No doubt it satisfies those for whom the primary rationale
for archaeology is to provide either privatized or disciplinary
intellectual pleasure.
   Another way in which the past may be written is to provide a
position on it which does not establish closure in a picture but
dispels finality in a creative juxtaposition of past and present.
Sartre states:

  this is the measure we propose to the writer: as long as his books
  arouse anger, discomfort, shame, hatred, love, even if he is no more
  than a shade, he will live.
                                                  (Sartre, 1950, p. 238)

We might argue that what is needed is not the production of
archaeological texts that provide and permit a passive understand-
ing of the past, texts to be simply 'absorbed' (see the discussion of
archaeological texts in chapter 1), but texts that challenge the
reader: writerly texts (Barthes, 1974, p. 4) that have the effect of
dissonance creating and actively inviting discussion, debate, 'com-
pletion'. Polemic and rhetoric should be an essential part of ar-
chaeological textual production to stimulate the reader to be a pro-
ducer of the text's meaning and its relation to the meaning of the
past, not a passive consumer of a bland and smooth narrative, or
unapproachable information report inviting acquiescence rather
than critical reflection. A critical archaeology will produce texts
which interrogate the past in the form of a social document forged
in the present, stimulating a reply, a reaction, another text. This

208         ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF THEORY

raises a whole host of questions such as how should a site be
represented? what is the significance of a measured pot drawing? is
a list of artefacts objective? what is the origin, the meaning of a
list? Whatever the answers, a politics of archaeology is also an
aesthetics and a poetics, a production of texts which interrogate the
past but do not pin it down to a set of mechanical and reified
essences, texts which subvert those archaeologies that would deny
the study of material culture as being fundamentally a study of
power, the mediation, representation and articulation of power
strategies through material forms.


                          CONCLUSION

An oppositional role for archaeology; the archaeologist as specific
or universal intellectual; war of position; establishment of a
counter-hegemony; value-commitment; the question of how reality
is to be represented, written according to a radical aesthetic and
poetic: we might also make reference to the idea of an avant-garde,
or the debate over socialist realism, or the emergence of a so-called
post-modernist culture. All are issues in a cultural practice, in a
politics of archaeology. These issues need to be faced - archaeology
must embrace a commitment to the present through a consideration
of the present's past. Archaeology should be conceived as acting as
a catalyst in the transformation of the present, for without commit-
ment to one's own historicity, the discipline becomes little more
than an escape from our own time and place.

                          Appendix
Notes Towards a New Problematic
                   1.   ARCHAEOLOGY AND THEORY

1.1. Archaeology is immediately theoretical. There can be no meaningful
separation of theory, method and practice in archaeology.

1.1.1. The idea of applying theories or models or concepts to
archaeological data and the idea of theories as abstract heuristics (different
ways of looking at the same data) both involve a disabling split between the
theory and practice of archaeology.

1.2. It is not possible to provide a set of abstract rules of archaeological
method. Method is in part style, or rhetoric, aspect of the relation between
theorizing and the practice of archaeology.

1.2.1. A stress on methodology associated most recently with the
advocacy of 'middle-range theory', or the attempt to produce a science of
the archaeological record, represent a retreat into a practical empiricism of
the most antitheoretical kind. Methodology is to be criticized as determin-
ing the past in advance of its confrontation in archaeological practice.

1.3. What is needed are not new answers to the old archaeological
questions such as the origin of the state or 'civilization' but the redefinition
of these questions in terms of a fresh problematic for social archaeology.
This problematic focuses on archaeology's specific object and context: the
place and meaning of material culture within the changing social worlds of
past and present, and the meaning and form of gaining knowledge of this
complex.


              2.    THE SOCIAL AND THE INDIVIDUAL

2.1. There is no such thing as 'society'; there can be no abstract and
universal definition of society.

210                              APPENDIX
2.1.1. Social typologies or hierarchies of determination (such as ritual
practices determined by material economic logic) are both essentialist and
reductionist.

2.2. The concepts of function, adaptation and evolution have no
explanatory role in a consideration of the social and need to be either
completely abandoned or reduced to a simple descriptive vocabulary.

2.3. The social is an open field fixed in the politics of social relations and
strategies and in the interpretative practices of discourses.

2.4 The individual cannot be screened out of archaeological analysis. The
individual is to be conceived as knowledgeable and active and yet at the
same time positioned in relation to social structures and strategies, a trace
within a structured social field. This means that social relations cannot be
reduced to interacting creative individuals.

2.5. The social practices of agents are always to be regarded as situated in
relation to power, group or individual interests, ideology and symbolic and
signifying practices.

2.6. Power is central to social analysis; power (both productive and
repressive) is coextensive with the social field.

2.6.1 Power does not simply involve social stratification, nor does it
simply arise from the logic of economic base or control over resources.

2.7. Ideology as a technology of power is a strategy for social contain-
ment and is fundamentally implicated in the reproduction as opposed to
the transformation of the social. It is never a unitary phenomenon and is
related both to forms of domination and the way in which agents must
necessarily relate to and live through forms of social signification within a
field of asymmetrical power relations.


                       3.   MATERIALCULTURE


3.1. Material culture does not provide a window through which we can
see through and read-off past social reality.

3.2. Actions refer and relate to sign systems. Material culture is to be
conceived as a sign system, a non-verbal discourse.

3.1.1. As a sign system there are multiple transformations involved in the
elements of material culture: parallelism, opposition, inversion, linearity,
equivalence.

3.3.   Material culture is a social, not an individual creation.

                                APPENDIX                                 211

3.4. Material culture is active. Meaning is always actively created; the
meaning attributed to any item always has to be argued for and against;
meanings are mediated in relation to interests and social strategies.

3.4.1. Material culture constitutes an open system, a chain of signifiers. It
is irreducibly polysemous.

3.5. Material culture forms a reified channel of communication and can
be drawn on as a significative resource, activiated in the contextualized
matrices of particular social strategies.

3.6. Understanding material culture is an act of translation. Meaning
depends on context and the position of the interpreter in relation to this
context, whether prehistoric social actor or contemporary archaeologist.
There is no original meaning to be discovered.


                 4.    TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY


4.1. There is no singular time, but temporalities. Time is related to social
practice. It is part of the social construction of reality. As with space, it
does not simply form a container for action but is a medium giving form to
action and establishing action as meaningful. Different structures of
temporality are implicated in different practices.

4.1.1. Time as chronometry, measured as date, is not a universal
temporality and only emerged as a dominant frame within capitalism.

4.2. Archaeology is in part a history of times, times to be related substan-
tially rather than abstractly to social structures and practices. Different
temporal orientations shape history itself.

4.3. History is a contingent and not a necessary progress, contingent
upon determinate and historically variable sets of social relations. There
can be no universal histories.

4.4. Archaeology is a mediation of past, present and future. It is a social
practice involving a temporal mode of presencing, uniting and yet holding
apart past, present and future, constituting each other in their difference.

4.4.1. The past exists not as the past studied in itself but represents a
project in the present.

4.4.2.   The past requires completion by the interpreting archaeologist.

4.4.3. Archaeology as contemporary practice reinscribes the past within
our own society. The interpretation of the past does not transport a truth
or property of the past into the present; it transforms or translates.

212                              APPENDIX
4.4.4. Choosing a past, constituting a past, is choosing a future. The
meaning of the past is political and belongs to the present.

4.5. Capitalism is unique in relation to the past. This requires the
rejection of uniformitarian assumptions as regards a connection between
past and present. The uniqueness of capitalism - in terms of (1) rapidity
and tempo 6f change; (2) dominance of the economy; (3) stress on the
individual as discrete centre of consciousness; (4) mass production and
mass consumption; (5) abstract or spatialized notion of time - has to be
offset against the otherness, the difference of the past. Conceptual tools
are required to theorize the otherness, this difference.


                          5.   SOCIAL CHANGE

5.1.   It is stability rather than social change that needs explaining.

5.1.1. Both stability and change are intimately connected, specific,
located in determinate historical and social conditions and not amenable to
redescription in terms of an atemporal aspatial 'culture process'.

5.2. Social change is a process of the mediation of strategic practice and
structure.

5.2.1. The social is immediately temporal. Social action, structured and
situated in relation to schemes of signification, involves the constant
reproduction of these structures and schemes within political, strategic
interests.

5.2.2. Social change involves structural contradiction and particular, con-
tingent historical conjunctures of actions and events.

5.3. The separation of statics and dynamics, synchrony and diachrony
depends on the abstract temporality characteristic of the alienating calculus
of the capitalist labour process. Analysis of social change which involves
such a duality and temporality may thus be ideological.

5.4. Any notion of social causality in the form of cause-effect type re-
lationships, however complex, needs to be abandoned.


             6.   THE FORM AND POLITICS OF THEORY

6.1.   Archaeology, as cultural practice, is always a politics, a morality.

6.2. Theory is thoroughly subjective. It is not a technical product of a
specialist but a delimited and localized production, arising from a specific
contextualized interaction between individuals, the experiences of these
individuals, the manner in which their life and work interacts, and the way

                                 APPENDIX                                 213

in which the archaeologist manages to arrive at a specific picture of the past
based on the scraps of contingent materials (texts, knowledges, artefacts)
and life experiences at his or her disposal.

6.3. No discourse on the past is neutral. The validity of a theory hinges on
intention and interest: it is to be assessed in terms of the ends and goals of
its archaeology, its politics and morality.

6.3.1. There can be no neutral algorithm (such as simplicity, comprehen-
siveness) for evaluating particular archaeologies.

6.4. Archaeology is a signifying practice, expressive and transformative.
The past is written. Past and present are mediated in the archaeological
text.

6.4.1. Self-reflection: it is necessary to consider archaeological discourse
in terms of systems of concepts, rules and conventions for the production
of knowledges.

6.4.2. What is needed is an archaeological topology, a rhetoric; an
archaeological tropology, a stylistics: an archaeological poetics concerned
with how the archaeological past may be written.

6.4.3. Established archaeologies need to be engaged in terms of a
dialogue with their always present, absent other - that which is
systematically suppressed or marginalized in the text.

6.5.   Archaeology is nothing if it is not critique.

6.5.1. We do not argue for truths about the past but argue through
the medium of the past to detach the power of truth from the present social
order.

6.5.2. A critical archaeology is value-committed, a willed personal act
with the aim of transforming the present in terms of its conceived
connection with the past.

6.5.3. The past is not to be dispossessed of its difference by erecting it as a
mirror reflecting the present. The difference, the tension between past and
present subverts the legitimacy of the present.
