subject.

       The Individual and the
               Social

          ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE INDIVIDUAL

If, as Wheeler claimed (1954, p. 13), archaeologists are digging up
people, how is this the case? Where is the individual in the archae-
ological past? Are archaeological data collective, going beyond the
individual personality? If so, in what sense? Individuals have
appeared in the archaeological literature as powerful but
anonymous agencies, for example a 'paramount chief might be
inferred from the construction of Stonehenge, Silbury Hill or the
Bush Barrow in the second millenium BC of Wessex. The work of
an individual artisan may, perhaps, be recognized from examples
of their work (Hill and Gunn (eds), 1977), but here individuality is
reduced to idiosyncracy and creativity. Literary sources may, of
course, rescue an individual from anonymity. However,
archaeology has been predominantly concerned with units larger
than the individual. We now want to assess this absence of the
individual in considering the mediation of the individual and
society.


                 Other cultures and other subjects
In the conclusion to his Huxley Memorial lecture of 1938 Mauss
wrote:

  From a mere masquerade to a mask, from a role to a person, to a
  name, to an individual, from the last to a being with a metaphysical
  and ethical value, from a moral consciousness to a sacred being,
  from the latter to a fundamental form of thought and action... who
  knows even if this 'category', which all of us believe to be well
  founded, will always be recognised as such.
                                                   (Mauss, 1979, p. 90)

62                    THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

The 'category' that Mauss was referring to is the concept of the
human subject, here conceived as a muted and variable entity
radically open to different forms of constitution, both temporally
and in different societies. Such a notion conflicts with our
common-sense, twentieth-century Western ideas about what it
means to be a human subject and the manner in which people live,
think and relate to others.
   There has probably never been a society which did not recognize
the individual subject by such means as naming or being able to
differentiate between and perceive physical bodies, but we should
not conclude from this too readily that a transhistorical or
transcultural form of subjectivity has ever existed, or exists now.
Persons are not in any sense to be regarded as given and un-
problematic entities. Conceptions of the subject differ between
cultures and have altered historically in tandem with the practices,
institutions and forms of reference constituting subjectivity; the
obvious concomitants of this are differences in bodily gesture,
practices of discourse, and patterns of conduct and interaction.
Mauss (ibid.) usefully challenges any notion of a person as being
reducible to a set of natural (biological) processes or as arising as a
transcendental spin-off of a unitary 'human experience' of the
world or society; or equally, as being a datum related to some
supposed universal consciousness of individuality. Particular ways
of specifying the individual or individuality may arise in all
societies, but this does not necessarily entail a specification of
subjects as being in any sense unique entities imbued with a distinc-
tive consciousness, will or intentionality. Although naming of
individuals is a commonplace in societies, i.e. the specification of a
subject within systems of persons, this naming does not necessarily
imply the constitution of persons as distinctive individual beings. In
other words names and statuses while specifying persons do not
necessarily individuate an autonomous ego as a separate agent with
a personalized consciousness and independently constituted mode
of individuality. In regard to Zuni: 'on the one hand the clan is
conceived as constituted by a certain number of persons, activities,
roles; and, on the other, the purpose of all these roles is really to
symbolize, each in its own portion, the pre-figured totality of the
clan' (Mauss, 1979, 65). In ancient China the individuality of a
person was his or her ming and this removed from individuals all
the connotations of perceptible, individual being:

     the name, the ming, is a collective noun, it is something that has
     come from elsewhere: the corresponding ancestor had borne it and it

                    THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL                           63

   will be inherited by a descendant of the bearer. And when the matter
   was considered philosophically, when in certain metaphysical
   systems the attempt was made to express the matter, it was said that
   the individual is a compound of shen and kwei (two more collective
   nouns).
                                                         (Ibid., p. 76-7)


   This suggests that actual concepts of personage may vary
markedly from one group to the next and that the modern Western
conception of a person as a bounded, unified and integrated being,
a subject of distinctive cognition and dynamic centre of awareness,
emotion, action and judgement is a rather peculiar idea. The ethno-
centric bias of such a notion is very clearly brought out in Geertz's
analysis of individuality in Javanese, Balinese and Moroccan
societies. The Javanese concept of a person is arranged in terms of
two sets of essentially religious symbolic contrasts: inside/outside;
refined/vulgar - both of which subsume individuals. The former
contrast differentiates between relations of human experience and
spirituality and is contrasted with the observed realm of bodily
behaviour, but both are considered to be an identical component of
all individuals; the latter distinguishes between different sets of
conduct. Individual persons become the momentary locus through
which the two sets of oppositions prevail and confront each other
- a passing expression of the permanency of these oppositions in
human existence (Geertz, 1979, pp. 230-1). In Balinese society all
aspects of personalized individuation are completely stylized, so
that individuals become, in effect, dramatis personae in a symbolic
play of affective emotions and actions. Physical subjects become,
according to Geertz, 'incidents in a happenstance history' (p. 232).
In Morocco personal being has a chameleon-like quality, differing
according to the context for action, and individuals become
effectively kaleidoscopes in the mosaic of social organization.


    Construction of the self: the imaginary and the symbolic
Lacan, in his rereading of Freud, has explored the problematic
relation between the subject and the social. This relation, he
proposes, can be conceptualized in terms of two modes or realms in
which the subject apprehends reality: the symbolic and the
imaginary. As these are interdependent, the subject is always
located at the intersection of the criss-crossing axes of the real, the
symbolic and the imaginary. The symbolic order is that which
confers meaning and relates the subject to a place in the social
order of other subjects. The imaginary is the order in which the

64                THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

subject develops a self-centred consciousness. The real is always an
absent presence - that to which the symbolic and imaginary relate.
Such a conception leads to the decentering of individual con-
sciousness which is no longer regarded as the origin of meaning,
knowledge and action.
   Lacan proposes that the child, at birth, is a hommelette, a little
person and also 'like a broken egg spreading in all directions'
(Coward and Ellis, 1977, p. 101). The child, at this stage, has no
sense of its own identity and no possibility of conceiving of itself as
a unity distanced from that which is other or exterior to it. In the
'mirror phase' (Lacan, 1977, pp. 1-7), the child learns to recognize
itself through the mirror as a being distinct from the outside world,
yet this identity is also imaginary because it is an imaged or a
specular knowledge. The child's imaginary identity with its image
in the mirror (the 'other') is the manner in which the infant forms
an image of itself as a distinctive objective entity. The imaginary
relation of the ego to the body characterized by the mirror phase is
constituted via a specular counterpart and so the relationship
between subject and ego is essentially narcissistic. The image is
more constituent than constituted for the infant. This specular
form situates the agency of the ego prior to any social deter-
mination in an imaginary or fictional direction - imaginary and
fictional because it suggests some degree of permanency to the I,
rather than the I as always something being constructed. In the
mirror phase the subject is represented as an image or something
other, a stand-in reflection of the self and yet, paradoxically, this
image constitutes part of the subject's self-knowledge and self-
awareness.
   It is only with the child's entry into language that it becomes a.
'full' subject entering into a determinate field of signification, of
which the paramount example is language use. Speech entails the
differentiation of I from you and creates a division between the
subject of the enunciation and the subject of the enonce, between
the I that speaks and the I that is represented in discourse and that
ultimately disperses the unity of the subject. The subject is situated
in discourse by the 'I' and yet this I is always a substitute for the
subject that speaks. The child that speaks always has to identify
with the I yet this I is formed in terms of a matrix of symbolically
defined relations and subject positions. As the subject is always
linguistically and discursively constructed he or she is always a
displaced or decentred subject, displaced and constituted across the
whole gamut of discursive symbolic and material practices making
up the social field. Hence there can be no unmediated discourse, no
pure constitution of the self. The self is always created in relation to

                     THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL                              65

the other and the subject loses control over meaning and
signification in the parallel objectivity of discourse (Lacan, 1977, p.
70). Rather than being a given, the subject is an entity linked to and
dependent on various strata of consciousness so that 'a signifier is
that which represents a subject not for another subject, but for
another signifier' (Lacan, 1973, pp. 180-1). Signifiers do not link
individuals to other individuals, or even to the world, but to other
signifiers. The subject therefore becomes an effect of the realm of
signifiers within any particular socially constructed symbolic field
and the subject's 'reality' is situated within this order. The subject
should be considered as a subject in process, in a constant state of
definement, individuation and construction: a network rather than
a point in the social field. The reality of the subject, produced by
discourse, is a transindividual reality. This entails that the
experience of the subject has to be located at the level of the sym-
bolic. The capacity to symbolize allows people to situate themselves
in reality and yet subjects are never in a position to establish any
control over the symbolic because people do not produce their own
meaning: structures of signification are always given to them.
Signification is a function of language and material practices which
are both part of the being of the subject and yet at the same time
distanced. Language is always received ready-made for subjects to
use. At the same time it is through language use that the individual
gains an identity and a capacity to transform the conditions of his
or her existence. The subject cannot find his or her truth in a cogito
because identity is dispersed in a field of signifiers in which the
individual locates himself or herself and yet is dependent on a
dimension which is always something more. The realm of the
imaginary constructs and organizes a world centred on the subject
while the subject's existential reality is radically decentred. The
thought of humanity

   always faces the exhausting task of going back from the thought to
   the thinker; everything it says about man, is said by man, and this
   man is man only through that which isn't he, through the life of him
   and the culture around him . . . he is always other, the other of
   others, and the other of his self: subject when he is object, object
   when he is subject.
                    (Dufrenne. 1967, p. 73, cited in Racevskis, 1983, p. 144)

                         History and the subject
It is, perhaps, most fully in the dialogue promoted by
psychoanalysis that the paradoxical nature of the Western myth of
the autonomous ego is most clearly revealed:

66                    THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

     Does the subject not become engaged in an ever-growing
     dispossession of that being of his, concerning which - by dint of
     sincere portraits which leave its idea no less incoherent, of
     rectifications that do not succeed in freeing its essence, of stays and
     defences that do not prevent his statue from tottering, of narcissistic
     embraces that become like a puff of air in animating it - he ends up
     by recognizing that this being has never been anything more than his
     construct in the imaginary and that this construct disappoints all his
     certainties? For in this labour which he undertakes to reconstruct for
     another, he rediscovers the fundamental alienation that made him
     construct it like another, and which has always destined it to be taken
     from him by another.
                                                        (Lacan, 1977, p. 42)

Lacan notes that the 'ce suis-je' of the time of Villon (mid-fifteenth
century) has become completely reversed in the 'c'est moi' of the
contemporary subject (ibid., p. 70). The subject and subjectivity in
mathematics, politics, religion or \ advertising animates
contemporary society and yet the symbolic character of these
cultural interventions has at the same time never been more
manifest. Yet this symbolic culture appears to us as having the
character of an objective plenitude, the 'objectivity' of the
mathematical symbol, the 'objectivity' of law and political
discourse, of religious statements and the advertising image.
   Foucault, in stating that 'man is an invention of recent date' and
that were the structure of contemporary discourse transcended he
would be 'erased like a face drawn in sand at the edge of the sea'
(Foucault, 1974, p. 387), is making more than a rhetorical point.
Foucault's archaeologies of Western culture, of knowledge, the
clinic, incarceration and sexuality, have all signalled poignantly the
radically different conception of the subject in Western capitalism
as compared to that existing in pre-capitalist social formations. His
focus on the decades around 1800 in The Order of Things is
especially significant in so far as this was the period in which the
'sciences of man' - those sciences which privileged humanity as a
centre and telos of their domain - were originally constructed, soon
to take on their recognizable modern positivity. This was the
appearance of Western humanity as a subject in and of discourse.
Sometime at the end of the eighteenth century humanity appeared.
Previously discourse had provided a fairly transparent medium of
representation with linguistic forms and relations corresponding to
specific elements in the world in which God had arranged a great
chain of being and drawn language into correspondence with it.
Humans were merely one kind of creation among many, each with

                   THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL                      67

its allotted space, the essences, natures and definitions of which
could be read off from a table of beings. There was no need for a
finite being, MAN, to make representation possible or posit the
existence of the nature of being in the world: 'In Classical thought,
the personage for whom the representation exists, and who
represents himself therein as an image or reflection, he who ties
together all the interlacing threads of the "representation in the
form of a picture or table" - he is never to be found in that table
himself (ibid., p. 308). Instead of humanity as a being amongst
other beings, he or she becomes a subject amongst objects and both
the subject and object of self-understanding, knowledge and the
organizer of a spectacle for self-appearance: 'the threshold of our
modernity is situated not by the attempt to apply objective methods
to the study of man, but rather by the constitution of an empirico-
transcendental doublet which was called man' (ibid., p. 319).
   Under this doublet 'man' appears as (1) a fact among other facts
to be studied empirically yet at the same time providing a
transcendental grounding for this knowledge; (2) surrounded by
that which cannot be comprehended (the unknown) and yet as a
potentially lucid cogito and source of all intelligibility (the cogito of
Descartes); (3) a product of history, the origins of which could not
be reached, and also the source or foundation for that history.

             Formation and constitution of the subject
The subject of Western society is a subject very much bound up
with and arising from the field of capitalist social relations and
lending support to the principles underlying capitalist production
(entrepreneurial freedom, competition etc.) Forms of property, law •
and contract, notions of individual mortality and the proprietal
subject enjoying certain 'rights' all arise from the reality of
individual private possession linked with commodity exchange
(Hirst, 1980). The proprietal subject who owns and acquires com-
modities also has certain possessive rights. Notions of greed,
selfishness, laziness etc. only make sense in terms of, are ideational
prerequisites for, and concomitants of capitalism which produces
and reinforces subjects of a specific type - subjects who must be
held accountable for their doings in the capitalist market place and
who are supposedly free to radically alter the conditions of their
own social existence.
   This is not to claim that the mode of production simply deter-
mines the nature of subjectivity but that subjectivity is inextricably
bound up with it. As we have argued, any social totality must be

68                     THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

viewed as an ensemble of partially integrated symbolic systems
including language, economic relations, cultural production,
religion, politics, which are mutually determining without there
being any primacy of determination at any one level. Different
forms of social life coexist in the form of an overall and overdeter-
mined set of correspondences made possible by the symbolic nature
of human thought and interaction. It is in terms of this network of
correspondences, which do not exclude the possibility of gaps or
fissures, that the subject finds explanation and justification for a
particular mode of being and action. The subject becomes a
transindividual relation made possible by the symbolic order both
permitting the existence of subjects and the symbolic experience of
those subjects. So-called 'humanist' attempts to explain society and
history by taking as their starting point a human essence, the free
subject of needs, work, moral and political action, find their reflec-
tion in the 'free' subject that is also the subject of the Law, playing
a key role in the reproduction of capitalist social relations. As
Barthes notes, the judicial notion of a consistent and unitary
subject derives its power only in the form of being a particular
representation:

     this psychology has . . . the pretext of giving as a basis for action a
     pre-existing inner person, it postulates 'the soul': it judges men as a
     'conscience'... in the name of which you can very well today have
     your head cut off [and] comes straight from our traditional
     literature, that which one calls in bourgeois style literature of the
     Human Document.
                                                        (Barthes, 1973, p. 45)

Social relations cannot be reduced to the fiction of a domain of
interacting and free agents.
   The very idea of a subject that can both speak and be spoken
about entails a paradox inherent in the use of the term in ordinary
language. The subject of discourse can be that which denotes as
well as that which is denoted. The subject understood as an
embodiment of thought is a subject that creates or sustains sense.
The subject can also be something that is brought under
domination or repressive control: that which has the capacity to
subject. So, the subject can be a support or medium for discourse
and at the same time be controlled or dominated by discourse or
material practices: an active agent and an agent acted upon. This
brings us to subjectivity, subjugation, agency and power.

                  THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL                    69

                      Subjectivity and power
The appearance of humanity in a field of discourse, as documented
by Foucault, can be regarded as issuing in a new mode of social
existence in which people become subjectified and reified as objects
of knowledge - 'bodies' in a field of forces constituted by power-
knowledge strategies instituting an integration of the subject in
terms of the overall social field.
   New methods of classification, hierarchization, codification,
surveillance and a disciplinary technology focusing upon the body
developed in the nineteenth century, producing fresh types of
coercion and subjectification. The prison (Foucault, 1977) remains
one example, among many, of the technology of discipline,
surveillance and punishment - one of the most visible and clearly
articulated sites of practices widespread in society. In Foucault's
terms Western societies are disciplinary societies. In the present
context this is important because discipline creates a new type of
subject, a fresh form of subjectivity, and a novel manner of sub-
jugation.

   1 Discipline operates on the body. The subject is approached as
an object to be analysed and separated into finely controlled consti-
tuent parts: arms, legs, head etc. The aim of these operations is to
produce a docile and easily manipulated body. For example
different parts of the body may be minutely trained, as in army
drill, with a standardization of operations being the ideal.
   2 Discipline results in the control of time and space. Discipline
requires precise control of time and the regular repetition of
practices in time, for example the school timetable. Space and the
organization of individuals in space is produced in specific ways;
hospitals, prisons, schools, factories and military establishments all
establish and operate in terms of ordered grid patterns allowing
individuals to be divided, organized and supervised. The act of
looking over and being looked at is a central means by which
individuals become controlled in disciplinary space and time.
   3 Discipline results in a proliferation of discourses enmeshing the
subject and individualizing him or her. By means of the
compilation of detailed records and dossiers on individuals every
subject becomes a subject that can be known, subjected to a
normalizing judgement and discourses of power. Deviancy from
the standards of the disciplinary apparatus can be measured, defined
and controlled.

70                THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

Discipline in contemporary Western societies is a manifestation of
power. The development of Western discursive practices, especially
in institutional and official bureaucratic forms, has favoured the
development of discourses and practices that actualize domination
and repression throughout the social field: the family, the school,
the museum, the hospital, the factory. Thus a new potential for
violence and subjugation is actualized in the very systematism of
power strategies. What constitutes the subject and forms of
subjugation is the operation of power, both as a positive and as a
negative force in society, by producing knowledges and actualizing
them in specific forms. We might then say no power without
subjects and subjugation and no subjects or subjugation without
power.
   What we are stressing is the centrality of power in social life.
Power is a force and process to be found in all social totalities and,
historically, different modalities of the operation of power produce
different subjects, forms of subjectivity and types of subjugation,
One concomitant of this is that the subject in capitalist social
formations will have a fundamentally different type of subjectivity
and be subject to different forms of subjugation than in other
societies. Specific forms of practices which produce subjects in
contemporary western society might be delineated:

1 Modes of inquiry which produce 'truths' giving themselves the
  status of sciences and objectivizing the subject in various ways:
  for example the positivist social sciences.
2 The development of practices in which the subject becomes
  divided from within or without so objectivizing him or her: for
  example divisions between the criminal and the upright citizen,
  the sane and the insane, the healthy and the sick, the sober and
  the alcoholic or drug user.
3 Discourses in which people turn themselves into subjects:: for
  example as subjects of sexuality or capital accumulation and
  commodity exchange.
4 Creation of subjects in terms of ethnic or social or religious
  divisions.
5 Creation of subjects in terms of those who possess knowledge
  and those who do not.
6 Creation of subjects as effects of the division of labour and
  economic exploitation separating individuals from what they
  produce.
7 Forms of property, law and contract create subjects with
  specific 'rights' and 'claims'.

                   THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL                   71

8 Creation of subjects in language, communication through
  material or linguistic forms, i.e. the realm of the symbolic.
9 Ideological practices create subjects, practices which are
  interbedded and intertwined in points 1-8 above.

   An examination of the category 'person ', 'subject' or 'agent'
reveals it to be by no means universal, nor a homogeneous unity.
Following Lacan we might also argue that individual consciousness
is not the simple origin of meaning, knowledge and action. Instead
the human subject is situated in a social and symbolic field. The
conception of an autonomous ego, is, after Foucault and Lacan,
historically specific; a feature of the emergence of the human
sciences, the agent must be situated within historical practice. This
draws attention again to archaeology as discourse, a practice
constituting objects of knowledge. Foucault's work also shows the
centrality of power in the constitution of subjectivity, and in social
practices more generally. Social practice involves subjectivity and
subjugation, power to and power over, agency and control. So
power is both creative and oppressive and social actors are
knowledgeable, not passive.
   In the last chapter we questioned the category of the social,
interrogating its coherence and definition and pointing to its
location within archaeological practice. We argued instead for an
open conception of social order stressing its constitution in social
practices, which immediately involve relations of negotiation,
strategy and power. In this chapter we have extended this position
in arguing that the individual social subject is dispersed and
decentred, situated in a nexus of power, historical and political
practice and the symbolic. We now focus on the mediation of the
social and the individual in considering social practice and
structure.


            SOCIAL PRACTICE AND STRUCTURE

In social practice the individual agent is always already positioned
in relation to structure: relational sets of meanings,.concepts, signs
which provide principles for conduct in a meaningful life-world.
Any social acts draws upon these already existing structured sign
systems or conceptual schemes for the ordering of experience; but
every manifestation of structure in an action is a concretization of
structure through its effects on social practice and on the object
world. This realization of structure contains the possibility of the

72                THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

reordering or transformation of structures because meanings and
principles for conduct are re-evaluated in practice, in the
negotiation between and manipulation of social agents, in the
historical and conjunctural circumstances of practice, and through
the contingent effects of unintended consequences of practice.
   Action, in other words, is in dialectical relation to structure and
social context. It begins in structure, is mediated by structure, and
ends in structure, but its realization in the world may result in the
rearticulation or transformation of structure. This is the concept of
structuration: structure is both a medium and an outcome of social
practice (Giddens, 1979, 1984). So individuals pursue projects
which make sense in terms of structure. Negotiation and strategy
are central to this social practice which is a chronic relation of
forces between social agents with differing aims and interests. This
is what we mean in emphasizing social practice as fundamentally
political, in emphasizing the centrality of relations of power.


                              POWER

Power, in archaeology, has been conceived primarily in terms of
ranking and control. As a possession, some sections of society have
more power than others; they have more status. In this way power
is conceived to flow from the top to the bottom of society. Ranking
comes to refer to the unequal distribution of power. Power
seemingly requires theorization in terms .of some sort of essence
which may be possessed. The concept is reified. Archaeologists
have concentrated very much on the role played by power and
ranking in the reproduction of society, on describing patterns of
hierarchy and control of resources (see chapter 2).
   We take a different line. Any analysis of power concerns us with
the social roots of power, attempts to achieve and maintain power,
and counter attempts to subvert power strategies and sap the social
bases of power on the part of those subjected to its exercise. Power
should not be understood in terms of an all-important essence in
society residing at a specific place, something which may be
possessed, 'taken up' and exercised. Instead, power is a feature of
society which is irreducible to individuals or groups or specific
areas of the social field such as the economic or the political. In
other words, power has no necessary and unitary form of existence.
Rather than being conceived as a feature of the social we regard it
as being coextensive with the social field as a whole. Relations of
power are thus interwoven and networked with respect to the

                   THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL                   73

specific conditions of existence and effects of social practices.
Power resides throughout: the entire gamut of social practices and
in the structural ordering of society. Power is that aspect of human
practices which brings about effects, or permits the achievement or
attempted achievement of outcomes. These may or may not be
transformative in intent. Power may usually be connected with the
sectional interests of individuals or groups involving exploitation,
domination and subjection, and resistance to these practices, but
this is its usual effect rather than part of its definition. Power is
also a positive and not just a repressive feature of the social.
   Power resides in all social intercourse because in any social
encounter actors inevitably employ, to a greater or lesser extent,
different sets of resources, material or non-material. Power relates
to and works in terms of these material (technologies, raw
materials, control over coercive and non-coercive media) and non-
material resources (knowledge, information, position within the
overall field of social relations, competences and skills), which
individuals, groups and collectivities draw upon routinely in their
day-to-day conduct. Power is dialectically related to these
resources. It both draws upon and reproduces them. This is why
power is not something exercised by individuals, something which
can be possessed, but the effects of its operation usually result in a
structured asymmetry of resources benefiting certain individuals or
groups as opposed to others. Power is, therefore, to be linked with
interests, but not as a reflection of interests but rather a feature
which works through interests in a variety of forms and without a
predetermined outcome. Consequently power, and struggles
operating in terms of power, form a fundamental feature of
societal reproduction and transformation (see chapter 6).


                         THE SYMBOLIC

We have already discussed how the subject is situated in a symbolic
field: the symbolic, signs and signification, is an essential
dimension of social practice. It, too, mediates practice.
   Actions are not just constrained and limited by external
conditions such as the friction of physical space but also by the
conceptual categories by means of which the social is constituted.
Cognition, however, does not simply posit limits but also creates a
field of possibilities for action. The social world as cognized by
social actors has both referential value and existential meaning.
Any conception of history as meaningful must recognize that signs

74                     THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

are always already situated in structures but whose meaning may be
reconstituted in action. Signs relate to other signs in structure as a
collective symbolic scheme providing meaning for action. In
structure signs have an abstract sense, signifying within a collective
scheme of signification in terms of their relations with other signs
(see chapter 4, pp. 136-43). Although signs relate to other signs in
structure in an abstract fashion, their relationship to action entails a
different significance. It is one of potential rearticulation and the
constitution of fresh meanings. In action signs become positioned
in a contingent relationship with regard to individual purposive
activity and collective social strategies. In the contextual matrices
of situated social activities signs become set in a contingent
relationship to objects. They may take on a particular rather than a
purely abstract referentiality and become subject to combination
and recombination with objects and other signs from which fresh
form and meaning may arise. In other words, signs, codes, symbols
and categories may always take on new meanings because their
meanings have their realization in relation to specific political
projects and strategies.
   So in social practice signs are brought into a referential relation-
ship to the objects of actions. Action grafts particular contextual
meanings to the conceptual values of signs. Secondly, they become
subject to contingent relationships affecting their semantic values
because signs are not just experienced by actors as something
standing outside themselves but are always dialectically related to
their political interests. As Sahlins point out:
                                           i


     the sign represents a differential interest to various subjects
     according to its place in their specific life schemes. 'Interest' and
     'sense' (or 'meaning') are two sides of the same thing, the sign, as
     related respectively to persons and to other signs . . . Reference is a
     dialectic between the conceptual polysemy of the sign and its
     indexical connection to a specific context. Notoriously, signs have
     multiple meanings as conceptual values, but in human practice they
     find determinative representations, amounting to some selection or
     inflection of the conceptual sense. And because the 'Objective' world
     to which they are applied has its own refractory characteristics and
     dynamics, the signs, and by derivation the people who live by them,
     may then be categorically revalued.
                                                            (1981, pp. 69-70)

Put more simply, what this suggests is that signs or conceptual
categories are always dialectically related to situated social action
and the interests and values of actors. Meaning is precarious; its

                    THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL                     75

reproduction may result in its reconstitution, because action results
in the re-evaluation of the meaning of the sign in practice, in a
fundamentally political and historical context of power, interest
and strategy.


                IDEOLOGY AND SUBJECTIVITY

As a concomitant of the considerations advanced above, we argue
that no social practices exist without signification and without
being situated within an overall symbolic field. Signifying practices
have specific determinations and effects in the field of social
relations, creating, reproducing or transforming this field. They are
a necessary element in any form of social practice.
   Ideology is a form of signifying practice which acts to constitute
subjects in a specific way in specific circumstances in order to
reproduce rather than transform the social totality. Consequently,
ideology can only have an existence and an effectivity through
subjects. As a form of power it subjugates subjects. Following
Althusser (1971) we can regard ideology as an imaginary relation-
ship between people and their conditions of existence. It is not an
illusion or a 'false consciousness' of that reality. Rather than
regard ideology as a set of illusions we can think of it as forming a
set of representations (discourses, images, myths, practices)
concerning the real relations in which people live. This notion of
ideology as representation in and for subjects emphasizes its
familiarity and naturalizing qualities. Ideological practices are
always likely to be practices that are recurrent, practices presented
in a new way, practices that are already 'obvious' from previous
discourses and practices. Ideology may be particularly effective in
the constitution of forms of subjectivity and in effecting
subjugation because it tends to represent not the real, or even a
distorted reflection of the real, but that which is supposedly
natural, obvious or beyond question. What ideology systematically
suppresses is the nature of its own construction in signifying
practices. As emphasized by Althusser (1971, p. 155), ideology is
both a real and an imaginary relation to the world: real in that it is
the way that people live their subjectivity within the field of social
relations that governs their existence; imaginary in that it system-
atically prevents full self-reflection of the conditions of existence in
which subjects find themselves. Within the ideologies of capitalism
it is perfectly 'obvious' that we are all autonomous individuals,
possessing a distinctive will and consciousness, an enclosed,

76                 THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

personal subjectivity, and 'free' to participate in the capitalist
market and to direct the development of our own destinies. As
individual speakers it is also 'obvious' that we are both the owners
and origins of our utterances.
   In considering Lacan's work in psychoanalysis we have already
been concerned to demonstrate the construction of the subject in
language and the symbolic order. Since the symbolic order must be
considered to be, in part, an ideological order all subjects are
constructed in and constrained by ideology. The network of subject
positions which make action possible are produced in the symbolic
realm of human signifying practices and ideology tends to displace
the contradictions which exist between different forms of signifying
practices. As ideologies are not merely reflected in the psyche but
lived they are always inscribed in the materiality of social practices
and objectified in material manifestations. Subjects must necessarily
live their relations to their conditions of existence and hence they
must live through ideological practices. Ideology operates by
positioning the individual as a subject in relation to a certain
meaning. So, ideology both produces individuals with a subjec-
tivity and also subjugates them within the social totality with its
always already existing sets of contradictory principles for action,
motivation and meaning. As Coward and Ellis note, 'ideological
practice is necessary to societies of whatever kind because the
individual is not the centre of the social whole: the social process
has no centre, no motivating force' (1977, p. 74). If ideology is
necessary to any society in the process of subjectification and
subjugation then we must distinguish between two senses of
ideology: ideology as a necessary and positive force; and ideology
as legitimating systems of repression and social domination. The
former creates subjects; the latter, as a dimension of power,
subjugates subjects in the interests of certain hegemonic
individuals, interest groups or classes (we take this up further in
chapter 6).
   The concept of ideology has already been taken up in
archaeology. Some have used the concept as part of a social
reconstruction of the past: ideology refers to that part of society
which masks social inequality or contradiction in society and so
prevents radical social change (e.g. Shennan, 1982; Kristiansen,
1984), Others have applied the concept to archaeology itself and
have shown how archaeological reconstruction, for example in
museums, may hide social inequality or contradiction in the
present. The concept of ideology is here central to the project of a
critical archaeology (see chapter 7) which aims to investigate the

                    THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL                    77

production of the past in the present (e.g. Leone, 1981, 1984;
Meltzer, 1981).
   Hodder has produced an effective critique of such use of the
concept (1986, pp. 61-70). He argues that people are not fooled by
ideologies; they do not simply succumb to 'false consciousness'.
And that if ideology masks 'real' reality, how is objective social
reality to be defined? How are we to decide,between different
definitions of social reality (masked by ideology)? Hodder also
criticizes the cross-cultural nature of the concept: that it pays
insufficient regard to the specific historical context; and it pays
little attention to the production of particular ideologies, where
they come from.
   While we also criticize the identification of ideology with false
consciousness (Shanks and Tilley, 1982, p. 130) and the simple
functionalist use of the concept as masking contradiction, we hope
to show how ideology may be situated within particular social
practices (see above and chapter 4) and is involved in social change
(chapter 6), while the concept remains central to a critical
awareness of archaeology as a disciplinary practice (Shanks and
Tilley, 1987; chapter 7 below).
   We have presented a case for a fresh notion of subjectivity - a
position which goes beyond dogmatic humanism or anti-
humanism. Any position which displaces or decentres the subject is
regarded by some (e.g. Thompson, 1978) as fundamentally
dehumanizing, a Stalinist intervention. What such a position tends
to overlook is the constitution of different types of subjects in
different societies and the historically peculiar conception of the
subject in our own society and its relation to capitalism. The free,
autonomous subject going around conferring meaning and
significance at will is also an ideological component of capitalist
social relations. We should not, of course, seek to abolish the
subject or humanity. To the contrary, we should restore that
humanity by founding a critical position for conceptualizing a new
type of subject: the subject as a trace within the social field; as con-
structed in language, by relations of power and signifying practices;
a subject ideologically constituted but also aware of the possibility
of being subjugated by, that ideology. To regard human subjects as
being constructed is to recognize their sociality, their insertion
within a symbolic field. Any subject is therefore transindividual, a
locus for action rather than a point from which that action arises.
The subject is always present, always doing, creating,
knowledgeable of many aspects of his or her social existence. But
this presence, action and knowledgeability also entails an absence

78                THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL

- the absence of the other - of the domain of the symbolic, a primary
area of which is material culture. We must therefore aim to divert
attention from the essentially isolated subject of the capitalist
market-place to focus on a social subject that is created in the
otherness of human existence. We are refusing that symbolic
violence which ignores who we are, that would make us a mere
component of the system, and we refuse the inquisition of those
'scientific' practices which would place us in a field of objectifying
determination that goes beyond the social. This brings us to a pos-
ition where we may tackle material culture, the primary object of
archaeology, as a signifying practice.
