        Time and Archaeology


In about 2400 BC people began to live in a small community of
stone houses at Skara Brae in the Orkneys. They kept cows and
sheep, ate shellfish, made furniture out of stone, and made basically
the same sort of pots for perhaps 500 years. It would seem that little
changed over that stretch of time. How are we to understand those
centuries of life when compared with time in contemporary
capitalism and consumerist change? The issue is one of the meaning
of material culture and the character of social structures which we
have considered in earlier chapters. It is also an issue of the
meaning of time itself.
   Most of the human past is the province of archaeology: vast
stretches of time. Yet there is virtually no discussion of time in
archaeology. It is assumed as an unproblematic dimension. We aim
to direct attention to this lacuna, to challenge conventional
assumptions about time. Is time a dimension? What is the meaning
of chronology? How is time related to social change? Is time the
dimension of the historical disciplines? Is there a specifically
archaeological time - long term as opposed to short term? How are
past and present related in terms of time? We intend to argue that
these questions are vital to a critical reflection on contemporary
archaeology.

                  THE TIME OF CHRONOLOGY

                       Chronology: spatial time

  Any inquiry into the past which does not reckon with the dimension
  of time is obviously nonsense; the past is the past by virtue of the
  place it occupies in the time-scale.
                                                  (Piggott, 1959, p. 63)

                       TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                        119

The archaeological text legislates on chronology. Relative and
absolute; stratification and radiocarbon: time in archaeology is
presented as sequence and date. Time is identified as a dimension.
Each object or feature has a temporal attribute, objective and
quantifiable. This is its date, a universal index or scale according to
which everything may be related and compared. Time as dimension
is thus conceived spatially as location and distance. As a diachronic
dimension (abstract in that it is a neutral attribute separate from
that to which it refers), time provides a framework or context
within which the traces of the past may be situated and ordered.

                  Time in the space of excavation
Chronology is applied to the traces of the past to bring order and
sense. It is a technology for the reduction of difference and the
production of meaning.
   It is the excavation which establishes difference. The excavation
produces variety and variability in space - the three dimensional
volume of the site containing artefacts, features and layers. The
archaeological imperatives are to reduce this difference to
similarity, order, and to establish meaning. Reduction of difference
involves the identification of spatial pattern and temporal
sequence. The concept of stratigraphy translates variation in space
into variation in time, establishes relationships in time.
Technologies for identifying spatial pattern include taxonomics
(locating artefact, feature and site in a hierarchy of ordering taxa)
and spatial analysis.

                      Chronology and change
It is not now often accepted that any pattern produced is
meaningful in itself. There is the problem of the origin, meaning
and development of the ordered, classified archaeological universe.
The traditional answer to this problem is a narrative of 'cultures',
involving concepts of innovation, diffusion of ideas, population
shift and, more generally, notions of evolutionary progress - from
savagery to civilization.
  The new archaeology of the 1960s and since conceives of the
explanation of an identified pattern and sequence in terms of
culture process, the workings of culture systems, social systems and
cultural evolution. The problem of social change has been
foregrounded. Agents of change have been variously proposed:
prime movers such as population pressure and adaptation to

120                    TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY

environment; the technomics of economic rationality; the
mechanisms of mathematical logic (see the discussions in chapters 2
and 6).
   Time is assumed to be a theoretically unproblematic dimension
like space. With time and space separable from that to which they
refer, change becomes a problem. Change becomes variability
associated with time as abstract sequence. Change becomes a
catalogue of difference with an abstracted essence, the universal
motor of history, generating variability. Time conceived as
chronometric space is conceptually separate from social production
and reproduction. It is present only as a context, with change as a
problem.
   Time is separate from space; both are separate dimensions. This
separation is associated with a distinction between synchrony and
diachrony, social statics and dynamics, with dynamics or change
Apparently belonging to time. Such a separation is related to
functionalist conceptions of the social, organic units open to
synchronic analysis; it is related to static conceptions of social
entities ordered in evolutionary sequence: band, tribe, chiefdom,
early-state module . . .


 BAILEY IN THE APORIAI OF TEMPORAL LANDSCAPE

The most sophisticated and illuminating discussion of time in
archaeology has been produced by Bailey (1981,1983) and it merits
some considerable attention. Arguing for a duality within time,
between time as objective process and time as socially and so sub-
jectively represented, he identifies a series of distinctions (not
necessarily coincident or parallel):

      occurrence                       representation
      objective                        subjective
      duration                         event
      long term                        short term
      durable                          ephemeral
      collective                       individual
      present explained                past explained
        in terms of the past             in terms of the present
      nature                           history

Time as process is a function of objective occurrences. This may be
distinguished from time as existing in its representation as a

                        TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                         121

product of concepts which are to be related to their social context.
The single event, visible in the short term, is distinguished by Bailey
from long-term process possessing a duration, ex hypothesi, longer
than the event. Long-term process is presented by Bailey as going
beyond the individual and consequently having a collective aggregate
character (not necessarily 'social').
   These features of two aspects of time (Bailey assumes that
chronology is objective time, its representation is secondary and
subjective) are associated with a distinction between academic
disciplines. Environmentalist disciplines and the natural sciences
aim to explain the present in terms of the past. The present is a
dependent category within neutral and objective temporal scales
and involves long-term biological and ecological pressures which
eclipse the individual. Their frameworks employ cross-cultural and
generalizing regularities. For Bailey the social sciences and history
extrapolate from necessarily short-term behaviour in the present to
explain the past. They assume time to be internal to the social, as
part of the social, and regard the social as an independent variable.
   To be distinct and non-derivative a discipline must formulate its
own concepts and theories, conceptual schemes derived from its
own data base. Arguing that archaeological data refer to aggregate
behaviours, he proposes that archaeology's temporal index is not
the single momentary event but long-term process. Archaeology's
temporal scale is not that of the other social sciences whose concern
is with the short term. To be a distinct and autonomous discipline
archaeology must view the past in terms of processes probably not
visible in the present. Bailey claims that criticisms of concepts such
as adaptation apply only to the scale of the social sciences. In
archaeology's scale of long-term continuity the concept of
adaptation is meaningful. Archaeology, then, is to be grouped with
the natural sciences having an environmentalist perspective.

              Scale and the discipline of archaeology
For Bailey archaeology should be concerned with a different order
than that of the social sciences, for its scale is different. He suggests
that archaeological data refer to aggregates of behaviour, averages
which go beyond the individual event, short-term social process,
which are the focus of the conceptual schemes of the social scien-
tist. Social process is defined as short term by Bailey, or rather
he has it applying 'to a scale different to that of aggregate
behaviour. This definition is simply asserted; he only states that the
social sciences must show that social process can be long term. But

122                    TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY
the ancient city-state displays a continuity of social process that can
be historically documented for over a thousand years (de Ste.
Croix, 1981; Anderson, 1974). What constitutes long term as
opposed to short term? Bailey makes the point that environmental
phenomena can be as sudden as social phenomena: flood, drought,
earthquake. Clearly the answer cannot be a simple quantitative
reference to chronology: short term referring to year by year; long
term referring to century by century.
   Bailey relates temporal scale to process: different scales refer to
different processes. The processes pertain to a hierarchy of natural
entities from subatomic particles to organism to society to environ-
ment to cosmos. Scales apply to this hierarchy of entities and
moreover are incommensurate. The social sciences have their scale
and processes; archaeology shall have its own independent scale
and processes. The disciplines are incomparable. They exist side by
side (although within the same abstract temporal context -
chronology). The individual subject of the social sciences has no
relation to long term structure.
   But this surely implies a contradiction between his assumption of
time being chronology and time being specific to process, a
contradiction between empty abstracted time and a saturated time
inseparable from the process of an entity, a substantial time. How
can scales be, in Bailey's own terms, incommensurate within a
chronometric time? Furthermore, the process of archaeology he
outlines is the logic of economic and ecological relations, adaptive
logic within empty chronometric time; the logic and the time are
separate. Is there not, in fact, a confusion of logical sequence and
temporality? What is the temporality of scale? What is the
temporality of all these separate processes? Bailey needs to explain
how scale and process or logic has anything to do with temporality.
We might say with John Berger that 'reality should never be
confused with scale, it is only scale that has degrees' (1984, p. S3).
   A great deal is made of the claim that archaeology must be an
independent discipline with its own conceptual framework and
body of theory. Bailey's arguments about scale are meant to
support archaeology being defined as a specific discipline and are
meant to resolve or rather neutralize the increasingly emergent
splits within it. These rifts have been especially obvious to him at
Cambridge, origin of both palaeoeconomy (Bailey's subdisci-
pline) and the symbolic-structuralist-post-structuralist approach
associated with Ian Hodder and others. To Bailey both are
acceptable; they simply ask different questions, apply to different
processes, different scales. It is pointless arguing one against the

                       TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                        123

other but environmentalist palaeoeconomy is more archaeological.
Post-structuralist archaeologies are for Bailey essentially derived
from the present. They are nonetheless interesting.
   But isn't this simply a way of justifying essentially arbitrary
divisions between academic disciplines with the individual separate
from an independent realm of long-term 'structural' logic, with
incommensurate scales existing within the same spatial time? We
argue that all social disciplines, including archaeology, are
historical; long and short term, all deal with social practice. Bailey
is proposing a disabling theoretical fragmentation for the sake of
justifying archaeology as a separate discipline.

                        A subject of history •
The distinctiveness of Bailey's archaeology lies in its aggregate data.
Again the objective is given primacy. But what constitutes
aggregate behaviour? He makes the point that the whole is more
than the sum of the parts. But what are the parts and what is the
sum? To what, in his natural hierarchy of entities, does
archaeology refer? What is the subject of 'archaeological' process?
It is presumably not 'society' but a natural, as opposed to a social,
entity. Is it 'Man' ('Woman') and 'Nature'? Whatever Bailey's
answer (he does not provide one in the two papers concerned with
time), he must report to a metaphysics, an idealism. Bailey's
proposed archaeology is idealist in that it assumes an essential
principle or subject of archaeological history. History is assumed as
a coherent order, the workings not of social process (incoherent in
the long term) - but of what? A ratio naturae with its adaptive
logic? The logic of hyperscale?
   Bailey opposes history to nature, taking the natural as the
ontological first principle - prima ratio - the eternal against which
'Man' is measured. History is defined as a separate and incommen-
surate order. In this sense his archaeology is no history at all.
   Bailey's archaeology is a universal history applying to
'humanity' from the moment such an entity can be defined. His
scales and separate subjects assume an independent regularity,
single themes for different scales. The archaeologist is to become
initiate in the as yet mysterious laws of this reason, searching for
the key to diversity, the pattern, the regularity. Time is divided into
subject and law, metaphysical entities natura and ratio. In Bailey's
non-historical history human experience and suffering are
dismissed as belonging to another scale, subjective, contingent;
absorbed, rationalized into adaptive logic; subjected to the Law:

124                    TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY

natural reason, ratio, a goddess wreaking vengeance on those who
mark not the will of natura.

                          Past and present
Archaeology is to find its essential reality, its subject and its scale.
The archaeologist is observer of this reality; Bailey's idealism is
contemplative. Archaeology is locked into its time, the present,
observing a distant or rather incommensurate archaeological past.
But this temporal distance is postulated a priori. It is a function of
associating tense with date: conceiving the 'past' as of a different
date and so distant from the 'present'. Where is the present in
Bailey's spatial time? It becomes a durationless and invisible
instant in the overwhelming flow.
   Bailey's scheme of independent scales is logically connected with
the paradoxes of the division of time as dimension. The possibility
of the infinite subdivision of a chronometric time ends in the
durationless instant. This becomes the essence of temporality, just
as abstract space ends and begins in the dimensionless point.
   The material event is the province of the archaeological past, a
past which cannot, in Bailey's idealism, be thought as a present. He
presents no conceptual apparatus for dealing with the past as a
present - it is over and lost because of the nature of archaeological
data, and for Bailey the data are determinate. To treat the past as a
present, he says must result in archaeology being a derivative
discipline. The data are far better now for producing
generalizations about social process. But this is to privilege
generalization and again assumes a homogeneous past, a unified
and rational past.
   Nor is there an adequate consideration of the past in the present,
the presence of the past, the time of the archaeologist,' the
historiographic issue of the production of the past. He considers
that different archaeologies merely ask different questions of the
same data. The relation between present archaeologist and past
artefact is assumed to be unproblematic - simple reflection in
thought? The titles of both of his papers on time in archaeology
('Concepts, time-scales and explanations in economic prehistory'
and 'Concepts of time in Quaternary prehistory') refer to concepts
of time, but what is the relation of concept to 'reality'? This is not
considered.
   Bailey's dual conception of time amounts to a radical separation
of past and present and a valuation of the former; the past is where,
we are to find ontological and disciplinary security. The present

                        TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                             125

and subjective time, that is time as experienced and lived, time as
implicated in social relations, is marginalized. Human
consciousness is treated as an event like any other. Objective
occurrence is distinguished from representation in symbolic struc-
tures. He thus adheres to a split between material event and mental
appropriation. Bailey does mention that time is related to social
structure, but this relation is again lost in the archaeological past.
He also accepts that ideas of time may have had an influence on
behaviour in the past and refers to time scheduling and budgeting
in subsistence practices: a logistical time of calculation.


               CHRONOLOGY AND ITS ORIGINS

But what is the meaning of such temporality - the time of measure-
ment and calculation? Is such a conception of time itself
atemporal? We argue that temporality itself is historical, that any
definition of history is itself historical, and deny any chronology
which claims universality.
  Spatial neutral time, the time of archaeological taxonomics,
Bailey's fragmented temporality, are capitalism's chronometry.

  History since the French Revolution has changed its role. Once it was
  the guardian of the past: now it has become the midwife of the
  future. It no longer speaks of the changeless but, rather, of the laws
  of change which spare nothing . . . Social life which once offered an
  example of relative permanence is now the guarantor of imper-
  manence.
                                                     (Berger, 1984, p. 12)

Change is transformation, metamorphosis of the object. It belongs
to the object. But chronology is an index, a law applying to all
events, a single all-powerful force. Change under the law of
chronology becomes an aspect of time itself. Time as chronology,
abstract and inhuman, the law or principle which applies to
everything, becomes in Bailey's archaeology death triumphant over
all, adaptation, fatum naturae. No longer a condition of social
existence and life, time becomes sentence and punishment. The
archaeologist becomes the executor of the law and people become
the objects of history.
   Contemporary chronology flows. The past is lost in the distance
in the unceasing flow, exotic, mysterious and a problem. The past
is no longer organically related to the present. The present
represents ephemerality; the present is itself lost in the flow. This

126                    TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY

corresponds to the impermanence of consumerism, but also refers
to the possibility of social change in the non-Western world, the
promise of social revolution. Contemporary historical existence,
historicity, is both violence and possibility: violence to life, actual
and symbolic, and the possibility of revolution and change (Berger,
1984).
   Capitalism's chronometry is the calculus for organizing and
programming labour. It is a commodified time allowing the
calculation and comparison of incommensurate labours. It is
an ideology of production. Chronometric time is money.
Chronometry is the time of the factory clock. The private and the
public are separated as work-time and leisure-time. Lived time is
marginalized; times other than chronometry destroyed, condemned
as subjective, irrational, superstition.
   This is not to long for an age before capitalism's colonization of
time. Contemporary historicity is the emergence of a sense of
possibility, a possibility enabling a prospect of social justice, that
the present may be changed, that it is not under the guardianship of
a mythical past. Not nostalgia, but what is needed is a mediation of
Bailey's oppositions.
   This is to undo the identification of reason with reality, the
identification of chronology with the reality of time. In this way
nature and history come to mediate each other: what appears as
natural is historical production, and the identification of history
with what happened - objective occurrence - is dissolved in terms
of the concrete existence of the past. So the past is not assimilated
into the time of the archaeologist but realized as discontinuous with
the present, realized as being more than its representation by the
archaeologist.


                       TIME AND PRAXIS

We can agree with Bailey that time is to be grasped in relation to
particular processes. Time is thus substantial, not a dimension, not
a context. Context is to be subverted. Context is not exterior; there
is no stable 'event' and its 'context'. Temporal interval does not
consist of emptiness. Time exists in the relation between presence
and absence, both physical and temporal. Intervals are a part of
presences, defining, marking edges, structuring difference. There is
a chronic reciprocity between past, present and future. So the
archaeological past exists as a future project in the present, in the
social practice of archaeology. No time then exists in itself as

                       TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                           127

 abstract date or whatever. Time is not an abstract existent,
 contentless form. As we have argued, this would require a
 metaphysics of time. Substantial time is to replace the momentary
 present with the event of presencing. Presencing is a historic
 present, 'mutual reaching out and opening up of future, past and
 present' (Heidegger, 1972, p. 14), holding them together in their dif-
 ference, a relational nexus. Time is the event of praxis. So instead of
length of time we should refer to the density of relations of practice.
   Time is a condition of social practice. As we have stressed earlier
(chapter 3), in social practice social actors draw on structures which
enable action and in the action reproduce those structures. So every
social act implicates different temporalities: the occasion or event
of the action; the life history of the social actor; and the
 institutional time of structure. This is the social logic of 'scale'.
   In arguing against a 'Hegelian' total and abstract time, Althusser
proposes multiple temporalities within a social formation - times
specific to the separate instances: economic, political, legal and
ideological (Althusser and Balibar, 1970, chapter 4). There is thus
no single unifying time, no single 'now'. The only unity to different
temporalities is their location within a structured social formation.
While not agreeing with Althusser's characterization of 'social for-
mation' we agree that time is unavoidably implicated in social logic.
So chronology does not explain, nor does it provide a context. It
is part of that which is to be understood.
   Time may not involve chronology, as we shall illustrate in a
moment. Synchronic does not necessarily mean at the same date; at
the same date does not mean that two events were necessarily
synchronous. Dates act as taxa, uniting 'events' according to an
abstract calculus. We argue instead that any synchrony and
diachrony must arise out of the social structures of which they are a
part. Bailey was lost in the abstract landscape of a quantitative and
spatial time. We can conceive a substantial time as an eventful
landscape of continuity and discontinuity: structured difference.

                         A history of times
Our point is that different temporal orientations shape history itself.

   "The moment is a moment' (Bourdieu reporting an Algerian peasant)
                                                          (1963, p. 59)

  Time for the Algerian peasant is not measured but marked.
There are not spatial points of division, segments of regular

128                   TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY

succession, but self-enclosed, discontinuous units. Points of
reference are supplied by experience of the agricultural cycle: a
ritual calendar. The peasant temporality of tradition is not
coincident with chronology.

  Marked time                            Measured time
  Submission to the                      Managed time
  passage of time
  Self-enclosed                          Repetitive segments of
  recurrent moments                      regular succession
  The forthcoming:                       Future void, open
  exalted by tradition
  Imitation of past;                     Design of a projected
  conformity with                        future
  ancestral model
  Concrete horizon of                \   Mutually exclusive
  the present;                           possibility
  single context of
  meaning
  Reading signs to                       'Rational' calculation
  which tradition
  provides the key
  Deferred consumption                   Abstract absent
  (hoarding)                             accumulation
  Gift                                   Credit
  Social imperative                      'Rational' choice

  SUBSTANTIAL TIME                       ABSTRACT TIME

The measured time of abstract chronology, to be managed,
calculated, saved and expended, is distinct from the peasants'
immersion in a substantial time, a mythology in action, a
submission to the passage of time, with no one dreaming of 'saving
time', 'spending time'. The future in an abstract quantitative
chronometry is a void of mutually exclusive possibilities, a time to
come to be forecast; the forthcoming of substantial temporality is a
single context of meaning, the concrete horizon of the present
exalted by tradition, to be an imitation of the past, conforming to
the ancestral model. To presume to calculate the future is hubris.
So rational calculation of the future, opening up possibility,
opposes a prophetic readings of signs for which tradition furnishes

                        TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                                129

the key, a reduction of possibility. Provision for the forthcoming
involves hoarding, concrete deferred consumption, opposed to
abstract absent accumulation. The gift, with debt a social and
moral issue, is distinct from credit. Social imperative opposes
rational 'economic' choice.
   Reason (1979) locates what he calls the textual time of the
peasant and capitalism's abstract time in the organization of
production and relates this distinction to different forms of
classification. Socialized production by the peasant family is
orientated towards use-values of anticipated products that are
qualitatively distinct and strictly not commensurable. Accounting
practices and orientation to abstractly commensurable exchange-
values are inapplicable. Peasant work-time is substantial, rooted in
concrete labour: 'work time is a physiognomy of subsistence'
(Reason, 1979, p. 229). Conversely, capitalist labour presupposes
an abstract temporal frame: time is money. Reason opposes
abstract repetitive temporality to a textual time, a temporality that
constitutes and is 'constituted in, the narrative account as the prime
formula for reflecting [upon] the curses and causes of events, and
provides the essential means of explicating the sense of the
accomplished facts of life . . . With textual time, we deal not with a
dimension but with a way of grasping one's living' (ibid.; pp. 230-
1). He relates textual time to a world composed by exemplification
- 'the production of signs which "possess;" that to which they refer'
(p. 237) - categorization as opposed to a system of classification.
   Classification implies a separation of sign and sense, an arbitrary
signifier with a stable structure of rules and articulatory criteria of
identity which transcend the particular occasion. Reason here refers
to Saussure's observation that in linguistics 'as in political economy
we are confronted with the notion of value: both sciences are
concerned with a system for equating things of different orders -
labour and wages in one and signified and signifier in the other'
(Reason, 1979, p. 241, citing Saussure, 1974, p. 79; Saussure's
italics). In both, time is an indexical quality. These orders of
temporality are clearly implicated in social practice. It should also
be noted that they are not mutually exclusive: we can understand
the time of the peasant, just as the peasant can understand
chronology. The important point is the structural relation of time
to social practice, the social and historical production of time.
   Levi Strauss has written that

   The characteristic feature of the savage mind is its timelessness; its
   object is to grasp the world as both a synchronic and a diachronic

130                     TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY

   totality and the knowledge which it draws therefrom is like that afforded
   of a room by mirrors fixed on opposite walls, which reflect each other
   (as well as objects in the intervening space) although without being
   strictly parallel. A multitude of images forms simultaneously, none
   exactly like any other, so that no single one furnishes more than a
   partial knowledge of the decoration and furniture but the group is
   characterised by invariant properties expressing a truth. The savage
   mind deepens its knowledge with the help of imagines mundi. It
   builds mental structures which facilitate an understanding of the
   world in as much as they resemble it. In this sense savage thought can
   be defined as analogical thought.
                                                (Levi-Strauss, 1966, p. 263)

   He has distinguished systems of totemic classification from
history. In totemic system 'history' is eliminated or integrated; in
the Western present the historical process is internalized, becoming
a force of change. As we have already described, Western
chronology transcends discontinuity and, difference, closing gaps,
relating events and objects to one another. The totemic system
remains faithful to the timeless model of the past, the authority of
tradition, the legitimacy of absolute antiquity. The mythical past
appears as separate from the present. The ancestors, creators, were
different to ordinary people, their imitators; the mythical past is
joined to the present because nothing has been going on since the
appearance of the ancestors except events whose recurrence
periodically overcomes their particularity. The historical process is
not denied but admitted as form without content. There are before
and after, but each reflects the other.
   The traditional is the predictable, bringing past into present,
shortening chronology into present memory and model of the
mythical past. This predictability is not the mechanical predictability
of the identification of prediction and explanation which depends
on a temporality of date and sequence. It is a predictability which
arises from incorporating or eclipsing historicity, breaking chains
of events which have not occurred before, a predictability which is
a social accomplishment.
   The rhythm and nature of social change is related to social
temporality. Tradition's temporality is short, a thin overlay on the
authority of a timeless and mythical past. Chronology is thus
compressed. We might say that tradition's temporality is of a
different 'scale' to that of contemporary Western historicity.
   We can make reference here to Gurvitch's (1964) typology of
time. He specifies the parameters and forms of social time and
relates these to types of social frames and societies. His eight forms

                        TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                            131

of social time depend on different relations between past, present
and future, greater and lesser duration, continuity and
discontinuity, contingency and necessity, qualitative and
quantitative. Enduring time (the time of slowed down long
duration) involves the past

  projected in the present and in the future. This is the most
  continuous of the social times despite its retention of some
  proportion of the qualitative and the contingent penetrated with
  multiple meanings. For example, the ecological level moves in this
  time, particularly its demographic aspect. The past is relatively
  remote, yet it is dominant and projected into the present and the
  future: the latter thereby risks annihilation. It loses much of its
  concrete and qualitative coloration, and for this reason can be
  expressed in ordinary quantitative measures more easily than all
  other times. The quantitative measures, however, always remain in-
  adequate. Kinship and locality groupings, especially the rural, are the
  particular groupings which tend to move in this time.
                                                  (Gurvitch, 1964, p. 31)

Other types of time include cyclical time where past, present and
future are mutually projected into one another with an
accentuation of continuity and a weakening of contingency with
the qualitative element emphasized (ibid., p. 32); and explosive
time where the present as well as the past are dissolved in the
creation of an immediately transcended future: discontinuity,
contingency and the qualitative are stressed (p. 33). Other
parameters are real lived time as opposed to the perception and
awareness of time, and the control and mastery of time.
   Gurvitch's social frames and societies, correlated with these
different times, include social levels (ecological base, practice,
symbol and value systems, collective consciousness), interpersonal
and intergroup relations, structured and unstructured social groups
(such as kinship groups, organizations), social classes, archaic,
historical and contemporary societies. While we oppose the strong
typological basis of such work it is nevertheless a useful heuristic.
What needs emphasis is the social production of times - their
relation to determinate structures of power and interest. So we need
to consider the ideological implications of the temporality of
tradition (described above) and the relationship between writing
and time.
   Writing transforms the temporality of tradition, extending time,
producing the absent present in the graphical trace. Writing first
appears as the list, as a means of storage. No longer the storage of

132                      TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY

ritual information in the memory of the initiate in tradition, writing
allows the creation and control of information, of records and
archives (cf. Goody, 1978). As such it is the basis of the develop-
ment of surveillance and forms of social control. Inscription is
duration; writing transforms temporality, but temporality itself is
not neutral. As an aspect of social practice, temporality is related to
social control, written into relations of power.

           From historicism to the historicity of discourse
    Zeno says what is in motion moves neither in the place it is nor in the
    one in which it is not.
                                                  Diogenes Laertius IX, 72

    Aristotle summarises Zeno's third paradox: The arrow in flight is at
    rest.
                                                     Physics Z9 239b30

Zeno seems to have argued as follows:

1  The arrow at rest in the present moment is contained in space
  just its own size.
2 The arrow in flight in the present moment is contained in space
  just its own size.
3 In the present moment the arrow in flight is at rest.
4 The arrow in flight is always in its present, a sequence of present
  moments.
5 The arrow in flight is always at rest.

This is the paradox of statics and dynamics, synchrony and
diachrony, of time as date, moment, sequence, and duration as
length.
   But there is at least one resolution: the arrow flies and is at rest
when it is drawn. The paradox is resolved in the act of inscription
(Barthes, 1982a, pp. 232-3).
   The telos of objective chronologies is historicism where the
artefact is explained in terms of its location within its time, within
events and relations contemporary with it. Past is separated from
observing present, each located on a chronometric continuum. The
telos is eternal image. But what of the event of observation, of
excavation, of analysis, of writing? Objective chronologies eclipse
this historia rerum gestarum with the res gestae; discourse is eclipsed
by artefact and attribute, digging by the site.

                       TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                          133

                     Mediating past and present
Time is established as social practice. Archaeology is established as
social practice; it is a relation between past and present, the story
told and its telling. The artefact then is not in itself; it emerges in
the social practice of archaeology. So archaeology's object is not an
eternal image. Archaeology is act of excavation, act of writing.
Archaeology is a specific act of engagement with the past. So we
need to move from contemplative, distanced representation, an
image that goes beyond time, to the material act of production, act
of excavation and inscription, acts which have their own time. The
past is 'the subject of a construction whose locus is not empty
time, but the particular epoch, the particular life, the particular
work' (Benjamin, 1979, p. 352); each is to be broken from
historical continuity in the act of engaging with the past. So
understanding the past is not to look back along a continuum
which has led to the present. It is not to escape the present to see the
past in itself. Understanding the past is to break with the past.
   This is not to put the past at risk. The past can only be
determinate by virtue of the present. To be in itself the past requires
the exteriority of the present interpreter, the archaeologist. Past
and present must be held in tension, in relation. To conceive of the
archaeologist as executor of the laws of time, of change, of natural
reason is to disguise the assimilation of the time of the past to a
universal homogeneity. To preserve the time of the past we must
accept paradoxically the past's coexistence with the present, its
relation in the present. What separates past from present is not
knowledge, it is not date: it is the temporality of the past, the
experience of time as it was in the past. This means that people of
the past cannot be controlled as is implied in their assimilation to
abstract chronology. We can only trace them in the time they live
and we perceive. The past, the time is theirs. But the meaning of the
past is the present's.
   The tension between the past and the present involves a
redescription of past events in the light of subsequent events
unknown to the actors themselves; it involves the creation of
temporal wholes, historical plots. It is not possible to know of the
past as witnesses of the past. This is the fallacy of empathy: that the
subject, the social actor of the past is the locus of history. To
understand the past as archaeologist is to know the past as
 temporal wholes. It is vital to emphasize that these do not involve
 the foregone conclusions of universal history, but there are
 successions or developments in the past and it is the task of the

134                     TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY

archaeologist to elucidate and understand them. As Adorno has
remarked, 'no universal history leads from savagery to civilisation,
but there is one which leads from the slingshot to the hydrogen
bomb' (Adorno, 1973, p. 320). It is the archaeologist in the present
who develops the plot, the narrative.


        The event of archaeology; the archaeological event
   There is no one thing, no some thing, nor such a thing whatsoever.
   But it is from motion or being carried along, from change and from
   admixture with each other that everything comes to be which we
   declare to 'be', speaking incorrectly, for nothing ever is, but always
   becomes.
                                                   (Plato, Theaitetos 152d)

To say 'what is emerges' is to say that nothing exists in itself but
emerges or comes to be in a field of relations with others, emerges
as different to something else. It is also to say that what is emerges
from its transformation. For archaeology this transformation
occurs especially in the text.
   The past is excavated away. It must be recorded. The artefact is
described, drawn, symbolized; the event is similarly represented.
The past emerges in the archaeological text. Metaphor and allegory
are thus central to archaeology. Archaeological metaphor: an
assertion of identity in difference; the past is represented but the
difference, the tension between the past and its archaeological
representation remains. The archaeological past cannot be simply
represented or precisely imitated. There is no unmetamorphosed
reality of the past now.
   The past decays, is dismantled, and is constructed, The past is
not 'discovered' or simply presented to perceptive consciousness.
Artefact is not simply added to artefact, event to event, to
accumulate an archaeological past. The past is dis-closed; its
elements are grasped together in the archaeological judgement
which constructs meaningful wholes, meaningful pasts. So the
artefact is not simply the past but is inherently reflective, mediated
and mediatory, uniting past and present. It is critical, that is
existing in the time of krisis or judgement, the archaeological act
which brings together past and present. Archaeology then is a
mediated relation between what happened and its representation,
between being historical and doing history. So our historicity is in
part doing archaeology: this is simply to say that the past is
temporally inseparable from the event of archaeology.

                       TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY                         135

   Now the archaeological event does not exist: the event has no
existential reality. There is no stable 'event', singular objective
occurrence, 'this happened then'. So what is an event? The idea of
event was the focus of the ideographic/nomothetic distinction as
applied to archaeology especially by Trigger (1978). Is archaeology
a historical or a natural discipline? Is its subject the unique and par-
ticular historical event, or a logic of the (social) event in general?
This distinction was often assumed to coincide with the difference
between traditional and new archaeology, between humanist
historical narrative and hard science providing explanation through
generalization. But a universe of radically dissimilar particular
events is meaningless, a literal chaos or non-sense; while a scientific
archaeology subsumes the particularity of the past beneath an
abstract concept of occurrence - an event is conceived as simply
that which occurs. This is to oppose abstract concepts of the
particular and the universal and begs the whole question of the
meaning of history.
   An event is an abstraction but an abstraction from a
configuration of which it is a component; an event only makes
sense in terms of a meaningful whole, a historical plot. So an event
cannot exist in itself; it cannot be separated from its context, its
relations with other events and meanings which contribute to the
understanding of plot. The event is more than singular occurrence.
And scale is not a reality but a construction.
   So the practice of archaeology is a construction of pasts. It
establishes event as event, artefact as artefact. The event emerges
from archaeology; the event, time, duration is inscription.
   We can draw some implications. We said above that metaphor
and allegory are central to archaeology; archaeology is unavoidably
historio-graphesis. It is a system of regimes for production of the
'past'. What is needed is a theory of archaeological inquiry: an
archaeological topology (a rhetoric); an archaeological tropology
(a stylistics); an archaeological poetics asking how the past is to be
written, how the past can be represented without identifying it with
its inscription in the present. To say the past is written, that it
emerges in inscriptions, is not to give primacy to text. It is to direct
attention to the tension between the traces of the past, now over,
completed, and their representation in discourse. It is to direct
attention to the mediation of the historical and fiction, the fictive,
that which is created. How can the past be expressed as completed
without making it a point in an abstract temporal continuum? It is
necessary again to challenge a unified past of formal coherence, to
point attention instead to the meaning of archaeological plot and

136                   TIME AND ARCHAEOLOGY

ask the meaning of third-person report, of synthesizing narrative,
the disguises of figure and allegory. It is to ask why archaeologies
are written now, how and why they make sense, if they do.
  The question of time in archaeology is not a neutral and
academic question of method. Archaeology is not simply filling out
an empty time with the debris of history. Time is not simply a
neutral dimension in an academic discipline. Archaeology's
appropriation of the past is a moral and political act. Choosing a
past, that is constituting a past, is choosing a future; the ideology
of contemporary archaeology's temporality is that it is imposing a
Western valuation of measured abstract time on a multitude of
pasts which cannot answer for themselves - even the dead aren't
safe. The event of archaeology is disguised in a separation of past
and present with present disappearing and past becoming spectacle,
entertainment, illustration. We hope to have initiated a challenge to
this regime of archaeological temporality, and in the following
chapter consider the implication of time in social change, one of the
most important areas of archaeological theory.

           Social Evolution and
             Societal Change

In this chapter we wish to address the question of social change and
the manner in which transformations in the archaeological record
may be described, assessed and interpreted. Nowhere is the
intimate connection between archaeological theory and wider social
theory so evident as in considerations of social change in terms of a
long temporal perspective. In a very real sense the study of long-
term social change marks out an intellectual field in which
archaeology and social theory do not just come together, with
perhaps slightly different perspectives, but actually coalesce.
Consequently, we will be concerned to analyse conceptualizations
of long-term change within the broad context of the sociological
literature and archaeological texts, and in historical perspective.
   The question of why and how social change occurs is vital to
archaeology. Indeed, for many archaeologists it provides the
justification for archaeology as a worthwhile academic pursuit.
What other discipline can boast such a temporal perspective on
humanity? By comparison, sociologists and anthropologists (even
historians) lack such temporal data. They can, at best, hope to
provide fairly synchronic 'snapshot' views of social totalities in
which processes governing change have to be inferred from a
delimited 'slice' cut through an ongoing temporal sequence.
Despite such claims, frequently made in the archaeological
literature, it is worth noting that no distinctive theories of change
have been produced by archaeologists, nor does it seem likely that
there will be any in the future. All theories of social change utilized
in the discipline are derived from the wider social sciences and then
used as modelling devices for considering temporal and spatial
alterations in archaeological sequences. As in all other areas of
archaeological theory and practice, views of the past are
thoroughly embedded in the present.

138            SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

   Both social theorists and archaeologists, when considering social
change over long time spans have relied heavily on some notion of
evolutionary development, whether working within a Marxist or
non-Marxist framework. It is almost impossible to exaggerate the
profound influence an evolutionary conception of society has had
in considerations of the relationship between past and present. A
tendency to think in evolutionary or developmental terms has been
pervasive in Western thought since, at least, the Enlightenment. It
forms part and parcel of the nineteenth-century origins of both
archaeology and sociology as academic disciplines. Archaeological
views of the past have been greatly influenced by social theory of an
evolutionary type and, in turn, archaeology has been used in social
theory to provide a broader temporal perspective for its
consideration of the nature of change.
   We discuss a number of influential evolutionary perspectives
used in archaeology and social theory to conceptualize change,
studies relating change to forms of economic exploitation and the
environment within a systemic framework, cultural evolutionary,
Marxist and structural Marxist perspectives. In particular, we
intend to urge that any notion of social evolution is theoretically
flawed and almost always embodies unwarranted ethnocentric
evaluations. We suggest that evolutionary theories, of whatever
kind, need to be abandoned in favour of a theoretical framework
that can adequately cope with the indelibly social texture of change
within a framework avoiding both reductionism and essentialism.


          SOCIAL CHANGE AND SOCIAL SYSTEM

                          Systems theory
Systems theory was introduced into archaeology primarily in order
to explain change. Paradoxically, as utilized, it is a conservative
theory of persistence and stability (see chapter 2). Accounting for
change has always been the major problem with the approach. This
is a result of the emphasis put upon homoeostasis and pattern
maintenance, and owes much to the old Hobbesian problem of
order, or how is society possible in the struggle between competing
individuals, in the battle between all against all? In classical
sociology, and in the systemic perspective, this 'problem* becomes
resolved by the internalization of social facts, norms or values into
the consciousness of individuals in the form of needs dispositions
providing motivational referents for individualized action. Society

               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                 139

becomes treated in a reified manner in which change takes place
'behind the backs' of social actors who become irrelevant to the
analysis, mere 'components' of the system (Cooke and Renfrew,
1979). The sole theoretical function of the individual is to act as an
offset to the social realm, so serving to establish, in this difference,
the existence of the specific realm of the social.
   Systems theory provides a form of functional analysis no
different from the Malinowskian functionalism which dominated
anthropology until the late 1950s or the functionalist sociology of
Parsons (1952) or Merton (1957), based more or less on organismic
and physiological analogies. Any functional explanation of change
presupposes some needs, wants or goals. In other words it is
teleological in form. Something occurs as the result of reaching
towards or pertaining to a desirable state. Individuals may be very
well said to have needs. Indeed it is a fundamental feature of
humanity to have aspirations and desires. By contrast, social
systems themselves have no needs, they have no need to function,
to survive, to attain a goal range or to seek out homoeostatic states.
The needs of the social system cannot be independent of the actors
which make it up so any notion of system function or subsystem
function or the function of rituals or other institutionalized
practices is entirely irrelevant and misplaced. But in a systems
perspective feedback processes cannot be conceptualized except in
terms of some goal unless they are just random, but to
anthropomorphize such processes is invalid.
   Why change should occur becomes a very real problem in a
systemic perspective because the system has been defined in such a
way that stability is a norm. In other words, systems theory, as
utilized in archaeology, has a theoretical structure describing how a
system is maintained but not how it is transformed. The
theoretical structure is not isomorphic with the ontological struc-
ture it seeks to represent. Change via positive feedback mechanisms
is always circumscribed and does not really penetrate the internal
structure. The concepts used to analyse change are no different
from those used to explain system equilibrium, and the processes
operating to change a system are the same as those serving to main-
tain it in a stable state. They are only different forms of regulated
feedback. So in order to explain change a position of exogenous
causality must be resorted to. As a normative consensus is
attributed to the social actors within the system (whom, we are led
to suppose, all live together in a fairly harmonious fashion, with
few internal conflicts, tensions, struggles for power, and contradic-
tory sets of interests or wants), changes can only occur as a result of

140               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE
pressures induced from outside the system. Hill (1977, p. 76) claims
that to think that internal tensions might promote systems
change merely 'begs the question' as to why these arise and this
must result from factors external to the system impinging upon it.
Plog argues that changes are constantly occurring in systems but
these will always be 'deviation-countering changes' (1974, p. 47).
However, under 'abnormal' conditions

      there are conditions under which a change is so great that the
      response fails to restore the initial equilibrium. These conditions are
      called environmental changes, and the behavioural or sociocultural
      responses to them are called morphogenic or deviation-amplifying
      changes.
                                                                 (Ibid, p. 47)


The view is that the cumulative effect of regulatory mechanisms
and deviation countering devices will offset and countermand
change unless there is a particularly violent oscillation in the
system's environment which causes the normal operation of the
homoeostatic mechanisms to break down. Positive feedback
processes are then set into operation until a new state of
equilibrium is reached.
   Despite the general view, repeatedly advocated (most recently by
Juteson and Hampson, 198S), that a systems framework is superior
to other models of change because it enables change to be explained
in terms of multivariate causality, in practice the approach all too
often leads to the postulation of a few 'prime movers' such as
exchange (Renfrew, 1969, 1972), population increase (Cohen,
1977) or the environment (Binford, 1964; Flannery, 1968; Plog,
1974). Of these the second, population increase, is undoubtedly the
most popular and it is difficult to find texts ostensibly explaining
change which do not use this supposedly independent variable to
explain why change - any kind of change - occurs (e.g. Bradley,
1981; Sherratt, 1981; Dolukhanov, 1986), irrespective of whether
or not a systems perspective is explicitly adopted. This kind of
universal recipe is, in fact, no more than an easy way out. It
remains non-explanatory in precisely the same way as the
'normative' diffusionist theories to which the new archaeology so
strongly objected.
   Plog (1974) in his 'dynamic-equilibrium' model of change
isolates four features promoting change, which he also refers to as
'growth': population, differentiation, integration and energy. The
first refers to the size of the system; the second to the number of

               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                 141

'parts'; the third to the strength of internal system ties; and the
fourth to the nature and quality of the resources utilized in the
system. His analysis, in common with many others, suffers from
double determination. Plog characterizes systems as having inbuilt
emergent properties and as changing adaptively in relation to the
environment. These two modes of determination of systems change
are theoretically incompatible. Plog states that differentiation
'refers to evolution from multi-functional role structures to more
special ones' (1974, p. 62) while also stating that 'changes in the loci
of resources being utilized by an adaptation and experimentation
with new resources may account for changes in differentiation'
(ibid., p. 64). On the one hand, then, systems change becomes
teleological, an inbuilt capacity towards change in the direction of
increased differentiation; and at the same time change occurs as a
result of environmental adaptation. The effectiveness of the one
would appear to preclude that of the other.

               Systems theory and cultural evolution
Binford asserted that White's cultural evolutionism (1959) had 'laid
the theoretical basis for a logicodeductive science of culture'
(Binford, 1972, p. 110) and this involved viewing culture as an
extrasomatic means of adaptation. He argued that evolutionary
change was change occurring within maximizing systems which
included the adaptation of social systems to their environments, the
more efficient use of resources and energy flux. Concomitantly,
'evolutionary processes are one form of ecological dynamics'
(ibid., p. 106). The unit of evolutionary relevance is not changes in
parts of social systems which, according to him, may be given a
functional explanation, but changes in the integrated system as a
whole. Evolution thus takes place as a result of the interaction of
the total social system with its environmental field, and adequate
explanations 'must make reference to forms and kinds of selective
pressures operative in concrete environments' (ibid., p. 109). For
Binford, if statements are to be explanatory rather than descriptive,
this requires the formulation of evolutionary laws to relate relation-
ships between the environmental field and the socio-cultural
system. The search is for universal processes underlying different
empirical sequences of societal change, and the reason for this
change is environmental adaptation.
   Flannery's linkage of systems theory with a cultural evolutionary
perspective is important because he is prepared to view change as
arising from within as well as from outside the system. He criticizes

142           SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

'prime mover' explanations, concentrating attention on one
or a few variables and proposing multivariate causality. For
him, an adequate explanatory framework requires us to distinguish
between: (1) the processes of evolutionary change; (2) the mech-
anisms by means of which these processes take place; (3) the socio-
environmental stresses which serve to activate the mechanisms
(Flannery, 1972, p. 409). According to Flannery, the processes and
mechanisms are universal features of evolutionary development not
only in human societies but in all living systems, whereas different
selective stresses may be specific to any particular trajectory or
evolutionary sequence. Social evolution is to be understood in
terms of increasing segregation or differentiation and
centralization or integration. Two possible mechanisms are
discussed, promotion and linearization, corresponding to the twin
processes of segregation and centralization. Promotion is the
mechanism by means of which an institution or lower level office
such as chiefdomship moves to a higher position in the total system
with expanded and generalized functions. It results in increasing
segregation of the system. Linearization or the expropriation of
lower order by higher order controls leads to increasing
centralization of the system. Segregation, then, is the agent of
change.
   For Flannery, each member of an evolutionary series (e.g.
chiefdom or state) forms a set of structural conditions for further
segregation to a higher level of institutions, functions, offices etc.
These become, as it were, crystallized at various stages or levels of
complexity of articulation by centralization processes. Segregation
cannot proceed unabated for the social system would simply tear
itself apart from the centrifugal tendencies of promotion
mechanisms. In the long run the trend to increasing segregation
cannot be stopped as more complex forms of social organization
develop as a result of the failure of the simpler forms to fulfil their
functions effectively. The new offices and institutions are more
flexible than those they replace. So segregation is viewed as a
process of development and maturation. It is beneficial and may
serve to cure internal 'pathologies' subjecting the system to stress:

   In a multivariant model, we might see the state evolving through a
   long process of centralization and segregation, brought about by
   countless promotions and linearizations, in response not only to
   stressful socio-environmental conditions but also to stress brought
   on by internal pathologies.
                                                (Flannery, 1972, p. 414)

              SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                143
The use of the term pathology indicates quite clearly the biological
analogy that Flannery wants to make and also serves to indicate
that a failure of internal system function is a quite extreme
condition contrary to an assumed norm of systemic compatibility
or, translated into social terms, a normative consensus existing
between individuals. It is adaptation to socio-environmental
stresses that, for Flannery, as for Binford, provides the overall
meaning and direction for evolutionary change. Without it there
would be no reason for the segregation and centralization
processes. Evolution permits an increasing degree of efficiency and
control over the environmental field. If any particular social system
is unable to adapt through segregation it is no longer able to
maximize its environmental control and resultant energy yield and
must be extinguished in the long run. Societies, or those that
survive, attain new and higher levels of adaptive efficiency and are
able to compete more successfully with their neighbours.
   Sanders and Webster reiterate the point that environmental
stimuli are 'basic causes of cultural evolution' (1978, p. 251). The
model they use outlines various possible evolutionary trajectories
from egalitarian societies to states conditioned by the permutation
of environmental variables and assumes that population growth
occurs, that rates of growth remain constant, and that this is a
necessary precondition for evolution (ibid, p. 297). Adaptation
simply accommodates people to their environment and permits the
development of societal growth and higher order social structures.


     SOCIO-CULTURAL EVOLUTION: CHANGE AND
                 DEVELOPMENT
The 'new' archaeology has generally been regarded as marking a
revival of explicit interest in evolutionary theory on the part of
archaeologists, rather than the largely implicit adherence to vague
notions of social evolution found in much of the traditional
archaeological literature. The connection made by Binford and
Flannery (among others) between the conception of society as a
functional system and evolutionary change of such systems through
time is thus understandable. However, evolutionary perspectives
have always played an important role in the discipline, used for
example to explain artefact change (see chapter 4, p. 80). A recent
survey of American archaeologists carried out in the mid-1970s
listed 'the rise of civilisation' and 'sociocultural evolution' as
among the top research interests (Schiffer, 1978, p. 154). The

144             SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANCE
literature on evolution continues to grow (e.g. Bintliff (ed.), 1984;
Cohen, 1983; Dunnell, 1980; Foley (ed.). 1984; Flannery and
Marcus (eds), 1983; McGuire, 1983; Segraves, 1982; Van de Leeuw
(ed.), 1981; Wenke, 1981 - to mention only a few examples in the
more recent literature).

              Social evolution: a nineteenth-century view
The current popularity of evolutionary theory in archaeology seems
to be indicative of the discipline being unable to break free from the
shackles of its nineteenth-century origins. It is striking how little
the level of conceptualization of the social has really altered over
the last 120 years.
   A general unity of conceptualization underpinned the
evolutionary schemes developed during the nineteenth century by
Spencer, Morgan and Tylor, among, others, irrespective of the
details of the various frameworks advocated (Smith, 1973, pp.
27-8). This can be summarized by the following seven points:

1      A totalizing holism. The primary object of study was the entire
      history of humanity. Culture with a capital C was writ large and
      conceived as essentially unitary.
2     Gradualism. Social change was conceived to be an incremental
      and cumulative process without significant discontinuities or
      ruptures in the historical process.
3     Universality. Change was a generic and natural process shaping
      humanity and social institutions.
4     Potentiality. Change was conceived as being endogenous and an
      inherent feature within human societies.
5     A directional trajectory. Social change was neither cyclical nor
      random but conceived as a unified process leading to human
      fulfilment.
6     A deterministic perspective. Change being both irreversible and
      inevitable led from the simple to the complex, from the
      homogeneous to the heterogeneous.
7     A causal reductionism. Change was at all times and in all places
      subject to the same causal laws which conferred an underlying
      logic to the total social process.

Most of these features occur in one form or another in varieties of
twentieth century evolutionary theory.
  After Spencer became an evolutionist in the early 1840s he wrote
sociology as the history of societal evolution. There was no alternative

               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                         145

to this since not to consider the social life of human beings as an
all-embracing developmental totality would entail the abandon-
ment of large areas of social life as being random and arbitrary.
For Spencer, evolution was a unitary process and the theory he
advocated covered all types of natural processes from the develop-
ment of animal species, the maturation of the embryo and the
evolution of the solar system, to the development of human
society. He did not so much start from the phenomena to be
explained as from an ethical and metaphysical position to be
established. This was the doctrine of the universality of natural
causation and its inevitable corollary, the doctrine that the universe
and all things in it have reached their present forms through
physically necessitated successive stages (Peel, 1971, p. 132). The
source of evolutionary change was derived from an inverted
account of Malthus' account of population increase: 'from the
beginning population has been the proximate cause of progress . . .
It forced men into the social state; made social organisation
inevitable; and has developed the social sentiments . . . It is daily
pressing us into closer contact and more mutually dependent
relationships' (Spencer, 1852, cited in Peel, 1971, pp. 138-9).
Population pressure is only a proximate cause and the ultimate
source of change Spencer invokes is the inevitable differentiation of
human society from homogeneity to heterogeneity: 'from the law
that every active force produces more than one change, it is an
inevitable corollary that through all time there has been an ever-
growing complication of things' (Spencer, 1972, p. 47). Spencer did
not just produce a totalizing history; his conception was, quite
literally, cosmic. Everything could be reduced to a unitary process.
   While the contemporary literature on evolutionary theory in
archaeology is not quite so all-embracing as the framework
adopted by Spencer and other nineteenth-century evolutionists, the
'explanatory' perspective remains surprisingly similar. European
social evolution, from the neolithic to the Iron Age, according to
Bintliff, can be explained in terms of

  the relative balance between population density, resource availability
  and extraction efficiency (cultigens, technical skills). It is suggested
  that imbalances lead to regular or cyclical 'crashes' of population
  and linked political superstructure; that dramatic rises in absolute
  population density produce cumulative increases in the surpluses of
  food, raw material and manpower capable of supporting social hier-
  archies and complex division of labour; that high levels of absolute
  population density produce authoritarian potential and conflict
  resolution needs that are met by the elaboration of leadership roles.
                                                     (Bintliff, 1984, p. 29).

146           SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

 Bintliff endorses fully the role of population increase as the
causative agent in social evolution, asserting that the archaeological
record is entirely in keeping with Malthus' postulate of relentless
population increase (Bintliff, 1984a, p. 174). Population density,
resource availability and extraction efficiency, together with
population increase, 'cause' social evolution.
   Segraves (1982) similarly asserts the relation of population
pressure to available natural resources as a cause of evolutionary
change (1982, p. 294) and claims that 'people's "beliefs" and even
their value systems as a whole will ultimately change as the mutual
and reinforcing feedback between population size and technical
and economic organization presses the system in a new direction'
(ibid., p. 297).
   Such examples indicate how little this evolutionary theorizing has
moved beyond Spencer's speculations. Over and over again, the
same old 'mechanisms' and 'processes' are drawn out of the hat.
And if environmental adaptation, population pressure, resource
extraction efficiency and the like are not stressed, then equally
reductive explanatory mechanisms are drawn upon. Cohen, for
example, states quite unequivocally that 'evolutionary changes in
organizations of social relations are exogenic' (1983, p. 164) and
that change may be explained solely in terms of boundary-cultural
relations of inter-societal dependence for harnessing goods and
resources.
   Our aim, in the sections that follow, is not to provide a detailed
descriptive review of the uses of evolutionary theory to explain
societal change in the archaeological record. Instead we wish to
identify and criticize some of the fundamental assumptions (found
in both nineteenth- and twentieth-century uses of evolutionary
theory) underlying the use of an evolutionary perspective, of
whatever particular kind, in both social theory and the
archaeological literature. All forms of social evolutionary theory,
we contend, involve one or a number of the following four features
which undermine their validity for an understanding of social
change: (1) a spatialized view of time; (2) essentialism and reduc-
tionism; (3) problematic connections with biological evolution;
(4) ethnocentrism. We shall consider each of these in turn.

                          Spatialized time
One of the primary justifications for evolutionary theories has
always been the claim that they are ideally suited to the study of
long-term change over long time spans. Evolutionary theories

               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                  147

depend upon a particular conception of time: time as spatial,
uniform and abstract; time as a measurable empty duration, or
container utterly separate from the human activities that take place
in this flow of time (see Chapter 5). Time is supposedly a continuous
whole, a spatialized matrix for action. This time is repeatable, vacant,
a commodified time utterly different and opposed to lived human
time, the time of action and human practice. Such time allows and
permits the production of a homogeneous history, a history that
 claims to be the history of the whole of humanity. It provides
justification for the 'equal' treatment of human culture at all times
and in all places: the comparative method. Such time permits
general classificatory stages to be developed. It allows culture to be
compressed into evolutionary sequences.
   A qualitative view of substantial human time which would
recognize difference is replaced by quantitative classificatory time.
So, all 'tribes' are considered to be equal and hierarchically placed
in relation to 'chiefdoms', 'bands' or 'states', History is asserted to
be an intelligible unity and continuum, a longitudinal totality made
up of logical progression or developments in which there is a
continuous       concretization    of    particular    social    forms.
Spatial time becomes equated with change such that in most
evolutionary theories the terms time and change become more or
less interchangeable. A succession of societal forms in the distance
of spatial time invites ethnocentric evaluation and a constitution of
the other: the savage, the primitive. Spatial time lends justification
to the idea of necessity in the historical process, that things could
not be otherwise, they had to happen this way. But people do make
history in accordance with an awareness of history, of the
humanity of history; that history is a contingent and not a
necessary process.


         Essentialism, reductionism and social typologies
As well as a spatialized view of time, and partly as a concomitant of
it, social evolutionary theories are characterized, by either
essentialism or reductionism or both. These features permit and
encourage its ethnocentrism. Although evolutionary theories are
ostensibly about change in spatial time, by means of a reductionist
line of argument they contradict this emphasis and instead assert
stability - the static developmental processes or essential charac-
teristics of social forms that are supposed to induce change.
   Beneath the transformations in social and political systems
evolutionary theories attempt to reveal stability, and paradoxically

148           SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

this is always considered to be primary when dealing with social
change. Evolutionary theories seek out and attempt to elevate to
the status of generalities or laws supposedly irresistible processes,
iron constraints on human action and underlying tendencies that
transcend history. This is an attempt to reveal the essential features
moving beneath and governing individual events and the thick
empirical layers of the archaeological record. Everything is to be
boiled down, reduced and fitted to one single totalizing framework
which presupposes some underlying continuity, whether emergent,
divergent, progressive, regressive, cyclical, lineal or multilineal, in
the relationship between past and present. The archaeologist
becomes an investigator who pores over the past, sorting out the
essential from the inessential, the necessary from the merely
contingent, the wheat of process from the chaff of event.
Ultimately the past becomes domesticated in its essentialist, con-
tinuous inevitability. But this inevitability is at the same time an
intellectual construct, a form of power which in the attempt to
produce a totalizing history reduces that history to the shadow
world of essence, of economic and behavioural process.
   When the term evolution is used in any discussion (unless merely
used as a grandiose term for change - one of the most frequent
uses, or abuses of the term) what is implied is one or a series of
developmental and cumulative processes that lead somewhere.
Axiomatic authority is invariably given to the reality of the term
evolution. Exactly why this term is supposedly beneficial in
understanding change is rarely explicitly questioned. Emphasis is
instead placed on processes: is this or that process evolutionary?
does such and such a trait have evolutionary potential? In this
manner the validity of an evolutionary framework becomes
internally safeguarded. Archaeological research becomes a strategy
of recognizing what is evolutionary as distinct from what is not,
what is necessary rather than what is merely contingent.
   Evolutionary theories have generally relied upon typologies of
social forms: band, tribe, chiefdom, state (Service, 1962) and many
other variants. These have had an enormous impact upon
archaeological research with various attempts being made to
identify and define these stages in terms of the archaeological
evidence (see chapter 2). There have been those who have questioned
the validity of such typologies (Dunnell, 1980; Yoffee, 1979); but
others are still claiming the general utility of a typological model
and it is still very influential as a way of thinking about the past.
The use of such typological frameworks creates a view of history as
an overall intelligible unity and continuum History itself becomes

               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                 149
a continuous process of concretization of abstract, paradigmatic
stadial forms. It is also always an approximation - 'we haven't got
it quite right yet.' Bintliff, the major contributor to the volume
European Social Evolution (1984), claims that 'the overall sequence
[in the Bronze and Iron Age] is strongly comparable to the neo-
evolutionist model of band/big-man/tribe/chiefdom/early state
module' (1984, p. 30). He asserts the reality of developmental
stages and claims that 'the totality of archaeological data for the
European Bronze Age points to the dominance of small scale
chiefdom organisation throughout Europe' (1984a, p. 158). The
mass of archaeological data has been reduced to order with the
'recognition' of a chiefdom-type social organization. The concrete
and the particular become subsumed in terms of an abstract
category permitting the ordering and classification of the data, a
reduction to its essentials. Any that don't quite fit become merely
contingent to the model being used.
   Such a typological framework systematically excludes difference
and instead asserts identity. Identity is always the primordial term.
Although each documented chiefdom or hunter-gatherer band is
distinct from any other chiefdom or band, in an evolutionary
framework these differences become subsumed and relegated as
secondary or contingent. Hence all instances of hunter-gatherer
social organization become relegated to the classificatory stage
'band'. This is a reductionist search for the 'essential'. The supposed
identity of all hunter-gatherer societies permits a classificatory
distinction separating them from other forms of human social
organization divided into other categories, e.g. chiefdom or state.
However, difference is not to be derived from the supposed identity
of differential social forms - it makes these abstract categories
possible in the first place. The concomitant of this is that a notion
of difference, difference between forms of human social
organization, deconstructs any possibility of erecting rigid social
categories such as a 'band'. Bands, tribes etc, have no identity, no
reality whatsoever. What is primary is not the sameness of human
societies but their uniqueness. In order to be posited at all the
notion of band presupposes both an abstract identity and a
difference from some other abstract identity such as a chiefdom.
Differences between forms of human social organization both
permit the abstract identities of bands and chiefdoms to be posited
and, at the same time, deconstruct the possibility of these
abstractions having any analytical significance.
  A typology of social stages is an attempt to create self-sufficient
and exclusive categories. These are intended to order history

150              SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE




                   FIGURE 6.l A Bronze Age chieftain
Source: Modified from C. Burgess (1980). Reprinted by permission of J, M. Dent
                                   &Sons.

               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                151

conceptually. They also order it normatively. Plural differences
between societies become reduced to abstract forms, which in turn
support a normative hierarchy of good and bad. Any empirical
instance of an actual society undermines the efficacy of any such
typology. Social typologies are not only theoretical fictions, they
are also idealist fictions. Notions such as 'band' provide
semblances of conceptual unity, permitting and yet simultaneously
preventing and moulding thought. They promote a vision of
homogeneity in the archaeological record. The complexity and
variability in the archaeological data becomes ordered, fixed and
shaped according to an ideal model created from the 'detached'
subject position of the observer. The identity of social forms is only
possible and discoverable by fitting them into a diachronic totaliz-
ing framework: an inexorable succession of stages allows the
multitudes of different social forms to be divided into abstract
phenomena, their necessary characteristics to count as a band etc,
to be separated from contingent detail, and such a division is made
according to the degree to which societies approach modernity.

                  Biological and social evolution
One particular aspect of the use of essentialist and reductionist
frameworks in evolutionary theory is the relationship posited
between social and biological evolution, which merits some more
detailed discussion. Despite the fact that notions of social evolution
developed before the publication of Darwin's Origin of the Species
(1859), it is in biology that evolutionary processes have been most
successfully defined through work on the concepts of natural
selection and adaptation. Any use of the term evolution after the
publication of Darwin's work in the social sciences in general, or in
archaeology in particular, has not been able to avoid some kind of
conceptual connection with biological evolutionary theory. In prac-
tice most authors writing about social evolution have made explicit
links between social evolution and biological evolution. We wish to
make two main points in this section: firstly, that any author adopt-
ing the term 'evolution' cannot avoid some kind of homology be-
tween biological and social processes or the term would become
redundant. Secondly, any notion of biological evolution is funda-
mentally incompatible with an attempt to understand the social.

                      Biology and technology
Childe, throughout his work, asserted a position of technological
determinism in relation to a requirement for populations to adapt

152            SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

to their natural environments and this provided not only a
fundamental principle but also an ontological vindication and
justification for archaeology. A perspective in which societies were
viewed as being involved in an endless series of technologically
governed environmental adaptations gave a 'clue' for the analysis
of the archaeological record and a way of reducing its complexity
to 'an easily comprehensible order' (Childe, 1947, pp. 71-2). This
order was for Childe an evolutionary order in which social
evolution was deemed to form a logical progression from biological
evolution, while retaining many essential features in common.

  Prehistory is a continuation of natural history. . . there is an analogy
  between organic evolution and progress in culture. Natural history
  traces the emergence of new species each better adapted for survival,
  more fitted to obtain food and shelter, and so to multiply. Human
  history reveals man creating new industries and new economies that
  have furthered the increase of his species and thereby vindicated its
  enhanced fitness.                                  (Childe, 1936, p. 13)


The bulk of Man Makes Himself, as with almost all Childe's
works, is devoted to empirical description and discussion of culture
sequences and, in this book, such sequences are characterized as
being punctuated by a series of revolutionary developments which
result in denser population concentrations supposedly illustrating
the higher degree of adaptive fitness of technical innovations: the
neolithic revolution, the urban revolution and the 'revolution in
human knowledge' with the advent of literacy. Innovations (e.g.
the arch, bronze, the seal, irrigation and bricks in the urban
revolution) are explicitly likened by Childe to biological mutations
(Childe, 1936, p. 228). In Social Evolution, Childe claimed that a
Darwinian framework could not only be transferred from
biological to social evolution, but was 'even more intelligible in the
latter domain than in the former' (1951, p. 175), and that rigorous
processes of selection operated on cultural innovations in the same
manner as natural selection (ibid., p. 177). Cultural evolution, like
biological evolution, could best be represented as 'a tree with
branches all up the trunk and each branch bristling with twigs. . .
differentiation - the splitting of large homogeneous cultures - is a
conspicuous feature in the archaeological record' (ibid., p. 166).
However, cultural evolution is to be at least in part distinguished
from organic evolution because of the property of 'convergence'
between different cultures brought about through diffusion of
techniques and knowledge (ibid., p. 168).

               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                        153

   Much of the recent literature on social evolution in archaeology
differs remarkably little from Childe. Connections between
biological and social evolution generally remain on the same level
of a vague general analogy:

  Divergence from a common ancestor is one of the fundamental
  aspects of biological evolution, and it has undoubtedly played a
  major role in the evolution of a bewildering variety of human
  cultures with which the anthropologist is confronted. Each of those
  cultures also has a complex series of legacies from its evolutionary
  past, perhaps reinterpreted and integrated with adaptive
  innovations.
                                                   (Flannery, 1983, p. 2)

Or, again:

  In the process of both biological and societal evolution we witness a
  progressive differentiation of structure and a corresponding
  specialization of function: 'Wherever we look we discover
  evolutionary processes leading to diversification and increasing
  complexity.'
                                  (Segraves, 1982, p. 292, citing Prigogine,
                                        Allen and Herman, 1977, pp. 5-6)


                  Adaptation and natural selection
In Childe's work or in books such as The Cloud People (Flannery
and Marcus (eds), 1983) and European Social Evolution (Bintliff
(ed), 1984) notions of biological evolution, vaguely translated into
social terms, seem to play very little theoretical role whatsoever and
are entirely swamped in the morass of empirical detail. In most
social evolutionary theories adaptation is usually called upon to
play the major explanatory role but there is no counterpart in social
theory of Darwinian evolutionary theory. Societal adaptation
always has to do double service as both cause and consequence of
change. This can only lead to tautology when the concept of
adaptation is used to explain or account for the existence of par-
ticular traits. To say that adaptive traits are present in a society or
that those traits present are adaptive adds nothing to our
understanding. Arguments normally amount to little more than
saying that those traits present in a society are adaptive, therefore
those traits are present; or those societies that survive are adaptive,
therefore they survive. As Giddens notes, if it were the case that
there were some sort of generalized motivational impulse for

154            SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

human beings progressively to "adapt" more effectively to their
material environments, there would be a basis for sustaining
evolutionary theory. But there is not any such compulsion'
(Giddens, 1984, p. 236). Cohen, however, does suggest one such
'compulsion': that in small-scale societies direct producers have an
interest in reducing unpleasant labour or toil and so will accept
innovations that reduce toil and/or increase productivity (Cohen,
1978, pp. 302-7). Such an argument overlooks entirely the nature
of 'toil' as socially constituted in the first place and that in hunter-
gatherer societies at the bottom of the evolutionary ladder toil
seems to be very limited. In societies characterized by forms of
class exploitation there is anyway no necessary correspondence
between development of the productive forces and reduction of
labour time. When one reads attempts to provide accounts of why
adaptation occurs the level of reductionism involved often becomes
almost absurd. Socio-cultural systems, for example, may be
portrayed solely in terms of feeding behaviour (just who or what is
feeding is rather unclear!):

   More complex sociocultural systems tend to be more generalized in
   their overall feeding behaviour by virtue of their particular feeding
   specializations. This gives them a versatility when intersystem
   competition occurs. They can better exploit new energy sources, but
   also the complex sociocultural systems persevere because success in
   the long run goes to the specialist who can harness the greatest
   number of kilocalories.
                                          (Gall and Saxe, 1977, p. 264-5)

   Dunnell (1980, p. 77) notes that although the archaeological
literature is full of references to adaptation and adaptive process, it
tends to be rather short on selection. Although critical of cultural
evolutionary theories Dunnell wants to reinstate modern biological
evolutionary theory, suggesting that 'evolution is a particular
framework for explaining change as differential persistence of
variability' (ibid., p. 38). This entails that biological evolutionary
theory involving natural selection, mutation, drift etc. should be
translated in terms of the archaeological record: for example style
and function can be defined in terms of natural selection (Dunnell,
1978). Even if human beings are indeed animals and subject to
processes of natural selection in an equivalent manner to badgers,
hedgehogs or guinea-fowl, this by no means implies that any
adequate explanation or understanding of social totalities,
institutions or material culture patterning can be achieved by
reference to either natural selection or adaptation. Most social and

               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                155

material practices have no demonstrable physical survival value for
human populations whatsoever (see Shanks and Tilley, 1987).
   Societies, unlike individual organisms, do not have any clear-cut
physical parameters or boundaries, nor do societies have conscious
problems of self-maintenance or a need to adapt. Individuals may
have these characteristics but they cannot be validly anthropomor-
phized in terms of entire social totalities. Furthermore,
evolutionary theories must apply to some unit, a society or a
cultural system, and here again there is a problem. Is British society
of 1987 a society or cultural system in just the same sense as a group
of palaeolithic hunter-gatherers? Clearly not, and this leads one to
reject any totalizing account of change framed in terms of basic
processes supposedly good for all times and places. Societies
construct their own social reality and the reproduction of societies
entails far more than physical, biological reproduction.


                           Ethnocentrism
Although evolutionary theory logically need not involve
ethnocentrism and in Darwin's biological theory of natural
selection there is no such implication, theories of social evolution in
practice have always been riddled with ethnocentric evaluations. By
ethnocentrism is meant the manner in which a group identifies with
its own socio-cultural individuality and creates a privileged and
central image of itself in relation to others. This normally involves
an explicitly or implicitly defined valorization of the achievements,
social conditions etc. of a group (the in-group) with which the
individual or author identifies himself or herself and a reference
to other groups (the out groups) which are usually defined,
conceptually constituted and evaluated by reference to the in-group
adopting specific concepts, norms, measures of difference and
criteria (figure 6.2). Ethnocentrism in one form or another is likely
to be found in all societies and in the discourses those societies
produce.

          The Enlightenment and the colonial encounter
A very significant 'discovery' of the eighteenth century was the idea
of progress which emerged as a consistently reiterated feature of
social philosophies on a grand scale, permeating all aspects of
social and political thought (Sklair, 1970, ch. 2). Scientific
progress, material progress and moral progress were all conceived
as being inextricably linked in an overarching conception of the

FIGURE 6.2 Forms of ethnocentrism, after Preiswerk and Perrot
        Source: From R. Preiswerk and D. Perrot (1978).

                  SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                      157

growing perfection of human society which was both natural and
inevitable. The social evolutionary theories of the nineteenth
century gave substance and justification to the notion of progress
as providing the dominant classification and explanation of social
institutions and the history of humanity.
   Evolutionary theories were shaped during the period of British
world dominance and the consolidation of empire, a world shaped
and given significance by a confident and ascending middle class
and a perceived equation between scientific and social progress.
The nineteenth-century evolutionary schemes of Spencer, Morgan
and Tylor, among others, did not so much start from the
phenomena to be explained but from an ethical and metaphysical
principle to be established. For Spencer the goal to which evolution
led was perfection, and in terms of human society progress led to
civilization, the conditions of origin for this process being savagery
and ignorance. A natural outcome of social evolution was the
displacement of less developed societies by those that had differ-
entiated further along the road to perfection:

     in a struggle for existence among societies, the survival of the fittest
     is the survival of those in which power of military cooperation is
     the greatest, and military cooperation is that primary kind of
     cooperation which prepares the way for other kinds. So that this for-
     mation of larger societies by the union of smaller ones in war, and
     thus destruction or absorption of the smaller ununited societies by
     the united larger ones, is an inevitable process through which the
     varieties of men most adapted for social life supplant the less adapted
      varieties.
                                                       (Spencer, 1967, p. 78)

It    would     be   difficult   to   find   a   more    clearly   articulated
rationalization for the British imperial subjection of the colonies.
This was, after all, a natural and inevitable process.
   Like Spencer, Tylor and Morgan were leading exponents of the
progressionist argument that all societies and institutions go
through a gradual and natural process of development. While
Spencer used the biological organism as a useful analogy for social
analysis, Tylor and Morgan favoured the development of science as
an appropriate model. Just as sciences pass through stages utilizing
erroneous theories (e.g. alchemy), human societies develop through
the thrusting aside of false and inadequate knowledge. Societies
low on the scale of evolutionary development possess a high degree
of ignorance, superstition and error. Evolution occurs because, at
least in the long run, logic and rationality must prevail: 'it is a law

158            SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

of human progress that thought tends to work itself clear' (Tylor,
 1881, p. 341). Morgan's stages of savagery, barbarism and
civilization were the product of a process of historical
generalization, but history could not have happened otherwise. The
evidence showed that 'the principal institutions of mankind have
been developed from a few primary germs of thought; and the
course and manner of their development was predetermined . . . by
the natural logic of the human mind and the necessary limitation of
its powers' (Morgan, 1963, p. 18). Analysis was facilitated by the
study of primitive 'survivals' which provided both proof and
examples of the stages leading toward civilization. To Tylor in par-
ticular, cultural similarities and differences in artefacts or customs
were of no significance and 'little respect need be had in such com-
parisons for date in history or for place on the map' (Tylor, 1871,
vol. I, p. 6). Archaeology played no significant role in the develop-
ment of these theories, but was occasionally harnessed to provide
the necessary historical back-up, and general conceptions of
evolution were adopted (e.g. Lubbock, 1865).
   The evolutionary schemes of the nineteenth century provided a
picture of continuous and sustained endogenous growth gratifying
to the Victorian consciousness, making it possible to look down
benignly on the lowly savage (in some more literary works elevated to
the status of the noble savage). The social functions of anything
that was superstitious or supposedly irrational could only be
recognized provided they were someone else's beliefs, or a mere
relic and a transitory feature of Victorian society. This provided a
means of being both relativist and non-relativist at the same time,
'of admitting that many diverse modes of organising and inter-
preting social life might have something to say for them, and might
play vital roles in the lives of human beings, while continuing to
maintain the absolute validity of one such mode - the positivist'
(Burrow, 1966, p. 263). The social order of laissez-faire capitalism
became validated in terms of an inevitable all-embracing process. It
represented the highest point humanity had reached and, if not
perfect, was nearly so. If Marx (1859) was to dissent from all this,
socialism was only around the corner, predicated on the growing
contradictions between the social relations and forces of
production.


                      Evolution and progress
The ethnocentrism apparent in nineteenth-century evolutionary
thought hardly needs to be spelled out in detail. What is possibly

              SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                  159

not so readily apparent is the presence of ethnocentrism as an
underlying theme in varieties of mid-twentieth-century and
contemporary evolutionary schemes.
   The stadial perspectives of Childe (1951), Fried (1967) and
Service (1975) are, in essentials, only refinements of Morgan's
scheme. Steward's multilineal approach (1955) with its societal
typologies shares many of the assumptions of the stadial models,
while the primacy given to adaptation is clearly reminiscent of
Spencer. White stated in the introduction to The Evolution of
Culture that his position did not 'differ one whit in principle from
that expressed in Tylor's Anthropology in 1881' (White, 1959,
p. xi). White dealt with the entire history of humanity as Tylor had
done but this history was now primarily a history of technological
progress. Human culture was a means of adaptation and developed
as the efficiency of energy capture increased. This was the 'law' of
cultural evolution and culture was progressive, permitting a
steadily increasing control over the forces of nature. Furthermore
the process of cultural evolution was sui generis: people were swept
up in a cumulative process of exponential growth which was
impossible to control. Steward's multilineal evolution was not,
according to him, concerned to develop an a priori scheme but
'deals only with those limited parallels of form, function and
sequence which have empirical validity' (1955, p. 19). He con-
sidered that cultural laws or regularities could only be founded on
the detailed consideration of comparative sequences. However, the
differences between simple and complex societies could not be
conceptualized as being solely quantitative (an increase in size etc.)
but, more fundamentally, were qualitative in form, involving new
types of societal integration. Steward suggested that 'progress must
be measured by definable values' (1955, p. 13). In his perspective
progress was a necessary component of change, an 'attribute' of
development. Quoting Kroeber (1948, p. 304), Steward goes so far
as to list three criteria for the measurement of progress:

1  'The atrophy of magic based on psychopathology.'
2 "The decline of infantile obsession with the outstanding
  physiological events of human life.'
3 'The persistent tendency of technology and science to grow
  accumulatively.'
                                                          (Ibid., p. 14)

Such statements would have been readily embraced by any
Victorian social theorist! A point very similar to the first has been

160              SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

made by Habermas in his attempt to develop a revised version of
historical materialism in evolutionary terms (Habermas, 1979).
Drawing on Piaget's theories of cognitive development in children
Habermas proposes that homologies may be found between ego
development and the evolution of world views. In small-scale
societies thought is bound up with myth and it is only with the
transition from archaic to developed civilizations that there is a
break from mythological thought towards accounts of the world
with 'argumentative foundations' (ibid., pp. 104-5). The modern
world, for Habermas, is more enlightened than the 'primitive'.
Traditional cultures form closed and non-reflective worlds
compared with contemporary rationality which brings with it
potentiality for Change. Small-scale societies are composed of
individuals who have not yet undergone the 'learning processes'
that bring enlightenment. The highest forms of human rationality
turn out to be those of the contemporary West.
   Childe always maintained a rigid separation could be held
between facts, values and interpretations, expressing this as early as
the epilogue to The Danube in Prehistory (1929) in which he main-
tained that he had always attempted to consign to separate
paragraphs interpretations of data as opposed to their factual
description (1929, p. 418; cf. Childe, 1936, p. 2). Approaching
history in a 'humble and objective manner' meant that, paradox-
ically, a notion of progress was both objective and scientific and
non-objective and irrational. On the one hand to ask whether
hydroelectric power represents progress in relation to, say, a
neolithic technology could only be to Childe a meaningless question
involving dubious value judgements; one could still ask, on the
other hand, 'what is progress?' Childe's answer to the latter was
that the historical record itself was a record of progress and that
archaeology, given its long time scales, was ideally suited to
document this record of progress, illustrating 'improving technical
skill, accumulating knowledge, and advancing organization, for
securing a livelihood' (Childe, 1936, p. 34). The traditional
periodization of archaeology in terms of the technological stages of
stone, bronze and iron, broadly correlated with hunter-gatherer,
agricultural and urban economies, provided unassailable proof
of progress (ibid., p. 35), and this coloured all Childe's
interpretations. Prehistoric hunter-gatherers certainly lived in no
Garden of Eden:

      Faced with the terrifying fact of death, their primitive emotions
      shocked by its ravages, the bestial-looking Mousterians had been

              SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                     161

  roused to imaginative thinking. They would not believe in the
  complete cessation of earthly life, but dimly imagined some sort of
  continuance thereof in which the dead would still need material
  food and implements. The pathethic and futile tendency of the dead,
  [is] thus early attested.
                                                          (Ibid., p. 55)

Elsewhere he writes: 'getting food and shelter and indulging in
sexual intercourse . . . were presumably alone available to lower
palaeolithic savages' (Childe, 1944, p. 114).
   In Progress and Archaeology (1944) and Social Evolution (1951)
Childe admits the occurrence of certain 'dark ages' in which
technical progress seems to have halted, even declined. Such
periods are brushed aside as merely temporary phases (1944, p.
 109) in an overall cumulative development leading up to the
twentieth-century pursuit of scientific knowledge (ibid., p. 115).
History itself is defined by Childe as progress and science as the
mode of thought in which progress culminates. Consequently
history becomes the unfolding of scientific rationality and it
therefore becomes possible to make the claim that present-day
reality is reason itself: i.e. it is reasonable, ordered in accordance
with rationality. So the capitalist market system with its division of
labour and treatment of labour as a commodity is rational(ity). It is
also possible to claim that a 'scientific' history represents actual
history. Reason and contemporary reality become identified;
subject is collapsed into object, object into subject.
   Sahlins and Service (1960), in their well-known attempt to
reconcile the positions of White and Steward, coined the terms
general and specific evolution. General evolution, or White's con-
ception, was considered by them to be 'the central, inclusive,
organizing outlook of anthropology, comparable in its theoretical
power to evolutionism in biology' (ibid., p. 44). This entailed the
 'determination and explanation of the successive transformations
of culture through its several stages of overall progress' (ibid., p.
29). Evolution was, of course, a necessarily good thing and if it had
not taken its course the 'civilized', industrial West would never
have come into being and distinguished itself from other cultures.
   Parsons, in his paper on 'evolutionary universals in society'
(Parsons, 1964), was concerned to develop a generalized analytical
theory and remained opposed to any view that evolutionary theory
should be historical in the sense of historicism. Hence he only
adopts, tacitly, a two-stage model of social growth: the 'primitive'
and the 'modern'. He shuffles the evolutionary cards so as to

162                SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE

distinguish between evolutionary universals and evolutionary
prerequisites. An evolutionary universal is identified as being 'a
complex of structures and associated processes the development of
which so increases the long-run adaptive capacity of living systems
in a given class that only systems that develop the complex can
attain certain higher levels of general adaptive capacity' (ibid., pp.
340-1). Evolutionary prerequisites are universal elements in all
human societies and Parsons lists four of these, their presence
marking a minimum for a society to be considered truly human:
technology, language, kinship and religion. He identifies six
evolutionary universals:

1 Social stratification.
2 Cultural legitimation of differentiated social functions.
3 A bureaucratic organization or the institutionalism of the
  authority of office.
4 A money and market complex.
5 Generalized universal norms, i.e. a formal legal system.
6 A democratic association or a liberal, elected leadership.

The first two of these evolutionary universals are of primary
importance for societies to 'break out' from a primitive stage of
social organization. The rest have served to promote advanced
industralization, our present social order. Now, as Gouldner (1970,
p. 367) is quick to point out, what all this implies is that capitalist
America happens, conveniently, to embody all those evolutionary
universals which, according to Parsons, have ever been invented.
Furthermore, the communist nations are structurally unsound,
inherently unstable, an evolutionary dead end:

      I must maintain that communist totalitarian organization will
      probably not fully match 'democracy' in political and integrative
      capacity in the long run. I do indeed predict that it will prove to be
      unstable and will either make adjustments in the general direction of
      electoral democracy or . . . 'regress' into . . . less advanced and
      politically less effective forms of organization.
                                                        (Parsons, 1964, p. 356)

In part, this is because 'those that restrict [the markets and money
system] too drastically are likely to suffer from severe adaptive
disadvantages in the long run' (ibid., p. 350). Had Parsons not
assigned technology to the status of an evolutionary prerequisite
but to an evolutionary universal, the socio-political conclusions

               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE                          163

that he draws regarding the relative merits of American and Soviet
society might not have been so readily forthcoming.

              Valorization: from 'simple'to 'complex'
In the 'new' archaeology the term 'progress' is rarely used. It has
become conceptually shifted into the realm of adaptation and
relative adaptive efficiency. Nevertheless ethnocentric valorization
is hardly missing and one of the primary arenas in which this takes
place is in discussions of societal complexity. A string of examples
are readily to be found in almost any recent publication; here we
identify just a few from Marcus's conclusions to The Cloud People:
Divergent Evolution of the Zapotec and Mixtec Civilizations
(Flannery and Marcus (eds), 1983). 'Low population density could
be seen as a factor delaying divergent evolution [in the Archaic
period]' (Marcus, 1983, p. 356; our emphasis). It is implied that
evolution has reality as a process, is inevitable and that a high
population density is necessarily a good thing: 'The development of
urban centres in the Mixteca Alta seems to have lagged a few
centuries behind the Valley of Oaxaca' (ibid., p. 357; our
emphasis). Urbanization is positively valorized:

  Even if we grant the rise of the Oaxaca peoples from band-level
  hunters and gatherers to state-level stratified societies, this rise is
  insufficient to explain the differences between Mixtec and Zapotec
  culture . . . If we are genuinely interested in understanding
  individual Mesoamerican cultures, we cannot ignore drift, adaptive
  divergence, convergence, and parallel evolution while concentrating
  single mindedly on advance through stages of sociopolitical
  organization.
                                             (Ibid., p. 360; our emphasis)

Later 'stages' of social evolution are positively evaluated. Bands
may eventually 'rise' to the status of a state or a civilization; the
latter can only 'decline' or 'fall'.
   The direction in which evolution is invariably depicted as leading
is from the simple to the complex. The terms simple and complex in
evolutionary discourses also imply the absent presence of two other
strongly normative related concepts: respectively, the superior and
the inferior. Both complexity and simplicity are multidimensional
concepts and they cannot be defined except with reference to some
entity or social form. They are relative, not fixed, terms. In evolu-
tionary theories 'complex' is invariably associated with the state or
those social forms which are gratuitously labelled civilizations. Any

164               SOCIAL EVOLUTION AND SOCIETAL CHANGE
use of terms such as 'complex', 'civilization' or 'state' - they are
virtually interchangeable in the literature on evolution - is
inevitably predicated on the basis of its difference from its absent
other, the uncivilized (savage), the simple, the non-state. Such a
notion of complexity is ideologically loaded. Despite the fact that
differentiation can be argued to exist in all societies from the
palaeolithic to the present, this differentiation only counts in the
case of a limited number of societies which become labelled
complex. Furthermore complex does not imply better organized,
better adapted, having better societal self-maintenance etc. (witness
Chernobyl). Nevertheless the complex always becomes valorized vis
a vis the simple, its polar opposite. As Rowlands points out,

      the significance of these categories of social life owe their origin to
      European deliberation on the important innovations marking the
      beginnings of modernity. Projected backwards such categories can