SOUTH ASIA

[images]

42 A Passage through India

Indian rock art and villages on the Ganges Plain, 20,000–8500 BC

John Lubbock begins his journey through the prehistory of southern Asia
by standing in the rear of Muchchatla Chintamanu Gavi, one of the
Kurnool Caves of central India. The brilliant patch of daylight that
marks its entrance dazzles his eyes. The date is 17,000 BC.

As he approaches the light he hears voices and then briefly sees a
number of bobbing silhouetted forms. But before he reaches them, the
hunters have gathered their few belongings and left, disappearing into
the woodland that surrounds the cave. Lubbock looks at what they have
left behind: a few rocks around still-hot ashes, a scatter of greasy
flint flakes and the unwanted parts of a small butchered deer, its head
and hoofs. A pile of guts lies just outside the cave next to a patch of
bloodstained ground.

As Lubbock wonders which way the hunters might have gone, a thick fog
descends; he gives up hope of following and sits alone upon the floor of
Muchchatla Chintamanu Gavi. Taking Prehistoric Times from his bag, he
searches in vain for a passage on Indian archaeology, only finding a
description of the ‘modern savages’ of Ceylon (Sri Lanka) – the Veddahs.
There is a brief account of their huts made from bark and their skills
at stalking game; a Mr Bailey is cited who ‘thinks it would be
impossible to conceive of a more barbarous race’. As if to distance
himself from such views, in the very next sentence Victorian Lubbock
describes the Veddahs as a kind and affectionate people.¹ Modern Lubbock
looks up from his book; the fog has thickened and he decides to remain
within the cave until it begins to clear.

Fleeting glimpses of people shrouded in fog convey the sense of our
limited knowledge about ice-age settlement in the Indian subcontinent,
especially that which comes after the last glacial maximum of 20,000 BC.
Scatters of stone artefacts, assumed to date between the LGM and the
spurt of global warming at 9600 BC, are widespread, providing an
archaeological glimpse into people’s lives. But there are few
radiocarbon dates, no known traces of dwellings and no burials. From the
whole subcontinent there is just one single Late Pleistocene hearth and
very few collections of butchered bones.

With the exception of an extended coastal plain on its west, the
topography of India at 20,000 BC was much the same as it is today. In
the far north rose the heavily glaciated Himalayan mountain chain. Its
great river systems drained into the Indus and the Ganges that flowed
across vast alluvial plains. These merged in the northwest to form the
Thar desert, where strong winds and extreme aridity created immense sand
sheets and dunes. Ostriches thrived in such conditions but many other
animals had to leave when ice-age conditions became severe. The
landscapes remained dry far beyond the desert zone itself. Lake levels
were low and rivers cut deep channels; with few trees and plants to hold
the soil in place, erosion was severe.

The hills that sweep in great arcs across central India were covered in
grassland with pockets of swamp and forest in the valleys. Their
southern slopes leading to the Deccan plateau and the hills on either
side of southern India – the Eastern and Western Ghats – were covered in
woodland, probably little different to that of the present day. We know
about some of the animals that lived within these varied habitats
because their fossils have been recovered from river deposits: wild
cattle and deer, rhino and boar, a variety of monkeys, snakes and small
mammals. The hills of the far south were thickly forested, as were those
of Sri Lanka that might have been joined to the mainland at the LGM.

The distribution of sites shows that people were living in many
environmental settings throughout the continent during the turbulent ten
millennia of climate change that brought the ice age to its close. They
camped on sand dunes in the northwest, sometimes turning ostrich-egg
shells into decorated beads;² they were drawn to the banks of any rivers
that continued to flow and lakes that retained their water. Caves in
central and southern India provided shelter, while campsites were made
within the grasslands, woods and forests. The tools left behind are
typical for ice-age hunters: nodules of chert, jasper and quartzite
turned into flakes and blades, scrapers and arrowheads.³ In Sri Lanka,
however, the ice-age hunters had adopted microliths as the most
effective use of stone, even before the time of the LGM.⁴

Much of their lifestyles is hidden from us so we must, in the absence of
evidence itself, assume that these South Asian ice-age hunters also had
tools, clothing and dwellings made from wood, bone, bark, fibres, hides,
feathers and other materials that have left no trace. As elsewhere in
the world where the archaeology is sparse, one is tempted to look at
more recent hunter-gatherers to add greater substance to the otherwise
vague picture of prehistoric life – just as Victorian John Lubbock had
done when writing Prehistoric Times. The temptation is especially strong
in India where so many people have lived by hunting and gathering into
recent times. And hence Indian archaeologists such as V. N. Misra of
Deccan College, Poona, have tried to lift the ice-age fog by using
accounts of people such as the Kanjars, hunter-gatherers of the Ganga
valley in Uttar Pradesh, to interpret the archaeological remains.⁵
Rather than just describing the size and shape of stone blades, Misra
speculates about the use of hunting nets and baskets made from cane,
about animal skins turned into drums and those of monitor lizards made
into shoes. The risk, of course, is that the fog is lifted not to reveal
the past, but simply the present imposed on a time to which it does not
belong.

Archaeological study of the Kurnool Caves, found in the limestone crags
of the Eastern Ghats in Andhra Pradesh state, began in 1884 when Robert
Bruce Foote excavated the so-called Charnel-house. Foote, who was
employed by the Geological Survey of India, undertook pioneering
archaeological work especially in the south of the country where he
found the first Pleistocene-aged stone implements. He introduced the
terms ‘Palaeolithic’ and ‘Neolithic’ into Indian archaeology;⁶ one must
assume, therefore, that he had read John Lubbock’s Prehistoric Times in
which they were first coined. Foote’s work was followed by that of his
son who excavated two more caves, known intriguingly as ‘Purgatory’ and
‘the Cathedral’. The sediments in all three were more than ten metres
deep; although just one stone artefact was found, animal bones were
abundant throughout.⁷

Foote believed that human hands had worked a great many of the bones. He
describes finding barbed harpoons, arrow-heads, awls and knives of
similarly elegant designs to those discovered by Lartet and Christy in
the ice-age caves of France. Foote had little idea of how old such tools
might have been; he suggested that the occupants of the Kurnool Caves
had been at a ‘low stage of civilisation’.

M. L. Krishna Murty of Deccan College began new excavations of the caves
in the early 1970s.⁸ He tackled Muchchatla Chintamanu Gavi and found
similar bone-packed deposits, together with large quantities of stone
artefacts. With the improved understanding of animal fauna that had
arisen since Foote’s time, it was now evident that many of the bones
came from animals that were only present in Andhra Pradesh before the
ice age had reached its close.

Murty believed that the bones, coming from a variety of carnivores,
herbivores and small game, had all arrived in the cave by human hand,
presumably while encased in meat and fat. Like Foote, he also thought
that many had been shaped into tools. Both men’s conclusions are open to
doubt. None of the bone ‘artefacts’ illustrated in Murty’s report have a
clearly imposed form – certainly nothing to compare with the fine
harpoons and carvings from ice-age France. And as Foote’s collections
have been lost, his claims cannot be appraised. Breakages caused by
carnivore-gnawing, trampling and simple decay, can easily cause bones to
look as if human hands have worked them. This leaves the stone blades, a
hearth made with limestone blocks dating to between 17,000 and 14,000
BC, and a few burnt bones, as the only definite evidence of human
activity close to the LGM. So even at Muchchatla Chintamanu Gavi we gain
little more than a hint of what life was like in ice-age India.⁹

It was not until 9600 BC that the fog had lifted sufficiently for
Lubbock to think it worth while to leave the cave. This coincides with
the rapid global warming that brought the ice age to an end and
accelerated the pace of environmental change that had begun soon after
the LGM. Unfortunately, archaeologists have as yet gained little
specific detail on the precise pattern of change that occurred in India,
being unable to go beyond generalities about an overall increase in
rainfall and the establishment of a vegetation little different to that
of today – or rather, which existed before India’s extensive
deforestation.¹⁰

Lubbock travels northwards along animal paths and riverbanks. He passes
many types of tree quite new to him – some are heavy with scarlet fruit,
others have huge stems and roots that hang from branches to create
cloister-like pillars and arches. There are feathery mimosas and
acacias. Within the forest he sees many deer, some with spotted coats
and others with spiky horns, wild boar, monkeys and rhino. All seem to
be thriving in the warm, wet Holocene world, as are the crickets and
cicadas whose constant chirping fills the sultry air – air that becomes
hotter as the year passes from spring to summer.¹¹

The modern rhythmical pattern of the Indian monsoon became established
once the Holocene began: a relatively cold and dry start to the year,
increasing temperatures through March to their peak in June, and then
the arrival of the rains in late summer. Lubbock is crossing the Deccan
plateau when he experiences his first Indian monsoon. For days the sky
has been lurid, with heavy rain-charged clouds. When they begin to
discharge torrents of drenching rain, Lubbock shelters in a cave to
watch the dry streambed below become a great rushing sea of turbid
water. Trees are uprooted, tons of earth and rock are whirled along,
unlucky animals washed away. Thunder rolls around the sky as it is torn
apart by lightning.

Archaeologists must assume that many other people also sought shelter
from the monsoons of the early Holocene, as archaeological sites after
9600 BC are relatively abundant compared to those of the ice age. While
this partly reflects better presentation and ease of discovery, the
human population is likely to have risen substantially once the ice-age
droughts came to an end. People continued to inhabit the same varied
environments as their ice-age ancestors but were also able to settle
upon newly available riverbanks and lakeshores, and within scrubland
that had previously been desert.¹² But their presence is still indicated
by little more than scatters of worked stone. As in so many other
regions of the world, microliths become prevalent, most likely
reflecting a more varied diet and a reliance on local stone.¹³ Only on
very rare occasions are the artefact scatters accompanied by collections
of animal bones, traces of dwellings or human burials.¹⁴ As in Europe,
archaeologists refer to those who created such sites as Mesolithic
hunter-gatherers.¹⁵

On a hot and dusty summer’s day in 9000 BC Lubbock climbs into the hills
now known as the Western Vindhyas. From one low summit he sees another
topped by a line of turret-like stone boulders that rise above the
trees. This striking hill is known as Bhimbetka; Lubbock finds its
slopes covered by thick, thorny woodland through which there are many
tiny paths. Some were made by wild pigs and deer and can only be crawled
along; others have been cleared beyond head-height, the branches cut
neatly with stone blades.¹⁶

The paths lead between small rockshelters that dot the hillside, gouged
from its soft sandstone by millennia of wind and rain. Others are found
below fallen boulders which balance precariously on rocky outcrops.
Further paths lead to groves of fruit trees or muddy pools surrounded by
animal tracks and human footprints.

After following a trail, Lubbock finds himself in a shelter where an
artist is at work – the first he has seen since leaving northern
Australia. The wall provides a rough surface, a few metres across and
entirely open to daylight – quite unlike the deep underground cave walls
that were painted in France at the LGM. A hunting scene is unfolding,
but whether it is a myth, a memory or a wish is quite unclear. Eight
stick-like and seemingly nude figures are already in place; two have
armbands with tassels; one either wears a head-dress or has long flowing
plaits. Most look male and a few are evidently so; others have wider
hips and larger buttocks.

All the figures are busy; three of them are in a line, the first
stalking prey with a bow and arrow, the second carrying small game from
a pole across his shoulders, and the third, a woman, with baskets. Near
by there is another group who bend, crouch and twist, perhaps while
dancing in a circle. Further figures are scattered around, holding
sticks and bags; one lies on the ground.

The artist takes his brush and begins to paint a deer immediately next
to the hunter with the bow. With a few deft strokes, it is running
across the rock-face with a swollen body, and then the tiny figure of
its unborn young is painted inside. Lubbock moves closer and looks at
the paint pots: dried and hollowed gourds, one containing a dark red
paint, another black and a third white. Nearby are nodules of coloured
rock which have been scraped into the gourds, the pigment then mixed
with oily tree-sap to make a sticky paint. Some sticks and stone flakes
lie on the ground, along with several brushes. As Lubbock watches, the
painter reaches for one, dips its fine hairs into a pot of red and
begins a new line upon the wall. But this is too thin and faint for his
liking, the brush too soft. And so the artist takes a stick, pounds one
end with a stone hammer and scrapes away the pith to leave a fan of
stiff fibres. With this and a thicker paint he completes his line – the
bold figure of a buffalo twice the size of the pregnant deer.

Bhimbetka has the greatest concentration of rock art in the whole of
India, no less than 133 painted rockshelters and at least another
hundred from which the paintings may have eroded away. This hill, with
its distinctive pillars of stone is one of seven in the Western
Vindhyas, across which more than four hundred painted rock-faces have
been found. The date at which the paintings were made is open to debate
– as is so frequently the case with rock art throughout the world. The
local people attribute them to evil spirits – much as the Aborigines of
Arnhem Land believe their ‘Dynamic Figures’ were painted by the mythical
Mimi people – so the rock-faces of Bhimbetka were certainly painted
before the time of living memory. Unfortunately, no attempt has been
made to date the Bhimbetka paintings by taking carbon from the pigment
itself, as has been done successfully in ice-age Europe. But
circumstantial evidence suggests that many were made in the Early
Holocene, at least by 8000 BC.

The most persuasive evidence comes from excavation. During the 1970s
several rockshelters were dug to reveal a predominance of Mesolithic
debris – stone artefacts, domestic refuse and a few buried bodies.
Excavations by V. N. Misra of Deccan College in a rockshelter known as
IIIF-23 revealed that it had been first occupied during the Late
Pleistocene by people who left a collection of quartzite tools behind.
Its Mesolithic occupants had used a larger array of tools, including
microliths and querns, the latter reflecting the new-found importance of
plant foods in the Holocene woodland. They paved its floor, built a wall
within the cave and, as nodules of red and yellow ochre were found
within the rubbish, most likely painted its walls.¹⁷ Such pigments have
been found in several Mesolithic deposits on Bhimbetka and leave little
doubt that the Mesolithic people created many of the cave’s paintings.
Neolithic and later peoples seem to have hardly used it at all.

A second line of evidence comes from the paintings themselves. Yashodhar
Mathpal of Deccan College has described them in exhaustive detail and
identified two themes.¹⁸ The first and most prominent is hunting and
gathering – paintings of deer and boar hunts, of people collecting
honey, dancing, beating drums, and a wide variety of jumping, running
and leaping animals. The animals are typical of the surrounding forest –
boar, deer, buffalo, monkeys and an assortment of smaller game; several
are painted with their unborn young inside. The second theme differs in
both subject matter and style: men riding or controlling horses and
elephants, often armed with metal swords and shields. Some engage in
warfare, others form royal processions. These paintings lack the
vivacity of the hunter gatherers and wild animals. None of the pictures
relate to agriculture or animal herding – images readily seen elsewhere
in India with the depiction of the distinctive zebu, the humped cattle.

Mathpal reasonably concludes that the first theme was the work of Early
Holocene hunter-gatherers who lived in the hills either for all or part
of the year. The second theme may have also been that of
hunter-gatherers, but ones who lived in relatively recent times and had
seen soldiers and royalty within towns and cities on the plains.

Mathpal tried to discover the motivation behind the artists’ work. In
contrast to those of ice-age Europe, the Bhimbetka paintings were made
in places quite readily seen by all – a public rather than a private
art. Its animals and people seem to be of the earthly rather than the
supernatural world. For Mathpal, the paintings provide ‘a record of the
varied animal life which shared the forest environment with the
prehistoric people, and of the various facets – economic and social – of
the life of these people’. There is no reason, he suggests, to look for
esoteric explanations for Bhimbetka’s art.¹⁹

At daybreak Lubbock is on the summit of Bhimbetka. He climbs on to the
pillars of rock so artfully sculptured by nature’s hand and looks across
a broad, flat valley towards the north. It is blanketed by a thick and
vibrant woodland, with brilliant patches of red and orange from
flowering trees that seem to have captured the sunset of the night
before. He descends into the valley and once again travels through an
exotic forest, finding shade below immense fig trees that look and sound
like aviaries. The short, sharp whistles of golden orioles and the
screeching of equally vibrant Indian rollers pierce the mixed melodies
from insects and birds.

Lubbock continues travelling north, now on the flat alluvial plains of
the River Ganges. Some trees are huge, both hardwoods, such as ebony and
teak, and those with heavy loads of fruit; he passes through immense
swathes of bamboo and crosses rocky ridges that rise abruptly from the
plain. Signs of human activity are plentiful: remnants of fireplaces
that suggest overnight hunting camps and clusters of stone along
riverbanks that look too ordered to have been positioned by nature
alone. Lubbock finds the still-warm carcass of a deer, its leg caught in
a snare and death seeming to have ended a long and exhausting struggle.
Other signs are also present: the fresh tracks of a tiger, the dung of
elephant and rhino.

People start appearing – parties of women digging tubers, men inspecting
deer tracks and checking snares. Lubbock travels with them, hitching
rides on their canoes across the Ganges and other rivers, until he draws
near to his next destination. A well-worn path then takes him to a
hunter-gatherer village at 8500 BC.

He finds a dozen tent-shaped huts built on raised ground at the
confluence of two small rivers. Their pitched roofs are made from stout
branches and brushwood; each has a circular clay-lined pit containing
ashes or burnt bone. Sitting by the nearest hut, Lubbock surveys the
village and finds it similar to many others he has seen on his global
travels. The hut floors are well swept but elsewhere the ground is
littered with the material of hunter-gatherer life: piles of firewood,
grinding stones, pegged-out skins. Something, however, is missing: those
large piles of wasted stone flakes so often seen at hunter-gatherer
camps elsewhere. The settlement looks deserted, except for a scraggy dog
that is sniffing around and a flock of crows picking at a pile of bones.
But inside one dwelling, Lubbock finds a young man, perhaps aged
eighteen or twenty, lying upon its floor and seemingly in pain. One of
his arms is deformed and he sweats profusely although the afternoon is
cool and dry. All he wears is a loincloth and a white pendant around his
neck.

Children running into the camp chase away the crows and announce the
arrival of people from the forest. The adults who follow are physically
big, looking strong and healthy. Some carry bundles of firewood, others
have baskets with vegetables dug from the forest floor. One man has a
deer draped across his shoulders, another carries an enormous white and
weathered bone. On returning to her hut, a woman – presumably the mother
– attends to the man on the floor, wiping his sweat with soft leaves and
helping him to the fire which a young girl – his sister – stokes with
dry wood.

Feeling like an intruder in the mother’s grief, Lubbock steps outside
again, and finds the other women grinding seeds, and the deer already
being skinned. A quiver of arrows now stands against one of the hut
walls. They are tipped with microliths almost identical to those he has
seen at Azraq, Star Carr, Zhokhov and so many other places in the
prehistoric world. But these are particularly small in size; Lubbock
appreciates why when he sees the tiny pebbles being used as cores. Stone
is evidently precious in this village – which explains the absence of
knapping debris. Large points have to be made from bone, such as that
scavenged from an elephant carcass which Lubbock had seen being carried
into the village.

He follows a couple of the older children who head towards the river.
They check fishing lines and nets and need Lubbock’s help to haul a
captured turtle to the riverbank. Together they drag it back to the camp
alive and are shown how to slit its throat. When dusk arrives, Lubbock
joins the family of the man who is ill while they share their food. When
divided between all present, their portion of the roasted deer provides
a mere morsel for each; all that Lubbock can sneak is a little marrow
from a broken bone. He waits for some turtle meat but none arrives. They
mainly eat coarse plants – pounded, roasted and mixed to a gruel in
wooden bowls. The addition of honey makes it palatable but chewing is
tough work and everybody finishes by picking their teeth with splinters
of bone.

Damdama, as this Mesolithic site on the Ganges plain is known today, was
discovered in 1978 close to the village of Warikalan and excavated until
1982 by J. N. Pal and his colleagues from Allahabad University.²⁰ Along
with Mahadaha and Sarai-Nahar Rai, excavated in the early 1970s, it is
one of three relatively well preserved Mesolithic settlements on the
plain, now almost entirely cleared of its ancient forest. As both human
and animal bones were eroding from the ground, these sites had become
part of local mythology – Damdama and Mahadaha were believed to be where
ancient warriors had been buried. The word ‘Damdama’, however, has a
more prosaic origin: it means the sound which emanated from the ground
when struck.

That may have been due to the richness of the archaeological remains
below the surface. Damdama was found to have 1.5 metres of occupation
deposits, containing large quantities of microliths and other stone
tools, grinding and hammer-stones, charred plant remains and animal
bones. Small pits and holes marked where posts had once stood to support
walls and roofs; compacted floors were found along with fireplaces and
many clay-lined pits. The dwellings may have been tent-like and thatched
in design – as used by the recent Kanjars of the Ganga valley – or
perhaps simple constructions from leaves and grass like those of the
Pandaram people of southern India.

The deposits at the nearby sites of Mahadaha and Sarai-Nahar Rai, both
located on the banks of horseshoe-shaped lakes, were almost as rich,
contrasting dramatically with Early Holocene sites from elsewhere. With
woods full of game and edible plants, and lakes brimming with fish and
turtles, this was evidently a favoured locality. For although it was
originally supposed that the Holocene hunter-gatherers had spent most of
their year in the rocky Vindhyas, only visiting the Ganges plain for
food and water during the summer months, it now appears that they had
opted for a settled and sedentary way of life.

Studies of the excavated animal bones have shown a diverse range of
species and that wild pigs, deer and possibly other game had been killed
throughout the year.²¹ Moreover, the bones of the bandicoot rat were
found at Mahadaha and Damdama. This is a commensal animal – it cannot
live without a constant supply of human waste to feed upon – and hence
its presence has been used to argue for a permanent human presence in
the same way as that of mice and sparrow remains at the Natufian sites
of western Asia.²²

Sedentism is further indicated by the eighty burials uncovered at the
three sites – many more remain unexcavated. Most contained a single
individual, almost always stretched out on its back with the head tilted
to one side. The graves had mainly been dug close to the pit-hearths by
the huts, suggesting that families kept their dead within their homes.

The skeletal remains provide some useful insight into social life,
health and diet. About the same number of males and females were buried,
with a possible bias towards the males. Most were quite young,
suggesting that few people survived beyond the age of thirty-five.
Children were rare. J. N. Pal – the excavator of Damdama – suggested
that the very young had been buried outside the village. The same may
have been the case with adults dying from an infectious disease, traces
of which were rare in those buried between the fireplaces and hearths.
Teeth were heavily worn, indicating a diet dominated by coarse plant
material, and often carried tiny grooves reflecting habitual
tooth-picking. Many teeth had hypoplasias: horizontal lines in the
enamel showing periods of nutritional stress when young. But as almost
all the people buried had acquired a substantial stature,²³ this does
not appear to have inhibited growth.

Grave goods were scarce. Although a few contained arroweads, pendants
and beads, nobody at Damdama, Sarai Nahar Rai or Mahadaha seemed to be
particularly wealthy or to have been given a more impressive burial than
others. The overall impression is a healthy population with few, if any,
social distinctions. But just as Lubbock has seen elsewhere, social
tensions are prone to arise among sedentary hunter-gatherers. This might
explain the three skeletons from Sarai Nahar Rai with arrow-heads
embedded in their ribs, hips and arm bones.²⁴

Lubbock remains at Damdama for the autumn and winter months. When the
monsoon arrives, the rivers flood and Damdama becomes an island within
an extensive shallow lake. Once the waters subside Lubbock joins a party
who trek southwards for 100 kilometres into the Vindhyas to find nodules
of stone. On their return the young man with the deformed arm has died,
his body remaining in the cave and already drained of blood. A grave is
dug beside the fireplace where he had slowly withered away. Lubbock
watches the burial ritual with little understanding: a fire is lit
within the grave itself and left to burn out before the desiccated body
is laid upon the hot ash, along with two arrow-heads and his ivory
pendant. He is covered and left, only to be exposed when J. N. Pal
excavates what he will describe as Grave VIII in AD 1974, recording that
‘the left humerus presented some pathological deformity’.²⁵

After a spring departure, Lubbock begins a journey westwards, heading
towards the Indus valley where, for the first time since his travels in
Europe, he will enter the world of farming.

In 8500 BC domesticated plants and animals were quite unknown to the
people of Damdama; they had abundant supplies of wild foods and
continued living as hunter-gatherers long into the Holocene. Lubbock had
found them similar to several other groups he had visited during his
travels – those of Uenohara in Japan, of Koster in North America and
Skateholm in Sweden. All became sedentary for at least part of the year
when surrounded by abundant and diverse resources, and all used their
dead to signify ownership of the land. But what Lubbock could not have
anticipated is that the occupants of the Ganges plain would survive as
hunter-gatherers long after those in Japan and North America had adopted
a farming way of life.²⁶

43 A Long Walk Across the Hindu Kush

Early farming in South and Central Asia; the domestication of cotton, 7500–5000 BC

Five adults, four children, three dogs and a flock of goats emerge from
the wooded hills that mark what is today the end of the Bolan Pass in
west Pakistan. It is 7500 BC and as Lubbock watches from his resting
place by a river, the party of travellers search for a level area on
which to dump the many bags and bedrolls they carry. A woman gently lays
down her baby which had travelled wrapped tightly to its mother’s body.
Dusk is also arriving and this family looks exhausted after their
journey from the west. Quite where they have come from Lubbock never
discovers; but their goats and the bag that splits open to spill its
barley seed announces them as the very first farmers on the Indus
plains.¹ As people and animals alike quench their thirst, the region is
set on a new historical course. Within 5,000 years the cities of Harappa
and Mohenjo-Daro will be flourishing as centres of the Indus
civilisation.

Lubbock remains seated to watch the gradual transformation of their
camping site into a farming village. A second family of economic
migrants arrive from the Bolan Pass, and then another. Woodland is
cleared and barley sown in the fertile soils that are annually
replenished with silt from winter flooding of the Bolan River. The
riverbank provides clay for the bricks of rectangular houses and storage
rooms; babies are born and the old die; harvests are good and more land
is brought into cultivation.

Lubbock leaves his seat in 7000 BC, breaking through the dense mat of
grass and shrubs that has bound him to the floor. He wades across
freezing and fast-flowing waters to have a closer look at the cluster of
buildings that now stand where twenty generations ago the first arrivals
had dumped their bags. This is Mehrgarh, a farming village with more
than a hundred inhabitants and the earliest known settlement of its type
in southern Asia.²

Today, the archaeological remains of Mehrgarh are spread across several
sites close to the Bolan River on the Kachi plain of Baluchistan – a
parched landscape in the westernmost province of Pakistan that
experiences the highest summer temperatures in the whole of southem
Asia. The sites accumulated over a 4,000-year period as new settlements
were established following the complete or partial abandonment of
earlier ones. Throughout this time, the Bolan River kept changing its
course; deserted dwellings became buried beneath its sediments and then
exposed again as a new change of course cut through its deposits of silt
and sand.

It was by one such shift of the river that the earliest settlement at
Mehrgarh was revealed: 10 metres of superimposed mud-brick walls.
Archaeologists discovered the site in the early 1970s, since when the
French Archaeological Mission in Pakistan and the Pakistan Department of
Archaeology have undertaken excavation. Jean-François Jarrige is the
leading figure, having now excavated at Mehrgarh and its adjacent sites
for almost thirty years.³ The date of the original settlement remains
unclear, but by 7000 BC several multi-roomed rectangular mud-brick
houses with square storerooms were positioned on the riverbank. They
were separated from each other by courtyards where most of the domestic
work was done and beneath which the dead were buried. Initial finds of
grinding stones and flint blades with the characteristic shine that
comes from prolonged cutting of cereals, suggested a farming settlement;
confirmation of this was soon obtained from a source similar to that
which had first identified rice cultivation in the Yangtze valley.

The earliest people of Mehrgarh had mixed clay with chaff – the
otherwise discarded waste from threshing – when making mud bricks.
Although the walls they built later collapsed, became buried below new
walls and then alluvium, were eroded by river water and finally
excavated by archaeologists, the bricks still contained plant
impressions – the chaff itself having almost entirely decayed. These
were examined by Lorenzo Constantini of the National Museum of Oriental
Art in Rome, a specialist on early plant remains who works with Jarrige.
He identified several varieties of domesticated wheat and – in much
larger quantities – barley. Wild plant foods had also been gathered from
Mehrgarh; along with the cereals, Constantini identified the seeds of
the plum-like jujube fruit and date stones. Such fruits suggest that the
Kachi plain had been considerably wetter than it is today.

The only known archaeological remains in this region prior to Mehrgarh
are scatters of microliths. These were left behind by hunter-gatherers
who appear to have been neither cultivating wild plants nor living in
permanent settlements.⁴ And so the archaeological history of Baluchistan
contrasts sharply with that of western Asia where the first farmers were
preceded by village-based hunter-gatherers who lived in villages and
cultivated wild cereals. We must conclude that farming arrived on the
Indus plain as a ready-made package of wheat, barley, goats and
mud-brick architecture, one brought by economic migrants from the west.
The Bolan Pass seems the most likely point of arrival, this having been
a route-way for traders and travellers throughout historic times.⁵

Migrations eastward from western Asia to the Indus plains are more
difficult to explain than those westwards into Europe, as they involved
crossing the immense Iranian plateau before fertile soils were found.
But it should come as no surprise that people were prepared to make such
journeys – this history has already recounted the remarkable travels of
ice-age hunters through the Americas, Australia and the Arctic to reach
the far corners of the earth. The migrant Neolithic farmers were simply
following in a long tradition of Homo sapiens; they were incorrigibly
curious about new lands and economically bold.

As Lubbock approaches the buildings of Mehrgarh in 7000 BC he notices
penned animals other than goats – mainly the young calves of zebu, the
local wild cattle that have humped backs, unlike those from western
Asia.

A burial is taking place and one of the courtyards is crowded with
people who circle a pit dug into its floor. Lubbock manages to squeeze
to the front and sees the body of a young man positioned with knees
tucked to his chest in a shallow grave. The dead man wears a red cloth
shroud and a string of seashells around his neck. Having seen so many
burials throughout the prehistoric world, Lubbock is more interested in
looking at the people around him. Many are also wearing shells and he
recognises some as dentalium – the tube-like shells that were so valued
during the Natufian in western Asia and which he had also seen at
Gönnersdorf in ice-age Europe. Their teeth are also rather striking as
they are stained an unpleasant yellowish brown.

A priest-like figure nods to an assistant who comes forward dragging
five young goats tugging at their leash. One by one they are held aloft;
each has its throat slit and is drained of blood into bitumen-sealed
baskets. The carcasses are placed at the dead man’s feet. One of the
blood-brimming baskets is placed within the grave. And then the man and
goats are buried and the floor repaired with clay.

Burial within houses and courtyards is no longer a novelty for Lubbock.
Many other features of Mehrgarh also have a familiar feel. As he
explores the town he finds the same range of activities and daily
rhythms, the same sounds and smells, as in the towns of western Asia
which were also dependent upon cereals and goats. Just like at Jericho
and ‘Ain Ghazal, an assortment of wooden bowls, stone vessels and
baskets take the place of pottery. But the stone artefacts – arrow
points, knife blades, hide-scraping tools – are closer to those used by
the hunter-gatherers who are still living on the Indus plains in 7000
BC. As both peoples rely on quartz nodules from the river-bed for their
raw material, and as both go hunting for local game, this is hardly
surprising. The hunter-gatherer population, however, has already felt
the impact of the incoming farmers as many of their adolescent females
have been taken for wives. The young women were quite willing to abandon
their hunter-gatherer life for the perceived economic security of
farming.

Lubbock’s attention is suddenly drawn to heated voices from inside a
house near by. He enters and squats behind two men sitting cross-legged
upon the floor of its single room. One is dressed in a black woollen
cloak and scarf quite different to the white and brown clothing worn at
Mehrgarh. He has a pile of bright blue beads and is evidently a visiting
trader. The other runs his fingers through the seashells that he keeps
hidden within a leather pouch. The room is dingy and the air fetid. A
smoky clay oven burns in a corner, above which hangs part of a butchered
deer. Baskets, stone bowls and an assortment of hoes, digging sticks and
other clutter are stacked against the walls. A woman sits upon a pile of
hides and rush mats, breast-feeding her child while watching the
bartering.

The deal takes several hours to complete. It is frequently interrupted
by servings of herb tea, made by dropping hot stones from the oven into
bowls of water and dried green leaves. Agreement is eventually reached
long after nightfall. Bread and venison are shared, followed by milk
drunk from wooden beakers. The man, his wife and child, the trader and
Lubbock all sleep within the single room, completely filling its floor.
When the trader rises at dawn, and departs to climb the Bolan Pass,
Lubbock feels compelled to follow him, glad to escape the child that had
cried throughout the night.

Lubbock’s visit to Mehrgarh has been too brief for him to appreciate its
arts and crafts; neither did he have time to witness its economic
growth. He missed, for instance, the stylised clay figurines of seated
people and animals that are found within some houses; while he saw the
penned zebu calves, he was unable to appreciate their significance for
the future economy of the town.

When Jean-François Jarrige and his colleagues examined the animal bones
in successive layers of the archaeological deposit they found that those
of cattle and sheep became progressively smaller, while those of goat
and gazelle remained largely unchanged.⁶ This indicated that the local
wild sheep and humped cattle had slowly become domesticated, while
gazelle remained wild throughout the town’s history – although their
numbers evidently fell as their bones become increasingly scarce. The
gradual switch from a dependency on wild game to domesticated animals,
especially cattle, is also reflected in the far smaller number of
microliths – and hence hunting weapons – found in the later deposits of
the town.

There were many burials at Mehrgarh. Most were found below the
courtyards and contained a variety of grave-goods – quite unlike those
of the hunter-gatherers at Damdama. Polished stone axes, elegant flint
blades, stone vessels, nodules of ochre and polished stone beads were
all placed with the dead. Several beads were made from turquoise and a
few from lapis lazuli which had most likely originated far to the north
in modern-day Afghanistan. Conversely, the seashells of Mehrgarh had
come from the Arabian shore, 500 kilometres to the south. Some of the
excavated bones were tinted red, suggesting that bodies had been covered
by painted shrouds.

As the town expanded, a formal cemetery was created containing at least
150 burials. Many graves were now constructed as underground tombs, with
bodies being placed in subterranean chambers divided by low mud-brick
walls. These walls were periodically dismantled so that a new body could
be placed within the chamber, requiring existing bones to be shifted
aside. The wall was then rebuilt and the tomb buried once again. The
appearance of such tombs must reflect the increasing importance of
family ties but with what consequences for daily life, it is hard to
know.

To date, little information on health and diet has been gleaned from the
bones.⁷ A dental study found the teeth of the Mehrgarh people to be
similar to those of the indigenous Mesolithic people of southern Asia by
being noticeably large. This appears to challenge the idea that their
ancestors were immigrant farmers from the west rather than local people
who had simply adopted the idea and means of farming. Most Neolithic
farmers had poor dental health, due partly to a diet of coarse plant
foods invariably mixed with grit from the grinding process, and partly
due to the large quantity of carbohydrates they consumed that caused
decay. But caries were practically absent among the Mehrgarh people,
their teeth being as healthy as those of hunter-gatherers. This appears
to have been due to the fluoride that was naturally present in the river
water; this reduced decay, although it caused yellow and brown staining
on their teeth.

One of the funerary chambers, dating to around 5500 BC, had contained an
adult male lying on his side with legs flexed backward and a young
child, approximately one or two years old, at his feet. Next to the
adult’s left wrist were eight copper beads which had once formed a
bracelet. As such metal beads were only found in one other Neolithic
burial at Mehrgarh, he must have been an extraordinarily wealthy and
important person. Microscopic analysis showed that each bead had been
made by beating and heating copper ore into a thin sheet which had then
been rolled around a narrow rod. Substantial corrosion prevented a
detailed technological study of the beads; yet this turned out to be a
blessing as the corrosion had led to the preservation of something quite
remarkable inside one of the beads – a piece of cotton.⁸

Christophe Moulherat and his colleagues at the Centre de Recherche et de
Restauration des Musées de France made this astounding find. When one of
the beads was cut in half, vegetable fibres were found – the remnants of
the thread that had once strung the beads. These had survived because
organic compounds had been replaced by metallic salts arising from
corrosion of the copper. A section of fibre 5 millimetres square was
isolated and covered with a fine layer of gold to allow a scanning
electron microscope to reveal its structure. To make additional
microscopic observations, the fibres had to be encased in resin and
polished with a diamond paste.

After further microscopic study, the fibres were unquestionably
identified as cotton; it was, in fact, a bundle of both unripe and ripe
fibres that had been wound together to make a thread, these being
differentiated by the thickness of their cell walls. As such, this
copper bead contained the earliest known use of cotton in the world by
at least a thousand years. The next earliest was also found at Mehrgarh:
a collection of cotton seeds discovered amidst charred wheat and barley
grains outside one of its mud-brick rooms.

Moulherat was unable to determine whether the cotton fibres at Mehrgarh
came from wild or domesticated plants; but he strongly suspects the
latter. Constantini thinks so too in light of the cotton seeds being
found with domesticated cereals in what had likely been a storage area.
It appears that the Mehrgarh farmers had been cultivating cotton not
only for its fibres but also for its oil-rich seed.

Cotton is today the most important fibre crop in the world, cultivated
in more than forty countries. More than fifty different species are
known, all classified as members of the genus Gossypium. Only four of
these are cultivated, each of which appears to have evolved quite
independently, in a different part of the world. Gossypium hirsutum is
the most widely grown species and is thought to have originated from its
wild progenitors in Meso-America; a second New World domesticated
cotton, G. barbadense, arose in South America. The most widespread
African cotton is G. herbaceum which probably originated in South Africa
as a likely ancestor has been found growing as an indigenous element in
its open grasslands and forests. The fourth species, G. arboreum, is
thought to have originated somewhere between India and eastern Africa.

Up until the Mehgarh discoveries, it was assumed that the domestication
of G. arboreum occurred during the time of the Indus civilisation, not
earlier than 2500 BC. But we should not be surprised if the farmers of
this region had already been cultivating cotton at 5500 BC; we know that
farmers of the Jordan valley, who had a similar economy and technology
to those at Mehrgarh, had been making fabrics since at least 8000 BC.
The evidence for that came from an unlikely source – the tiny cave of
Nahal Hemar, located far from any known settlement. But even that now
seems a mundane discovery compared with the use of gold leaf and diamond
paste to reveal traces of cotton within a corroded copper bead.

By 5500 BC the occupied buildings of Mehrgarh were situated 200 metres
from its original setting. Cattle had become the dominant animal,
possibly being used for ploughing, transport and milk, as well as
providing meat. Other developments included the production of pottery.
This first appears in the form of rather fine vessels – pear-shaped,
red-painted jars with outward-curving rims. Stone vessels and
bitumen-covered baskets were evidently still catering for everyday
needs; the new pottery seems most appropriate for display and impressing
visitors. Perhaps it was used for drinking milk.

Mehrgarh continued to expand for several thousand years, repeatedly
shifting its position on the Kachi plain and laying the foundations for
the Indus civilisation. Jarrige’s excavations have revealed a remarkable
sequence of development. By 4000 BC, coarse pottery had been introduced
for daily needs and become wheel-thrown for mass production; bow-drills
were now tipped with green jasper for turning a variety of exotic stones
into beads. By 3500 BC, the stylised clay figurines had been replaced by
those of a more naturalistic appearance, which, together with pottery,
would soon be produced on a massive scale. Clay and bone were used to
make stamp seals. These attest not only to the growing importance of
trade, but also to a new culture of private ownership, secrecy and
wealth. Trade may have been the stimulus for developing copper work,
evident from the discovery of crucibles used for smelting. By this date,
similar farming towns are found throughout eastern Iran and western
Pakistan. From these, the cities of Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro would
eventually emerge – the culmination of a process set in train by the
origin of farming in western Asia and then by economic migrants who
found fertile soils on the Indus plains at 7500 BC.⁹

While these agricultural towns were flourishing, farming spread
eastwards into India. But the West Asian ‘package’ of barley, wheat and
goat had reached its environmental limit. Beyond the eastern extent of
the Indus plains the climate changed from one with dry summers and wet
winters to the precise converse, owing to the Indian monsoon. And so,
rather than continuing to spread, selected elements of the Neolithic
package were adopted in a piecemeal fashion – just as happened in
southern Europe. The indigenous hunter-gatherers of southern Asia also
soon began to cultivate their own local plants such as mung beans, urd
and millet.

The site of Bagor in Rajasthan illustrates the type of hybrid economy
that arose.¹⁰ Located on a sand dune within a savannah-like environment,
the site overlooks the Kotari River which only retains water today
during the monsoon. It appears to have been a short-term camping site,
one most likely used on an annual basis at around 6000 BC. The ground
had been paved with slabs of schist, while roughly circular alignments
of stone suggest windbreaks or flimsy huts. There was one burial – an
eighteen-year-old female laid on her back with her left arm resting
across her body. The artefacts were all Mesolithic in character: large
quantities of microliths made from local quartz and chert, together with
fragments of grinding stones and pounders. The excavated animal bones
came principally from wild cattle, deer, lizards, turtle and fish. But
they also include those of domesticated sheep and goat. These may have
been from feral animals that had escaped from flocks further west, or
those taken by hunter-gatherer raids on farming settlements.
Alternatively, the hunter-gatherers themselves might have begun to
manage their own small herds.

Central India became an agricultural melting pot, especially from 5000
BC onwards, when domesticated rice began to arrive from southern China.
That, at least, is the most likely scenario for how rice came to be
recovered from the site of Chopani Mando on the flood plain of the Belan
River below the northern extent of the Vindhya hills.¹¹ Indigenous
domestication of wild rice is another possibility.

The spread of farming to southern India did not occur until 3000 BC and
principally took the form of cattle pastoralism. Many Neolithic
settlements are known from the tops of granite outcrops across the
Deccan plateau but acidic soils have destroyed plant remains and left
animal bones extremely scarce. Complementing these sites are numerous
‘ash mounds’, sometimes located next to a settlement but often isolated
within what would have been thick forest. These were formed by the
periodic burning of cattle dung within palm-trunk enclosures, once used
to protect cattle from wild animals and raiders.

Direct proof of penned cattle comes from hoofprints preserved in the
deposits of burnt dung at the site of Utnur. This particular stockade
was burnt and then rebuilt several times. In modern India, the burning
of similar enclosures is associated with festivities either at the
beginning or end of seasonal migrations of cattle to forest browsing
grounds. Such fires also have a practical role: cattle are driven
through the heat and smoke to kill off parasites, preventing the spread
of disease.¹²

Back in 6500 BC, Lubbock’s summer-time journey follows the trader from
Mehrgarh and takes him through the mountains of Afghanistan. He has to
climb over tumbled granite and pass through narrow gorges where
thundering rivers suck and tug at boulders while their noise
reverberates between canyon walls as if inside a tomb.¹³ Such gorges
open into wooded valleys edged by banks of scree which provide
occasional glimpses of jagged snow-covered peaks. The high valleys are
bounded by boulders that mark where glaciers had reached before global
warming had made this land habitable to humankind. The trader visits
several settlements, each with a patch of bright green sprouting cereals
and goats foraging on an adjacent hillside. Some are based around large
caves, often with brushwood huts built inside; others have small, oval,
mud-brick dwellings roofed with leaves of the giant wild rhubarb that
grows profusely in the valley bottoms. Several days are spent at each
settlement while the trader exchanges a few of his seashells for
coloured stone and renews his friendships. Food and water are swapped
for news and gossip from Mehrgarh and the other villages he has passed
through.

As Lubbock heads into central Afghanistan, he parts company with the
trader to visit a settlement in the north where the high mountains and
narrow passes give way to less dramatic but still rugged limestone hills
and crags. He arrives at the entrance to a large cave. Two families are
living within, along with their goats and dogs; it is dark and musty,
the floor littered with debris from preparing food, making tools and
clothing. The date is 6250 BC but there are no signs of pottery vessels,
use still being made of wooden bowls and wickerwork baskets. Pockets of
soil nearby are cultivated for cereals.

The cave’s residents are sitting idly in the sun, drinking herb tea and
reflecting on the beauty of their world. Lubbock sits with them; he
admires the carpet of primulas that spreads around the cave, enjoys the
scent of wild roses and the sounds of a nearby river that gushes between
mulberry and walnut trees. Here in the heart of Central Asia – some
would say at the heart of the world¹⁴ – only the beetles are at work,
carrying away goat droppings to their private store.

This particular cave, known locally as Ghar-i-Asp (Horse Cave) and
located at Aq Kupruk (the White Bridge) on the terrace of the Balkh
River, is one of a small number that has been archaeologically examined
in Afghanistan.¹⁵ It was excavated with the nearby Ghar-i-Mar (Snake
Cave) by Louis Dupree in 1962 and 1965, working on behalf of the
American Museum of Natural History and the National Museum of
Afghanistan. Both caves had deep deposits showing near-continuous
occupation from soon after the LCM of 20,000 BC into historic times, the
uppermost levels containing Islamic glass of the thirteenth century AD.
The ice-age occupants had used the cave for hunting ibex, wild goats and
deer; they were followed by people with domesticated goats and sheep who
later acquired pottery. Copper objects appear in the upper levels and
then iron artefacts: many miscellaneous pieces along with knife blades,
spear points, bronze bracelets and fragments of a Chinese coin.

Dupree placed the time at which Aq Kupruk’s hunters started to become
herders at the strikingly early date of about 10,000 BC. He was reliant,
however, upon some very questionable identifications of goat bones as
belonging to domestic rather than wild animals, together with some
equally dubious radiocarbon dates.¹⁶ If correct, it would be the
earliest domestication of goats currently known, but we must be
cautious. A new study of the Aq Kupruk Caves is required before any
conclusions can be drawn. What is clear, however, is that by 6250 BC
scattered communities were living throughout the high valleys of central
Afghanistan, herding goats and tending small plots of wheat and barley.

After visiting Aq Kupruk, Lubbock continues heading northwest, until he
reaches the edge of the mountainous plateau which we call today the
Kopet Dag (the Dry Mountain) in modern-day Iran. A sharp drop leads to
enormous fans of sediment, at first immensely steep then decreasing to
pistachio-covered woodland. Lubbock stands upon its precipitous edge and
looks towards the northeast, half-closing his eyes against the icy wind.
Beyond the woods a grey savannah pimpled with hills and specks of red,
silver and green stretches far into the distance, blending into the
yellow of a seemingly infinite sandy desert.

Lubbock follows the scarp edge for another 200 kilometres, until he
reaches a point at which he must descend to visit the next settlement in
his travels: the farming village of Jeitun.¹⁷ He chooses a steep valley,
and clambers down towards the woodland, where fruit trees are laden with
pomegranates, apples and pears ripe enough to eat.

A river that meanders between the poppy-covered foothills and dunes at
the desert edge takes Lubbock to Jeitun. About twenty mud-brick houses
are clustered on a small hill, encased in thick and acrid smoke from the
dung being burned as fuel. There is a great deal here to remind him of
Mehrgarh and the farming towns in western Asia, although Jeitun is much
smaller in size. The houses each have a single rectangular room and are
arranged around courtyards with outhouses and storage racks for grain.
Lubbock walks around the village, watches a pair of goats being
butchered in one courtyard and basket-weaving in another. Grinding
stones lie unused but are surrounded by a thick patchwork carpet of
coloured husks and chaff.

Pushing aside a hide drape to enter a house, Lubbock finds it hot, smoky
and smelly inside. The walls are painted red, the floor no more than
beaten earth and trampled ash. A large rectangular hearth burns dung in
one corner, with partly-baked bread on its hot clay surround. In the
opposite corner, a pile of hides, furs and mats are stacked upon a
platform, presumably used for sleeping. In a third, a clay-lined pit is
used for storing grain. Shiny-bladed sickles with bone handles hang upon
the wall; a basket contains a variety of other stone-bladed tools.
Several bowls are stacked upon the floor; Lubbock picks one up – a
pottery vessel painted with wavy red lines.

A woman enters, dressed in thick layers of hides and woollens; she wears
a necklace of seashells, much like those seen at Mehrgarh, and wraps her
head up in a scarf. As she turns the bread, Lubbock notices two clay
figurines close to the fire, one a goat, the other a human. But before
he can take a closer look, three children giggle and stumble through the
draped doorway; they stand patiently until a morsel of half-baked bread
is placed within their dirty hands. And then they scarper away.

Lubbock visits several other houses, finding them almost identical in
design, although most have plaster floors. As the Jeitun people are at
work in the courtyards and surrounding fields, most of the occupants are
either very old or very young. Lubbock sees a cluster of men and women
by the river which ends just beyond the village in a marsh and goes to
investigate. They are making mud bricks, eagerly helped by children who
have, of course, coated themselves in mud. Some are digging from the
riverbank, others are mixing clay with straw and then shaping it into
bricks, each about the size of Lubbock’s forearm but a little thicker.
The straw is being cut in a nearby field, the ears of wheat having been
harvested several weeks before.

That night Lubbock sits within a courtyard as a full moon rises above
the mud-brick houses of Jeitun. It is 6000 BC and he imagines what is
happening elsewhere in the world at this date in human history. He
recalls those living at Damdama and hunting polar bears at Zhokhov in
the Arctic; he thinks how canoes might be crossing the Torres Strait and
arriving at Skateholm in southern Sweden; how ducks are being trapped at
Koster; and finally, of those living face to face with bulls at
Çatalhöyük. America, Europe, Australia, North, South, East and West Asia
– Lubbock has visited them all. There is just one blank left to fill,
one habitable continent in the world that he has yet to visit: Africa.

Jeitun is one of several archaeological sites in the piedmont zone at
the base of the Kopet Dag in modern-day Turkmenistan which testify to
the cultivation of cereals and herding of goats by 6000 BC. The
similarities that Lubbock felt between Jeitun, Mehrgarh and the farming
towns of western Asia are real and unsurprising – all have the same
economy in similar environmental settings around the rim of the Iranian
plateau. And just like the settlement of Mehrgarh, Jeitun raises the
problem of whether the first farmers of Turkmenistan were immigrants
from the west, indigenous hunter-gatherers who had acquired seed and
animals by trade, or had their origins in the hills below the Kopet Dag
where wheat and barley were already being cultivated some time before
6000 BC.¹⁸

Jeitun and its neighbouring sites exist as mounds referred to locally as
Kurgans. The first excavations occurred at the turn of the century and
demonstrated these to be the accumulated collapsed and weathered remains
of mud-brick houses. In the 1950s the first systematic excavations took
place at Jeitun, notably by the Soviet archaeologist V. M. Masson. This
small mound was situated beyond the piedmont and among the sand dunes of
the vast Kara Kum desert. Masson revealed a settlement of at least
thirty small, rectangular one-roomed dwellings in the upper portion of
the mound, along with hearths, storage areas and courtyards. Although no
plant remains were recovered, the same signs of farming as those at
Mehrgarh were found: flint sickles with the distinctive gloss from
harvesting and impressions of barley and wheat within mud bricks.

Renewed excavations at Jeitun began in 1987 by the Turkmenian
archaeologist Kakamurad Kurbansakhatov. In 1989 V. M. Masson invited
David Harris from the Institute of Archaeology, London, to apply the
latest techniques for extracting plant remains from the archaeological
deposits and to recreate the landscape in which the Jeitun people had
lived. Working with his colleague Gordon Hillman, Harris recovered
grains of wheat and barley, along with those of many wild plants,
confirming that Jeitun had become an established farming village by 6000
BC.¹⁹ British involvement continued between 1990 and 1994 when a team of
excavators joined those from Russia and Turkmenistan.

This renewed work resulted in a shift away from descriptions of
architecture and stone artefacts to those of Jeitun’s prehistoric
economy and local ecology. But Harris and his colleagues faced a
daunting task. Few clues existed about the prehistoric vegetation as
excavated plant remains were rare, pollen was absent and the indigenous
vegetation has been almost entirely destroyed by millennia of foraging
goats. Similarly, modern irrigation schemes have radically altered the
course of the Kara Su – the river Lubbock had followed – so that the
timing, quantity and whereabouts of water for the Jeitun people remains
unclear. Nevertheless, some progress has been made.

The trees and shrubs that still grow within the humid valleys of the
Kopet Dag, such as the apples and plums that Lubbock enjoyed, are
assumed to have once been more widespread. Woodland dominated by
pistachio is thought to have covered the lower hills owing to the
survival of climbing plants which are normally exclusively associated
with this type of tree. As the rainfall regime at 6000 BC is likely to
have been similar to that of today, with an effective summer drought,
wheat could only have been grown on soils that held sufficient ground
water to tide them through the summer months. Destructive spring floods
caused by excessive rainfall and melting ice from the Kopet Dag were
another problem facing the farmers of Jeitun. David Harris decided that
the only viable fields must have been on the relatively high, flat,
salty soils between the dunes, close to, but protected from, the active
flood channels of the Kara Su. This was confirmed when Gordon Hillman
found the seeds of sea club-rush among the cereal remains – a weed that
infests wheat when grown on such soils and that cannot tolerate
riverside situations.

Study of the excavated goat mandibles by Tony Legge – whose work on the
animal bones of Abu Hureyra and Star Carr we have already encountered –
showed that all stages of tooth growth and wear were present. This
suggests that animals were killed throughout the year, implying that
some people, at least, were permanently resident at Jeitun. As well as
tending their herds, the Jeitun people hunted wild goats in the
foothills of the Kopet Dag, along with wild boar, hare and fox. But
gazelle was their favoured prey. Before the building of the railway that
crosses Turkmenistan today, large herds of these animals had migrated
seasonally from the mountains and high foothills to winter within the
Kara Kum before returning in the spring. If they had done likewise at
6000 BC, Jeitun would have been near perfectly positioned for
intercepting the migrating herds.

The recent excavations at Jeitun have failed to find any traces of
pre-farming settlements at which hunter-gatherers might have begun to
cultivate wild cereals themselves. Indeed, the wild ancestors of the
wheat grown at Jeitun are unlikely to have been present in this part of
central Asia. And so it seems that, just as in Baluchistan,
fully-fledged farmers had arrived in the foothills and steppe that
bordered the Kara Kum. To do so they must have descended from the Kopet
Dag on to which they, or their ancestors, had climbed from western Asia.

Once again, Lubbock stands on the edge of the Kopet Dag and looks
eastwards towards the steppe and desert. Spirals of smoke rise from
Jeitun and neighbouring settlements nestled in the foothills and sand
dunes far below. He now knows that the tiny patches of green are fields
of wheat and their shiny edges the salt marsh glistening in the sun.
During the year Lubbock remained at Jeitun he had helped build a new
house using mud bricks, participated in the harvesting and threshing of
wheat, joined in with the ambushing of gazelle and the collecting of
almonds, walnuts and pistachios. Much of the summer was spent at
campsites in the hills where the goats were taken to find pasture,
leaving few people in the village itself. But now it is time for Lubbock
to turn his back on Jeitun and the east; he is eager to reach Africa to
complete his global travels.

But first he must return to western Asia, not to the Jordan valley where
his travels began, but to the foothills of the Zagros mountains and the
plains of Mesopotamia. The date is 6000 BC and the farming villages that
once bordered the Tigris and Euphrates have long been replaced by
substantial towns – the largest aggregations of people that have so far
existed on planet earth.

44 Vultures of the Zagros

The roots of Mesopotamian civilisation, 11,000–9000 BC

The first civilisation of human history arose in Mesopotamia. This was
the name of a Roman province lying between the Euphrates and the Tigris
rivers, which is now called Iraq. By ‘civilisation’ I mean an entirely
new scale of human society to any that had gone before: monumental
architecture, urban centres, extensive trade, industrial production,
centralised authority and expansionist tendencies. The Mesopotamian
cities appeared at around 3500 BC, along with the invention of writing.
While such developments fall outside the time frame of this history,
their roots were laid much earlier in time. As from 11,000 BC,
succession of remarkable hunter-gatherer settlements, farming villages
and towns appear in Mesopotamia, associated with expanding trade
networks, innovative technology and new religious ideas. By 6000 BC,
Mesopotamia was home to flourishing agricultural communities that were
set to create a new type of human experience: urban life.

Athough the first cities arose in the southern plains of Mesopotamia, in
the vicinity of modern-day Baghdad, the cultural groundwork was done in
the north – a varied landscape of plains, limestone ridges, deep wadis
and imposing hills, most notably those known today as the Jebel Sinjar.¹
To their immediate south lies an extensive area of fertile soils, and it
was on this so-called Sinjar plain that the first Mesopotamian villages
and towns arose. These in turn developed from hunter-gatherer
settlements which are found 300 kilometres further east, in the
foothills of the Zagros mountains at 11,000 BC.

This is the date at which John Lubbock must begin his Mesopotamian
travels. And so when he leaves Jeitun at 6000 BC, heading west to cross
the Iranian plateau, time begins to go in reverse. At 7500 BC, he
reaches a newly-built village on a small alluvial plain known to us
today as Sang-i-Chakmak.² When he descends into the western flanks of
the Zagros and approaches a hunter-gatherer settlement known today as
Zawi Chemi Shanidar, located in the valley of the Greater Zab River,
11,000 BC has arrived.

Five hundred kilometres to the west, the hunter-gatherer village of Abu
Hureyra is flourishing by the Euphrates; a further 400 kilometres away
the people of ‘Ain Mallaha are cutting wild wheat and hunting gazelles
in the Mediterranean woodlands. Neither Mehrgarh nor Jeitun exist, nor
do Jericho and Göbekli Tepe: the whole of Asia, the whole world, is once
again the sole domain of hunter-gatherers.

Zawi Chemi Shanidar consists of a cluster of brushwood huts, a spread of
domestic debris, places for sitting, eating and talking, and a single
circular stone structure. This campsite is on a riverbank and close to a
spring; it nestles between steep valley walls and below a backdrop of
dramatic mountain peaks. Even Lubbock, who has now seen so much of the
world, finds it a spectacular setting. Both he and his new, unknowing
hosts watch with awe as eagles and vultures circle overhead.

Despite the special beauty of his surroundings, Lubbock finds that life
at Zawi Chemi Shanidar is little different to that of many other
hunter-gatherer settlements in the prehistoric world. Beyond the valley
itself the surrounding landscape is like that he had seen further west –
steppe woodland with oak and pistachio. Lubbock spends several days
collecting seeds and digging roots, grinding and pounding these into
flour and paste using stone mortars similar to those at ‘Ain Mallaha. He
helps to ambush wild goats and trap wild boar; he accompanies some of
the Zawi Chemi Shanidar people on long treks. One of these is 150
kilometres to the south, leaving the Zagros foothills and crossing
desert to find a source of bitumen bubbling from the ground. His
companions carry heavy bagfuls back to their campsite for lining baskets
and securing knife blades into sockets. Another trek of an equal
distance is made to the north, into the mountains to meet a party coming
from the west with obsidian to exchange.²

On his return to Zawi Chemi Shanidar, Lubbock finds that preparations
are under way for a dance. As dusk arrives he watches men and women
adopting costumes; some tie vast wings to their arms, evidently cut from
freshly killed vultures and eagles; others cover themselves in goat
hides. A fire is lit and when darkness descends the whole community
gathers to watch them perform.

Initially there is nothing but the flames, a slow beating of drums and a
goat settled upon the grass. An eagle swoops from the darkness with
talons extended; as it twists and turns, the goat runs into the night
with the bird in chase. A herd of goats now arrive and quietly graze in
the firelight. Having eaten, they cavort around the flames –
head-butting, copulating, mothers prancing with their young. The drum
beat begins again, this time faster and louder. The eagle returns
followed by massive vultures that encircle the goats. The drumbeat
quickens, the birds fly faster and the goats begin to panic; they
attempt to leap over what has now become a swirling wall of feathers,
with claws and hooked beaks ready to tear them apart. The drumbeating is
now frenetic and with a final tumultuous strike the eagle attacks. Amid
piercing cries it kills a goat and the vultures descend upon the others.
And then there is silence – except for the crackle of flames and the
panting of costumed human bodies lying exhausted upon the ground.

Zawi Chemi Shanidar means ‘the field close to Shanidar’ – Shanidar being
the name of both a small Kurdish village and a large cave about four
kilometres away.⁴ The idea that its people had dressed in costumes to
mimic vultures, eagles and goats is based on an intriguing discovery at
this site. When Ralph Solecki of Columbia University, New York, made his
excavations in the 1950s, he uncovered a dense mass of animal bones
within a deposit of reddened earth, close to the stone structure. It was
initially assumed to be a domestic rubbish dump, but was found to
contain goat skulls and bird bones alone. The latter had come from the
great bustard, along with various species of eagles and vultures, and
were almost entirely restricted to wing bones. Fine slicing marks showed
that the wings had been carefully detached from the birds; some had
eventually been discarded still intact.⁵

Several bones had come from huge birds, such as bearded vultures, whose
wins-span can reach 3 metres in breadth, and white-tailed sea eagles.
Quite how such birds were caught, and what their wing bones were doing
in a deposit with at least fifteen goat skulls, were not easy questions
for Ralph Solecki and Rose, his colleague and wife, to answer. While
vultures can occasionally become tame around settlements and hence be
captured by using bait, eagles are more challenging – perhaps requiring
young birds to be stolen from their nests and then hand-reared.

A ritualistic interpretation for the bone deposit seems likely, not only
because of its peculiar contents but in light of discoveries elsewhere.
When writing in 1977, Rose Solecki could cite the paintings and
sculptures found by James Mellaart at Çatalhöyük in southern Turkey
which associated animal skulls with birds of prey. Since then, the sites
of Nevali Çori and Göbekli Tepe have been discovered, with further
depictions of eagles and vultures, while talons are commonly found at
Early Neolithic (PPNA) sites in western Asia. The bird bones from my own
excavations in Wadi Faynan, for instance, are dominated by those from
buzzards, vultures and eagles. And so there can be little doubt that
birds of prey were held in high esteem throughout the Fertile Crescent,
most likely having profound symbolic and religious significance. Rose
Solecki suspected this in 1977, when she suggested that their wings had
been used as costumes during a ritualistic dance at Zawi Chemi Shanidar.

Lubbock wakes beside smouldering ashes. The costumes have been left in a
shallow pit near by – goat skulls and skins, bird wings and claws carved
from wood. These are reddened by ochre that had rubbed off sweating
bodies and which will now colour the earth around the bones. There is
nobody to be seen. The sound of pounding from the nearby huts suggests
that the dancers and spectators have returned to work – crushing acorns
and hunting in the hills. Not that they will have left their sacred
world behind: having travelled through prehistory, Lubbock knows there
to be no distinction between the sacred and the profane – other than
that invented for the modern world alone.

During his hunting and plant-gathering trips around the village, Lubbock
had noticed a cave in the crags 4 kilometres to the northwest. He knows
that the people of Zawi Chemi Shanidar still use the cave for shelter
but has never been inside himself.

In the few hours it takes Lubbock to undertake the rugged climb to reach
its entrance, two centuries of prehistoric time elapse, while vultures
continue to glide between precipitous mountain peaks. Shanidar Cave, as
it is known today, has a large chamber and grinding stones, baskets,
hides and a variety of tools clustered on its floor. There are patches
of paving and a few piles of cobbles that look as if they demarcate
special areas or indicate something buried below. The interior is smelly
– a blend of bats, damp animal hides, and the stale remnants of wood
smoke.

While Lubbock stands at the entrance to admire the view and enjoy the
fresh air, he sees a procession climbing towards the cave and guesses
that it comes from Zawi Chemi Shanidar. The line of people approaches
slowly, led by a man who carries a young child in his arms. They wear
particularly elaborate beads made from bone, teeth and stone and their
bodies are painted red.⁶ A couple are hobbling, one with the aid of a
stick. Lubbock sits upon a boulder within the cave to watch them arrive.
The man lays the little boy’s body on the floor; it is wrapped in
strings of bone beads that almost entirely hide its blue and bloated
form. Lubbock looks from face to face and detects signs of illness and
disease. One has a wad of leaves once soaked in some glutinous material
tied across an ear; another has a swollen jaw and looks to be suffering
from severe toothache.

A fire is made on the cave floor. Lubbock listens to the prayers and
watches strange poetic movements around the body, perhaps the miming of
wild animals and flurries of snow. The man who carried it, presumably
the child’s father, digs a pit that exposes burnt wood from previous
fires in the cave. The body, still clothed in beads, is laid to rest
upon a scatter of ash and buried. A moment of silence. And then the
people depart, the boy’s father being the last to leave.

When Ralph Solecki excavated Shanidar Cave in the 1950s he discovered
not only a cemetery of modern humans but also the bones of
50,000-year-old Neanderthals, for which the cave is better known.⁷ While
the Neanderthal remains were deeply buried below wind-blown sediment and
roof-collapse, the cemetery was found just below the surface, a cluster
of twenty-six graves together with domestic artefacts and debris similar
to those excavated at Zawi Chemi Shanidar. Such similarities and a date
of 10,800 BC suggest that the cave and riverside campsite had been used
by the same people.⁸ Many of the graves contained relatively young
adults and children. Several had been buried with beads – one child had
1,500 within its grave, suggesting he had belonged to a family of high
status. A further grave was found, isolated from the rest and containing
a woman in a box-shaped pit with red ochre and a grinding stone.

Agelonakis Anagnostis analysed the human bones as part of a doctoral
study at Columbia University.⁹ She found that many of the adults had
hypoplasias on their teeth – signs of malnutrition when young. Traces of
ear infections and dental inflammations were frequent, as were limb
bones that had been either cracked or broken, and signs of degenerative
diseases such as arthritis. The bones as a whole had come from a
remarkably unhealthy population – those who survived childhood had
evidently struggled to reach what we would call middle-age.

This is quite different to the Early Natufian populations of the Jordan
valley who appear to have been in a good state of health. Another
contrast is the nature of their settlement. Although the presence of a
cemetery suggests that Shanidar and the Greater Zab River valley were
regularly visited, the absence of substantial stone-built dwellings
either near caves or in riverside settlements suggests only temporary,
most likely seasonal, occupancy.¹⁰ In this regard the Zawi Chemi
Shanidar people, together with those who had occupied the nearby and
contemporary sites of Karim Shahir and M’lefaat, were quite unlike the
Natufians who lived in permanent villages.¹¹ To find anything comparable
in Mesopotamia, Lubbock has to leave Shanidar Cave and travel eastwards
for 200 kilometres to the foothills of the Jebel Sinjar and the
enigmatic village of Qermez Dere.

This journey requires Lubbock to cross the River Tigris and trek towards
the Sinjar hills. He crosses a dry wilderness covered with spindly
shrubs, tufts of grass and scattered trees. Among these lurk game of
various kinds: troops of gazelle spring from low cover and bound across
the plain, hares follow suit, while bustards with startling speckled
plumage and ruffs of long feathers rise squawking from the grass. Herds
of wild ass – onager – frequently graze in the distance. Lubbock’s
journey takes almost a millennium to complete, during which time
temperatures fall and rains become less frequent as the Younger Dryas
arrives. But its impact is far less severe than in the Jordan valley and
Mediterranean lands, where the recurrent droughts force the abandonment
of villages as Late Natufian people return to a life on the move.

Qermez Dere comes into sight as Lubbock reaches the summit of a low hill
and gains an extensive view across the plain. At its edge he sees a
cluster of huts next to the mouth of a shallow valley. From a distance
the thatched roofs look very low and on arrival he discovers that these
cover four subterranean dwellings accessed by ladders from above. It is
late afternoon; work has evidently finished for the day and people sit
lazily in scattered groups, some drinking from wooden cups, others
seeming to be asleep. Around them is the familiar debris of
hunter-gatherer life: grinding stones, piles of knapping debris,
fragments of butchered bones and stained soil where blood has soaked
away.¹²

Lubbock sits among them, feeling an empathy with their evident enjoyment
of the view – southwards across the plain and westwards along the flanks
of the rolling Sinjar hills. The only sounds are a gentle chatter of
voices and water flowing along a nearby stream. The date is 10,000 BC
and although the Younger Dryas is at its height in western Asia and
Europe, the people of Qermez Dere are healthy and well fed. They have
found an ideal place to live, one between the hills and the plain, each
providing their own suite of animals to hunt and plants to gather. From
the quantities of husks, stems, stalks and leaves heaped around the
grinding stones, Lubbock suspects that ‘wild gardens’ are near by:
stands of wild cereals and lentils that are watered, weeded and kept
free of pests.

Aware that the light will soon begin to fade and the subterranean
dwellings will then become pitch-dark inside, Lubbock leaves his seat
and climbs down a ladder into a single room with plastered walls and
floor. It is an odd shape, neither circular nor square, and dominated by
four pillars in a row down its centre. Lubbock immediately recalls the
pillars he had seen at Nevali Çori when travelling to Çatalhöyük – a
village that, along with many others in the Fertile Crescent, has not
yet been built.

The pillars at Qermez Dere are about chest-height; Lubbock examines them
closely, finding they are made of clay and covered in plaster. Each
rises smoothly from the floor and appears to depict human shoulders with
abruptly truncated arms. Their surfaces lack decoration but seem to
fluoresce in the increasing gloom. Lubbock walks around them, stroking
the smooth plaster and pondering the purpose of their rather sensual
forms.

Mats made from twisted fibres and luxuriant animal furs cover the floor.
One side has a fireplace – several stone slabs around a pit cut through
the plaster and containing ashes. The walls are bare, but are evidently
cared for as the plaster has been thickly applied, polished and patched.
Lubbock wonders what happens within this and the other subterranean
rooms of Qermez Dere. They could hardly be more different to the
cluttered, dirty and smelly rooms he has so frequently found at
hunter-gatherer and early farming settlements throughout the world. He
decides to wait and see. And so he gathers a couple of furs and settles
down in comfort against a wall, positioning himself directly opposite
the ladder from above.

During the next few days – or perhaps it is months, years or even
centuries – many people enter the room, sometimes alone or in small
groups: children, adults and the elderly. Lubbock soon begins to notice
recurrent visitors and physical similarities. He notes postures and
patterns of standing, touching and talking that suggest relationships –
parent and child, man and wife, siblings, lovers. He guesses that all
who come are members of an extended family to whom the dwelling belongs.
When it is cold several come and sleep upon its floor, often making a
fire in its hearth; when hot, they find shade below its thatch. It is a
place where people come to sit quietly and alone or with others, to sing
and maybe pray. Sometimes it is used for sex; babies are brought down
the ladder for feeding; the sick come here to rest. Occasionally the
room is packed for a family feast, or when visitors are being
entertained.¹³

These varied uses continue until one spring morning when two women climb
down the ladder and start to roll up the mats and furs. These are passed
to others waiting outside, after which the women begin to sweep the
floor, wipe the walls and polish the pillars, using brushes and leather
rags. Only when the room is meticulously clean do they move on to their
next task: its deliberate destruction.¹⁴

The roof is tackled first, timbers and thatch sending a great cloud of
dust and dirt into the air as they crash to the floor. Once this is
done, the family begins to fill the room with soil, using wooden shovels
and baskets – this having been dug some distance away to avoid domestic
refuse. After some ten minutes’ work, when the collapsed roof timbers
and thatch have been covered, one of the older men – whom Lubbock
assumes to be the family head – halts the work. He unwraps a parcel and
lifts each of its items in turn for all to see before throwing them into
the partly buried house. First a large joint of meat – most likely from
a wild cow, an animal rarely seen in the vicinity of Qermez Dere. Next,
a handful of wild wheat, and then a finely made leather robe. A string
of stone beads follows, and finally a selection of bone pins and
needles.

When work resumes, the children help by throwing stones and handfuls of
dirt into the hole. It continues all day until the room is completely
buried, the fill slightly heaped above the surrounding ground. And so,
as a final act, everybody jumps up and down to compact the soil –
initially with much laughter and then with sagging energy and increasing
fatigue.

During the next few days Lubbock watches the other subterranean
dwellings destroyed in a similar fashion until all that is left of
Qermez Dere are the clusters of querns, baskets and tools, scatters of
domestic debris, fireplaces, and several collections of rugs and mats.
Some patches of ground are swept clean of stones and kept clear of
rubbish and artefacts for peaceful sitting, while a few simple brushwood
shelters and windbreaks are hastily erected as protection from the wind
and cold.¹⁵ And then life at Qermez Dere continues much as before –
except that any chance of privacy has now been lost. So Lubbock
accompanies plant-gathering and hunting trips; he helps to clean hides
and grind seeds, joins in with singing and dancing; he sleeps with
others under the stars.

As the weeks pass he notices that a pile of firewood is gradually
accumulating next to a growing collection of stone nodules; these are of
gypsum and will be eventually crushed and mixed with water to make
plaster. When autumn arrives young trees are felled, stripped of their
branches and stored as timber. Grass is cut, for its stalks rather than
seed; these are tied into bundles and stacked alongside the wood and
stone. Within a few weeks the piles of firewood, gypsum and new roofing
material are deemed sufficient. And so work begins on a new set of
dwellings.

To Lubbock’s surprise, each is built on practically the same spot as
before, even though plenty of untouched ground is available near by. An
approximate circle is marked out and then digging begins, removing much
of the soil that had been so laboriously dumped just a few months ago.
The marked lines are followed meticulously; when the old plaster walls
are encountered they are simply cut through. Any old timbers and thatch
are dumped – as are the objects that had once seemed so precious.

While the new pit is being dug the kilns are burning, rapidly using the
store of firewood and reducing the gypsum nodules to powder. Pillars are
moulded from clay and erected within the new subterranean room. These
are plastered, along with the floor and walls, already prepared with a
wash of red-brown clay. The roof is made with new timbers and thatch.
Within a few days, the dwelling is complete – looking almost identical
to its predecessor. The family gather inside, pleased with their work;
Lubbock is left wondering why they had gone to all that trouble. Once
again he appreciates the cultural barrier that so frequently intervenes
between himself and those he visits on his travels, inhibiting his
understanding of the past.

Why did those people of Qermez Dere repeatedly fill in their old
dwellings and then construct them anew to the same design on precisely
the same spot? Trevor Watkins of Edinburgh University, who excavated the
room in which Lubbock had sat trying to discover its function, asked
this question. He found that it had been rebuilt on at least two
occasions. When backfilled for the last time, presumably just before the
village was abandoned, six human crania had been placed upon its floor.

Watkins’ excavations took place in 1986–7 in advance of the site’s
complete destruction by road building and quarrying. To him, Qermez Dere
had initially appeared as a low mound adjacent to a deeply cut wadi. The
scatters of grinding equipment, stone tools and butchered bones provided
no surprises; but the subterranean houses with their fine plaster,
pillars, and deliberate burial were different to anything found
before.¹⁶

More than two decades after Watkins completed his work, Klaus Schmidt
excavated Göbekli Tepe, located 300 kilometres to the northwest and a
few centuries more recent in time. The similarities with Qermez Dere
were striking: both sites had subterranean structures containing pillars
but lacking in traces of domestic activity; at both sites the structures
had been deliberately back-filled. Although those of Göbekli Tepe were
on a far larger scale than those of Qermez Dere, having a grandeur that
matched their massive pillars and dramatic setting, there is an
unquestionable cultural link between the two sites, one that leads to
Nevali Çori. Something deeply mysterious lies behind these sites and the
societies that made them, something that must hold the key to the origin
of the Neolithic world.

The third and last of the Mesopotamian hunter-gatherer settlements that
Lubbock visits is also in the Zagros foothills and known today as
Nemrik. Stefan Kozlowski of Warsaw University excavated it in
conjunction with the Iraqi State Organisation of Antiquities and
Heritage as a salvage project prior to the construction of ‘Saddam’s
Dam’.¹⁷ The work took place during the same years that Trevor Watkins
was excavating at Qermez Dere, a mere sixty kilometres away on the far
side of the River Tigris. The prehistoric occupation of Nemrik and
Qermez Dere had overlapped in time, although the earliest dates for
Nemrik place it just after 9600 BC. People were still living there
almost two thousand years later; by then they had left their
hunter-gatherer past behind to become farmers.

Lubbock left Qermez Dere at 9400 BC, after Holocene rain and warmth had
arrived. That site would remain occupied for another thousand years
until its residents joined, or perhaps created, one of the new farming
settlements that had developed on the Sinjar plain by 8000 BC. But such
developments are yet to occur as Lubbock treks northeast across a steppe
now dotted with groves of ash and walnut, tamarisk and pistachio. In the
distance the Zagros mountain slopes have been greened by oak forests and
become home to deer, boar and wild cattle.

Nemrik sprawls across the end of a ridge that juts on to a plain; rivers
run along gullies on either side, all the way into the River Tigris
itself. Lubbock arrives at dawn. A few of its people have already left
to go hunting in the hills, others remain sleeping within their circular
dwellings – not subterranean, as at Qermez Dere, but with standing
walls. There are eight of them, located in two clusters and surrounded
by paved yards. These are evidently the working areas as Lubbock sees
the familiar range of grinding stones, mortars and flint waste scattered
across their slabs. Fireplaces and blackened stone bowls suggest that
the yards are also used for cooking. They seem to be shared between the
houses, as does a large and stinking refuse pit.

Lubbock looks closely at the sun-dried mud bricks from which each
dwelling has been built – little different to those he had seen at
Jericho and Jeitun. The entrance is hung with thick hides; pushing these
aside, he enters a gloomy interior. It is partitioned by four posts,
arranged in a square and supporting timber beams – the walls of mud
bricks could never have supported such a weight.¹⁸ The roof itself is
made of latticed branches, interwoven with straw and plastered with
clay. Raised platforms made from wood and clay have been built against
the wall. These are beds and each supports a sleeping body covered with
hide. Opposite, there is a cluster of domestic items and debris
surrounding an embedded grinding stone. Between the sleeping and working
areas of the house there are higher and narrower platforms that look
like benches. Most of the floor is covered with mats and hides; the rest
is trampled earth, especially around a stone slab that partially covers
a pit. Lubbock peers down a hole and sees a skull staring back at him.

The detailed information about the structure and design of this dwelling
derives from its excellent preservation and the quality of its
excavation. Kozlowski, who called it ‘House 1A’, found charred lumps of
clay from its collapsed roof which carried impressions of the
lattice-work and straw. There were pits inside the remnants of walls
where posts had stood. He also found the burial pit, an area where
artefacts were concentrated, and the platforms that he thought were beds
and benches.

Houses of this type were constructed at Nemrik around 9000 BC when its
inhabitants lived by hunting and gathering. Kozlowski’s excavations
recovered the bones of wild animals and birds, along with the claws from
crayfish which had been caught in the adjacent rivers. Although plant
remains were scarce, traces of cereals, peas, lentils and vetch were
found – all presumed to be from wild plants. Only towards the end of the
lengthy occupation at Nemrik – at a date of around 8000 BC – were
domestic varieties grown around the village. By that time the houses had
taken on a more rectangular form, but practically all other aspects of
life remained the same.

Kozlowski also made some more elaborate finds – one of which makes
Lubbock recall the start of his Mesopotamian travels. He is still inside
the house and intrigued by a series of small clay sculptures and carved
stone pebbles that have been placed in little niches around the walls.
Some are difficult to identify – one looks like the head of wild boar,
another might be a goat and a third a human figure. Lubbock spends
little time with these, prefering a far more impressive carving in
stone. It rests within his palm; Lubbock enjoys its weight and feel as
he runs his fingers along the smooth neck, around the eye-sockets and a
sharp edge that forms a beak. It is the head of a vulture – just one of
several such carvings prominently displayed at Nemrik two thousand years
after people had worn eagle and vulture wings and swooped to kill at
Zawi Chemi Shanidar in the valley of the Greater Zab.¹⁹

45 Approaching Civilisation in Mesopotamia

The development of towns and trade, 8500–6000 BC

On leaving Nemrik, Lubbock spent one thousand years travelling in
northern Mesopotamia, observing the development of farming villages.
Soon after 8000 BC he also watched family groups climbing the Zagros
foothills to search for new grazing and arable lands on the Iranian
plateau, the first steps in the spread of farming to South and Central
Asia that would lead to Mehrgarh and Jeitun. But most people remained
upon the Sinjar plain, cultivating the land and building more dwellings
while unwittingly laying the foundations for a new type of urban world.

Lubbock began by looping back on himself, crossing the Tigris and then
following a small tributary river as it wound its way through low
oak-covered hills on the flanks of the Sinjar hills. The river valley
was picturesque, with periodically steep, canyon-like sides. It was just
after one such gorge that Lubbock found the village that we now know as
Maghzaliyah¹ – ten rectangular and multi-roomed houses partly surrounded
by what appeared to be a defensive wall. He was no more than twelve
kilometres from the now abandoned site of Qermez Dere, whose debris had
long ago been washed away by the rain and buried in the dirt.

Lubbock arrived at Maghzaliyah in the spring of 8000 BC, just as wheat
was being harvested from small pockets of suitable soil around the
village, each squeezed between outcrops of rock. It was cut with sickles
made from obsidian blades and the grain stored in barrel-shaped clay
bins. He discovered that obsidian was the main type of stone in use, no
longer acquired by long treks from home, as at Zawi Chemi Shanidar, but
from traders who arrived at Maghzaliyah from the north. Clay was
extensively used for building, modelling figurines and making ovens;
although pots were moulded into shape, no firing occurred to make
brittle ceramic vessels. Lubbock doubted that this was from ignorance of
the technique; it seemed more likely that plates, bowls and jars made of
stone, wood and wickerwork were quite sufficient for people’s needs.

Maghzaliyah was discovered by the Russian archaeologist Nikolai Ottovich
Bader in the spring of 1977: a steeply conical tell, partly cut into on
its northern edge by a road and destroyed on the eastern side by the
Abra River. Otherwise the site was undisturbed. Bader’s excavation
revealed its dwellings to have had clay walls on stone foundations with
thatched roofs and paved floors, both coated with plaster – fragments of
which contained the imprints of reed matting. During the village’s
five-hundred-year history, between eight and ten houses had existed at
any one time, suggesting a population of around a hundred people. But as
each house had remained standing for no more than fifty years, and was
rebuilt upon the same spot, the site was densely packed with
architectural features. The animal bones and plant remains that Bader
excavated indicated that the inhabitants of Maghzaliyah had been equally
dependent upon wild and domestic foods; they hunted onagers on the
steppe while managing flocks of sheep and cultivating fields of wheat.

Maghzaliyah was surrounded by a wall of massive stone slabs for much of
its existence, possibly as a defence against wild animals, raiding
parties or organised assaults by people from other villages – although
no traces of violence were found on the bones of the dead. Adults and
infants had been buried together in stone-lined tombs clustered within a
discrete area of the settlement; these suggest family groups rather than
warrior graves.² Perhaps the wall had not been for defence at all, but a
means to delimit the world of human culture from that of nature, or even
to distinguish the occupants as farmers from the hunter-gatherers that
lived outside.

The origin of Maghzaliyah largely parallels that of early farming
villages and small towns in the Jordan valley and beside the Euphrates,
such as Beidha, ‘Ain Ghazal and Bouqras. The descendants of the
hunter-gatherer-cultivators who lived at Zawi Chemi Shanidar, Qermez
Dere and Nemrik appear to have adopted cereal farming as soon as
seed-grain became available. Whether domesticated cereals had originated
in the north – perhaps at, or around, Çayönü – or in the west – perhaps
at Jericho – remains as unclear as it is unimportant. Once present, the
domesticated seed-grain had spread just as rapidly throughout northern
Mesopotamia as it had in the Jordan valley, before being taken westwards
into Europe and eastwards into central and southern Asia.

Maghzaliyah was just one of several farming villages that developed in
the lands around the Tigris and in the Zagros foothills as soon as such
grain became available. One of the first to be discovered is known as
Jarmo, excavated by the American archaeologist Robert Braidwood during
the 1950s.³ Located 300 kilometres southeast of Maghzaliyah, Jarmo had
about thirty houses at its peak, most of which were built with stone
foundations and thick clay walls. Some of these had a striking
similarity to contemporary houses built at Çayönü, 600 kilometres to the
northwest. Further farming villages developed throughout the Zagros
foothills. Two are known to the south of Jarmo: Ganj Dareh in the
Kermanshah valley and Ali Kosh on the Deh Luran plains of modern-day
Iran. Both have been claimed as having particularly early domesticated
goats.⁴

This proliferation and rapid growth of farming settlements in northern
Mesopotamia closely parallels that in the Jordan valley up until around
6500 BC. But after that date the two regions have an entirely different
history. As Lubbock discovered at ‘Ain Ghazal, a combination of
farming-induced environmental degradation and renewed droughts drove
some of its inhabitants into a nomadic lifestyle and others back to tiny
villages scattered across the steppe. The town was abandoned and left to
decay. While the same story of cultural collapse occurred throughout the
Jordan valley, the precise opposite happened in the lands between the
Euphrates and the Tigris. The soils, topography and climate of
Mesopotamia were far more favourable to intensive cultivation. Rather
than the economic boom and bust of the Jordan valley, its farming
settlements proliferated in size and number. Sustained eonomic growth
occurred, leading to that new scale of human society that we call
‘civilisation’.

Umm Dabaghiyah, a settlement to the immediate south of the Sinjar plain,
was one outcome of that economic growth.⁵ It is here that Lubbock
arrives in 7500 BC. To do so, he has crossed the fertile plain and found
Umm Dabaghiyah’s mud-brick buildings surounded by a dry steppe with no
signs of cultivated crops. It looks quite different to anywhere else in
the prehistoric world. While all other Neolithic settlements have been
higgledy-piggledy affairs, with new houses and rooms added in a
haphazard fashion, the whole of Umm Dabaghiyah looks to have been
planned and built at once. It smells as bad, if not worse, than any
other settlement Lubbock has visited – a rank stench of animal grease,
fat, flesh and innards that lingers around its people and which has
permeated its clay walls and plaster floors.

Exploring the settlement, Lubbock finds distinct areas for living,
working and storage. Entry into any of the rectangular rooms is by an
outside staircase on to its roof and then down an internal ladder,
similar to those he found at Çatalhöyük. There are paintings on the
walls – but thankfully no depictions of bulls, decapitations or
sculptures of split female breasts. Instead, the paintings illustrate
scenes of onager being stampeded into nets.

While only a few of the houses have these paintings, all are laid out in
the same way: a small single room with plastered floors and walls.
Although following a rigid plan, many appear hastily built by
inexperienced hands as numerous repairs to crumbling clay walls and
collapsing roofs are in progress. Each room has a hearth against a wall,
surrounded by a kerb; they share chimneys with large clay ovens attached
to the outside walls. Floors are covered by rush mats; there are stone
bowls, wicker baskets and coarse pottery vessels lying untidily around
the hearths. Overall, the houses lack a ‘homely’ feel; they are basic
and functional, and seem more like workmen’s quarters than family
dwellings.

Two blocks of storerooms form the centrepiece of the settlement. These
are split into many small chambers which have been built with much
better materials and techniques than the dwellings, having thick clay
walls with internal buttresses and plaster footings. Most are entirely
enclosed, lacking doors and with roofs made from hides and brushwood.
When walking between the roofs – the thick walls provide a pathway –
Lubbock widens tiny gaps in the roofing material to peer inside these
stores, which are secure from rodents and the weather. In one he sees a
pile of folded hides, in another a stack of salted meat, in a third
bundles of onager tail hairs, and in a fourth hoofs and gazelle horns
heaped in corners. Another has baskets of grain, roots and tubers. The
rooms containing animal products are evidently becoming stocked during
the hunting season, while those with stored vegetables are being slowly
depleted.

Back in the courtyard a party of hunters have arrived with several
onager carcasses. These have been caught in just the manner illustrated
on the walls – by stampeding a small herd into nets that were suddenly
raised from the ground to block their flight. Lubbock watches as the
onagers are skinned; their hides are scraped clean of fat and sinews and
then placed within clay-lined basins of salted water. Those from a
previous kill have already been soaked and are draped across a series of
low clay walls which form drying racks. The newly skinned carcasses are
butchered with flint blades and basalt axes. Most joints will be rubbed
with salt and left to dry before being salted again and put into store;
the remainder will be roasted that night and eaten with some of the
dwindling vegetable supplies.

Umm Dabaghiyah was discovered and excavated during the early 1970s by
Diana Kirkbride while she was Director of the British School of
Archaeology in Iraq. By this time, she had already excavated Beidha in
southern Jordan; this led her to expect that Umm Dabaghiyah would be a
similar type of farming village. As the site was a small tell, Kirkbride
decided to attempt a ‘total excavation’. Although that wasn’t achieved,
many buildings were exposed, several of which had been rebuilt on four
separate occasions during five hundred years of occupation.

After three seasons of excavation, Kirkbride began to question the idea
of a farming village. Her doubts were motivated by the finds themselves
– the storerooms, plaster-lined basins and low walls of no structural
value – along with what she didn’t find: substantial traces of
agricultural activity.

The near-desert environment in which Umm Dabaghiyah was located also now
struck her as being ‘singularly uninviting from the point of view of
Stone Age settlement’.⁶ The region was almost devoid of water; that
available in a nearby swamp would have been saturated by salt owing to
underlying deposits of gypsum. Such deposits inhibited tree growth,
making wood for fuel and tools extremely scarce, if not entirely absent.
The local flint had a coarse grain and many defects. It appeared that
the inhabitants of Umm Dabaghiyah were denied almost all the key
resources of Stone Age life. All except one: animals to hunt.

When Kirkbride excavated the site, the fauna of northern Mesopotamia was
relatively impoverished, consisting of foxes, hares, desert rats and
jerboas. In 7500 BC, however, onager and gazelle had grazed the plains,
while wild boar and goats foraged in the distant Sinjar hills. Bones
from onagers dominated those excavated from Umm Dabaghiyah, while
fragments of wall paintings depicted hunting – animals surrounded by
what Kirkbride had thought were hooks for holding nets.

When faced with her archaeological evidence and the bleakness of the
site’s contemporary landscape, Kirkbride changed her mind about Umm
Dabaghiyah. Rather than being a small farming village it became a
‘trading outpost’, one specialising in onager and gazelle – a small
satellite, she thought, to some nearby and as yet undiscovered
‘magnificent’ Çatalhöyük-like town.⁷ Kirkbride suggested that Umm
Dabaghiyah was a settlement of ‘middlemen’. She envisaged desert-based
hunter-gatherers bringing animal carcasses to the settlement and
receiving obsidian, cereal grain and other commodities in return; these
had, Kirkbride supposed, already been acquired by the middlemen of Umm
Dabaghiyah by trading meat, hide, hair and horn at the as yet
undiscovered town.

Kirkbride’s interpretation has not been supported by further fieldwork.
Archaeological surveys – most notably that by a Soviet Archaeological
Expedition of 1969–80 – failed to discover that town, finding a
scattering of small agricultural settlements in its place, one of which
was Maghzaliyah. Some of these villages did indeed develop into the type
of substantial town that Kirkbride imagined, but only after Umm
Dabaghiyah had fallen into decay.

Consequently, my scenario for Lubbock’s visit was a little different
from that proposed by Kirkbride: Umm Dabaghiyah as the seasonal
residence of specialist hunters from one or more farming settlements who
arrived with supplies of stone, vegetables and cereal grain, and who
killed and processed the animals themselves. I envisage them returning
at the end of the hunting season with their produce, perhaps partly
carried by tame wild asses.⁸ The hair, hides, hoofs, meat and fat would
have been exchanged for grain and stone, partly with other local
inhabitants and partly with visiting traders.

Whichever scenario is correct, the specialised nature of Umm Dabaghiyah
indicates a scale of organisation greater than that found in any
previous Neolithic society. It illustrates the key role that trade and
exchange were playing by 7500 BC in the gradual transition of farming
villages into the towns that precipitated the urban centres of the first
civilisation.

The Soviet Archaeological Expedition had been invited to undertake a
programme of survey and excavation by the Iraqi government and made a
remarkable contribution to our understanding of Mesopotamian
prehistory.⁹ Before it began in 1969, our knowledge was restricted to
the settlement of Jarmo in the Zagros foothills, dating to 8000 BC, and
the town of Hassuna on the Sinjar plain, which dated to 6000 BC.
Excavated in 1945 by the British archaeologist Seton Lloyd, Hassuna had
produced complex, multi-roomed buildings, sophisticated painted pottery
and a completely different scale of agriculture, craft activity and
trade to that of Jarmo.

The two settlements seemed worlds apart in their culture and economy.
Many archaeologists suspected that they were quite unrelated, the
Hassuna people having spread into the region from outside, with their
culture already formed. Kirkbride’s discovery and excavation of Umm
Dabaghiyah between 1970 and 1973 placed a settlement chronologically
between Jarmo and Hassuna, but it was one quite anomalous to both, with
its storeroom architecture and paintings of onager hunts.¹⁰ The Soviet
Expedition’s extensive programme of survey and excavation on the Sinjar
plain found further settlements, some contemporary with, some earlier
and some later than Umm Dabaghiyah. When their discoveries were combined
with the excavation of Qermez Dere by Trevor Watkins and of Nemrik by
Stefan Kozlowski in the late 1980s, a complete sequence of economic
development was established. The Hassuna towns had neither arrived on
the plain fully fledged, nor derived entirely from the Jarmo-like
villages of the Zagros foothills. They had developed from
hunter-gatherer and small farming villages on the Sinjar plain itself.¹¹

The Soviet Expedition had no difficulty finding sites to excavate –
indeed there was an abundance of mounds in northern Mesopotamia. These
had been known since Austen Henry Layard, the British diplomat and
archaeologist, had travelled through Mesopotamia in the 1840s and
brought its archaeology to public attention with his book Nineveh and
its Remains – strangely unmentioned in Victorian John Lubbock’s
Prehistoric Times of 1865. He described how he had spent one evening in
1843 on the edge of the Sinjar plain watching the approach of night and
counting ‘above one hundred mounds, throwing their dark and lengthening
shadows across the plain’.¹² Three years later he revised his estimate
to double that number. When the first systematic archaeological survey
of the Sinjar plain was undertaken almost a century later by Seton Lloyd
working for Liverpool University, the two hundred mounds were recognised
as ‘but a small part of a great number which are spread over this once
fertile plain’.¹³

One of the mounds excavated by the Soviet Expedition was fifty
kilometres north of Umm Dabaghiyah and rose no higher than 2.5 metres
above the surrounding plain. This was designated as Tell Sotto and
excavated by Nikolai Bader between 1971 and 1974. He found a succession
of single and multi-roomed houses showing the growth and then
abandonment of a farming village, one that never had more than three or
four houses at any one time.¹⁴ As a series of pits large enough to be
remnants of subterranean dwellings were found below the foundations of
later buildings, the original settlement at Tell Sotto may have been a
village much like that of Qermez Dere.

The houses of the first Sotto farmers were rectangular in shape; most
had a single room, but one at least had several accessed by a corridor.
While the walls of the Maghzaliyah buildings had been made from
amorphous lumps of clay, those of Sotto were of sun-dried bricks. Some
rooms had evidently been used for domestic tasks as they contained
grinding stones, hearths, animal bones, pottery, ovens and racks for
drying grain. In other rooms Bader found large pottery vessels, often
set into the floor and used for storing grain. Similar vessels were used
for another type of storage – that of deceased children whose tiny
bodies had been squeezed inside, leaving Bader to find their bones.

Although small in size, Sotto appears to have been a thriving settlement
to judge by the artefacts either made by its inhabitants or acquired by
exchange: stone bracelets, beads, polished axes and clay figurines. Many
of the dead were buried under floors and usually without any items in
their graves. One burial, however, had clearly belonged to an extremely
wealthy person; it contained a small clay basin with the remnants of a
meal, a necklace of exotic stone beads including those of marble and
lapis lazuli, and a small copper plate bent into a tube. The tube is one
of the first signs of copper work in the world, only matched by a small
awl from Maghzaliyah – both of these being a millennium older than the
copper beads at Mehrgarh.

While Sotto’s population never exceeded thirty or forty, the settlement
is likely to have grown rapidly and given rise to several of the new
villages that began to dot the Mesopotamian plain after 8000 BC.¹⁵ Some
of its inhabitants may have spent the winter season at Umm Dabaghiyah,
kept warm by the large fireplaces and ovens. Others may have left Sotto
to join a village that developed just two kilometres away and is known
to us today as Yarim Tepe.¹⁶ This continued to flourish long after the
abandonment of Sotto, with an immense elaboration of architecture and
pottery through twelve building levels. The result was a mound with 6
metres of archaeological deposits that was first described by Seton
Lloyd in the 1930s, and then excavated by Nikolai Yakovlevich Merpert
and Rauf Magomedovich Munchaev, two of Bader’s colleagues on the Soviet
Expedition.

Lubbock’s northward journey from Umm Dabaghiyah was no longer than 40
kilometres but it took almost a millennium to complete – a period in
which Maghzaliyah was completely abandoned and the population of Sotto
declined. During this short journey Lubbock could see the distant Sinjar
hills, furrowed with countless ravines, each marked by dark purple
shadows that melted into the evening haze.¹⁷ As he trekked north, arid
steppe was replaced by tender grass with scattered scarlet tulips – the
first of many spring flowers that would soon decorate the plain. Birds
frequently sprang from the grass and Lubbock found several clusters of
speckled eggs, laid simply upon the ground without any surrounding nest.
He collected some eggs to eat and sat to rest among the tulips,
remembering the other times he had sat among flowers on the steppe, once
close to Ohalo and once outside Abu Hureyra during his West Asian
travels.

Lubbock now sits somewhere quite different and feels disconsolate; he is
within a small yard amidst the maze of mud-brick walls and alleys that
constitutes Yarim Tepe. The date is 6400 BC, approximately halfway
through the town’s history, and although Lubbock only arrived a few days
ago, he is already keen to leave. The town is bustling with adults
attending to domestic chores; children run around in gangs, dogs
scavenge rubbish and stray goats wander aimlessly in and out of houses.
There are potters, stone craftsmen and weavers at work; right next to
Lubbock a resident of Yarim Tepe is arguing with an itinerant trader
about the relative worth of goats’ wool and obsidian blades.

The noise, the smoke and the all-pervasive stink of human waste makes
Lubbock wish to be elsewhere at this date in human history. He thinks of
Zhokhov in the Siberian Arctic where he could be surrounded by an
expanse of nature rather than the cultural claustrophobia of Yarim Tepe.
Who, he thinks, would be a town-dwelling farmer rather than a
hunter-gatherer? Having travelled through all but one of the world’s
continents he knows the answer: almost everyone in the prehistoric
world. And yet, he reflects, there is a certain ‘buzz’ about the town.
It is what some archaeologists describe as Mesopotamian civilisation in
the making.

As he walks around Yarim Tepe, the pottery vessels being made and used
are impressive. They come in a great variety of shapes and sizes – large
storage vessels, jars, bowls, plates, beakers and trays. Some have been
decorated by adding moulded figures or shapes, much as at Tell Sotto;
others are painted with simple geometric motifs, quite different to the
complex curved designs seen on the pots of Umm Dabaghiyah and Sotto. But
while the pottery is striking, it is the copper work that impresses him
most. Lubbock only sees a ring on someone’s finger and a copper pendant
dangling from a neck; he doesn’t discover whether ore was actually
smelted in the town or simply hammered into shape.

Yarim Tepe is easily more than twice the size of Sotto and is continuing
to expand. Fields of wheat and barley surround its buildings; large
flocks of sheep and goat are taken each day to graze on the nearby
hills. Such agricultural activity provides surpluses for trade and to
support the many craftsmen of the town. During his tour, Lubbock finds
that narrow trenches have been dug for the foundations of a new building
and lined with reed matting, followed by the partial construction of
mud-brick walls. He helps gather broken pottery vessels from around the
town and spreads their fragments between the newly built walls as a base
for the plaster floor.

Most of the buildings at Yarim Tepe are rectangular structures with
multiple rooms, sometimes grouped together to make distinct complexes
within the town. Some, however, are quite different. These are round and
a few metres across, with clay walls and domed roofs made from a lattice
of branches and thatch. Several are dotted throughout the town, either
within another building or in the corner of a yard. Lubbock learns the
function of at least one such structure when he sees it surrounded by
people eager for a view as the partly dismembered parts of a young
woman’s body are passed through an opening in its thatch and laid upon
the floor.¹⁸ Next came an assortment of objects which presumably the
woman had owned: a wicker basket, strings of beads, fine stone and
pottery vessels, bundles of flowers, the body of a baby goat. When
watching this, Lubbock recalls the man at Qermez Dere who had thrown a
similar collection of objects into a partly filled dwelling during its
destruction, and the man buried with goats at Mehrgarh. Once her body
parts and possessions are placed inside this tomb, the thatch is sealed
and she is left alone with her parents and grandparents, perhaps in wait
for her children. But to join their mother they will need to achieve
adulthood as only then will they be worthy of such dismemberment
themselves.

Merpert and Munchaev found the skeletons of young children tucked into
all sorts of places – beneath floors, between walls, in corners, nooks
and crannies of the houses. A few had been buried with pottery vessels
and animal horns, but most were seemingly left with little ceremony.
Adult skeletons were rarely excavated; those found came predominantly in
dismembered parts from inside the circular structures, or ‘tholoi’ as
the excavators described them. These were too few in number to represent
the whole adult population and so a cemetery outside the town appears
likely. Those who died as children qualified for neither the
(hypothetical) cemetery nor the tholoi and were kept eternally within
the home – or at least until archaeologists arrived and put them into
boxes and museums.

The type of architecture, economy, artefacts, and society of Yarim Tepe
– its culture – was the same as that found at Tell Hassuna when
excavated by Seton Lloyd in the 1940s.¹⁹ The Hassuna period,
approximately 6800–5600 BC, marks the turning point of Mesopotamian
prehistory. It leaves behind the world of hunter-gatherers and small
farming villages and looks forward to the expansion of towns and trade.

As from 6000 BC, settlements appear in central and southern Mesopotamia,
most likely created by people spreading from over-crowded northern towns
into a landscape sparsely populated by hunter-gatherers.²⁰ While similar
to those of Hassuna, the southern towns adopted their own pottery and
architectural styles and are referred to as Samarra communities. Some
are quite spectacular, such as Tell es-Sawwan – a cliff-top settlement
overlooking the River Tigris 110 kilometres north of modern-day
Baghdad.²¹

By 5000 BC substantial towns are found throughout the whole of the
Fertile Crescent, except in the extreme southwest where those of the
Jordan valley had long been abandoned. In the lands surrounding the
Tigris and Euphrates a new cultural unity had emerged, combining the
Hassuna and Samarra cultures. Known as the Halaf period, this lasts for
a whole millennium,²² supported by the same crops that had sustained
prehistoric farmers since the days of Jericho and Maghzaliyah: wheat and
barley, peas and lentils. But a key development had occurred: the use of
artificial irrigation. It had been this which enabled people to fully
exploit the rich alluvial plains of southern Mesopotamia.

Although sheep and goats were pre-eminent at Sawwan, cattle were
important, their significance reflected in cow figurines and pottery
painted with a bull’s-head motif. As the addition of rich milk fats to
human diets can increase the birth rate,²³ cattle herding may have been
a factor behind what appears to have been a population explosion. Many
new settlements were founded during the Halaf period, while existing
towns expanded, many reaching more than five times the size of Yarim
Tepe at its peak.

The Halaf towns shared a distinctive architecture and style of painted
pottery, some settlements supplying surrounding areas with their wares.
Painted female clay figurines, stone pendants and stamp seals were also
shared. The latter, often pierced and with linear designs, were used to
secure baskets and pots, suggesting the movement and storage of valuable
items. Both these and more mundane materials such as foodstuffs,
pottery, and stone were extensively traded between the towns – trade was
the root of prosperity, technological innovation and cultural unity.

The Halaf culture marks the end of Mesopotamian prehistory. During the
Uruk period that followed, the first traces of writing are found. Within
another thousand years the cities of the Mesopotamian civilisation begin
to appear. But both these and the Halaf towns themselves will remain
unseen by Lubbock – his time in Mesopotamia comes to an end at Yarim
Tepe in 6400 BC.²⁴

While sitting amidst the hubbub of that town, John Lubbock ponders where
else he has been at this date in human history: not only at Zhokhov but
also in the midden at Natsushima, the cemetery of Oleneostrovksi
Mogilnik, the village of Koster, and within the mangrove swamps of
Arnhem Land. He now recalls his astonishing journey through southern
Asia – from Muchchatla Chintamanu Gavi at the LCM to Jeitun at 6000 BC,
before travelling through Mesopotamian prehistory. That had been one of
continual physical descent. It began in the highlands at 11,000 BC with
the hunter-gatherers of Zawi Chemi Shanidar and continued in rolling
foothills with visits to the sedentary villages of Qermez Dere and
Nemrik; from these he had descended further into the lowlands to visit
the small farming settlement of Maghzaliyah and the specialised hunting
site of Umm Dabaghiyah which supplied the new towns with meat. Finally
he came to Yarim Tepe with its craft specialists and constant stream of
visiting tradesmen. No more than five thousand years have passed between
the people who hunted gazelle and collected acorns in the Zagros
foothills, and those around him now with their multi-roomed houses and
tholos tombs, their pottery and metalwork, fields of wheat and flocks of
sheep.

Lubbock wonders why Mesopotamia has been the scene for such rapid
economic growth and cultural change. Climatic and environmental factors
are evidently key – the presence of wild cereals, goats and sheep, a
relatively mild Younger Dryas (if one at all), global warming at 9600
BC, fertile alluvial soils around the Euphrates and Tigris. And yet
these factors only became significant in the ‘rise of civilisation’ due
to the particular actions and choices made by people as they went about
their daily lives. The inhabitants of Zawi Chemi Shanidar, Qermez Dere
and Nemrik had been just as responsible for laying its foundations, as
had those who lived at Maghzaliyah, Tell Sotto and Yarim Tepe. And none
of these people had any foreknowledge of what was to come.

History, Lubbock thinks, is an extraordinary tangle of causes and
consequences, of human ingenuity and complete accident, of environmental
change and human response.²⁵ Understanding requires the knowledge of
both local events and of the wider world in which these events occur.
Nobody at 9600 BC could have known where history was heading as the
final spurt of global warming arrived and the Neolithic world began.

