THE AMERICAS

[images]

23 Searching for the First Americans

The discovery of ice-age settlement, AD 1927–1994

The men observed by John Lubbock stand pensively above the bison bones.
They walk around the trench, bend and scrape away a little soil,
exchange a few words, nod and smile knowingly at each other. Some are in
blue denim overalls, others in white shirts and black bow-ties. Their
eyes keep returning to the centrepiece: a spear point made of stone,
sitting firmly between two ribs. One man appears to have made up his
mind; he strides confidently across to another, shakes him by the hand
and slaps him on the back. A third man draws deeply upon his pipe and
strokes his chin; he too will soon be convinced, as the case has
undoubtedly been proven. Forty years of ardent debate has been resolved:
people were in the Americas before the ice age had reached its close.

John Lubbock is at Folsom, New Mexico, on 30 September 1927. The mood of
the archaeologists seems to reflect the mood of the country at large –
the nation has been celebrating Charles Lindbergh’s solo flight to Paris
and is in the midst of an economic boom. Yet thoughts of aeroplanes and
automobiles are far from Lubbock’s mind as he too wanders around the
trenches. They adjoin a small creek that flows from Johnson Mesa – the
rocky tableland that crowns the landscape a kilometre to the west.

Jesse Figgins, director of the Denver Museum,¹ is the man receiving the
praise. He is mightily relieved, and remains rather shell-shocked at the
dramatic change in his fortune. Just one year ago he had no more than
his local museum in mind when he began to collect ice-age bison bones
for a new display. Now he has rewritten American history.

The bison bones at Folsom were originally exposed by torrential rains in
1908 within the ancient sediments of the now seemingly inappropriately
named Wild Horse Valley. Soon after beginning work, Figgins found two
spear points. He was immediately aware of their potential importance and
took them to Aleš Hrdlička, senior anthropologist at the Smithsonian
Institution in Washington. Hrdlička was a Czech-born immigrant, as
fearsome in reputation as in appearance, with swept-back hair, furrowed
brow, bushy black eyebrows and stiff white collar. He gave Figgins
crucial advice: if more spear points were found, they were to be left in
situ, exactly where they lay. Figgins was then to notify academic
institutions by telegram so that they could send representatives to
inspect the finds.

So on this late summer day in 1927 a party of academics have gathered at
Folsom – with Lubbock as a privileged onlooker. It includes the
pipe-smoking A. V. Kidder, one of the most respected archaeologists of
his time, Frank Roberts, a graduate student with a distinguished future,
and Barnum Brown, a palaeontologist from the American Natural History
Museum. Lubbock watches as Brown clutches a stone point to his starched
white shirt and declares that ‘the answer to the antiquity of man in the
New World is in my hand’.²

Barnum Brown was wrong; but his rashness can be forgiven. That sentiment
has most likely been felt, if not expressed, by a great many American
archaeologists during the last 150 years. Although the Folsom
discoveries proved that people were in the Americas before the end of
the ice age, the date of their arrival remains unknown – 12,000, 20,000,
30,000, 50,000 BC, or even earlier? Nobody can yet provide a definitive
account of how and when the first people arrived in the Americas. I have
little doubt, however, that this occurred after the great freeze of
20,000 BC; it was one of the key consequences of global warming for
human history.

In place of that definitive account, John Lubbock must visit some of the
most intriguing archaeological sites of the ice-age world, from northern
Alaska to southern Chile. As he travels between these sites there is a
remarkable story to tell, that of the history of prehistory in the
Americas – the passions, ingenuity, hard work and sometimes sheer luck
of those attempting to establish exactly when the first Stone Age
footsteps were made on the last of the habitable continents to be
colonised. Robson Bonnichsen, Director of the Centre for the Study of
the First Americans, Oregon, described those footsteps as ‘the ultimate
pioneering event … a brave new people in a brave new world’.³ From empty
continent to global superpower – the ultimate American Dream.

David Meltzer of Southern Methodist University, Texas, one of the
foremost scholars of American prehistory and a historian of
archaeological thought, has shown that debates about the First Americans
go back to the very beginning of modern America itself. The first
contact between European explorers and the Native Americans took place
at the end of the fifteenth century. The new arrivals asked the obvious
questions: Who were these indigenous people? Where had they come from?

The stock answer for more than three hundred years was that they were
one of the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel. In 1590 Fray Joseph de Acosta
speculated that this wandering tribe had made an overland migration and
arrived in the north of the continent, at a meeting-place between the
Old and New Worlds. Meltzer has meticulously documented how such
speculations developed up until the discoveries at Folsom.⁴ Some of the
nineteenth-century scholars – such as Charles Abbott, a physician and
keen amateur archaeologist from Trenton, New Jersey – had been adamant
that a Stone Age race of people using primitive tools had once inhabited
the Americas. Others were ardently against such views, notably William
Henry Holmes of the Bureau of American Ethnology. He was a member of the
archaeological establishment and was partly motivated by the audacity of
an amateur like Abbott making claims about the human past.

One spur to this debate was the demonstration of human antiquity in
Europe, through the discovery of human artefacts in association with the
bones of extinct animals. Prehistoric Times had explained the
significance of such finds, establishing that people had lived in Europe
during the ice age – even though nobody knew quite how long ago that had
been. Victorian John Lubbock had also devoted a chapter to ‘North
American Archaeology’, being keenly interested in the age of its
monuments, burials and artefacts.⁵ He was sceptical of two claims for
the association of human artefacts with extinct animals in North
America, concluding that there was no need to believe that people had
been in that continent for more than three thousand years. But he was
careful not to reject the possibility of more ancient settlement; he
simply noted that the required evidence did not currently exist.

The measured tone of Prehistoric Times was typical of an English
gentleman writing at a distance – Victorian John Lubbock never crossed
the Atlantic. Those Americans at the forefront of the debate, such as
Abbott and Holmes, used somewhat harsher language and held dogmatic
views. This led David Meltzer to name the few decades before the Folsom
discovery as the ‘Great Palaeolithic War’ – the level of acrimony,
accusations of incompetence, and plain insults between the protagonists,
makes our current debates about human origins seem the most genial of
affairs.

It is not surprising, therefore, that Jesse Figgins felt anxious when
several of those protagonists gathered to inspect his excavations on 30
September 1927. His discovery of spear points amid bison bones was quite
unexpected, even by those who were ardent supporters of ice-age
Americans. They had been anticipating the discovery of crude chopping
tools and human remains with ‘primitive’ features, similar to those
possessed by the Neanderthals of Europe. But the skilfully-made stone
spearheads found at the Folsom site bore witness to sophisticated
hunting.

The spear points were about 6 centimetres long, made by flaking from
both faces (a technique known as bifacial working), and had a long
groove – a flute – reaching from the base almost to the tip. They became
known as Folsom points and the term Palaeo-indian was introduced. Today
we know that Folsom points had been made and used between 11,000 and
9000 BC.⁶ Within a decade of the Folsom excavation many similar sites
were discovered. Now that people knew what to look for, they only needed
to explore old river channels and lake sediments for the bones of
extinct animals and then search among them for human artefacts.

In 1933 a site was found close to Dent in Colorado.⁷ Mammoths rather
than bison had been the prey, and the spear points were larger than
those at Folsom. The points soon came to characterise a new culture:
‘Clovis’. This name came from a small town in New Mexico near the site
of Blackwater Draw where further points and mammoth remains were also
found during the 1930s.⁸ The Clovis points were larger, had a flute that
reached only to the middle of the point and bases ground by a coarse
stone to facilitate hafting. The association with mammoths – believed to
have gone extinct before the bison from Folsom – suggested that they
predated any previous discovery. The excavations at Blackwater Draw
confirmed this by providing deposits in which Folsom points and bison
bones lay directly above those containing Clovis points and mammoth
bones.⁹

During the 1950s several Clovis sites were excavated in the San Pedro
river valley of southern Arizona. In 1953 no fewer than eight Clovis
points were found intermingled with the near-complete skeleton of a
single mammoth at Naco.¹⁰ There were no other archaeological remains and
this was soon christened as ‘the one that got away’ – a mammoth that had
been attacked, wounded but then escaped to die unrecovered. Two years
later, twelve spear points were found with the remains of eight mammoths
at Lehner Ranch, just a few kilometres from Naco.¹¹

By the 1970s, numerous radiocarbon dates for Clovis sites were
available, indicating that none were older than 11,500 BC.¹² With no
traces of any earlier settlement, the Clovis culture appeared to be that
of the first Americans. They were the pioneers who originated in
Northeast Asia and made that heroic journey first proposed by Fray
Joseph de Acosta: across the now flooded land mass of Beringia, that
which had joined Siberia and Alaska when the sea level had reached its
ice-age low, and then southwards as soon as the ice sheets covering the
whole of Canada had begun to melt. There had been two of these: the
Laurentide to the east and the Cordilleran to the west. When they began
to melt, an ‘ice-free corridor’ was created between them, through which
the Clovis hunters had supposedly passed into the landscapes of North
America.

The discovery of sites such as Naco and Lehner Ranch soon led the Clovis
people to be characterised as much more than mere pioneers. They had
evidently tackled mammoths with no more than stone-tipped spears, and
were believed by many to have pushed them into extinction – an idea that
became known as the ‘overkill hypothesis’. The most ardent supporter of
both ‘Clovis First’ and ‘overkill’ was – and still is – Paul Martin of
Arizona State University. He argues that Clovis hunters arrived at the
southern end of the ice-free corridor by 11,500 BC. From there they
spread through the woodlands, across the plains and into the forests of
both North and South America within a few hundred years, pushing not
just mammoths but many other types of giant animal species into
extinction.¹³

It is easy to make the postmodernist claim that Paul Martin was simply
writing the ideal of the American hero into the Clovis past, but this
would be quite unfair. In the 1970s, the ‘Clovis First’ scenario was the
most reasonable interpretation of the existing evidence. It had,
however, already been challenged by archaeologists claiming to have
discovered pre-Clovis sites on the American continent. Louis Leakey, the
revered scholar of human origins in Africa, claimed to have discovered
‘primitive’ human artefacts at Calico Hills in the Californian Mojave
Desert. He was wrong – they were nothing but broken river cobbles.¹⁴ But
by the late 1970s far more substantial claims for pre-Clovis settlement
had arisen.

It is AD 1978 and John Lubbock finds himself in the Yukon valley, just
inside the Arctic Circle. His destination is the far northwest, the land
which had remained free of ice throughout the LGM, that of eastern
Beringia which today we call Alaska. If people were hunting mammoths at
Lehner Ranch in southern Arizona at 11,500 BC, then surely this must be
where their ancestors will be found – those who first crossed the now
flooded land bridge from Asia.

It is midsummer, the sky remaining light throughout day and night. The
high peaks of the Brooks range to the north, the Alaska range to the
south and the MacKenzies to the east, protect this landscape, providing
it with a modicum of summer warmth. Alaska is vast – almost five times
the area of the British Isles but with a population less than one
twentieth of London’s.

Lubbock has travelled between rolling hills and low mountains, through
river basins and endless miles of cottongrass scrub. He has seen many
flocks of geese overhead, wolf and bear. But the only creatures on his
mind are the demonic mosquitoes and horseflies. These must be tolerated
so that he can visit Bluefish Caves in the northwest of the Yukon where,
in this year of 1978, another claim to have broken the Clovis Barrier is
about to be made.¹⁵

Lubbock finds the caves after travelling along the Bluefish River to a
point about 50 kilometres southwest of Old Crow village. The sides of
the spruce-clad valley slope up towards a jagged limestone ridge. He
scrambles between the trees and finds the excavation under way. There
are two small caves in the base of the crags; the mouth of one is
surrounded by buckets, spades and trowels.

This is the work of Jacques Cinq-Mars and his associates of the
Archaeological Survey of Canada. Cinq-Mars had first seen the caves when
making a helicopter reconnaissance of the Bluefish River in 1975. Today
he is digging in one of the caves, thickly clothed as a joint protection
against the cold wind and mosquito plague. Outside, there is a growing
pile of excavated sediment consisting of loess – wind-blown silt – and
rocks that had once collapsed from the roof of the little cave.

Tables, chairs, boxes, sieves, notebooks and the other paraphernalia of
excavation are set out in the shelter of the trees. Someone sits and
writes labels for large excavated bones, the codes carefully copied into
notebooks. The bones are secured inside crates in preparation for the
long journey to the laboratory. There are several boxes of heavily
fragmented bone, labelled to indicate the layer and area of the cave in
which they were found. The bones come from an immense variety of
animals: mammoth, bison, horse, sheep, caribou, bear and cougar,
together with many small animals, birds and fish. Several specimens are
covered in tooth- and gnaw-marks – the debris left by wolves and bears
that had used the cave for shelter during ice-age times.

There are also stone artefacts, small flakes and the remnants of the
nodules from which they had been detached. Similar types of tools have
already been found elsewhere in Alaska and designated as the Denali
culture, shown to be no older than 11,000 BC.

A third type of find is being inspected, sorted and labelled: animal
bones which are believed by Cinq-Mars to have been shaved and whittled
by human hands. When radiocarbon dates are acquired, these ‘worked
bones’ – found immediately next to the stone tools – will be dated to
earlier than 20,000 BC.

At the time of Lubbock’s visit, these dates are unknown to Cinq-Mars.
But he works with the conviction that his discoveries reveal a
pre-Clovis settlement in the Americas. Lubbock squeezes inside the cave
and experiences the cramped, dark and stuffy working conditions. Rather
than being horizontal and neatly stacked, the layers of sediment dip and
rise, start and stop in an erratic fashion – almost impossible to
decipher. His thoughts are with the wolves that have made their dens
within the cave and disturbed the layers, and with the rodents who
burrowed through the soft sediments. Tiny stone flakes could easily have
moved with them and mingled with bones brought by wolves to the cave
several thousands of years before people had come to chip at their
nodules of stone.

Ever since the ‘worked bones’ were found, archaeologists have debated
whether the smooth edges were really made by human hands. They might
have arisen from constant licking by animals close to starvation, or
even by wind or by water before the bone had been scavenged from a
rotting carcass and brought in desperation to the cave. If so, the
scavenger could have been either man, woman or beast. Almost thirty
years after conducting his excavations, Cinq-Mars remains convinced that
the smooth-edged bones are true human artefacts and demonstrate that
people were present in Alaska before the LGM. I have not seen the bones,
but from their descriptions I remain a sceptic – nature seems the most
likely workman.

Bluefish Caves is the only site in the whole of Alaska which can make
any claim to pre-11,500 BC settlement, and this is sufficiently weak to
allow confident dismissal. If such sites are absent in Alaska – or
eastern Beringia as we should call it – the likelihood that they exist
further south seems limited. Their absence in Alaska cannot be explained
by a lack of fieldwork, as might have been expected in such a
challenging landscape. Intensive archaeological survey has found more
than twenty sites – past camping places – of ice-age date. Several of
these are deeply buried in loess with undisturbed scatters of artefacts,
fireplaces and butchered animal bones. But not one of these dates to
earlier than 11,500 BC.¹⁶

In fact, the situation for the pre-Clovis advocates is far worse than
the absence of evidence from Alaska; there are no known sites in the
whole of Siberia – which formed the western portion of Beringia – with
an age greater than 15,000 BC. Hunter-gatherer communities were
certainly established in Siberia by this date, and it is reasonable to
imagine that they eventually spread into Alaska across what to them was
a quite invisible and unknown inter-continental barrier. People arriving
at that date, however, could not have travelled southwards owing to the
massive ice sheets that isolated Alaska from the rich tundra and thick
woodlands of North America. The ice-free corridor is unlikely to have
been passable until 12,700 BC; if a gap between the ice sheets had
existed prior to this, it would have been too inhospitable for travel,
lacking in any resources for firewood and food.¹⁷

But if that is the case, how can there be stone artefacts dated to
16,000 BC at Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania? This is the next
contentious site we must consider, one that lay to the south of the
Laurentide ice sheet.

In 1973 James Adovasio, from the University of Pittsburgh in
Pennsylvania, began excavating a small cave in Cross Creek Valley, a
tributary of the Ohio River.¹⁸ Adovasio was to spend the next thirty
years studying and debating the significance of Meadowcroft Rockshelter,
for the peopling of the Americas – and he is still going strong. His
excavations exposed 5 metres of neatly layered sediments from which many
radiocarbon dates were acquired. The lowermost layers date to around
30,000 BC and lack any sign of a human presence. Above these is a layer
dating to about 21,000 BC, within which a knot of plaited fibres,
possibly a fragment of a basket, was found. The next layers have been
dated to 16,000 BC and contained what are unquestionably stone tools
made by human hands.

Many animal and bird bones were found in the cave; some would have been
from roosting owls, denning carnivores and burrowing rodents; others are
undoubtedly the remnants of human prey. At face value, Meadowcroft seems
to demonstrate human settlement in the Americas by 16,000 BC – at least
5000 years before the date of the first Clovis points. But before we can
relinquish the ‘Clovis First’ theory, a couple of problems must be
resolved.

The geology around Meadowcroft is riddled with coal deposits. If coal
dust had blown into the cave or seeped into the sediments through
groundwater, then the charcoal samples used for dating may have become
contaminated. They could easily appear to be several thousands of years
older than is really the case. Adovasio rejects such claims by
explaining that none of the carbon-rich deposits in the vicinity are
water soluble, and that the amount of contamination required to alter a
date of, say, 10,000 BC to 16,000 BC would be so great that no dating
laboratory could possibly make such an error.

The animal bones also raise a question. At 16,000 BC the cave would have
been no more than 80 kilometres from the edge of the Laurentide ice
sheet, and hence, one assumes, surrounded by barren tundra. But the
Meadowcroft animal bones are from deer, chipmunk and squirrel; the type
of animals that live in thickly wooded landscapes. If the radiocarbon
dates are correct, shouldn’t these come from animals such as mammoth,
arctic hare and lemming?

Adovasio accepts that the bones supposedly dating from 16,000 BC come
from woodland-living animals, and that oak, hickory and walnut had grown
around the cave when it was first occupied. But this, he argues, was
because of its particularly sheltered location – Cross Creek Valley
today has up to fifty more frost-free days a year than the surrounding
area. So even at the height of the ice age, trees and woodland animals
could have survived in the vicinity of the shelter, providing
hunting-and-gathering opportunities for the First Americans.

By 1993 Adovasio was able to declare that Meadowcroft had become ‘the
most intensively studied, most extensively written about, and most
thoroughly dated of all the putative pre-Clovis sites known in the
Americas’.¹⁹ Testing and re-testing of his charcoal samples, and
microscopic study of the sediments, has produced no traces of
contamination of the charcoal samples from the earliest levels.²⁰

But serious doubts remain. If people were at Meadowcroft at 16,000 BC,
how did they get there?

An answer to this question had in fact been proposed in the 1970s by
Knut Fladmark: the First Americans, coming from Siberia, had bypassed
the North American ice sheets by travelling around the coast.²¹ This
idea has become popular with two archaeologists from the University of
Alberta, Ruth Gruhn and Alan Bryan. Rather than arriving via the
ice-free corridor, they claim that the First Americans had simply walked
or sailed around the west coast, or even crossed the Bering Sea in boats
from Kamchatka to California.²² Consequently, the key sites indicating
how people reached Meadowcroft at 16,000 BC have been submerged by the
rise of sea level as the ice age came to its end.

As the extent of glaciation is likely to have made any coastal or sea
routes impossible between 30,000 and 16,000 years ago, Bryan and Gruhn
argue that colonisation most likely happened around 50,000 years ago. To
support their claim, they point to the greater diversity of Native
American languages found on the northwest coast than elsewhere, which
they believe reflects the longevity of human settlement in this region.
When one of the first classifications of American languages was made in
1891, no less than twenty-two of the identified fifty-eight language
families were found in California.²³

But if the First Americans had arrived by a coastal route 50,000 years
ago, and even if their early coastal settlements have been flooded by
rising sea level, why is the earliest sign of their presence at a mere
16,000 BC at Meadowcroft Rockshelter? Could the First Americans have
spent more than 30,000 years without travelling inland from the coast?
Even to Bryan and Gruhn this seems unlikely. Hence they have a second
argument for the absence – or, if one is a Meadowcroft fan, the extreme
rarity – of pre-Clovis sites: the First Americans were living in small,
highly mobile groups, scattered across the continent at low densities.
The archaeological sites they left were highly ephemeral – so Bryan and
Gruhn claim – and even if such sites did survive the rigours of time,
the chance of their discovery and accurate dating is minimal. The sudden
appearance of archaeological sites across the continent at around 11,500
BC reflects, according to Bryan and Gruhn, the passing of a
population-level threshold after which a sufficient number of
sufficiently large settlements were created to have left a recognisable
archaeological record.²⁴

Such arguments can appear compelling. But without further early
settlements to support the claims from Meadowcroft, and ideally to
extend the time of the First Americans to before 20,000 BC, they are not
persuasive. And yet, just as Adovasio was completing his major work at
Meadowcroft, a new claim was made for precisely that – a site that dated
the First Americans to at least 40,000 years ago. This site is called
Pedra Furada and is found further from the northern ice sheets not only
than Meadowcroft but also the Clovis sites of southern Arizona.

It is 1984 and John Lubbock has travelled to a remote region of
northeast Brazil, the state of Piauí with its distinctive caatinga – dry
and thorny – woodland and sandstone cliffs. These have many small caves
with wall-paintings of the local animals: deer, armadillos and
capybaras. Some paintings are hunting scenes with little stick figures;
others depict sex and violence. Lubbock finds it a deeply unpleasant
land – poverty ridden, dry, hot, and brimming with biting insects and
creeping dangers.

The archaeologist that Lubbock is about to visit is Niède Guidon of the
École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales in Paris. She has worked in
northeast Brazil for more than twenty years, principally making a survey
of the rock shelters and documenting the art. In a bid to find out when
the paintings were made, she began excavating in one of the largest and
most brilliantly decorated sites, that known as Pedra Furada.²⁵ That was
in 1978 and now, six years later, her excavations have reached quite
momentous proportions. And, as Guidon claims to have evidence that
people lived at Pedra Furada more that 40,000 years ago, her interest
has shifted from the paintings – which date to around 10,000 BC – to
human antiquity.

Lubbock first sees the site from a distance, or rather he sees the
sandstone cliff rising above the thorn trees and cacti scrubland. When
he arrives, the rockshelter is of a daunting size; he leans back and
feels dizzy below the massive towering, tilted wall of stone, rising
more than 100 metres to the escarpment above. This shelters an area
about 70 metres wide and 18 metres deep, within which the archaeologists
are working. There is Guidon herself – a tough lady who survived an
attack of two hundred stings by Brazil’s infamously aggressive ‘killer
bees’ – inspecting a drawing of the site; she is as energetic and as
committed to the excavations as on the day when she first arrived.²⁶

Her work has evidently been on a scale to match the shelter itself; more
than 5 metres of deposits have been removed from the shelter floor, much
of which has been dumped within the trees beyond the excavation. Columns
of the floor deposits, bulwarked by cobble walls, have been left as a
reference both for the archaeologists themselves and for any visitors
wishing to inspect the site. Drawings and photographs are being made to
ensure that there is an accurate record of the sequence of layers from
which the artefacts have come.

Lubbock has a splendid view of their work from a catwalk positioned just
above the original height of the floor level and adjacent to the rock
face with its many red-and-white paintings. Massive boulders that had
once collapsed from the overhang mark the extent of the sheltered area.
At both sides there are heaps of pebbles and small boulders that have
evidently eroded from the top of the cliff. Stains on the walls show
that water has flowed from above; at times this must have been
persistent as there are plunge pools scoured out of the bedrock below.

Although a claim for 40,000-year-old settlement had been made by the
early 1990s, detailed reports on the site specifying exactly where the
stone artefacts had been found, their relationship to the dated pieces
of charcoal, and drawings of supposed fireplaces, had not appeared.
Aware of her critics, Guidon invited them to visit the site and inspect
the artefacts themselves. Unlike the visit made by distinguished
academics to Folsom in 1927, the excavations at Pedra Furada had already
been completed by the time three acknowledged experts – David Meltzer,
James Adovasio and Tom Dillehay – arrived in December 1993. And Lubbock
missed their visit – he departed from Pedra Furada in 1985, heading to
Dillehay’s own purported pre-Clovis settlement of Monte Verde in
southern Chile.

Had Lubbock remained, he would have watched Meltzer, Adovasio and
Dillehay make close inspections of the columns, examine the thick layers
of charcoal and frown when they found the columns packed full of
naturally broken cobbles rather than true artefacts; he would have seen
them collect discarded stones from the dirt heaps among the trees and
look even more concerned when they found that these were little
different to those claimed by Guidon as stone artefacts. Lubbock would
also have seen them inspect the water stains on the cave walls,
wondering how flowing water might have influenced the layout of rocks
and distribution of artefacts within the shelter.

Meltzer and his colleagues came to Pedra Furada with open minds, and
left unconvinced. They thought that the stone artefacts could easily be
quartzite cobbles that had become broken by the forces of nature rather
than the hammer-stones of the First Americans.²⁷ Meltzer found the
source of the cobbles at the top of the cliff, 100 metres above the
cave; from here, they had clearly been falling over the edge, to smash
on the ground below.

The three archaeologists could find no evidence for contamination of the
charcoal samples, as might be the case at Meadowcroft. They readily
accepted that many pieces of charcoal really were more than 40,000 years
old, but did that charcoal have anything to do with human activity? Arid
scrubland, which has surrounded Pedra Furada for at least 50,000 years,
is susceptible to natural forest fires created by lightning. If such
fires had broken out close to the cave, the resulting wood charcoal
could easily have been blown or washed into the sediments. Indeed, the
thick and diffuse layers of charcoal in the cave looked to Meltzer quite
unlike the thin, concentrated lenses of charcoal seen in authenticated
fireplaces at other sites, and indeed at Pedra Furada itself from 10,000
years ago.²⁸

In their 1994 report, David Meltzer and his colleagues concluded that
they were ‘sceptical of the claims for a Pleistocene human presence at
Pedra Furada’.²⁹ That was a measured and generous conclusion, offered
with many constructive suggestions to Guidon and her team as to how she
could support her assertions – such as by demonstrating how artefacts
can be distinguished from naturally broken cobbles. Unfortunately Guidon
reacted aggressively to the report, claiming that their ‘commentaries
are worthless’ being based on ‘partial and incorrect knowledge’.³⁰
Having written about the ‘Great Palaeolithic War’ of the nineteenth
century, David Meltzer had become a rather unwilling protagonist in its
modern counterpart.

24 American Past in the Present

Dental, linguistic, genetic and skeletal evidence for the peopling of the Americas

While Lubbock is travelling to Monte Verde in southern Chile we must
trace other developments in the search for the First Americans. At the
end of the 1970s a fundamental shift began in the study of the American
past: no longer was it possible to rely on archaeological evidence
alone. Linguists and geneticists who were studying living Native
Americans also became prehistorians and started asking when the First
Americans arrived, and where they came from. And so too did dentists.

The notion of a ‘dental prehistory’ may sound bizarre but its study is
very informative. People’s teeth vary in shape and size; incisors come
with a particular set of ridges and grooves; the number of roots to each
molar can vary, as do the number of cusps. These traits are heavily
determined by our genes and evolve very slowly – so two people with
similar dental patterns are likely to be closely related.

Christy G. Turner II, an anthropologist from Arizona State University,
became a dental prehistorian more than twenty years ago by collecting
information about the teeth of Native Americans, and comparing them to
the teeth of people throughout the Old World.¹ By 1994 he had measured
more than 15,000 sets of teeth. On each set he measured twenty-nine
different features such as the length of roots and the shape of crowns.
Most of the teeth had belonged to Native Americans prior to European
contact and had come from prehistoric burials. That was important, as
any new genes arriving into the American gene pool from interbreeding
with Europeans, or at a later date with Africans, might have influenced
the dental patterns he studied.

The question Turner asked was simple: in which part of the Old World do
we find people with dental patterns most similar to those of Native
Americans? Although he relied on complex statistical methods, the answer
itself was straightforward: northern Asia, and more particularly north
China, Mongolia and eastern Siberia. These people share such a
distinctive dental pattern with Native Americans that Turner called them
all ‘sinodonts’, contrasting them with people from elsewhere in Asia,
Africa and Europe, all of whom he named ‘sundadonts’. As such, he was
confident that northern Asia was the original homeland of Native
Americans.

Differences were also present within the dentistry of the North American
sinodonts themselves. Turner identified three distinct groups which, he
suggested, related to three different migration events, beginning around
12,000 BC – an idea that really took root when evidence was added from
Native American languages.

For more than two hundred years linguists have been trying to
reconstruct the history of contacts between human communities and their
patterns of migration. They look to the similarities and differences
between languages, seeking to group these together into families and
then to trace patterns of descent – in much the same way as biologists
seek to classify animal species into families and search for
evolutionary relationships. Such work should ideally be combined with
archaeological study – as we saw Colin Renfrew attempting to do by
relating the spread of the Indo-European languages to that of Neolithic
farmers across Europe.

The potential for a linguistic prehistory of the New World is
considerable, owing to its great number of languages. More than a
thousand have been recorded since the time of European contact and six
hundred of these are still spoken today. Attempts to classify them into
families and to trace their origins began more than three hundred years
ago. In 1794 Thomas Jefferson wrote: ‘I endeavour to collect all the
vocabularies I can, of American Indians, as those of Asia, persuaded,
that if they ever had a common parentage, it will appear in their
languages.’²

Since the 1960s, these attempts have revolved around arguments put
forward by the Stanford University linguist Joseph Greenberg. In the
late 1950s Greenberg was shifting his attention away from the
classification of African languages, on which he had built his
reputation, to those of the Native Americans. By the mid-1980s he had
concluded that these could be grouped into three families: Eskimo-Aleut,
consisting of ten languages and restricted to the Arctic region of North
America; Na-Dene, with thirty-eight languages found principally in the
far northwest of America, including Native American groups such as the
Tlingit and the Haida; and, controversially, Amerind which included all
the remaining languages of North, Central and South America.³

Greenberg reached this classification by searching for similarities in
the sounds and meanings of the basic vocabularies of each language he
studied, such as in the words which name parts of the body. He argued
that each of the language families derived from a separate migration of
peoples into the Americas. The first was of a people who spoke
‘proto-Amerind’ – the suffix ‘proto-’ being the conventional way to
refer to a language that no longer exists but which was the source from
which existing languages have diverged. Greenberg claimed that this
first migration event occurred at around 11,500 BC and is represented
archaeologically by the Clovis culture. The origins of the people
remained unclear; proto-Amerind was said to have similarities with
languages found very widely dispersed across Europe and Asia (referred
to by linguists as the ‘Eurasiatic complex’) and hence arose in a time
before existing language families had become established.

The next arrival, occurring at about 10,000 BC, was of a people speaking
proto-Na-Dene and represented archaeologically by new types of stone
tools, referred to by archaeologists as the Denali culture: that which
Cinq-Mars excavated at Bluefish Caves in 1978. Greenberg believed that
its source had been in Indo-China. Then, about five hundred years later,
the final migration happened. These people spoke proto-Eskimo-Aleut, and
were believed to have originated in northern Asia.

The idea of this three-event colonisation was published in the late
1980s. It was greeted with acclaim by some academics and despair by
others. The most significant article was in the journal Current
Anthropology in 1986,⁴ in which Greenberg collaborated with Turner and a
colleague of his, Stephen Zegura, who had been studying patterns in the
distribution of specific genes within Native Americans.

Greenberg and his collaborators made a powerful argument. They proposed
that those Native Americans within each language family also shared
specific patterns in their genes and dental anatomy. In other words,
three independent lines of evidence converged to substantiate the claim
for three discrete migrations to the Americas, with the first relating
to the appearance of the Clovis culture. Finding such a convergence of
evidence from diverse sources is the aspiration of all those wanting to
establish the truth about American colonisation. But many thought that
it was just too good to be true.

Ives Goddard of the Smithsonian Institution and Lyle Campbell of
Louisiana University are two vehement critics.⁵ They argue that the
supposed anatomical-genetic-linguistic correlations do not exist – a
close inspection of the data shows a mismatch in distributions, a fact
which is actually acknowledged by Greenberg and his collaborators.⁶

The two critics were principally concerned, however, with a far more
fundamental problem: Greenberg’s classification of Native American
languages was simply wrong. The methods employed did little more than
make superficial comparisons of similar words and pieces of grammar; no
attention had been paid to the study of whole languages, and how
languages change over time – a field of study known as historical
linguistics. Languages spread, change and become extinct quite
independently of genes or the shape of teeth; it is nonsense to search
for correlations between these without taking into account the vast
amount of intermarriage, slavery, internal migrations and warfare that
is known to have occurred during Native American history, let alone
prior to European contact.

Writing in 1994, Goddard and Campbell were unaware of any individual
specialist working on Native American historical linguistics who thought
that the Amerind family had any validity. Its incoherence was neatly
demonstrated when they showed that by following Greenberg’s methods,
Finnish had to be included as a member. All Greenberg had done, in their
opinion, was to collate linguistic coincidences and then misinterpret
these as prehistoric derivations.

This dispute is not the only one within the linguistic study of Native
American origins. In 1990 Johanna Nichols, a linguist from the
University of California at Berkeley, claimed that the large number of
languages in the New World – the ‘linguistic fact’ as she called it –
makes it ‘absolutely unambiguous’ that the New World has been inhabited
for tens of millennia, at least since 35,000 years ago – a date that
would have made Niède Guidon, who was digging at Pedra Furada in 1990,
very happy indeed.⁷

Nichols assumed that the number of languages within any region gradually
increases through time at a fairly constant rate. She favoured the term
‘stock’ to refer to the original language from which a number of
existing language families arose. In Eurasia, for instance,
Indo-European is the stock from which language families such as
Germanic, Celtic and Balto-Slavic arose. These could then function as
stocks for new language families. Stocks, she claimed, give rise to an
average of 1.6 daughter stocks/families every 5–8,000 years. Nichols
argued that the 140 primary languages she recognises within Amerind
would have required about 50,000 years to have arisen from the original
language spoken by the first people in the Americas. She moderates this
figure to a mere 35,000 years ago to allow for more than one
colonisation event, and hence more than one original stock.

When Daniel Nettle – a linguist from Oxford – looked at exactly the same
data as Nichols, he reached a quite different conclusion. To his mind,
the large number of Native American languages must be a sign of
relatively recent colonisation, one unlikely to have happened before
11,500 BC.⁸ Nettle argued that the rate for the emergence of new
languages claimed by Nichols was quite unfounded; he also questioned the
whole premise that languages proliferate in this fashion at all. A new
language ultimately arises, he argued, only as a result of some
particular event, frequently the movement of a group of people into a
new area, especially one that requires them to adapt their lifestyles to
a new set of resources.

According to Nettle, the colonisation of a new continent would rapidly
lead to a proliferation of languages as communities spread out and split
up into new ‘niches’ – areas with their own particular range of
resources. Within each ‘niche’ the settlers would begin a distinctive
way of life as hunters, fishermen, farmers or herders, developing their
own vocabularies, and, ultimately, languages. All the available niches
would eventually become full of people and consequently there would be a
slow-down and, finally, an end to the appearance of new languages. And
then, Nettle argued, the number of languages would begin to fall; some
groups would grow in power and subdue others, while the development of
trade would require the sharing of words and a degree of linguistic
convergence.

As populations further expanded and people became tightly packed, there
would be an ever greater reduction in the number of languages present.
This process is readily apparent in the world today where the existing
number of languages, about 6,500, is expected to halve in the next
hundred years, as a consequence of globalisation. And so Nettle
concluded that the high linguistic diversity of the New World indicated
a recent colonisation, a view compatible with a Clovis First scenario.⁹
This was precisely the opposite conclusion to that reached by Nichols.

How could Johanna Nichols and Daniel Nettle have arrived at such
different views? One reason is that they approach the study of language
from quite different perspectives. Unlike Johanna Nichols, Daniel Nettle
is an anthropologist by training; he is primarily concerned with the way
people use language to build and maintain social relationships, and how
economic and ecological factors affect the distribution and number of
languages within a specific continent. Linguists such as Nichols,
however, have only a marginal interest in such issues and see languages
as evolving entities with a dynamic quite independent from their social,
economic and environmental context.

With all these contradictory arguments on American colonisation, the
linguists seem to be in the same boat as the archaeologists – unable to
agree with each other on even the most basic facts. Those of us without
linguistic expertise are left in a quandary about who to believe. My own
inclination is towards the anthropological approach of Nettle and the
rather depressing conclusion of Goddard and Campbell: that the extent of
reliable knowledge about the linguistic history of the American Indians
is so incomplete that it is compatible with a wide range of scenarios
for the peopling of the Americas. So much for the linguists. Are the
geneticists doing any better?

We have already seen how the genetics of living people can be used by
archaeologists when considering whether the spread of farming across
Europe arose from the migration of farmers with a West Asian ancestry or
from the indigenous adoption of Neolithic culture. The same technique of
searching for specific patterns of genetic mutation, especially in
mitochondrial DNA, has been used to determine when people may have first
arrived in the Americas and where they came from.

Three sources of mtDNA have been studied: that from living Native
Americans; that from living people in North and East Asia to enable
comparisons with the American data; and that from the skeletal remains
of prehistoric Native Americans.¹⁰ The specific types of analyses
undertaken, and the specific conclusions reached, have varied widely.
But a major finding has been that the mtDNA sequences of Native
Americans fall into four major clusters, referred to as groups A, B, C
and D.¹¹

Native Americans from the Na-Dene and Eskimo-Aleut language families
mainly produce mtDNA sequences that belong to the A-group, while –
perhaps not surprisingly – the massive Amerind language family has
representatives from all four groups. Such genetic diversity – implying
contributions from several migrant populations – supports those
linguists who doubt the reality of the Amerind family. But just like the
archaeologists and the linguists, the geneticists cannot come up with a
single answer as to when and how colonisation occurred.

In 1993 one team of geneticists, led by Satoshi Horai of the National
Institute of Genetics in Japan, suggested that each of the four groups
is a product of a separate migration into the Americas between 21,000
and 14,000 years ago.¹² One year later a team lead by Antonio Torroni of
Emory University, Atlanta, USA, analysed the data in a slightly
different manner and concluded that Amerinds had migrated into the
Americas in two waves: the first carrying groups A, C and D arriving
between 29–22,000 years ago, and the second carrying group B alone at a
much later date.¹³ In 1997 Sandro Bonatto and Francisco Salzano of the
Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, concluded that all four
groups had a single origin from one migration earlier than 25,000 years
ago.¹⁴

Why should the geneticists find it so difficult to reach a consensus?
One reason is that they face several of same problems as the
linguists.¹⁵ Just as there is limited understanding of the rate at which
the languages diverge from each other, so there is limited agreement
about the rate of genetic mutation. Geneticists effectively use their
best guesses as to the frequency of mutations, and those guesses may be
quite wrong. Moreover, different genes may mutate at different rates,
and some mutations might mask others that had previously arisen.¹⁶

Another reason is that even with our limited knowledge of American
history and prehistory, it is clear that there has been an intense
mixing of the genes of people who may have originated from separate
migrations into the Americas at different times. After such jumbling, it
may be quite impossible to identify the number and timing of such
migrations from the genes of modern-day Native Americans.

The attempt to reconstruct American prehistory from present-day teeth,
languages and genes also comes up sharply against another potential
problem, one posed by the scanty skeletal remains of the First and Early
Americans. As of AD 2000 there are no more than thirty-seven individuals
represented by the entire collection of skeletal remains dating to
before 9000 BC. Many of these individuals are known only from a few
fragments of bone.¹⁷

When this collection was studied by D. Gentry Steele and Joseph Powell,
anthropologists from Texas A&M University, USA, they made a startling
discovery: the earliest Native Americans looked quite different to the
Native Americans recorded from later prehistory or historic times.¹⁸ The
more recent people are described as having a mongoloid appearance –
relatively broad and flat faces and high cheek-bones, clearly indicating
descent from northern Asia. But the skeletal sample from pre-9000 BC
suggests people with short and narrow faces and quite different dental
patterns to those described by Christy Turner for Native Americans. In
fact, rather than looking like recent American and North Asian people,
those early Americans were far more similar in appearance to the
earliest Australians dating to 60,000 years ago, and modern Africans.

In 1996, a precious new skull and the partial remains of a skeleton were
discovered in the Columbia River region, Washington State.¹⁹ After
conducting a forensic examination, the local archaeologist, James
Chatters, concluded from their caucasoid features – those which
distinguish people from Europe, North Africa and the Near East, such as
a narrow, high-bridged nose – that the bones were of a recent European
settler. But when dated, the man was shown to have died at about 7,400
BC – a date that fitted with the style of a stone projectile point
embedded in his thigh bone.

Kennewick Man soon became a cause célèbre. No fewer than five Native
American tribes claimed him as a direct ancestor. The Umatilla tribe
took the lead and, under the NAGPRA (Native American Graves Protection
and Repatriation Act) of 1990, demanded immediate reburial in a secret
location. Many scientists were horrified. They argued that that would be
an abuse of legislation, and that no links to any tribe could be
demonstrated: reburial would constitute the loss of priceless evidence
about the colonisation of the Americas. The bones were sealed within a
vault and protracted court cases conducted to decide their fate, before
permission was granted to test the DNA within them; something that has
outraged the Umatilla Indians.

When Chatters learned of the date of 7400 BC, he revised his opinion,
stating that Kennewick Man was merely caucasoid-like. A detailed
statistical analysis showed that the shape of the skull was most similar
to Polynesian people, particularly those from Easter Island in the
Pacific and the Ainu of Japan. The latter are indeed caucasoid-looking
and may well have descended from the earliest Homo sapiens, to spread
into eastern Asia soon after 100,000 years ago. Some of them had
travelled to Australia by 60,000 years ago and others may well have been
the very first to arrive in the New World.

In the light of their difference in physical appearance, the First
Americans, as known from the pre-9000 BC skeletal record, might have
been quite unrelated to the Native Americans known in the later
prehistoric and historic records, and indeed to those living today. All
of those more recent Native Americans evidently originated from
migrations – perhaps better described as dispersals – of North Asian
peoples after distinctive mongoloid features had evolved. Those already
present in the Americas may simply have been subsumed into these new
populations, with their own dental, genetic and linguistic traits being
swamped by those of the new arrivals. Alternatively, the First Americans
might have become extinct, making no linguistic or genetic contribution
to future populations. A third – and more unlikely – alternative is that
the First Americans were deliberately wiped out by the new immigrants –
remember the projectile point in the thigh of Kennewick Man. Whichever
scenario is correct, the dental, linguistic and genetic prehistories may
never be able to reach back to the First Americans. For that, we will
have to rely on the archaeological record. So now we must turn to the
last and perhaps the most critical archaeological site in the Americas:
Monte Verde.

25 On the Banks of the Chinchihuapi

Excavation and interpretation of Monte Verde, AD 1977–1997, 12,500 BC

John Lubbock walks along the peaty riverbank of the Chinchihuapi Creek,
a shallow meandering offshoot of the Maullín River in southern Chile. It
has been his guide through woodlands, marshes, and green cattle-grazed
pastures. High snow-capped peaks of the Andes tower above treetops to
the east; lower wooded slopes of the Pacific coastal range climb in the
west. The Pacific Ocean itself is no more than 30 kilometres away.

Lubbock’s destination is Monte Verde where Tom Dillehay, of the
University of Kentucky, completed his final excavation season in 1985 –
a site that had left him ‘overwhelmed and slightly confused’ when he
began work some eight years earlier.¹ Peat, the compacted remains of
marsh and bog plants, had rapidly accumulated over abandoned huts, work
areas, cooking places and rubbish dumps, inhibiting the normal processes
of decay and creating unprecedented levels of preservation. And so
Dillehay not only had stone artefacts and animal bones to excavate, but
plant remains, hut timbers, wooden artefacts, pieces of hide, and even
chunks of animal flesh.

Dillehay assembled an impressive team of collaborators: geologists,
botanists, entomologists and palaeontologists, not to mention his
archaeologist colleagues. They had both to analyse the archaeological
finds and to reconstruct the landscape in which the inhabitants of Monte
Verde had lived. His team had one more important task: to establish the
age of the settlement.

As Lubbock follows the creek, the water deepens and flows more swiftly.
The air temperature falls and it feels more humid; his footsteps no
longer bounce upon springy peat but sink a little into soft sand. There
are voices. As Lubbock rounds a bend in the river, he expects to see the
excavation in full swing, as he had done at Bluefish Caves and Pedra
Furada. But Lubbock has arrived at Monte Verde rather earlier than
planned – it is 12,500 BC and the settlement, with its original
inhabitants, is thriving.

The people have jet-black hair and olive skins; their bodies are lean
and draped in poncho-like cloaks of animal hide.² Several are working at
the end of a long oval-shaped tent which has been divided into several
units, perhaps family houses. This is positioned a few metres from the
riverbank and those working appear to be adding another unit on the end,
having already laid logs as foundations for the walls and floor.
Labouring quickly and efficiently, they sharpen the ends of poles with
stone flakes and push them into the sandy soil. Near by a cluster of
women sit preparing twine from vegetable fibres for securing hide drapes
over the tent frame.

While men and women work, children splash in the creek and an old man
tends a large fireplace outside another line of dwellings. He rearranges
the cobbles being heated by embers, while two younger men prepare the
food. They wrap small potato-like vegetables in large green leaves,
stacking them upon a bark platter in preparation for steaming; nuts are
crushed in a wooden mortar and emptied into a wickerwork bowl containing
sweet-smelling leaves.

A call comes from the woodland that lies beyond the marsh at the back of
the village. People peer through the hide drapes of their huts and work
is forgotten as a party of smiling figures with heavy bags steps out
from amongst the trees, crossing the brushwood pathway into the village.
Greetings are shouted, and the whole community – at least thirty men,
women and children – rush to meet them.

The new arrivals sit beside the fireplace, the half-prepared food pushed
to one side. Everyone gathers around, eager to see what has been brought
back from the coast. Lubbock finds himself squeezed among them, rubbing
shoulders with the people of Monte Verde – not the first, but the
earliest-known Americans.

The bags are opened. One by one the contents are removed, each item
being held aloft and presented with a story about its collection. People
are attentive. Almost every story ends with peals of laughter as the
item is passed around the group and then laid carefully upon the ground:
a bladder-skin full of salt, gleefully tasted as it circulates; a gourd
shell full of black, sticky bitumen that will be used to haft stone
flakes to wooden shafts; a collection of spherical beach pebbles which
will be much preferred as hammer-stones to the angular rocks found in
the creek.

Once everything has been laid out, the travellers continue talking,
answering many questions about what they have seen and who they have
met. They had been away for ten days, visiting another settlement and
returning via the coast to collect such delicacies as seaweed, shells,
cockles and sea urchins along with anything else that they thought
useful.

The crowd gradually disperses, only to return as dusk falls to sit and
sing around a fire and under a starry sky. Herbs are set to smoulder and
the air becomes replete with pungent aromas. One man takes the musical
lead while the others are silent; the song switches to the young women,
and then back again to the man as others begin to clap. There is
dancing, which leaves a patchwork of footprints around the hearth. Food
is shared from large leaf plates – the wild potatoes, roasted meat, a
mix of leaves, stems, grated roots and the crushed nut salad. When the
meal is complete, the singing and dancing resume and continue long into
the American night. It is 12,500 BC and as Lubbock drifts off to sleep
he recalls where else he has been at this date in human history:
trapping arctic hares at Creswell Crags; ambushing reindeer in the
Ahrensburg valley; watching the people of ‘Ain Mallaha grinding almonds
and baking bread.

Meandering rivers are always shifting their course, depositing the
sediments they carry to create new sandbanks and channels. The
Chinchihuapi Creek had a spate of such activity in 1976, cutting through
one of its own previous channels that had long been buried beneath a
peat bog. The old banks of the creek became exposed and were cut further
back by local woodsmen to make a track for their timber-hauling
ox-carts.

Members of the local Gerardo Barria family found bones protruding from
the bank, which they gave to a student studying agriculture in the
belief that these were from cows. He showed them to Carlos Troncoso, an
anthropologist at the University of Valdivia, and his colleague
Professor Mauricio van de Maele, Director of the Museum. They examined
the site and found further bones, together with stone artefacts. At that
stage Tom Dillehay, who was teaching at the university, became
interested, intrigued by possible cut-marks on the bones and the
peculiarly high frequency of ribs. He surveyed the site in 1976 and soon
began the excavation that would take both him and the whole of American
prehistory to the far side of the Clovis Barrier.

Even if ‘Clovis First’ had remained intact, the degree of preservation
at Monte Verde would still have ensured its renown as one of the most
remarkable archaeological sites in the New World. Dillehay required two
massive volumes to publish and interpret the evidence from his
excavations, the last appearing in 1997 – more than twenty years after
work had begun.³ With such evidence he could make an elaborate
reconstruction of the lifestyle at Monte Verde, arguing that people
lived all year round at the settlement, and either traded with coastal
dwellers or simply made regular visits to collect food and raw materials
from estuaries, rock-pools and beaches. Nevertheless, it is the date of
Monte Verde that elevates the site above all others in the Americas.

Dillehay was able to identify two distinct collections of artefacts. The
largest, that which included the majority of tools, the remnants of huts
and most of the food debris, was referred to as MV-II and dated by
radiocarbon methods to about 12,500 BC.⁴ The second collection, MV-I,
was more ephemeral and came from ancient river sediments. Dillehay found
charcoal scatters which may be the remnants of fireplaces next to
possible stone and wood artefacts, and these were dated to at least
33,000 BC.⁵ He himself remains cautious about MV-I, recognising the need
to excavate a larger area before any conclusion can be held with
confidence. But by 1985 he was in no doubt about the validity of the
12,500 BC date of the MV-II occupation. The Clovis Barrier, which had
resolutely remained intact for more than fifty years, had been washed
away by the waters of Chinchihuapi Creek.

By the time Lubbock wakes the next morning, work on the new hut has
already begun again; hides are now being tied on to wooden frames and
brushwood placed across the roof. Other people are making and repairing
tools with the newly acquired bitumen. The flakes being hafted are
hardly worked at all – they could easily have been mistaken for
naturally fractured stones. Indeed Lubbock sees that sharp stones
collected from the creek bed are used as found – stones that are little
different to those at Calico Hills and Pedra Furada.

Most of the activity is taking place about thirty metres away from the
huts at what appears to be the settlement’s workshop. Lubbock wanders
between several clusters of men and women each engaged in a different
task, many of whom are chewing as they work. Three men sit cross-legged
making bolas stones for hunting. Using the hard beach pebbles, they peck
and grind each nodule of softer stone into an almost perfect sphere,
before making a groove for a string. Another group chops wood with large
stone axes, implements made by flaking from both sides of a nodule –
much the same technique as that required to make Clovis points.

There is just one structure in this area of the settlement, one quite
different to the others at Monte Verde. It is dome-shaped – bent
saplings covered with hides. Lubbock peers inside. Its floor has a
raised triangular platform made from compacted sand and gravel, with two
curved extensions that protrude on either side of the entrance. Nobody
is inside but the floor is littered with an assortment of wooden bowls,
pestles and mortars, grinding slabs and wooden spatulas. Hanging from
the roof are bundles of leaves, grasses and flowers.

Nearby, animal skins are being worked. Some are tautly pegged to the
ground so that their fat and sinews can be scraped away; others are
being stretched and pummelled to make them soft and supple for clothing.
The bone implements being used have hardly been modified at all,
reminding Lubbock of the supposed tools from Bluefish Caves. A less than
meticulous archaeologist could easily fail to notice the slightly
smoothed ends and tiny notches in their sides.

Scattered among these tool-makers and hide-workers are a number of old
fireplaces. One is brought to life again – pebbles are placed within its
ashes and covered with dry wood and leaves. When lit, there is a sudden
but short-lived blaze. While the fire settles, dry leaves taken from
inside the structure are crumbled into a wooden bowl of water and, after
about thirty minutes, hot stones from glowing embers added to make the
tea. Work stops and the tea is shared, the bowl being passed from mouth
to mouth. Before drinking, wodges of chewed plants are spat on to the
ground.

Lubbock helps himself to tea. As he sits drinking, a canoe arrives and
the two young men occupying it call for help to unload. They have a
collection of ribs, and a massive thigh bone from a mastodon – a large
elephant-like creature that lived throughout the Americas prior to the
end of the ice age. The Monte Verde people had found the carcass some
days earlier in a treasure trove that had already provided hair, tusks
and hide. The thick footpads have been turned into excellent baskets;
selected internal organs have been emptied, cleaned and stitched to
provide waterproof bags.⁶

Lubbock recalls a passage from Prehistoric Times. Victorian John Lubbock
had summarised a published account from 1857 about the remains of a
mastodon in Missouri. It had apparently ‘been stoned to death by the
Indians, and then partially consumed by fire’. The account had been
written by a Dr Koch who thought that the Indians had found the huge
creature helplessly mired in mud and then hurled rocks at it collected
from a nearby riverbank. He also claimed to have found several
arrow-heads, a stone spearhead and stone axes among the ashes, bones and
rocks. Victorian John Lubbock quoted Dr Koch at length, but seemed
sceptical, commenting that such observations had yet to be proved
correct.⁷

After the controversies surrounding Bluefish Caves, Meadowcroft and
Pedra Furada, it will come as no surprise that not all archaeologists
were as convinced as Dillehay that he had broken the Clovis Barrier.
Thomas Lynch, an archaeologist now at the Brazos County Museum in Bryan,
Texas, suggested that the artefacts must have eroded into the deposits
from a much more recent human occupation – although none are known in
the area. The University of Massachusetts archaeologist Dena Dincauze
thought Dillehay had misinterpreted his radiocarbon dates.

In 1997 a group of acknowledged experts visited Monte Verde to examine
Dillehay’s claim – following in the tradition of those who had visited
Folsom in 1927 and Pedra Furada in 1993. The Monte Verde group included
the main protagonists in the debate about the peopling of the Americas
for the previous thirty years. There was David Meltzer with his intimate
knowledge of the history of archaeological studies; Vance Haynes, a
champion of the ‘Clovis First’ scenario since the 1960s; James Adovasio
who had fought his own case at Meadowcroft Rockshelter; and Dena
Dincauze who had questioned Dillehay’s interpretations.⁸

Their visit was an extremely thorough affair. It began with a study of
Dillehay’s final publication about Monte Verde, which was about to go to
press, and continued with an inspection of the Monte Verde artefacts
housed at the Universities of Kentucky and Valdivia. The group then
received presentations about the past and present environments at Monte
Verde, and finally made a detailed examination of the site itself. At
the end of that day the party sat down to discuss their findings, and to
decide whether Tom Dillehay had achieved that which had eluded Louis
Leakey, Jacques Cinq-Mars, James Adovasio and Niède Guidon: an
unequivocal demonstration of pre-Clovis settlement in the Americas.

Unanimity was achieved. None of the party was left in any doubt that
Dillehay had indeed broken the Clovis Barrier. There was no question
that many of the artefacts, notably the flaked stone tools, the ‘bolas’
stones and the knotted fibres had been made by humans; similarly, it
could not be doubted that these artefacts were found just where they had
been discarded, securely sealed by the peat that had grown across the
site. The dates were verified as being uncontaminated – unequivocally
demonstrating that human occupation had occurred at about 12,500 BC. It
could even have been substantially earlier. For although the MV-I
remains were sparse and received less attention, some of the party at
least were impressed with the evidence for a 33,000-year-old occupation
at Monte Verde.

But verification of that particularly early phase of occupation must
wait until Dillehay has excavated a larger area. For the needs of this
history – and those of American archaeology for at least the next decade
– acceptance of occupation at 12,500 BC is momentous enough. It means
that the Clovis First scenario is dead and buried.

Until 1927, nobody dreamed that the oldest site in the Americas would
produce spear points and bison bones. Folsom delivered a brand-new
vision of the First Americans: nomadic big-game hunters of the plains.
Monte Verde was equally unexpected and replaced that vision with
another: forest-dwelling, plant-gathering people in settled communities.

There is a further dramatic difference between these sites: whereas
Folsom is in New Mexico and seems reasonably positioned as a marker of
the first people to have arrived in North America, Monte Verde is no
less than 12,000 kilometres from the southern end of the ice-free
corridor. How much easier it would have been for unravelling the story
of American prehistory if Monte Verde had been in Alaska, or even North
America. For where are all the other settlements that people made on
their southward journey from the north? Perhaps in Bluefish Caves,
perhaps in Meadowcroft Rockshelter, perhaps at Pedra Furada. How many
settlements should there be? That depends on how long people took to get
to Monte Verde and whether they travelled overland or by sea.

David Meltzer thinks that whatever route they took, several thousands of
years would have been required. Although in historic times fur trappers
had indeed sped across the continent within a couple of centuries, he
contends that this could hardly have been true of ‘small colonising
bands (with children, of course) travelling through changing, diverse
and unfamiliar environments across major ecological boundaries,
occasionally confronting formidable physical, ecological, and
topographic barriers such as ice sheets and the swollen lakes and rivers
draining them, all the while maintaining vital kinship links and
population sizes’.⁹

The idea that the First Americans were bold explorers, travelling those
15,000 kilometres from Beringia to Monte Verde in less than 2,000 years
is, to Meltzer, most unlikely. If he is correct, then people must have
entered the Americas before the great LGM freeze of 20,000 BC. But, in
that case, the complete absence of validated settlements in the Americas
prior to Monte Verde is even more remarkable – much too remarkable for
me to believe.

To my mind, the First Americans, those who must have travelled from
Alaska to southern Chile within less than a hundred generations, were
the most extraordinary group of explorers ever to have lived on this
planet. I suspect that the mystery of the peopling of the Americas can
only be resolved by invoking those peculiar human qualities of curiosity
and thirst for adventure that in recent times have taken men to the
poles, to the deep oceans, and to the moon. Did the same notions drive
generation after generation of the First Americans to travel ever
further southwards from their original homelands, perhaps after having
left that land by boat to arrive on the coastal plain of the northwest?
Did they then move inland to traverse melt-water lakes, mountain ranges
and swollen rivers, to learn how to live in woodlands, on grasslands and
in rainforests, eventually arriving on time at Monte Verde? If so, then
Robson Bonnichsen was certainly correct when, in 1994, he described the
First Americans as ‘a brave new people in a brave new world’.

If that journey did indeed occur, a journey through the landscapes of
North America in turmoil as global warming took hold, it would have been
one of the most momentous events in human history. It is one that we
must now visit in order to reconstruct the next chapter of American
history after the ice – the extinction of the mega-fauna.

26 Explorers in a Restless Landscape

North American fauna, landscape evolution and human, colonisation, 20,000–11,500 BC

Imagine standing in unfamiliar woodland on a summer’s evening as the
light is beginning to fade in 12,000 BC. You are in a clearing,
surrounded by trees of juniper and ash, hornbeam and mahogany. A river
crashes its way through rapids, providing a backdrop to the buzzing of
insects and the occasional shriek of an unseen bird. Beyond the trees,
massive cliffs tower over the river and woodland, casting long,
protective shadows.

Now imagine a new sound, perhaps a new smell. A creature rapidly
approaches, snorting its way pig-like through the undergrowth, avoiding
the cacti while it searches for edible roots and stems. It stops a few
feet away and rears up on to its hindquarters to explore an unfamiliar
odour in the air. It stares at you, eye-level, six feet off the ground.
Brown and hairy, thickset, a small head with beady eyes and flared
nostrils. The front limbs hang motionless; three hook-like claws extend
from each shovel-like paw. It grunts, returns to all fours and passes on
its way, heading towards its cave within the cliff. There it will empty
its bowels and sleep.

Now place yourself upon a small knoll, amidst a stand of cypress trees.
The air is sticky with the smell of tar. Beyond you there are ponds; not
sparkling with fresh blue water, but oozing, black, oily ponds in which
putrid bubbles of gas swell and burst. A camel lies on its side within
this mire of pitch. Trapped. Literally stuck to the ground. It cranes it
head and makes one last bellow before giving up, exhausted by its
struggle. But the tar does not claim its life. A wildcat, the size of a
lion with serrated canine teeth 20 centimetres long, pounces. It makes
an enormous gape, before it stabs the camel and rips apart its flesh.

A short distance away wings flap furiously, as a vulture also struggles
to free itself from the tar. As the wings splash, they themselves become
black and heavy. The quest for freedom is quite futile.

Today, of course, it would be something of a surprise to come across a
smilodon dispatching a camel (appropriately named Yesterday’s Camel by
scientists) at the Rancho La Brea tar-pits in downtown Los Angeles, or a
shasta ground sloth on its way to the Rampart Cave in the Grand Canyon.
To have seen sights such as these, you would have had to have been one
of the First Americans.¹

The present-day American fauna is seriously impoverished compared to
that seen by the first human inhabitants. Not only does it lack the
shasta ground sloth and smilodon, but also the glyptodon, a type of
giant armadillo, and the eremotherium, a giant ground sloth, 6 metres in
length and 3 tons in weight. Castoroides, a beaver the size of a black
bear, and the teratorns, flesh-eating birds that outstripped condors in
size, are nowhere to be seen. Neither are the mammoths and their distant
cousins the mastodons, elephant-like creatures with straight tusks and
flat skulls.

Not all of the now extinct animals would have been strange to modern
eyes. The American dire wolf and cheetah looked similar to their modern
counterparts. So too did the five species of horse that became extinct –
an animal that had to be reintroduced to its ancestral home by European
settlers.

The bewildering variety of animals in North America encountered by the
First Americans was a consequence of millions of years of biological and
geographical evolution long before the arrival of the LGM. Up until 50
million years ago North America was connected to Europe by a land bridge
through Greenland. The two continents shared many of the same animals,
such as hyracotherium, or ‘dawn horse’, a forest-dwelling animal about
30 centimetres high, which would evolve in North America into the horse.
Yet as the two continents drifted apart, the land bridge was lost, and
the animals in Europe and North America began to evolve in quite
different directions. By 40 million years ago, a new land bridge had
arisen – one that provided a route from Asia and was taken by many
species. The most striking was the mastodon, an animal that both the
First Americans and the Clovis people would eventually encounter,
whether in the swamps surrounding Monte Verde or in the spruce woodlands
of North America.

Between 60 and two million years ago South and North America were quite
separate from each other. In the southern continent a remarkable array
of animals had evolved – including the giant sloths, the glyptodon and
other forms of giant armadillos. When the Panamanian land bridge was
formed two million years ago, some of these animals spread to North
America, while others such as the horse, deer, sabre-toothed cats and
bears spread from the north into the south. Not surprisingly,
palaeontologists describe this as the ‘Great Interchange’. At around 1.5
million years ago the first of two mammoth species arrived across the
Asian–American land bridge, the Columbian mammoth (Mammuthus columbi).
Its cousin the woolly mammoth (M. primigenius) spread into North America
around 100,000 years ago and remained in northern regions. The two
species effectively shared the continent between them.

The consequence of these periods of isolated evolution and interchange
of species is that when the First Americans arrived – some time prior to
12,500 BC – they encountered some beasts that were familiar, and some
that they and their ancestors had never seen before. There would have
been nothing like the giant ground sloths and giant armadillos in their
Asian homelands, although many generations of their forebears would have
known, and perhaps hunted, the mammoth.

We know about the extinct animals from more than a million bones
excavated from the Rancho La Brea tar-pits.² Since at least 33,000 years
ago oil has been seeping to the surface where downtown LA is located
today. When exposed, it reacted with the atmosphere to become sticky and
viscous, eventually turning to asphalt and solidifying. Animals became
trapped within these tar-pits, providing today’s geologists with a
unique record of ice-age fauna – a ‘gigantic fossil time capsule’ is the
way David Meltzer has described it. Excavations occurred throughout the
twentieth century and produced a remarkable array of skeletal remains,
many in almost perfect condition. Once scientists had worked out how to
remove the petroleum from the bones, these became available for
radiocarbon dating and showed a gradual accumulation between 33,000 and
10,000 BC.

Another source of evidence for the extinct fauna is the dung they left
behind in Rampart and other caves in Arizona.³ The cave interiors have
remained so dry since the end of the ice age that bacteria have been
unable to do their destructive work. Consequently the dung balls of
ground sloths up to 10 centimetres in diameter and still packed with the
twigs on which they fed, have survived – in some cases feeling and
smelling as fresh as the day they were produced. David Meltzer once
opened a drawer containing sloth dung in the prestigious Smithsonian
Institution in Washington and it smelled like a barn. Strands of hair
and even bits of hide are occasionally found within them.

Rampart Cave in the Grand Canyon was a treasure trove of such deposits –
until destroyed by a fire that burned from July 1976 until March 1977.⁴
Before that Paul Martin had had to dig through layers of rat midden and
bat faeces to find the dung balls. This cave is at the top of an 8-metre
vertical cliff-face and is not easily accessible: the sloths must have
had a crevice to climb up and, once inside, were carefully hidden from
the prowling wolves and sabre-toothed cats.

The bones of extinct animals have also been found eroding from the banks
of ancient rivers and – very occasionally – on archaeological sites of
the Clovis period. When all sources of evidence are placed together, it
is apparent that after evolution had taken many millions of years to
produce a wonderful panoply of animals in the Americas, they became
wasted almost overnight as a tragic finale to the Pleistocene in
America.⁵

No fewer than 70 per cent of all large mammals of North America –
thirty-six species – became extinct: animals described as its
‘mega-fauna’.⁶ This continent was not unique in its devastation. During
the same period of time forty-six large animals became extinct in South
America (80 per cent of its mega-fauna). Of the sixteen species that
were living in Australia at 60,000 years ago – including giant wombats,
giant kangaroos and a marsupial lion – only one has survived into the
modern day, the 6-foot-tall red kangaroo. Extinctions also occurred in
Europe, which lost seven species including the woolly rhinoceros and the
giant elk. Only Africa escaped largely unscathed, losing just two out of
forty-four species of ‘mega-fauna’.⁷ Thankfully, we have been left one
place on earth where we can watch extraordinary beasts – those we call
hippopotamus, rhinoceros and giraffe.

What happened to all the other ice-age mega-fauna? Their extinction
story is a key part of our history, and those extinctions which occurred
in the Americas are closely tied to another story – that of the Clovis
people. Once fêted as the First Americans, it has long been thought that
it was their mighty stone-tipped spears that pushed these beasts into
extinction – indeed, the stories of human colonisation and mega-faunal
extinction may be so closely interwoven as to be inseparable. But within
that weave there is a third story that must be told: the evolution of
the North American landscape following its release from the deep freeze
of the LGM.⁸

When people first set foot in the Americas the continent was, like most
of the world, in the throes of change.

The great thaw had gathered pace by 14,500 BC, pushed along by the
shrinkage of the ice sheets themselves. Initially they simply became
thinner – at the height of the great freeze the ice sheets are likely to
have reached a thickness of 3 kilometres. They began to move, changing
their size and shape in a quite erratic manner, contracting in some
regions while expanding in others. Their edges can be imagined as active
amoeba, unsteadily pulsating, undulating and wobbling.⁹ Between 14,000
and 10,000 BC there were at least four advances, as far south as Iowa
and South Dakota, with ice sometimes oozing its way across frozen
ground, at other times sliding over land which had defrosted.

When the ice sheets lost contact with the sea, icebergs no longer
shelved into and cooled the waters, resulting in warmer air being blown
inland; this further accelerated the ice-sheet demise. And then the
Younger Dryas interrupted global warming soon after 11,000 BC. Although
far less severe than in Europe and western Asia, this disrupted the
animal and plant communities which for the previous 7,000 years had been
adapting to a warmer world.¹⁰ The ecological confusion was made worse by
the sudden return of rapid global warming at 9600 BC. And then the
Americas, along with the rest of the world, settled down as the Holocene
began: a time of relative climatic stability, now threatened by the new
man-made bout of global warming that has just begun.

When the ice sheets finally lost the battle against global warming a
mighty legacy was left on the landscape of North America; in fact havoc
was wreaked on coastlines and coastal communities throughout the world
as billions of litres of melt-water poured into the oceans. Those who
lived in the far north of the Americas would have seen their homeland of
Beringia diminish in size year by year as the coast flooded and salty
water seeped across the steppe. I imagine the people standing upon
hilltops, old men telling young children how the forests of birch that
now stretch before them are quite new to their land. They explain how,
during their own childhood, herds of mammoths and musk oxen had grazed
on grasslands where the caribou now browse. Settlements were abandoned
as communities headed for the coast where they hunted the newly abundant
seals and walrus. As they did so, clear icy-blue skies became shrouded
in fog and drizzle.

The First Americans who travelled south from Beringia, most likely by
boat or foot along the coastal plain, explored the Rocky Mountains as
they became free from the Cordilleran ice.¹¹ I can see them climbing to
view the plains to the west and the mass of peaks and the labyrinths of
sharp valleys to the east. They crossed rivers that flowed through
canyons and visited the glaciers that remained within high valleys. They
were not alone: alpine plants and trees also climbed into the Rockies,
followed by mountain sheep and an assortment of small mammals. Beyond
the mountains, the First Americans found the great basins of the
Columbia and Fraser rivers. Once liberated from the ice, these basins
soon became covered in coniferous forest and their rivers replenished
with fish. And so, picture the First Americans standing knee-deep in the
ice-cold water, spearing the salmon as they came to spawn and deciding
that this was a good place to settle. When they headed further south,
into what we now call California, they found landscapes struggling with
a lack of water, trees becoming sparse and stunted. And new plants, such
as the cactus and yucca. It was perhaps here that they first encountered
the giant shasta ground sloth as it searched for edible roots and
tubers.

Settlements would have been located where people found the most abundant
plants to gather and animals to hunt; each settlement may then have
acted as a base for further exploratory journeys. The fact that none
have been found suggest that they were scattered thinly and occupied by
relatively small numbers of people, perhaps a hundred at most. Such
communities must have remained in touch with each other to ensure that
populations were biologically viable: widespread social relations were
required to avoid inbreeding and cope with the failure of a group of
hunters to return or the fatalities from a hard winter.¹² When food,
water and firewood were plentiful, population growth may have been high,
readily producing parties of men and women prepared to establish new
settlements in recently explored lands. Those lands may not have been
the ones immediately next door. Just like the first farmers of Europe,
the First Americans may have leap-frogged their way across unproductive
regions to find the river basins, prairies, estuaries and woodlands in
which food was abundant and the living was easy – at least, as easy as
it can ever be for people in an unfamiliar world.¹³

We must envisage parties leaving established settlements and heading
south, relentlessly exploring a world that became more exotic with every
kilometre they travelled. At some point on their journeys they would
have encountered the tar-pits of Rancho La Brea and most likely stopped
to watch the futile struggles for life and the bloody scenes of death.
Some intrepid groups most likely headed east from the Rockies and
trekked close to the edge of the Laurentide ice sheet, through a world
dominated by wind and water. Think of a group of men, tightly huddled
together with their fur-clad backs turned to the dust storm that had
suddenly arrived, and which will just as suddenly cease to blow. At
other times such explorers faced winds up to 150 kilometres an hour,
similar to those blowing off the Antarctic glaciers today.

The generations that followed had an easier time as the winds eventually
relented and the dust settled, to create fertile seedbeds for the hardy
shrubs and trees that had edged their way north. And so we can imagine
the grandchildren and great-grandchildren of the storm-trapped pioneers
making camp among trees of poplar, willow and juniper. Other arrivals
included insects, always quick to respond to the warmer weather, and
birds which soon followed. When our imaginary travellers break camp to
continue upon their journey, they will have made their own contribution
to the changing world by having carried further seeds and insects upon
their leather-strapped feet and leaving them behind to flourish within
the new soils.

As the First Americans travelled within Beringia, across the Rockies,
along the edge of the ice sheets and then further south, they had to
build maps of the New World – mental maps to be wrapped up in stories
and songs. For the very first time the Rockies, the Sierra Nevada and
the Appalachian Mountains would have acquired names, most probably a
whole host of them – one for each peak, valley and cave. And so, too,
would the lakes, rivers, waterfalls and estuaries, the forests,
woodlands and plains.

But such was the environmental turmoil brought about by global warming
that each new generation of travellers would have found a landscape
quite different to that learned from stories around the fire. Where they
had expected to find ice, new travellers may have found tundra;
conversely, previous tundra may have become buried beneath an advancing
glacier. Where they expected to find stands of poplar and willow, they
may have found woodlands of spruce and pine, the trees that crowded out
those pioneer species. They may have witnessed unexpected types of
insects and birds, and begun to encounter new animals such as mastodons
as they came to browse within the fresh spruce woodlands. And sometimes
they saw scenes of devastation: I can imagine a party standing aghast at
the sight of trees crushed, broken and buried by a new southward surge
of ice – trees that had been woodland in which their parents had hunted
for deer and gathered plants for food.

But their most daunting vision would surely have been the massive lakes
that developed along the edge of the ice sheets.¹⁴ These were vast
expanses of water, quite unlike any in North America – indeed the whole
world – today. They were formed by the melt-waters, dammed by cliffs of
ice on their northern edge and gently rising ground to the south. The
first had appeared by 15,000 BC – Lake Missoula at the southern edge of
the Cordilleran ice sheet, the size of Lake Ontario today – but their
apogee came with Lake Agassiz in the west, which had appeared by 12,000
BC and lasted for 4,000 years. When at its most expansive, it covered
350,000 square kilometres. That is four times the area of Lake Superior
today, which is itself equivalent to a medium-sized European country,
such as Ireland or Hungary, and currently the largest freshwater lake in
the world.

The drainage routes of these lakes were changeable – the most dramatic
example being Lake Agassiz which, up until 11,000 BC, had drained to the
south, into the Gulf of Mexico. Soon after that date an ice dam at its
eastern edge was breached and rather than taking the southern route,
billions of litres of water began to flow east, into the St Lawrence
River and then the North Atlantic. There it may have had a catastrophic
effect on the circulation of ocean waters, which may in turn have
influenced the climate, perhaps causing the Younger Dryas itself.¹⁵

While some North American lakes disappeared completely, creating
devastating floods almost as soon as they had appeared, others, like
Lake Missoula, could not decide what to do. Part of this lake’s western
boundary was formed by an ice dam that became increasingly insecure as
the lake basin filled with melt-water. When the dam floated, the lake
quite suddenly drained, sending many millions of litres of water through
its neighbouring lake, and then into the Columbia River valley,
violently submerging any woodland that stood within its way. In a mere
two weeks the lake bed was dry, and the land beyond had been not only
scoured of its trees and plants, but also of much of its soil, leaving
exposed bedrock. A new ice advance recreated the ice dam, and Lake
Missoula began to refill, only to eventually breach the dam once again.
This happened no less than forty times during 1,500 years of the lake’s
existence, each time destroying the fragile aquatic ecosystem that had
just become re-established after the previous catastrophic drainage of
the lake.

Such destructive floods were not unique to Lake Missoula – they were a
constant feature of life in the vicinity of the receding glaciers. And
so we must imagine the First Americans finding huge expanses of mud from
which lake waters had recently drained, where the first plants –
sagebush and ragweed – were finding a home. As they continued to explore
and learn about their world, they would have found lakeshores with no
lakes, river deltas with no rivers. Even more dramatically, those who
ventured all the way to the eastern seaboard of North America would have
witnessed the rapid advance of the Atlantic. As melt-water poured into
the sea, the coastline rushed inland, sometimes travelling at a rate of
300 metres a year. To the north of Cape Cod, offshore islands became
submerged, while further south an extensive coastal plain of mixed
tundra and spruce woodland became flooded and then drowned. Today
trawlers haul up mammoth teeth and mastodon bones within their nets as
momentary reminders of the lost ice-age world.

When the ice that blocked the St Lawrence valley disappeared in about
12,000 BC, the sea flooded into the interior of the continent. For two
thousand years Ottawa, Montreal and Quebec were submerged by the
Champlain Sea. I can see the First Americans watching for whales,
porpoises and seals, perhaps planning to hunt them from their kayaks.
This sea was unsettled, sometimes it was warmed and diluted by drainage
from freshwater lakes, at others it was cooled by melt-waters from the
ice, and at others still it was salinised by new influxes from the
Atlantic. Today, little survives of this lake – unless one has sharp
enough eyes to find the sea-water shells and fossilised strands of
seaweed buried in sediments now high and dry in the Ottawa River valley.
The sea disappeared simply because the land eventually rebounded
upwards, relieved of the weight of the ice.

Life at the edge of the ice sheets was not one that could be enjoyed for
very long; the woodlands and the plains to the south were the place to
live, but these, too, were ever changing. We must picture a party of the
First Americans standing bewildered in a new type of woodland – one in
which the trees were leaning at all angles or had collapsed into
hollows, perhaps to float upon ponds of water. Those First Americans
would have been in what ecologists today appropriately call ‘drunken
woodland’, that in which the forest floor was turning to water.

Such woodland had developed on soil which lay upon stagnant layers of
ice. Across large areas of Saskatchewan, North Dakota and Minnesota,
wind-borne dust, water-borne silt and gravel, deposits of soil and rock
shifted by re-advancing ice sheets, had buried and insulated layers of
ice. Soil developed, was colonised by pioneering insects and seeds, and
within less than a human generation woodland emerged. But as
temperatures kept rising the buried ice began to melt, initially where
the soil cover was thin so that pools and ponds seeped their way to the
surface. The melt-water within these ponds was joined by rainwater
warming them sufficiently for life to take hold.

The First Americans were not the only ones to discover these ponds: they
would have watched ducks and geese arrive, their muddy feet delivering
plant seeds and snails’ eggs. The ponds began to flow into rivers which
eventually joined the tributaries of the Missouri. Sticklebacks, minnows
and other fish could then find their way to new woodland lakes; the fish
brought their own host of fellow travellers in the form of parasites.
Ecology was blossoming and in the midst of it stood the First Americans.

As they headed further south they would have left coniferous forests
behind for open woodland, a botanical mosaic of trees and plants rarely
found together today. It was a landscape that provided ideal grazing and
browsing for many of the large mammals, such as the mastodons and the
Columbian mammoth. This was larger and less hairy than the woolly
mammoths of the north, often standing four metres at the shoulder and
requiring 225 kilograms of food each day. The First Americans may have
found a small group of Columbian mammoths sheltering within a cave on
the Colorado Plateau in southern Utah. There they left thick layers of
dung, spherical turds up to 20 centimetres across, which shows us that
they fed on grasses, sedge, birch and spruce. The quantity is not
surprising – we know that a modern elephant has to evacuate 90 to 125
kilograms of the stuff every day. Today we call that cave Bechan Cave;
this is the Navajo name – it means ‘the cave of the big turds’.¹⁶

By 13,000 BC, the midwest was a sodden landscape, a broken jigsaw of
pools, bogs and patches of spruce woodland. But as global warming
intensified, new drainage patterns developed and the midwest began to
dry out. Periodic droughts arrived at 11,500 BC, which were exacerbated
by the onset of the Younger Dryas a few hundred years later. Trees could
no longer survive in the arid conditions and were replaced by an array
of grasses and herbs such as sage, ragweed and many flowering plants.
The grazing mammals – mammoths, camels, horse, bison and many others –
exploited the new prairies, eagerly turning them into a North American
Serengeti. The First Americans would have watched those herds with the
same awe that we feel when we watch the wildebeest, antelope and zebra
on the African plains.

As their relentless southward progress continued, some of the First
Americans headed into Central America and beyond, into environments that
were fast becoming tropical. This was a new, exotic world in which their
ability to learn about new landscapes and new resources must have been
pushed to its extreme. The rainforests had remained largely intact
throughout the great freeze of 20,000 BC; when entering them, the First
Americans must have watched the feeding habits of the deer and monkeys
in an effort to identify which leaves and berries were edible and which
should be avoided. Here they would have encountered yet more fabulous
beasts, including the great glyptodon – the giant armadillo-like
creature that foraged along the riverbanks.

First Americans must have suffered many losses in their journeys from
Beringia to South America: explorers drowned in sudden floods and
mud-slides, killed by carnivores, and the victims of new diseases.¹⁷
Some communities are likely to have become isolated. If biologically
viable they may have evolved their own distinctive language, culture and
even genetic markers. Perhaps such ‘lost’ people became surprise
encounters for new generations of Early American explorers, originating
from new dispersals from northern Asia. Some isolated communities may
have been too small to survive. For them the future was bleak – one of
declining numbers and eventual extinction.

By 11,500 BC the First Americans were dispersed throughout the Americas,
from Tierra del Fuego in the south to Beringia in the north. This
population had most probably resulted from many migrations and already
acquired a multitude of languages, genetic mutations and cultural
traditions. Human numbers grew, and were perhaps boosted by new waves of
immigrants – or at least bolstered by what David Meltzer describes as
migratory dribbles.¹⁸

In an unknown place and for an unknown reason the Clovis point was
invented. This most likely occurred in the forests of eastern North
America where the spear points have been found in most abundance. With
the new Clovis toolkit and their greater numbers, people suddenly became
visible to archaeologists.

Quite why people started to make large stone points from the best stone
they could find, is unclear.¹⁹ It is easy to think that they were for
hunting – some were certainly used in that fashion. But Clovis points
may equally have been knives for cutting plant material or may have been
manufactured principally for social display. The remarkable speed with
which they spread across the whole continent, presumably as an idea
rather than as objects, testifies to the close links between communities
that had been essential for survival as the ice age came to its end.
Indeed, the numbers, design and distribution of such points suggests to
me that they were used as much for building social bonds between groups
as for acquiring food from the landscape.

Each group appears to have moulded the idea to their own specific
design, and hence there are many subtle variations in point size, shape
and style. Archaeologists have given each type a different name: Gainey
points in Ontario,²⁰ Suwanee points in Florida,²¹ Goshen points in
Montana²² and so on throughout the continent.²³ Whatever the reason for
the spread of this technology, once present we need no longer talk about
the elusive First Americans, but can refer to the Clovis people.

Now the exotic North American fauna faced a new type of potential
predator, one that came armed with stone-tipped spears, that hunted in
large groups, that laid ambushes and set traps. The mammoths, mastodons
and other giant herbivores were certainly used to predators that
attempted to take their young: wolves, lions and sabre-toothed cats.
They had been living and co-evolving with such carnivores for millions
of years and had their means of defence: large herd size, massive
bodies, lethal tusks, group formations to protect the vulnerable,
patterns of movement to enable them to keep out of the carnivores’ way.
Would these have been any good when a new type of predator arrived? One
whose spears were even more deadly than smilodon’s teeth, whose group
hunting tactics were more sophisticated than that of the wolf, and who
had one ‘weapon’ that the ground sloths, mastodons and even smilodon had
never encountered before: a large brain with which to outwit its prey.

27 Clovis Hunters on Trial

Extinction of the mega-fauna and Clovis lifestyles, 11,500–10,000 BC

When the claim that the Clovis hunters had hunted the great beasts of
North America into extinction was first mooted by Paul Martin in the
1960s, there was relatively limited understanding of the precise dates
at which these extinctions had occurred. Yet, as the evidence has
accumulated, the Clovis culture and some mega-faunal extinctions do
indeed seem to coincide.

By 1985 David Meltzer and Jim Mead, a geologist from Northern Arizona
University, were able to assemble no less than 363 radiocarbon dates on
extinct animals, coming from 163 fossil localities, especially the
Rancho La Brea tar pits and the bone-dry caves of the southwest.¹ With
the radiocarbon dates assembled, Meltzer and Mead weeded out any that
they thought might be suspect, such as those possibly contaminated by
old carbon in the ground, leaving them with a sample of 307 dates. A few
years later Donald Grayson from the University of Washington, another
expert on radiocarbon dating, thought it necessary to remove more dates
as unreliable, cutting the final sample to a mere 125 radiocarbon
determinations.²

Such rigour meant that the extinction date for twenty-nine of the
thirty-six extinct species could not be ascertained any more precisely
than having happened at some time in the last 50,000 years. Grayson
cautioned against assuming that these animals went extinct during the
final 1,500 years of the ice age when they shared the North American
landscapes with the First Americans and Clovis hunters. Nevertheless,
this left the ‘ice-age seven’: mammoth, mastodon, camel, horse, tapir,
shasta ground sloth and smilodon. The last living representatives of
these North American species were reliably dated to have been living
between 11,000 and 10,000 BC³ – precisely when the Clovis people were at
large.

Paul Martin’s claim that the Clovis people were responsible for their
extinction presents a compelling argument when considered with the
evidence from sites in the San Pedro River valley.⁴ When faced with the
remains of thirteen mammoths, spear points, butchery tools and
fireplaces at Lehner Ranch, one can readily imagine the drama: Clovis
hunters ambushing a small herd as they came to drink, the resulting
blood bath in the creek; fires lit as butchery begins, the smell of
roasting meat; vultures circling above and giant teratorns perched upon
nearby rocks waiting to feast upon wasted meat and innards. This is
precisely the type of scene reconstructed from a study of the mammoth
bones by Jeffrey Saunders of Illinois University.⁵

Perhaps such scenes were repeated throughout the continent; not just
with mammoths but also with the sloths, the camel, the glyptodon and the
giant beaver. Clovis hunters were just too powerful and cunning for
their prey; they were guilty of overkill and pushed the ice-age seven
into extinction.

A neat scenario, but is it correct? We should give the Clovis hunters a
proper trial. Paul Martin himself was aware of a severe weakness in the
prosecution’s case. While we have some (possible) kill sites for
mammoths, similar sites for the thirty or so other extinct animals are
absent – with very rare or highly ambiguous exceptions. Martin has a
cunning explanation: the apocalyptic slaughters happened so rapidly, and
to animals that were so sensitive to predation, that very few kill sites
were ever made. Borrowing military terminology, he described it as a
‘blitzkrieg’.

Moreover, Martin argued, the chances of archaeologists finding any site
from the last ice age are so remote that we should be surprised by the
number of Clovis/mammoth sites that have been located, rather than
bemoan the absence of sloth, camel and glyptodon kill sites. Such
animals may have been killed and butchered in grasslands or in the
hills, where erosion rather than sedimentation occurs. Here, any
cut-marked bones and fireplaces would have long since been broken up and
scattered out of sight – part of the dust and the dirt that is blown and
washed around the continent today.

Back in the 1970s the idea of Clovis hunters entering a virgin
landscape, sweeping southwards and conducting a blitzkrieg of the naïve
animals, couldn’t be proved or refuted, but it did fit the
archaeological evidence. Today, this isn’t the case, largely because of
Monte Verde – a settlement that tells us people could have been in North
America thousands of years before Clovis technology was invented, and
more significantly before the mass extinction. If the First Americans
had not hunted large game, then those animals could not have been the
easy prey that Paul Martin suggests. Conversely, if they had been
big-game hunters, then there could not have been a blitzkrieg and we
should have sloth, camel and glyptodon kill sites. Martin loses the
argument either way round.

It is not just the circumstantial evidence of Monte Verde that comes to
the defence of the Clovis people. In fact, they have a great number of
alibis throughout the continent – the Clovis archaeological sites
themselves. Although those in the southwest have yielded a substantial
number of mammoth bones, those elsewhere suggest a lifestyle devoted to
hunting small game, catching turtles and collecting plant foods.⁶ When
at Shawnee-Minisnik in Pennsylvania, the Clovis people had gathered
hawthorn berries and blackberries; when at Debert site in Nova Scotia
they hunted caribou; while at Lubbock Lake in Texas it had been rabbits,
geese and wild turkeys. Elsewhere, such as at the Old Humboldt site in
Nevada, the Clovis people had dined on trout, birds’ eggs and clams.⁷
Big game was hunted on some occasions. Whether or not the mammoth at
Murray Springs in the San Pedro valley had been hunted, a herd of bison
had certainly been ambushed and slaughtered in a marsh. But even at the
sites where mammoth bones are prominent, such as Lehner Ranch, it is the
small game present which may be more representative of the normal Clovis
diet.

The Clovis people appear to have been opportunists, gathering whatever
plants and killing whatever animals were available, rather than
specialising in big-game hunting. It could, therefore, have been no more
than a unique opportunity that led them to spear a giant land tortoise
at Little Salt Spring in Florida or to kill a mastodon at Kimmswick in
Missouri.⁸ If they had been particularly searching for big game, then we
would expect to have found Clovis points at Big Bone Lick in Kentucky
and Saltville in Virginia – natural salt outcrops and magnets for large
mammals throughout the ice age that could have provided easy big-game
hunting. Although both sites have been searched for two hundred years
and provided vast numbers of animal bones, not one single Clovis point
has ever been found.⁹

Consequently, the probable mammoth kill sites appear to be the exception
rather than the rule for Clovis settlement – and even these may be less
indicative of hunting than they first appear. The key problem is that
there are several ‘natural’ accumulations of mammoth bones in North
America that look very similar to those on Clovis sites, except for the
absence of human debris. These are from natural disasters, for example,
when herds crashed through ice when crossing a frozen lake, or became
mired in unanticipated mud. The animals would have died together, quite
unaided by any human hand.

This interpretation has found favour with Gary Haynes, an anthropologist
at the University of Nevada who studied the natural die-off sites of
African elephants during periods of drought in the 1980s. When he
examined the accumulation and decomposition of carcasses around dried-up
water-holes he found a striking resemblance to the mammoth remains at
sites such as Murray Springs and Lehner Ranch.¹⁰

Haynes suggests that the Clovis people had been the spectators at
natural die-offs of drought-ridden mammoths, occasionally making a
coupdegrâce killing to send an animal on its way. The carcasses were
left largely untouched because there was so little meat on them: it was
not worth even cracking the bones for marrow as these animals had
starved to death. The mammoths may indeed have been living through a
period of drought, either immediately before or during the Younger Dryas
– but here again, the evidence is inconclusive, with the severity and
even the existence of droughts at this time in much dispute.¹¹

Coup-de-grâce killings, or even the passive observation of starving
mammoths, present a quite different view of the past to that of Paul
Martin and Jeffrey Saunders. Indeed, the Clovis points themselves could
have had quite a different role to that first suggested; these valuable
stone points might have been laid near, or even on, the dead animals as
a mark of respect or as part of a religious observance.

Such speculation is a reminder that there must have been far more to
Clovis lifestyles than simply trying to find the next meal.
Unfortunately, evidence both of religious beliefs and of the
organisation of their societies is very limited. Whatever they did with
their dead they certainly did not regularly bury them, at least not in
places where they survived or where archaeologists have been able to
look.¹² There are just two exceptions: Fishbone Cave in Nevada provided
the remnants of a skeleton wrapped in a cedar-bark shroud¹³ and the
fragmentary remains of two young adults were found at the Anzick site,
Montana.¹⁴

The Anzick site was discovered in 1968 at a small collapsed rockshelter.
In the dry dirt a cluster of more than one hundred stone tools was
found, including many fine spear points. These had not been haphazardly
discarded, but intentionally placed within a cache of tools which had
been dusted with red ochre.¹⁵ Similar caches of stone artefacts have
been found elsewhere in the continent.¹⁶ If these were simply stores of
artefacts to be recovered when a hunting party returned to a region,
then the red ochre, the particularly fine workmanship of the stone
points and the association with a burial at Anzick remain unexplained.

The striking colours of many Clovis points also suggest that they may
have been more than mere utilitarian objects. Points were made from
chert coming in alternating red and brown bands, multicoloured
chalcedonies, red jasper, volcanic glass and petrified wood. Why choose
such an exotic range of coloured raw materials? The Australian
Aborigines did likewise because of their religious beliefs. A deep red
chert was often used because it had been formed from the blood of
ancestral beings; quartz was treasured because the way it shimmered was
related to the quality of ‘rainbowness’, believed by Aborigines to be
the essence of life.¹⁷

Clovis people may have had similar reasons for choosing coloured stone.
But if they did so, they failed to leave behind any rock paintings as
evidence for their religious beliefs. All we can do is surmise that they
had lived in a social and symbolic world in which stone points may have
been as meaningful as the carvings of figurines were to ice-age
hunter-gatherers in Europe or quartz points to the recent Aborigines of
Australia.

Although there is definitely blood on their spears, the archaeological
evidence leaves us in considerable doubt about whether the Clovis people
played the sole, or indeed any, role in the mass extinction. But if they
are innocent – or at least temporarily released on bail – who, or what,
else can be taken in for questioning?

There are two alternatives, the first of which can be dealt with quite
rapidly as an intriguing but purely hypothetical idea: a lethal plague.

Ross MacPhee, a palaeontologist at the American Museum of Natural
History, and Preston Marx, Professor of Tropical Medicine at Tulane
University, have suggested that at 11,000 BC in North America a virus
jumped from the new human colonists to the large game.¹⁸ This
hypothetical ‘hyper-disease’ would have been more lethal than anything
known in recorded history. As yet there is not a shred of evidence, but
they suggest that a plague could explain several of the awkward facts
about the mass extinction, notably its speed and bias to large animals
who, they claim, would be more susceptible because of their slow
breeding rates. Theoretically, evidence could be found: fragments of the
DNA of the viral infections may survive to be extracted from the bones
of the extinct animals. Well, perhaps. It seems a long shot, and
recovering DNA from ancient bone has proved immensely more difficult
than scientists had thought just a few years ago.¹⁹

The second alternative to overkill is climate change and for this we
have a trio of principal prosecutors: Russell Graham, a palaeontologist
from Denver Museum, Ernest Lundelius, Professor of Geological Science
from the University of Texas, and Dale Guthrie, Professor of
Palaeontology from the University of Alaska. They believe that climate
change, and its consequence for animal habitats, was the perpetrator of
the mass extinction. According to this formidable trio, the climate did
not kill its victims directly by making it too hot, cold, wet or dry for
them. Rather it destroyed their habitats.²⁰ We know that this is the
major cause of animal extinction in the modern world and we should be
immediately sympathetic to their case. Graham and Lundelius’s claim is
that severe habitat loss at the end of the ice age was a consequence of
changing weather patterns – the summers became relatively warmer and the
winters colder. Animal and plant communities which had evolved for many
thousands of years in conditions of limited seasonal differences
collapsed as some members became unable to tolerate the winters, and
others the summers.

It is one of the most astonishing features of ice-age animal communities
that species which now live many thousands of miles apart, in radically
different environments, then regularly rubbed haunches with each other.
The First Americans, touring their new world, would have seen what today
are far northern tundra species, such as caribou, musk ox and lemmings,
living side by side with what to us are quite southern species (that
live in woodland or on the prairies) such as elk and bison. Such animal
mosaics could exist in the ice age because the contrast between the
seasons was not nearly as marked as it is now.

When the winters became colder, some animals were driven to the south;
conversely, warmer summers pushed others to the north. No more could the
twain meet in neutral ground, as that place simply no longer existed.
Those animals that found new niches were the lucky ones; many that were
unable to adapt became extinct.

Dale Guthrie has explained why some animals survived and others didn’t
by reconstructing the impact of climate change on the distribution of
plant communities. In the world today we see these as distinct bands: in
the far north there is the band of tundra; south of that coniferous
forest; south again deciduous woodland; and then grasslands. The ice-age
world of the First Americans was not like this at all; rather than
arranged in latitudinal bands, plant communities were found in ‘plaids’
or mosaics – bits of today’s tundra, coniferous forest, deciduous trees
and grasslands mixed up together. It was the warmer summers and colder
winters that pulled these bands apart.

In the process, the animals that had depended upon this mixture of plant
types suffered – and they were predominantly those of very large
body-size: the mammoths, mastodons, giant sloths. These animals suffered
owing to a shortening of the growing season, restricting the time
available to feed their enormous bulk. They also suffered from the
marked reduction in plant diversity – they relied on eating a vast
assortment of plants to gain sufficient energy and nutrients. As seasons
became more marked and plant diversity reduced, specialised feeders rose
to ascendancy. In the far north, it was the caribou that could rely on
no more than lichen; in the woodlands it was the deer, a highly skilled
browser; in the south it was the bison which fed on the few types of
short-stemmed grasses that replaced the mix of many long-stemmed
varieties and herbs which had been favoured by the generalist grazers.
These new plants also came with chemical defences which the bison could
tolerate but which were toxic to many others. In effect, everything was
stacked against the mammoths, mastodons, and sloths. Guthrie’s argument
is that extinction was inevitable.

The competition between species reminds us that all animals are parts of
communities, and once one element is disturbed there might be a cascade
of consequences throughout the food web. So the loss of the carnivores,
such as the American lion, cheetah and smilodon, may simply have been
due to the loss of their preferred prey. And this may also account for
the extinction of giant birds, most of which had been eagles, vultures
and condors. These were all flesh-eating birds, as were the teratorns.
They may have relied on the vulnerable young camels, horses and even
mammoths, either as predators or as scavengers.²¹

The ecologist E. C. Pielou expresses caution in accepting these
environmental and ecological explanations for the mass extinctions.²²
Why, she asks, would the small modern beaver have been the victor in the
competition against the massive castoroides? Why could not the America
lion and smilodon have fed upon the many grazing animals that not only
survived but whose numbers flourished, such as the bison, moose and
deer? And why could the rotting carcasses of their victims not have fed
the teratorns and the vultures? We don’t normally think of such birds as
fussy eaters.²³

A strong argument, and with it comes an even stronger one – the simple
fact that far from being a unique event, this period of global warming
was just the most recent in the roller-coaster of climate change along
which our planet has been propelled for at least the last million years.
Periods of dramatic global warming have occurred roughly every 100,000
years, only for the planet then to revert back to ice-age conditions. On
each of those occasions, the resulting changes in seasonality and plant
distributions are unlikely to have been significantly different to those
which occurred during our period of interest, the millennia following
the most recent glacial maximum of 20,000 BC.

Yet the mega-fauna survived all of these previous climatic turnarounds,
habitat loss, and ecological havoc. No doubt their numbers suffered, but
they coped, finding refuges, perhaps in the far north, where conditions
remained sufficiently similar to those of the preceding ice age. And
then, once the climate reverted, they dispersed from those refuges to
become a major element of the global fauna once again. Why, then, could
the mastodon have not simply shifted their range northwards at the end
of the last ice age, to where spruce and pine forests survived, and
waited there to see out those ghastly warm and humid days of the
post-glacial? Could not yesterday’s camel, the giant sloths, castoroides
and even horses have found somewhere to survive within the vast and
astonishingly diverse continent of North America? Even if nothing ideal
was available or accessible, could these animals not have learned to
adapt to new habitats, and would not natural selection have provided a
helping hand by making subtle changes in their physiology and behaviour?
This is precisely what these species must have done many times during
the previous millions of years. So why didn’t the same tactic work at
the end of the most recent ice age?

We have one sensational discovery about an attempt at survival –
evidence that shocked scientists when it came to light in 1993. Up until
March of that year it was thought that every single mammoth in the world
had died by 10,000 BC – or at least very soon after. But then came the
announcement from Russian scientists that they had found mammoth bones
from animals that had survived long after this date on Wrangel Island –
a remote and desolate dot of land in the Arctic Ocean, 200 kilometres
north of Siberia.²⁴ Those mammoths had survived not just for a few
hundred more years, but, staggeringly, for another 6,000, to the time of
the Egyptian pyramids.

Twelve thousand years ago Wrangel Island was part of Beringia and the
mammoths that roamed across its hills were just like those elsewhere,
about 10 to 12 feet high at the shoulder. When the sea level rose, those
mammoths were isolated – but they paid a price for their survival. For,
over the course of about 500 generations, they shrunk in size, becoming
dwarves; the last survivors were no more than 6 feet high. This is not a
unique event – several other cases of mini-mammoths and mini-elephants
have been found from much earlier times in human history, such as on
Cyprus, Malta and islands off the coast of California. Some of those
mammoths had been no bigger than goats.

Becoming a dwarf is a good survival strategy when living on a small,
isolated island. When the quantity of food is restricted, there is a
reproductive premium to be gained from reducing body-size – one can
become fully-grown and sexually mature more quickly and, consequently,
pass on one’s genes into the next generation faster. And if one of the
original reasons for having a great hulk was to deter predators, this
becomes unnecessary when there are no wolves, lions or sabre-tooth cats
around. So we should not be surprised that the mammoths of Wrangel
Island were mere dwarfs compared to those which had been killed by
Clovis people at Lehner Ranch.

Although their discovery was sensational, it has done little to resolve
the mystery of the mass extinction from elsewhere in the world by 10,000
BC. The mammoths on Wrangel Island most likely survived because it
maintained a rich diversity of grasses, herbs and shrubs, owing to its
particular climate and geology. So the island had indeed been a refuge
for mammoths as boggy tundra and woodland spread elsewhere. It was one
from which the mammoths could have expanded their number and resumed
full body-size again – but only if the next ice age, the fall in sea
level and the return of an extensive mammoth steppe had occurred before
the Wrangel mini-mammoths had also fallen into the pit of extinction.

Did they fall or were they pushed? Probably the latter, as the first
date for human occupation on Wrangel Island is coincident with the last
date for the mammoths. We know little about that occupation. We simply
have a few traces of stone artefacts that must have come from people
pushed to the very limits of their own survival in such an inhospitable
land. But what could have been easier prey than mini-mammoths, animals
totally naïve about predators and with nowhere to go?

The Wrangel Island discoveries seem to put the Clovis hunters back into
the dock. These show that mammoths could have found refugia at the end
of the last ice age, but that once humans enter the equation, extinction
can rapidly follow. So perhaps it was just those few animals that the
Clovis people killed each year, represented at sites such as Naco,
Murray Springs and Lehner Ranch, that pushed mammoths over the edge into
the abyss of extinction – animals whose populations had become
fragmented and numbers depleted, animals who were weak and in poor
health as they sought refuge in conditions of ecological chaos.

We must now make one final return to the Northern American continent to
investigate what now seems to be the only possible solution to the
extinction. For although neither Clovis hunters nor climate change
appear to have had sufficient impact when working alone, they amounted
to a death sentence for mammoths, sloths, mastodons and fellow victims
when their forces were combined.

In conducting this final trial of the Clovis hunters and climate change
conspirators, I will draw on my own research from the early 1990s. Much
as I would love to excavate a Clovis kill site, this work was done with
a computer, far from the rigours of fieldwork. Just as economists use
computers to predict the future, such as the impact of an increase of
interest rates on the level of inflation, so too can archaeologists
build models to ‘predict’ the past. The objective of my research was to
explore the impact of slightly increased rates of predation in
conjunction with similarly increased frequencies of droughts on the
level of the mammoth population in North America.²⁵

One of the skills I acquired as a student was that of building
mathematical models for animal populations and then using a computer to
simulate prehistoric hunting methods.²⁶ I had worked with an ecologist
to write a computer program to simulate the population dynamics of
elephant populations in Africa. We had then experimented with the
simulated populations in the computer by ‘hitting’ them with years of
drought and with poachers to examine the likelihood that elephants would
survive as a living species into the next century.

Mammoths and the Clovis problem were always in the back of my mind.
Because of their similarities in body size, the population dynamics of
modern-day African elephants and pleistocene North American mammoths
will also have been similar. So I developed some alternative versions of
the computer simulations geared to Clovis hunting of mammoths. Then, as
with the elephant models, I used these simulations to do some
experiments: different levels of mammoth hunting, different strategies –
such as killing whole herds or just animals of a particular age or sex –
different degrees of environmental stress.²⁷

The findings were quite startling. It was of course possible to push
mammoths into extinction by environmental change alone. Making the
intensity of droughts ever more severe and their appearance more
frequent, would eventually kill off any mammoth population. Infant
mortality would become so high, and the onset of sexual maturity so
late, that populations would decline rather than grow. Equally, even
without any climate change the mammoth populations were very susceptible
to human predation. Even if hunters were randomly taking animals from a
herd at a rate of no more than 4 to 5 per cent each year, the
populations would enter serious decline and suffer eventual extinction.

The reason for this is simply their slow rate of reproduction. Remove a
few of the reproductively active females from a herd and the
consequences can be immense. I then combined a small amount of hunting
with a slight drought, neither of which would have been sufficient alone
to kill off the population. The mixture, however, was potent. Within my
computer I could watch mammoth populations of many thousands of animals
crashing to extinction within a few decades. A graduate student of mine,
Melissa Reed, built more sophisticated models which yielded the same
result.

Nothing like a blitzkrieg was required to achieve this – the low degree
of opportunistic hunting that is compatible with the archaeological
record appears to be quite sufficient. To pursue the military analogy,
guerilla warfare had devastating consequences. Moreover, the
environmental stress and the hunting do not need to be concurrent. The
population consequences of killing a few mammoths, especially the young
females, may not be felt until a decade later; if that is when
environmental stress also occurs, its effect on the population may be
devastating.

The same explanation might suffice for the extinction of the ground
sloth, the mastodon, the American horse, camel and tapir. However, it
should be remembered that there is a complete absence of archaeological
evidence for any of these animals and that the evidence for drought
during the Younger Dryas remains contentious. Moreover, we must also
attempt to discover why some large mammals avoided extinction, notably
the bison which need to consume huge amounts of water to survive.²⁸

In the spring of 1997 Melissa and I travelled to Lehner Ranch, Murray
Springs and Naco with Paul Martin and Vance Haynes, the geoarchaeologist
who excavated the site during the late 1960s.

We had given a seminar about our research at Arizona State University,
describing the results of my work and Melissa’s new simulations. This
involved giving a demonstration on a monitor while we talked, so that
Vance, Paul and others could watch our version of prehistory replayed:
people colonising Alaska, ice sheets retreating, people passing through
the ice-free corridor and dispersing across North America, the emergence
of the Clovis culture and the onset of drought conditions in the south,
and then mammoth populations collapsing into extinction

We approached the seminar with some trepidation. Vance and Paul had
spent more than thirty years involved with the issue of mammoth
extinction; they had been working on it before Melissa was born; they
had dug and visited the sites, published books and papers, attended the
major conferences arguing the odds for or against overkill while I was
still at school. So, as we gave our presentation, I kept a watchful eye
on them, worried as they whispered to each other, wondered what they
thought, and feared we might have made some fundamental error that they
alone could detect.

There was no cause for anxiety, as both Vance and Paul proved themselves
to be constructive in their criticisms and generous with their praise.
And they offered to take us to those classic sites – Murray Springs,
Lehner Ranch and Naco, the site of ‘the one that got away’. Before that,
Paul provided another treat – a visit to his hilltop laboratory
overlooking Tucson and the Arizona desert. In a splendid glass-topped
cabinet, in which lesser people would have kept coins, medals or pinned
butterflies, he had his treasured collection of prehistoric dung balls.

Vance seemed to want to relive the excavations at Murray Springs. To get
there we had to leave the vehicle and walk for a short distance across
the scrubby desert. At the site he explained the stratigraphy, pointing
to the layers in the exposed sections that might indicate prolonged
drought at the end of the ice age, and then the transition to the
Holocene. He showed us precisely where Elouise had been discovered – his
name for the she-mammoth that he had found intact. She had shown no sign
of being killed and was thought to have died a natural death. He
supposed that Clovis people had scavenged upon her carcass. We saw where
her footprints had been found; perhaps they were her final steps, or
those of another animal, curious and maybe caring about the dying beast.
Paul drew from his jacket a replica of an enigmatic artefact found at
the site: a 10-inch-long piece of mammoth bone that had been carved and
perforated with a hole, believed to have been a shaft-straighter. He
asked Vance to place it precisely where it had been found, as if this
were some ritualistic act. A few metres from the site of Elouise, we
were shown the bison kill site; here the remains of a herd of bison
which seem to have been driven into a swamp before being slaughtered
were found.

The last North American mammoth died at some time around 10,000 BC.
Whether it had a violent, bloody death perpetrated by Clovis hunters, or
quietly passed away unseen other than by encircling vultures, is
unknown. At a similar date, life also departed from the very last ground
sloth and mastodon, from the last of the glyptodon, yesterday’s camel
and American horse. The world became a far poorer and less interesting
place without them. The bison dominated the prairies and caribou were
the masters of the boggy tundra that replaced the mammoth steppe, once
home to such a magnificent array of ice-age mammals.

North America took on its modern appearance. The southwest turned into
desert; great plains stretched through the centre of the continent.
Deciduous woodland was established in the east and coniferous forest in
the north. The ice sheets practically disappeared and the great lakes
were rapidly draining to leave those which we know today. The climate
settled down, with no more of the violent oscillations of the last few
thousand years.

Something else had happened too: the last Clovis point was manufactured,
used and discarded. With the passing of the ice-age bestiary and the
emergence of a more stable environment, the Clovis way of life had
disappeared. As it did so, human culture underwent the exact converse of
nature; it diversified, to make the North American continent a much
richer and more interesting place. All its inhabitants continued to live
as hunter-gatherers but never again would there be the unity to the
North American people that was found during Clovis times.

28 Virginity Reconsidered

Hunter-gatherers of Tierra del Fuego and in the Amazon, 11,500–6000 BC

It is 11,000 BC. The cool water of Chinchihuapi Creek laps across John
Lubbock’s toes as he sits quietly upon its bank pondering the journey
ahead, one that will take him through American history until he reaches
5000 BC. The surface shimmers with light beams that have penetrated the
canopy from the newly risen sun. Other than for a kingfisher perching
upon an overhanging branch, Lubbock sits alone. Monte Verde has been
abandoned, but elsewhere in South America people are living in almost
every ecological nook and cranny, and by virtually every type of hunting
and gathering imaginable: some survive as big-game hunters, some as
fishermen, others as plant gatherers. Their cultures are also varied:
some continue to use the crudest of stone tools, others have adopted
elegant stone points chipped into a variety of shapes. Indeed, South
America at this date is far more culturally diverse than its northern
neighbour, a continent where the Clovis point and its minor variants are
all-pervasive.

From Monte Verde Lubbock follows the Chinchihuapi into the valley of the
River Maullín, and then climbs into and across the Andes. As he does so
the temperate forest gives way to beech woodland and then to scattered,
stunted pines. Finally he walks across a carpet of grass and flowers,
through a mountain pass between glaciers and alongside a crystal-blue
lake. Peaks of snow-capped granite tower above, turning from grey to
pink in the brilliant sun. The glaciers extend far down the western
mountainsides as long tongues of ice that stretch into the valleys and
beyond.

Lubbock heads south and begins to encounter abandoned campsites and
scatters of charred animal bones. The grasslands on which they lie cover
an extensive plateau that is cut by deep ravines. It tilts gently
towards the Atlantic Ocean, its coastline located much further to the
east than it is today as the sea level remains at its ice-age low.
During the next 10,000 years these grasslands will become quite arid,
making them so barren that Charles Darwin will consider them cursed by
sterility when he too travels through Patagonia in the early nineteenth
century.

Lubbock reaches a region of shallow flat-bottomed valleys, canyons and
low hills close to the Atlantic coast. The ravine he enters provides
shelter from the exhausting wind that has been a constant companion
since leaving the Andes. Others are also finding shelter – a group of
hunters returning to their cave in the cliff-like wall of the valley
side. There are four of them, dressed in furs and hides, carrying
segments of a horse. Lubbock follows them inside.

The air is smoky and dense from a fire burning dung. As his eyes adjust,
Lubbock sees six others – women, children and an old man – sitting in
the cave; to the rear, more bodies shuffle in the darkness. Pieces of
precious wood are placed to refuel the fire and steaks of horse meat are
set to roast. Lubbock sits close to the fire, as grateful as the hunters
for its warmth, and listens to the telling of the hunt. He learns that
they trapped the horse in a ravine, ambushed and killed it from above
with stone-tipped spears. It was butchered and the best joints carried
home. During their return journey, the men had encountered a recently
deceased giant sloth. Had they not killed the horse they would have
scavenged upon its carcass. Instead they left it for the vultures that
they knew would soon arrive.

During the next few days Lubbock learns that this hunter-gatherer group
uses several different caves, frequently shifting their few belongings
and dependants from one shelter to another. One that is particularly
favoured is about 30 kilometres to the west, located in an old volcanic
crater. As well as horse and sloth, they hunt guanaco – a llama-like
creature that lives in small herds on the grassland. They are effective
hunters, making use of spear points as lethal as those used by Clovis
hunters far to the north but of a quite different design. Their points
lack the Clovis flute, the central shallow groove, but have an elegant
long stem.

On one occasion Lubbock travels with a party of hunters to the far
south, to what we today call Tierra del Fuego. When sitting in one
cramped shelter, that known as Tros Arroyos,¹ near deafened by a howling
wind and surrounded by the blackest of black nights, Lubbock knew that
he had reached the very end of the earth. Across the glowing embers his
companions talk quietly, deciding whether the next day should be spent
searching for horse or setting traps for fox. Lubbock opens Prehistoric
Times and finds sufficient firelight to read what his namesake thought
about the nineteenth-century inhabitants of this barren land.

Victorian John Lubbock had no personal experience of the Fuegians and so
he drew on the account provided by his great friend and mentor, Charles
Darwin, who had arrived in Tierra del Fuego in 1834 during his voyage on
the Beagle.² The people that Darwin met had been living entirely by
hunting and gathering, making his account, and those of other Victorian
travellers, of great value to modern-day archaeologists when attempting
to interpret the prehistoric remains in caves such as Tros Arroyos.
Indeed, the nineteenth-century Fuegians were most likely the direct
descendants of the very first inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego, those who
had used Tros Arroyos and other caves in 11,000 BC. But Victorian
accounts need to be read with great caution in order to separate useful
observation from racial prejudice.

‘While going on shore,’ Darwin had explained, ‘we pulled alongside a
canoe with six Fuegians. They were the most abject and miserable
creatures I anywhere beheld… These poor wretches were stunted in their
growth, their hideous faces bedaubed with white paint, their skins
filthy and greasy, their hair entangled, their voices discordant, their
gestures violent and without dignity. Viewing such men, one can hardly
make oneself believe they are fellow-creatures and inhabitants of the
same world.’ Darwin had continued to describe how they ‘slept on the wet
ground coiled up like animals’, and avoided famine by cannibalism and
parricide (the murder of a near relative). Robert Fitzroy, captain of
the Beagle, thought the women should be called she-Fuegians and that
‘they may be fit for… uncouth men, but to civilized people their
appearance is disgusting’.³

Victorian John Lubbock had also extracted from Darwin’s account
descriptions of expertly crafted technology and sophisticated
hunting-and-gathering methods – quite the opposite of what one would
have expected from poor wretches and uncouth men. The Fuegians had
wigwam-like shelters, ‘straight and well polished arrows’ and ‘hooks
very nearly the same shape as ours’ as part of a wide range of
stone-tipped spears, fishing tackle and bows and arrows. They had
remarkably well trained hunting dogs, were excellent swimmers, and were
evidently adept at ambushing guanaco. ‘In reading almost any account of
savages,’ Victorian Lubbock had concluded, ‘it is impossible not to
admire the skill with which they use their rude weapons and
implements.’⁴ He was evidently struggling to reconcile the prevailing
Victorian attitudes to savages, epoused by no less a figure than Charles
Darwin himself, with his own admiration for the skills required to make
and use hunter-gatherer tools.

Modern John Lubbock’s journey from Monte Verde to the caves of southern
Patagonia had taken him from one of the most recent excavations in South
America to two of the earliest. The first cave he entered was Fell’s
Cave; that in the volcanic crater had been Palli Aike. Both were
investigated in 1934 during the pioneering archaeological survey of
southern Patagonia undertaken by Junius Bird from the American Museum of
Natural History.⁵ His excavations uncovered the remains of fireplaces,
the distinctive stone tools which soon became known as ‘fishtail’
points⁶ and bones from horse, sloth and guanaco.⁷

Bird knew that these deposits were of great antiquity. He had recognised
the bones of extinct animals, and found that the remains in Fell’s Cave
had been sealed under roof collapse, on which later people had camped.
Bird had little idea about the age of the fishtail points, or the means
to find out, as radiocarbon dating had still to be invented. It was not
until 1969 that this technique revealed that Fell’s Cave had been
occupied as early as 11,000 BC.⁸ That was, of course, long before the
discovery of Monte Verde but it remains one of the earliest-dated
occupations in the whole of the Americas.⁹

It is now 10,800 BC. Lubbock is in the Amazon, having travelled more
than 5,000 kilometres northwards from Tierra del Fuego.¹⁰ He paddles a
canoe on a river that will one day be known as the Tapajós, although its
course will change many times before it receives that name. In Europe
and western Asia the Younger Dryas has just arrived; hunters at
Stellmoor in the Ahrensburg valley are checking their bows, while the
dwellings of ‘Ain Mallaha have been deserted. But here in the Amazon the
Younger Dryas will go by quite unnoticed. Lubbock passes caiman basking
on sandbanks in the river; a dolphin follows his canoe.

The Amazon today is the greatest museum on earth, with contents worth
far more than the combined treasures of the British Museum, the Louvre,
and the New York Metropolitan. Its plant communities passed through the
whole ice age almost unchanged. And although we are doing our utmost to
destroy it today, much of this museum survives as a twenty-first-century
prehistoric world.

It was once thought that the Amazon had been decimated by the ice age.
Arid conditions were supposed to have broken up the continuous forest
into a patchwork of woodlands, savannah and grassland. But when samples
of pollen were collected from ice-age sediments, these showed that the
forest had remained virtually intact.¹¹ Practically the same range of
plants and trees in broadly the same proportions had continued growing
in the basin throughout the collapse of global temperatures that
culminated in the LGM and then through the rise of temperatures to the
present day. Some developments did occur; at 20,000 BC the Amazon
lowlands had been home to several tree species that require a cool
climate and are today restricted to the eastern slopes of the Andes. But
their exclusion as temperatures rose was a matter of detail – the
rainforest has hardly changed at all.

Lubbock entered the Amazon basin after a journey through the grasslands
and thorny woodlands of eastern South America, passing close to Pedra
Furada where Niède Guidon will one day excavate. He met many communities
of hunter-gatherers but passed quickly by, anxious to reach the
rainforest. The woodland had gradually become thicker, the temperatures
rose and soon he had taken to travelling by water rather than land.
Tropical animals and plants appeared as one small tributary led into
another and transported Lubbock to the heart of the rainforest.

Lubbock’s river joins another, one much larger and flowing more swiftly
with dark brown rather than crystal-clear water – the Amazon itself. A
troop of monkeys in the tree canopy is alarmed and starts to howl,
herons are startled and take flight. Soon after entering the new current
Lubbock sees a canoe moored on the far bank, and then two figures
standing by the shallows listening to the commotion. They turn and
disappear into the trees. Lubbock crosses the river, ties his boat to
theirs and follows the trail. It leads through a strip of marshy
woodland and then into the thick forest, soon becoming a well-worn path.

Below the trees it is cooler and quite dark as the dense canopy provides
few spy-holes for the sun. The ground is soft underfoot from thick
layers of rotting leaf litter; the air is thick with the pungency of
organic decay. Lubbock passes an immense variety of forest trees, many
with massive vertical trunks wrapped in huge serpent-like creepers. Some
have buttresses so vast they appear as wooden walls within the forest.

He catches occasional glimpses of the two men and notices that one
carries a large fish strung across his back, its tail sometimes dragging
along the ground. They walk swiftly, never pausing to rest. After almost
10 kilometres a peak of brilliant red rock emerges triumphantly above
the trees, and soon Lubbock faces a warren of caves in a sandstone
knoll. The fish-bearers disappear inside, calling out that they have
returned. Lubbock hears greetings; a joke is evidently made as hearty
laughter follows.

As he approaches the cave entrance Lubbock sees paintings on its
sandstone wall: concentric circles in red and yellow, hand-prints and an
upside-down schematic figure with rays emanating sun-like from its head.
They remind him of those at Pedra Furada.

Lubbock has arrived at Monte Alegre – or Happy Mountain in Portuguese –
and is about to join the occupants of Pedra Pintada cave. This is one of
the most important archaeological sites of the Amazon basin – indeed
within the whole of South America. It was found in 1991 during a survey
in the lower Amazon basin, conducted by Anna Roosevelt from the Field
Museum of Chicago. When her team excavated the site, they found evidence
for human habitation at 10,800 BC,¹² proving – to the surprise of many
anthropologists – that people were able to live as hunter-gatherers in
the Amazon rainforest. Anthropologists had previously believed that
without slash-and-burn agriculture people were unable to acquire
sufficient food from the forest and consequently that the Amazon had
remained unoccupied until at least 5000 BC. But, as Lubbock is about to
discover, those who occupy Pedra Pintada live by hunting and gathering
alone.

In the cave’s airy interior there are at least ten people standing in a
circle admiring the catch. They wear few clothes and are reminiscent of
today’s Amazonian Indians – stout, with copper skins, straight black
hair and elegantly painted faces. The floor is covered with mats made
from enormous leaves; there are baskets and bags stacked along a wall;
spears, fishing rods and harpoons are propped in a corner. Wooden bowls
at the rear of the cave contain lumps of red pigment that have been
crushed and mixed with water. Along another wall there are bundles of
soft grass, tied with plant fibres into cushions. In the middle, a small
smouldering fireplace next to which the fish lies magnificently on the
ground.

A woman crouches and with a stone knife removes the fish’s head. This is
offered to a young man, the fish bearer, who takes it with a grin. He
sucks at each eye-socket in turn while blood and juices trickle down his
chest. With that preliminary over, the fish is taken outside and
gutted.¹³

Lubbock spends the next few days with the people of Pedra Pintada,
helping to gather freshwater mussels and collecting a bewildering
assortment of fruits, nuts, roots and leaves. Some, such as brazil nuts
and cashews, are familiar to him, while others are quite new. He sees a
new tool-making technique: flakes of stone are shaped into spear points
not by striking with hammer-stones but by pressing pointed pieces of
bone against the stone with such force that tiny chips become detached.
This is known by archaeologists as ‘pressure flaking’ and was used
throughout the prehistoric world to make particularly elaborate
artefacts, such as the triangular points found at this site and the
Clovis points of North America.

As Lubbock has already seen a great deal of hunting and plant-gathering
in his South American travels, the sophistication of his unknowing
host’s foraging comes as no surprise. Neither does their skill and
ingenuity in using an immense range of plant material for making
clothing and equipment. But the extent of freshwater fishing is quite
new to Lubbock and at this the people excel. Large fish are speared from
boats and smaller ones caught in nets. Recent Amazonian people have used
poison to catch fish and it is easy to believe that those who inhabited
Pedra Pintada in 10,800 BC did likewise.

Lubbock learns about this when he accompanies a party of men, women and
children – about a dozen in all – into the forest. They go to one
specific tree about a kilometre from their cave. It is a mighty size,
the girth far larger than any Lubbock has seen before. Several metres
from its base the forest floor has evidently been disturbed many times
before. He watches as the party space out and begin to dig little pits
to expose a network of roots. Next, they use stone saws and knives to
cut sections, each about the size of Lubbock’s forearm, and pile them
into baskets. Once these are full, the party departs, with the young
women carrying the load upon their heads.

A tiny trail is followed to a small clearing by the edge of a shallow
creek where the baskets are emptied on the ground. Both men and women
disappear momentarily into the forest; Lubbock remains with the
children, throwing sticks into the shallow, murky water. The men return
with stout wooden sticks and proceed to smash the roots to a pulp,
keeping their mouths firmly closed as bits of fibre and white sap are
sprayed into the air.

Meanwhile the women have returned with large flat waxy leaves. Within a
few minutes, these have been tied into loose baskets. Root pulp is
scooped inside and the men carry these away, taking care to avoid any
contact with the oozing, fibrous mush. Lubbock remains with the women
and children, passing them branches and leaves to help build a dam
across the creek. The men have reached about 500 metres upstream where
they wade knee-deep in the water and swish the baskets around to create
a milky-white cloud.

Back at the dam the women are now resting while eating some berries.
They are soon joined by the men, who prefer to chew upon wads of leaves.
The children peer excitedly into the water and then shriek as they see
the first fish arrive. They are literally swimming for their lives,
trying to escape the poison that is drifting downstream. Once they reach
the dam they have nowhere to go. Some turn and swim back to an immediate
death while others flounder on to the sticks and leaves, where they
suffocate. Within minutes the surface of the creek is shimmering with
the bodies of dead fish. These are collected by the women who thread
each fish through its gills on to twine with bone needles. Soon the
whole party is returning to Pedra Pintada draped with their silvery
catch. Gutting, washing and baking will eliminate the poison. But
Lubbock is no longer with them: he has departed westwards for the
distant Andes.

Roosevelt’s excavation found the remains of many animals and plants
still exploited by Amazonian people today, including the fruits of the
tarumā tree which is used for fishing bait. The animal bones were poorly
preserved but allowed an immense variety of species to be identified,
including snakes, amphibians, birds, tortoises and – in greatest
abundance – fish, ranging in types from those just a few centimetres to
over 1.5 metres in length.

Amidst the plant remains, animal bones and fireplaces Roosevelt found
more than 30,000 stone flakes from tool-making – but no more than
twenty-four finished tools – and hundreds of lumps of red pigment. She
took immense care to ensure that this was the same pigment that had been
used to make the wall-paintings in the cave, examining it
microscopically and analysing its chemistry. It did indeed prove
identical to that used in many of the paintings, providing one of the
most thoroughly documented cases for Pleistocene rock art in the
Americas.

Pedra Pintada was abandoned soon after 10,000 BC. As at Monte Verde,
quite where the people went we do not know. For more than 2,000 years
the cave was empty, while its floor became covered with blown sand. And
then new occupants arrived, coming to use the cave on a far more casual
basis and having no interest in painting the walls. They left a similar
array of plant, animal and fish remains, together with something else,
something quite new in the whole of South America – pottery. By 6000 BC
those living in the Amazon had invented the use of ceramic bowls,
sometimes decorating them with simple geometric designs.¹⁴ As that new
technology emerged, so an old one faded as the fine triangular stone
points were abandoned and stone stools became no more than simple flakes
and unshaped grinding stones. It would take another 1,500 years before
pottery was adopted in northern Central America, and another 4,000 years
until it was found in the central Andes, even though its people were
already domesticating plants and animals.

Fragments of similar pottery are found within shell middens that appear
along the riverbanks after 6000 BC, showing how some of the Amazonian
people had begun to specialise in river fauna, both the molluscs and the
many varieties of fish. As time passed, riverside villages developed,
and eventually the cultivation of manioc and maize began.¹⁵ These were
the type of people first encountered by Victorian travellers, such as
Darwin’s intellectual bedfellow Alfred Russel Wallace, long after the
hunter-gatherers of Pedra Pintada cave – and presumably elsewhere in the
Amazon basin – had faded from human memory.

The triangular stone spear points that were found were assumed to have
come from prehistoric horticulturists, living in much the same way as
recent Amazonian Indians. And yet both their shape and technique of
manufacture were quite similar to points found elsewhere in South
America and already known to have a terminal ice-age date.¹⁶ And so
Roosevelt’s excavations in Pedra Pintada were very special indeed – not
only extending the known duration of occupation in the Amazonian
rainforest, but adding a further way of life for people who lived as the
ice age came to its close.

But perhaps the most intriguing consequence of her work is that it
questions the ‘virginity’ of the forests. Such was the term used by
Alfred Russel Wallace in his 1889 account of his Amazonian travels. Like
all other nineteenth-century travellers Wallace assumed that the whole
forest was quite unaltered by human hands. But now that Roosevelt has
revealed an extra 5,000 years of human occupation, this must be
questioned. The possibility arises that the distinct clusters of
food-producing plants that are found, such as the brazil and cashew nut
trees, are as much a consequence of human activity as of nature.¹⁷ The
exhibits of the great museum of the Amazon may have been slowly and
subtly rearranged by generations of prehistoric foragers.

