37 Pigs and Gardens in the Highlands

The development of tropical horticulture in highland New Guinea, 20,000–5000 BC

Three Aborigines sit in front of John Lubbock, expertly paddling their
canoe into currents and away from reefs. He leans back, relaxing; his
hand trails through the water while sea birds are gliding in the
brilliant blue sky above.

Lubbock is crossing the newly formed strait that separates the
northernmost tip of Australia and the southern coast of Papua New
Guinea. At the LGM, this 300-kilometre-wide stretch of water had been
grasslands, providing hunting grounds for ice-age Aborigines. By 6000
BC, the date of Lubbock’s stowaway canoe journey, rising sea levels had
flooded the Arafura plain and breached the last remaining isthmus of
land. Only the hills escaped, surviving as more than one hundred islands
scattered across the Torres Strait. Some have hills of their own, some
possess rocky coastlines ringed with mangrove swamps and others are mere
islets of sand.¹

The first islands Lubbock reached are known today as Muralug, Moa and
Badu. He found them inhabited by people with lifestyles similar to that
he had experienced in Cape York. But as Lubbock travelled further north,
the islands became smaller and lacked any sign of human life. Some
remained uninhabited until the present day; others were colonised by
people from New Guinea, although it is difficult to say when as
archaeological research has been so limited.² They were certainly
occupied by AD 1898, the year that the Cambridge anthropologist A. C.
Haddon arrived in the Torres Strait to make a survey of its people. His
monumental six-volume work became an invaluable record of traditional
Aboriginal lifestyles.

Haddon’s studies built on the first scientific observations of the
Torres Strait made in 1770 by Joseph Banks who travelled as the
naturalist on Captain Cook’s ship, the Endeavour.³ Anthropologists,
geographers and, most recently, the archaeologist David Harris from
University College, London, went on to develop Haddon’s work. Since 1974
Harris has been reconstructing the lifestyles of the Torres Strait
islanders both at the time of Captain Cook’s voyage, and of Lubbock’s
visit – 6000 BC – so soon after the islands had been formed.⁴

Harris discovered that while the people encountered by Banks and Haddon
on the larger southern islands were hunter-gatherers, those further
north were farmers, or more accurately swidden horticulturalists. Each
year they burned woodland and planted yams, sweet potatoes and taro –
tropical root crops that are still dietary staples for much of Southeast
Asia today. Groves of banana, mango and coconut trees were also cared
for in their gardens. Wild plant foods were gathered, especially from
the mangrove swamps that fringed the islands, while dugongs were hunted
for their meat and fat.⁵

The intensity of horticulture encountered by Harris was minimal compared
with that observed by the first Europeans to visit New Guinea. Both in
its lowlands and highlands vast areas of forests had been cleared and
turned to garden plots for root crops. In complete contrast to the
transient hunter-gatherer campsites of northern Australia, the first
European explorers found densely populated villages ruled by powerful
chiefs whose wealth was measured by the number of pigs they owned and
who regularly waged war against each other. Hence the narrow Torres
Strait divided two quite different worlds: Australian hunter-gatherers
to the south and New Guinea farmers to the north.

Why hadn’t the Australian Aborigines adopted agriculture? Captain James
Cook asked this question when he landed on Possession Island off Cape
York in 1770 and reflected that ‘the Natives know nothing of
cultivation’ and ‘when one considers the proximity of this country with
New Guinea…which produces cocoa-nuts and many other fruits proper for
the support of man it seems strange that they should not long ago have
been transplanted here’.⁶ To Cook, and many later anthropologists, the
Aborigines appeared quite backward to have remained as hunter-gatherers
when they could have adopted a lifestyle ‘proper for the support of
man’.

From studies of the Aborigines, it became apparent that their devotion
to hunting and gathering could not be explained by a lack of farming
knowledge, as they were quite aware of how to cultivate plants. When
those in Cape York gathered wild yams, for instance, they often ensured
that parts of the tubers were left behind, or were even replanted to
ensure a supply in the following year.⁷ Moreover, substantial trading
contacts between the Aborigines and the Torres Strait islanders had
brought the hunter-gatherers into direct contact with the farmers. So
why had farming not spread from New Guinea to Australia, just as it had
spread from Western Asia to Europe?

An answer was provided by Peter White from Sydney University in 1971:
the Australian hunter-gatherers were ‘simply too well off to bother
about agriculture’.⁸ By that date, views about farming had changed
dramatically from those held by James Cook, and indeed by academics
right up until the late 1960s. The view that farming was an inevitable
step on the path to civilisation, one that would be grasped at every
opportunity, had been overthrown. Western academics who lived with
hunter-gatherers in Australia and Africa decided that they had been
among what the anthropologist Marshall Sahlins declared to be the
‘original affluent society’.⁹

Such hunter-gatherers were found to work for no more than a few hours
each day, to be free from the physical ailments caused by back-breaking
tillage and harvesting, and unencumbered by the social tensions and
violence found in densely populated farming communities. And so the
question that Peter White and his colleagues were asking by 1970 was not
why had certain hunter-gatherers ‘failed’ to adopt farming, but what had
forced others to do so when it had such disastrous consequences for
their quality of life.

Lubbock gains his first sight of New Guinea from afar – green lowlands
below pale clouds that had resolved themselves into ghostly-looking
mountains. His unknowing companions remain on one of the islands and he
paddles on alone towards the mangrove-edged coastline. A wide river
mouth takes Lubbock into New Guinea itself. For some distance the river
remains broad, winding in fine sweeps below mangrove-covered banks,
until, after an hour of paddling, it splits into two. One branch runs
with chocolate-brown water, indicating it to be a forest stream rising
in the lowlands, while the other is milky-white, revealing that its
waters had once flowed across limestone and hence have a mountain
source. To find human settlement, Lubbock must follow the latter. While
substantial settlements most likely existed in the New Guinea lowlands
at 6000 BC, archaeologists have yet to find them.¹⁰ So begins Lubbock’s
exploration of the highlands.

The first European exploration did not in fact occur until the 1930s.
Earlier expeditions to New Guinea, such as that of the British
Ornithologists’ Union led by A. F. R. Wollaston in 1910, had assumed
that ‘novelties’ other than exotic birds might be found above 1,000
metres. But they had no idea what such novelties might be; nor did they
know that fertile inter-montane valleys existed, believing that there
was a single mountain chain across the middle of the island.¹¹

The first European contact with the New Guinea highlanders who lived
within those valleys was by German Lutheran missionaries in 1919. They
kept their discovery secret for fear of attracting rivals in the
business of winning human souls: the Baptists, Anglicans, Wesleyans and,
their most feared opposition, the French Roman Catholics. It was the
1930s quest for gold by Australian prospectors that brought the New
Guinea highlanders to public knowledge. In 1935 Jack Hides penetrated
into one of the inter-montane valleys with his fellow prospector Jim
O’Malley. Hides later wrote that ‘on every slope were cultivated
squares, while little columns of smoke rising in the still air revealed
to us the homes of the people of this land. I had never seen anything
more beautiful. Beyond all stood the heights of some mighty mountain
chain that sparkled in places with the colours of the setting sun.’¹²

Lubbock’s journey also leads to the highlands, but long before such
intensive cultivation has begun. As his river journey continues, small
trees from which he picks fresh fruit replace the mangroves. When the
river runs straight he snatches glimpses of the distant mountains; but
such infrequent views are soon lost altogether as the river narrows yet
further and begins to meander between huge trees which shut out all but
a narrow strip of sky.

Travel becomes monotonous; the riverside vegetation turns to rank
undergrowth and rotting trunks protrude from steep muddy banks.¹³ On
good days the air is musty; on most days it is rife with the smell of
organic decay. It rains frequently, and the leeches are relentless for
Lubbock’s blood. Compensation for such trials arrives in the occasional
sightings of exotic birds, especially the grandiloquent plumes of a bird
of paradise. As the river begins to climb, exotic birds are rivalled by
other natural wonders: iguanas sunning themselves on logs; bee eaters
and swallows swooping amongst swarms of bright yellow flies; tree ferns
and flowering creepers.

Lubbock is, however, more interested in the first indication that
another type of forest dweller is near by. Some of the fallen trees have
evidently been cut with stone axes; others have been burned. He passes
an abandoned dugout canoe sinking into river mud. And there are paths –
small trails where the bush has been cleared or simply beaten back. Some
cross the river, others run parallel for short stretches before veering
off into the forest. Some must belong to animals but human feet have
marked many others.¹⁴

Lubbock moors the canoe, leaves the river and begins to follow one such
path towards what we now call the Wahgi valley. The air remains hot,
humid and musty; the light is gloomy and takes on a greenish hue. Only
on rare occasions is the canopy incomplete, splashing sunlight on to the
forest floor. New odours arise – some like honeysuckle, others like
rotting fruit. And new sounds, perhaps of the same birds and animals he
has heard before, but now limited and muffled by the confusion of trees.
Perhaps human voices. The path continues, through forest, along
riverbanks, and on to ridges from which he can see the huge expanse of
forest climbing over hills to disappear under heavy cloud.

Below those clouds the forest climbs to 4,000 metres above sea level. At
6000 BC, it has only recently attained such heights; during the LGM,
lower temperatures and reduced rainfall had kept the trees below 2,500
metres. Instead of highland forest there had been open grasslands with
scattered shrubs and tree ferns. Glaciers had formed on the peaks and
extended into the higher montane valleys.¹⁵

The grasslands might have been good hunting territory. Two sites are
known from close to the tree-line, but neither gives much away as to
what people had been doing in the highlands. Kosipe yielded a scatter of
artefacts including axeheads at 2,000 metres above sea level, some left
there as long ago as 27,000 BC. Dense stands of fruit and nut trees
still grow close by, suggesting that Kosipe might have been occupied by
people on seasonal expeditions to collect their produce.¹⁶ A little
lower, at 1,720 metres, the rockshelter of Nombe can be found, which had
been sporadically occupied between 27,000 and 12,500 BC. Along with
stone artefacts, the bones of several ground- and tree-living animals
were found within the cave. The human occupants of Nombe seem to have
had a time-share arrangement with the thylacine, the native wild dog
otherwise known as the Tasmanian tiger. The bones of various
forest-browsing animals were also found, but whether they, and the other
animals, had been the prey of its human or thylacine occupants remains
unclear.¹⁷

With the advent of marked global warming at 9600 BC, the trees spread
above 3,000 metres, following in the wake of shrubs that had already
invaded the higher altitudes. Unlike the global trend, the climate
appears to have become less rather than more seasonal.¹⁸ Within a
further two millennia the forests were much like those Lubbock viewed on
his journey to the Wahgi valley, and much like those one can see today.

The upper reaches of that valley lie about 20 kilometres west of Mount
Hagen in the centre of Papua New Guinea. Missionaries first arrived in
1933 and found a series of small empires ruled by dictatorial big-men.
Their wealth and power were measured by the number of pigs, women and
shell valuables they owned, these being acquired through the complex
trading system between tribes known to anthropologists as the Moka
exchange. The women and low-status men worked in gardens, cultivating
crops of yams, sweet potatoes and taro. Warfare between villages was
endemic, a means by which the big-men extended and consolidated their
power.

The missionaries, closely followed by gold prospectors and government
officials, were treated as people from the spirit world. They provided a
seemingly unlimited supply of the highly desired steel axes and marine
shells. In so doing they undermined the traditional ceremonial exchange
system on which the big-men had relied for securing their wealth.
Warfare was also suppressed and European administrators began to usurp
the authority of traditional leaders. As a consequence, when the
anthropologist Andrew Strathern went to live with the Kawelka tribe in
the Upper Wahgi Valley in the early 1960s to make a classic study of
big-man society, the traditional lifestyle had already been
substantially altered by Western contact.¹⁹

At around that time, members of the Kawelka tribe returned to the part
of the Wahgi valley known as Kuk Swamp. They had abandoned this land in
1900 after the loss of a tribal fight, and all signs of previous
cultivation had long been hidden by a thick carpet of grass.²⁰

Kuk Swamp lies at 1,500 metres above sea level and appears today as an
extensive area of grassland with an almost complete absence of trees.
North and east of the swamp is a high, narrow ridge known as Ep, covered
with much shorter grass and the only trees of the region. These are not,
however, part of the original forest of the Wahgi valley; they are a
secondary growth that occurred after the area had been entirely cleared
for farming. Marshes are found to the south, and low hills separated by
drained ground to the west.

The Kawelka tribe began their recolonisation of Kuk Swamp by developing
gardens on the surrounding drylands; within three years, confirmation of
their territorial rights by neighbouring tribes, and an increase in
their number, led them to reclaim the swamp itself by digging
substantial drainage ditches. But the government claimed much of Kuk
Swamp in 1969 for its own developments, including an agricultural
research station, and inhibited the Kawelka expansion. It was
excavations at that research station during the 1970s, by Jack Golson of
the Australian National University, that exposed a much more ancient
history of farming in the New Guinea highlands.

John Lubbock arrives in a clearing above Kuk Swamp in 5500 BC, the path
bringing him on to hills to the west of the wetland area itself. The
landscape is quite different to the open grassland that will be found by
the missionaries and anthropologists of the twentieth century. The
forest which had been growing and evolving at this altitude for many
thousands, probably millions, of years remains largely intact, having
survived throughout the LGM. But on the drylands around the swamp there
are clearings where the forest has already gone; within some of these,
shrubs and grasses have taken hold to create a tangle of undergrowth.
The trees in Lubbock’s clearing have only recently been removed –
charred stumps suggest the use of both axes and fire. As a result,
sunlight floods on to the few trees and plants that remain.

Just as Lubbock crouches to examine one such plant his attention is
drawn to something altogether more striking – a pig. A fat, brown, hairy
pig with white tusks, sleeping in a hollow of its own making. Lubbock
approaches with caution. It stirs and he halts. Grunting, it rises and
Lubbock is first astonished by its size and then fearful. The pig steps
forward, sniffs and grunts again; it attempts another step but is halted
by a tether – a rope of twisted bark fibres that ties it to a stake. The
pig tugs but without much vigour and then turns, dismissively, to resume
its wallow.

The edge of the clearing looks out across the wetlands where people are
at work, the first people Lubbock has seen since canoeing across the
Torres Strait.

An area of about half a kilometre square has already been cleared of
forest and is now covered with a mosaic of different plants. The men and
women, ten or twelve in all, are digging with wooden spades. They are
dark-skinned and naked except for short skirts made from leaves and
grass. A long, low mound of grey clay marks the trail of their work, a
straight ditch that cuts across the wetland from the marshes at its
southern end to a river flowing at its northern margin.

Lubbock descends the slope and walks between the plants, finding that
many grow on circular islands between a network of channels, which are
themselves full with leafy plants. Banana palms have been planted on the
islands, along with several other types of green-leafed plants familiar
to Lubbock from his journey through the forests. Among these is another
tree-like plant that he has also seen in the forest but never quite as
large and healthy-looking. These have thick stems, or trunks on the
larger specimens, from which leaves have grown and then dropped in a
spiral pattern, leaving a corkscrew appearance. Roots are growing from
the stem itself and appear to be propping the plants up; indeed, in some
of the larger specimens the base of the stem itself has entirely
decayed.

The plants in the ditches, growing in much wetter conditions, are
dominated by a type that has large, heart-shaped leaves, pale green in
colour; many have still to unfold from the end of lengthy stalks.
Lubbock snaps a fresh shoot and rolls it between his fingers, squashing
out its sap; it smells acrid and his nostrils and skin begin to sting.

An irrigation ditch is being dug; a much larger ditch than those
defining the raised beds, it runs quite straight for several hundred
metres and is evidently meant to carry a continuous flow of water.
Digging is hard work as the ditch is already waist-deep, the clay heavy
to remove, and the humidity stifling. The term ‘spade’ is a kind
description for the tools being used, as these are little more than
flattened sticks. Lubbock is soon using one just to lever up the clay
which he then removes with his bare hands.²¹

While most people dig, others are carrying some of the clay on to the
islands to raise them even higher from the surrounding channels. Still
others are weeding around the plants, removing diseased leaves, killing
some of the bugs they find and leaving others. One woman is walking
through the bushy plants in the channels and picking fresh young leaves.
She does so with considerable care so as not to damage the plants, and
seems quite unaffected by the irritation that Lubbock had felt when
touching similar leaves.

After some hours a decision is made that the day’s work is done. Lubbock
tags behind the other workers as they make their way to the stream where
mud is washed from bodies and thirst is quenched. And then they all
follow a small path into the trees until another clearing is reached.
This one has at least twenty huts, each made with branches bent into
domes and covered with banana leaves. There are fences surrounding a
patch of cultivated plants and a pen in which a pig is kept. A fire, one
of several in the village, is smouldering and children run to greet the
returning party. The baskets of leaves collected from Kuk Swamp are
passed to an old woman who sits by the fire and the party disperses to
rest.

That night, the fire is in flame again and at least thirty people gather
to eat the leaves picked from the field and prepared by the old women.
They have been crushed, covered with juices from fruits and then wrapped
in banana leaves to be cooked on hot stones.

Golson’s excavations at Kuk Swamp uncovered traces of ancient drainage
ditches, hollows and holes from stakes along the bottoms and sides of
the modern drainage ditches of the Kuk agricultural research station.
Subsequent work exposed more of these and showed that the oldest dated
to about 8200 BC, with another set having been made about 3,000 years
later.²² That second set of ditches, those in which Lubbock worked, had
consisted of long irrigation channels, up to two metres deep, and a
network of much shallower channels creating a maze of small islands.
Still later in time, about 2000 BC, the ditches became more numerous,
were laid out more systematically and covered a larger area.²³

Golson believes that these ditches provide evidence for the earliest
agricultural activity in the highlands – the first stages in the
development of the big-man societies that would be encountered in the
twentieth century. Quite what type of farming – if any – was attempted
in 5500 BC, however, remains unclear owing to the absence of plant
remains, artefacts and traces of settlement. But the soils are very
telling.

At the base of the deepest of the modern ditches there is a thick peat,
one created by many millennia of rotting plants in the basin. Some of
the hollows and stake holes had been cut into this and then filled with
grey clay that covered the whole area. This clay had seemed to form
quickly, 10 centimetres being deposited every millennium between 8200
and 5500 BC. Golson believes the clay to be the remnants of soil from
the dryland area surrounding the swamp that had eroded into the basin
after the first clearances had destabilised the soils.²⁴ The hollows
both below and on top of the clay might, he suggests, have been the
wallows of pigs, as they look just like those created when animals are
tethered to a stake.

Other than native bananas, microscopic traces of which were left in the
soil, the plants grown at Kuk Swamp can only be guessed at.²⁵ The sweet
potato, currently the most important crop in New Guinea, was certainly
not present as this only arrived on the island three centuries ago.²⁶
Taro is the most likely candidate – the plant growing within the
drainage channels that had stung Lubbock’s hands. No remains of taro
plants were found in Golson’s excavations, but this may be explained by
poor preservation.²⁷ Taro was once thought to have been an introduced
plant, having first been cultivated in Indonesia. But it now seems more
likely to have been a native of New Guinea and independently
domesticated on the island.²⁸ It is one of the most widespread tropical
crops today, and was a key plant grown by the New Guinea highlanders
when they were first encountered in the 1930s. Both its leaves and
underground stem, or corm, can be used as vegetables. Although it can
tolerate high altitudes, taro needs plenty of water to thrive, and so it
is perhaps the best candidate for the cultivated plants at Kuk Swamp.

Three other likely candidates are yams, sago and pandanus – those
tree-like plants with the corkscrew stems.²⁹ All three were used in
their wild forms by hunter-gatherers in northern Australia and as
cultivated plants by the New Guinea highlanders. Groves of pandanus,
otherwise known as screw pines, were jealously guarded and maintained in
recent times as they provided substantial quantities of fruit. A wide
range of other green-leafed plants, including sugar cane, might easily
have been cultivated at Kuk Swamp – plants which had once been gathered
from the forests and marshes and were now being irrigated, weeded and
perhaps transplanted from elsewhere.³⁰

Just as it was for the woodland around ‘Ain Mallaha at 12,500 BC and the
scrubland around Guilá Naquitz at 8000 BC, the term ‘wild garden’ is the
most appropriate description for Kuk Swamp at 5500 BC. The use of the
word ‘agriculture’ for Golson’s discoveries is probably a misnomer for
the place and time; the wild gardens of Kuk Swamp constituted a form of
intensified plant gathering with no radical break from a
hunting-and-gathering past. Indeed, intervention in the forest may
stretch back to the time of the very first human arrival in New
Guinea.³¹

None the less, there is still the question of what motivated people to
undertake wetland cultivation rather than simple gathering. It could
have been that a burgeoning population was unable to secure sufficient
food from the dryland forest alone.³² The wetlands are likely to have
provided much higher yields – but only after the substantial initial
investment in labour to drain the land. And yet, just as we found when
considering the origins of squash cultivation in the Oaxaca valley in
Mexico, there is no evidence to suggest population pressure; in fact, we
have no evidence at all about New Guinea population levels prior to the
1930s.

When Kent Flannery faced this dilemma he suggested that the Guilá
Naquitz people from Oaxaca may have been attempting to make the
availability of plant foods more reliable. This provides the most
effective explanation for the investment made in clearing trees and
digging ditches at Kuk Swamp, and presumably elsewhere in the highlands
and lowlands of New Guinea at this date.³³ The result is likely to have
been scattered localities throughout the island, where high yields of
plant foods could be guaranteed at specific times of the year. Such
localities would enable normally dispersed groups to meet up and spend
time together. Hence the motivation for swamp drainage might have been
as much for social as nutritional reasons – just as it may have been for
the cultivation of wild wheat in the vicinity of Göbekli Tepe in
Southeast Asia at 9500 BC.

The switch from being New Guinea hunter-gatherers who also cultivated
plants, to horticulturalists who also collected wild foods, may be
attributable to the pigs Lubbock saw wallowing at Kuk Swamp. This animal
had to be introduced into New Guinea from Indonesia, where it had either
been domesticated or had spread already domesticated from an original
source in China.³⁴ Although pigs are good swimmers, the shortest
crossing to New Guinea at the lowest sea level would have been almost
100 kilometres and so they would have had to be transported by boat.

Some archaeologists are confident that such pigs were present in New
Guinea by 6000 BC in the light of pig bones found within rockshelter
deposits, which are believed to be at least this old. Indeed, in one
case a 10,000-year-old date has been proposed. But of the few
radiocarbon dates available, the earliest presence for the pig is a mere
five hundred years ago.³⁵

Once present on the island, whether by 6000 BC or in much more recent
times, pigs would have become a nuisance, if not a serious pest, to
those cultivating plants. Whether feral or domestic, they too would have
enjoyed many of the native food plants of the forest – and wild gardens.
All, that is, except the taro because of its toxins; but pigs when
rooting in the drains might have grubbed even those plants up.³⁶ And so
the cultivators would have needed to impose a barrier between the
domains of nature and human culture by fencing in their gardens. Such
physical barriers may have also created a mental barrier between
hunter-gatherers and horticulturalists, with people fencing themselves
into one domain or the other.

For the next few days Lubbock remains at Kuk Swamp, helping to complete
the drainage ditches and weeding around the taro, bananas and pandanus.
He then decides it is time to leave: with the passing of 5500 BC his
journey through Australian prehistory is at its end. Not long afterwards
the villagers themselves disperse into the hills to resume their hunting
and gathering of wild foods. They will return to Kuk Swamp when the
bananas are ripe and the corms of the taro are ready to dig. For now
they are relieved to depart – living in one place is not in their
nature, and will not be for another few thousand years.

On a cloudless day Lubbock climbs the slopes of Mount Hagen, passing
beyond the tree-line into an alpine meadow. From a rocky crag he looks
east and sees the Pacific Ocean. There are large islands near by, those
that will become known as the Bismarck Archipelago, while scattered on
the horizon are the future Solomon Islands.

There are people on those islands, and most likely in boats travelling
between them. The sea-crossing to the Solomons was first made as long
ago as 30,000 BC, although longer voyages into the Pacific would not be
attempted for several more millennia. Travel between the islands must
have been easier when the sea levels fell during the LGM. During that
time a small tree-climbing marsupial known as the phalanger had become
another new occupant. Whether the phalanger had been taken intentionally
to stock the islands with wild game, or whether the animals had ‘stowed
away’, is unclear. But archaeologists have found their bones in the
rockshelters of New Ireland along with the stone artefacts of the
tropical ice-age hunters.³⁷

Lubbock climbs higher until another crag provides a view southwards:
more islands, the Torres Strait, and then northern Australia. It has
taken him 12,000 years to travel the 6,000 kilometres from Kutikina Cave
in Tasmania to where he is now. Memories of wallaby hunts and a moonlit
burial, of deserts and mangrove swamps, of fighting men, Rainbow
Serpents and canoeing along leech-ridden streams are as clear in his
mind as the sky is a brilliant blue. He wishes he could have had the
time to climb the mountains of eastern Australia, cross the Western
Desert, spend longer with the artists of Arnhem Land, and discover
whether Diprotodon had really been browsing in the woodlands of the
Murray River. After another hour of walking, Lubbock approaches the
summit and gains a view to the north and east. In those directions lie
not only Indonesia, China and Japan, but also the start of another
journey through human history.

38 Lonesome in Sundaland

Hunter-gatherers in the Southeast Asian tropical rainforests, 20,000–5000 BC

In July 1971 Manuel Elizalde, a member of Ferdinand Marcos’s government
with responsibility for national minorities, made an incredible
announcement. The ‘Tasaday’, a group of cave-dwelling, stone-tool-using
hunter-gatherers, had been discovered living in complete isolation from
the modern world in the Cotabato forest of the southern Philippines. A
report in the National Geographic magazine, entitled ‘First Glimpse of a
Stone Age Tribe’, soon followed, illustrating their lifestyle with
glossy photographs of bare-breasted women in orchid-leaf skirts.¹

For eighteen months the Tasaday became media celebrities. Convoys of
journalists, photographers, politicians and scientists made
well-publicised visits to their caves, all under Elizalde’s strict
supervision. Newspapers carried their story, books were written about
them and films were made. As the gentle peace-loving Tasaday, living in
complete harmony with both nature and each other, were the antithesis of
life elsewhere in Southeast Asia, such adulation was not surprising.
Just a stone’s throw away across the South China Sea, America was
bombing the Vietnamese.²

One voice questioned the Tasaday’s authenticity: that of Filipino
anthropologist Zeus Salazar. His challenges were immediately suppressed
and he was prevented from visiting the Tasaday people. In 1972, access
to them was banned completely when President Marcos created a special
forest reserve for their protection. Lengthy prison sentences were
promised for anyone who dared to enter.

That many archaeologists were as enthralled as the journalists by the
discovery of living Stone Age people in the forests of Southeast Asia
can, perhaps, be excused. The archaeology of this region – the Malaysian
Peninsula and Indonesian islands – between 20,000 BC and 5000 BC almost
entirely consists of chipped stone artefacts. As they are some of the
least impressive tools made by modern humans, archaeologists politely
refer to these as ‘unstandardised forms’. Given the uninformative nature
of such tools, the Tasaday seemed to offer an unmissable chance to see
not only how they had been used but the whole panoply of Stone Age life
itself.³

Archaeologists have found the stone tools within caves, often deeply
buried below multiple layers of bat guano, roof collapse and ancient
soil. The great majority are no more than pebbles from which a few
flakes have been removed with little evident intention to impose a form.
Some have one or more edges ground smooth; others have been chipped to
create a ‘waist’ around which fibres had tied them to a haft. On the
Malaysian peninsula most were made from complete pebbles, whereas on the
Indonesian islands a higher proportion of flakes were used. All such
tools are often grouped together and called the Hoabinhian culture.⁴

One of the largest collections has come from Niah Cave, now located in
Sarawak. It is within this cave that John Lubbock’s journey through the
prehistory of eastern Asia begins; it will take him from the equatorial
tropics to deep inside the Arctic Circle.

Lubbock awakes in a cathedral-like cave and sits at its mouth watching a
rainforest dawn.⁵ The gorge below and the trees beyond are half-obscured
by a heavy morning mist. Swifts are darting in and out, the cave ceiling
covered with their nests. Bats disappear down passages in the sloping
recess of the cave. It had been a restless night, the unpleasantness of
constantly creeping insects matched by the stench of guano from the
floor. But in the freshness of dawn, before the appalling heat and
humidity begins, the cloudy layers of moisture rising through the trees
infuse John Lubbock with energy for the day. The whooping and ringing
hoots of a female gibbon suggest that she must be feeling it too.

The date is 18,000 BC, and the cave mouth is light, cool and perfectly
dry. It would, Lubbock thinks, provide an attractive shelter for
hunter-gatherers – it is certainly better than many he has crouched
inside during the course of his travels around the world.

As the sun completes an extraordinarily rapid rise, Lubbock searches for
traces of human activity inside the cave. The floor itself is only
exposed in the entrance area, where insects and the breeze have taken
the guano away. The only bones he finds are those from birds that had
once roosted within. Many fragments of rock lie either on, or are partly
embedded in, the guano mat but Lubbock cannot decide whether they had
been flaked by human hands or fractured by nature. Equally unclear is
whether these had been ‘made’ a few days, years, centuries or even
millennia ago.

Tom Harrison, the curator of Sarawak Museum, undertook the first
excavations in Niah Cave, working in its west mouth between 1954 and
1967.⁶ His experience is best described by the name he gave his trench –
Hell.

Working in conditions of stifling heat, almost one-hundred-per-cent
humidity and direct afternoon sunlight, ‘Hell’ trench produced a human
skull likely to be 40,000 years old, one of the first modern humans to
have lived in Southeast Asia. Harrison also recovered vast numbers of
stone artefacts and several human burials in the upper deposits of the
cave. The material in Niah probably covered the entire duration of human
settlement in Southeast Asia, including the 15,000-year period of
interest to this history.⁷

But we can’t be sure. Tom Harrisson had many remarkable qualities –
including, it is rumoured, a palang⁸ – but the skill needed to excavate
cave sediments was not among them. Although the cave floor was heavily
undulating he sliced off its deposits in horizontal layers, most likely
mixing up artefacts of a quite different age. The bones he
radiocarbon-dated most likely came from animals that had simply lived
and died within the cave, rather than having been butchered by human
hands. In Harrisson’s defence, he was working long before archaeologists
had begun to understand the true complexity of how cave deposits and
bone collections are formed. Fortunately a new team of archaeologists
has recently started work in the cave, applying the very latest
techniques of excavation. Led by Graeme Barker of Leicester University,
a four-year excavation project was initiated in AD 2000 to unravel
Niah’s complex history of deposition and record of human activity.

Four years of fieldwork will require at least the same amount of time
spent on laboratory study to analyse the finds. So it will be several
years before we discover what Niah Cave can reveal about human history
as the Pleistocene reached its end. Although Barker has previously
worked in the challenging conditions of the Libyan and Jordanian
deserts, he describes those at Niah as being by far the hardest he has
ever faced. Fortunately he finds that Sarawak provides rich compensation
for his toils:

The cave is an hour’s walk and climb through the rainforest … All the
specialist equipment has to be carried to the cave from our riverside
camp every day, and then carried back with bags of sediment. Add the
cobras in the cave, the crocodiles in the river, and the poisonous ferns
and millipedes in between, set alongside the overpowering beauty of the
rainforest and the hospitality of its people, and you have an
unforgettable and exhilarating experience.⁹

There are two striking features of Hoabinhian artefacts, the first of
which is their simplicity. This most likely reflects their minimal role
in the day-today life of foragers in Southeast Asia as the ice age came
to its close. With a wide range of robust plant material available,
notably bamboo, there was little need for stone.¹⁰

The second feature is their consistency through time – a remarkable
contrast with technology elsewhere in the post-LGM world. This is
because the forests of the region – and presumably the people who lived
within them – also remained largely unchanged as the rest of the world
went through its roller-coaster ride to global warming.¹¹ More
accurately, the forests of the surviving land masses underwent minimal
change – the rising sea drowned those that had covered the extensive
low-lying plains.

At the time of Lubbock’s visit, Borneo, Sarawak, Java, Sumatra and the
Malay Peninsula formed one continuous expanse of rainforest and mangrove
swamp, much of which now lies below the South China Sea. Known to
archaeologists as Sundaland, this ancient land mass also spread 30
kilometres west beyond the present-day Andaman Sea coastline of the
peninsula. The result was more than two million square kilometres of
forest – twice the area that exists today and the greatest expanse of
forest in the ice-age world.

The flip side of this was a coastline no more than half the length of
today’s. As is evident from this history, hunter-gatherers are
frequently drawn to coastal habitats owing to the abundance and
diversity of resources they provide. The poverty of the archaeological
record in Southeast Asia might be largely explained by this simple fact:
the stone artefacts found within the caves may result from rare inland
sorties by people who lived in coastal settlements. Had they survived,
archaeologists might also have dwellings, middens and burials to
excavate. Such shell-midden sites certainly exist from the relatively
recent past, after modern sea levels had been reached at around 6000 BC.
Or at least they did so until quarried for their shells – used for
making cement – which left no more than huge water-filled holes in the
ground.¹²

The forest surrounding Niah Cave is subtly different to that seen by
Lubbock in New Guinea: he is now on the western side of ‘Wallace’s Line’
– the boundary between flora and fauna that has an Australian descent to
its east, and an Asian descent to its west. But although Lubbock has
crossed this boundary, much of his forest experience is entirely
familiar. The humidity is extreme and the leeches are just as eager to
suck his blood. The forest abounds with gigantic trees with buttressed
or furrowed trunks. Some trees appear to begin in mid-air, having an
umbrella of aerial roots, while others have their own forest of stems.
Palms, creepers, ferns and epiphytes fill the spaces between. Flowers
are scarce. Many of the orchids have disappointing inconspicuous blooms;
but these make the occasional extravagant displays all the more
startling.

The forest is crowded: whenever Lubbock stops, butterflies come to feed
upon his sweat; hornbills alternately flap and glide across the rivers
with their trailing plumes; orang-utans spy him from the tree-tops;
marauding ants attack him from the floor. And yet Lubbock feels alone
amidst this abundance of animal life, as there are neither people among
the trees nor any signs to indicate their presence.

Having travelled southwest from Niah Cave, Lubbock now sits within
another cave, known to archaeologists as Gua Sireh. This is a much
smaller one than Niah and even further from the sea, which is now 500
kilometres away. The sky grows black and a silence descends. Huge
globules of rain begin to fall; they splash at the cave entrance as
thunder rumbles across the trees. A flash of lightning momentarily
illuminates every single leaf, tendril and flower of the forest for
miles around. Gloomy darkness returns and the rain falls with
extraordinary force. Lubbock retreats inside the cave and once again
searches for the debris of human life. But he finds neither artefacts
nor hearths, neither butchered bones nor piles of vegetable waste. The
only possible sign of a recent human presence is a small cluster of
broken mollusc shells looking like ones he had seen in the forest
streams. Could these have got into the cave by nature alone – perhaps by
a bird or a massive flood? Lubbock thinks not. But just like the flaked
stone in Niah Cave, there is little to indicate quite how long the
shells have been lying on the floor.

Lubbock’s journey continues, now heading northwest, across a low-lying
forest-covered swamp from which a few isolated hills arise. After
travelling 200 kilometres from Gua Sireh he arrives on what will become
the Malay Peninsula. The terrain is mountainous, cliffs of granite
taking him into deep inland valleys before steep ridges of limestone
climb in the west. Naked white precipices sparkle in the sun in stark
contrast to the verdant cover that clothes the land elsewhere. After
climbing through hanging fronds of ferns and above ravines with foaming
white water, Lubbock emerges from the cool, dark forest to be greeted by
rhododendrons and spectacular views. In every direction the interminable
forest, partitioned by glistening winding ribbons of river water, covers
the hills and valleys.

In 17,000 BC Lubbock arrives at another potential site of human
habitation: a platform below a massive limestone overhang, known today
as Lang Rongrien. To reach it he climbs a steep talus slope and then
edges along a narrow ledge. Having hoped to find a flat earthen floor
with people gathered around a fire and the usual domestic clutter, he
finds it starkly empty, a crude spread of angular boulders and loose
rubble.

Looking up, he sees that the roof of the overhang is quite smooth and
clean – with no discolouration from centuries of weather, lichens,
roosting bats and nesting birds. It appears to have recently collapsed,
burying any traces of human habitation that may have existed upon its
earthen floor. There is just one such sign among the rubble: a small
patch of charcoal and five stones that might have been flaked by human
hands. Lubbock guesses that recent visitors had lit a fire, perhaps to
cook, have a smoke or just to sit quietly by the flames. And then they
must have left to find a more comfortable shelter for the night. Lubbock
does the same, returning along the ledge and disappearing once again
into the dark and humid forest.

Both Gua Sireh and Lang Rongrien were excavated during the 1980s. The
first, located in the southwest of Sarawak, had already been partly
excavated – but little understood – by Tom Harrisson during the 1950s.
Ipoi Datan, now deputy director of Sarawak Museum, re-excavated the main
chamber in 1988, finding successive layers of ash and soil containing
many stone artefacts, pottery shards, mollusc shells and a few poorly
preserved animal bones.¹³ The majority of this debris had accumulated
after 4000 BC, deriving from rice farmers who had spread into Southeast
Asia from the north. But one of the shells was dated to around 20,000
BC, coming from a freshwater mollusc that still lives in the
fast-flowing clear-water streams near the cave. Ipoi Datan thought that
it could only have entered the cave by human means. If the shell did
indeed arrive in the cave by a human hand, and if the date is accurate,
this still only reflects the briefest of visits to the cave – a single
overnight camp at most.

Douglas Anderson of Brown University, Rhode Island, USA, excavated Lang
Rongrien in 1987 and found traces of human occupation dating back to
40,000 BC.¹⁴ A substantial roof collapse had occurred between 25,000 and
7500 BC – the dates established for layers immediately above and below
the rubble. The charcoal within the rubble gave a date of around 42,000
BC, leading Anderson to think it had come from deposits within a fissure
or cleft in the limestone that entirely disappeared when the roof
collapsed.¹⁵ It was this charcoal that Lubbock had seen and so he had
been completely wrong – there had been no other visitors to Lang
Rongrien at 17,000 BC.

The absence of occupation in Lang Rongrien at the LGM, or even within
several millennia on either side, repeats a pattern found throughout the
region. Only in Gua Sireh is there a trace of a human presence at this
date: the single freshwater mollusc shell dated to around 20,000 BC. It
is not surprising, therefore, that Lubbock is finding the forest lonely
as he leaves Lang Rongrien – there may simply be no one else around. One
can only guess that the people of Southeast Asia were all living on the
coast.

After 17,000 BC, stone artefacts are found within many caves, showing
that people were now regularly travelling inland even if they still
preferred the shore. The successive floor layers in Lang Rongrien reveal
much about the increasing ease and frequency of travel between the coast
and inland areas. When the cave was approximately 100 kilometres from
the coast, between 30,000 and 25,000 BC, there were no marine shells
among the stone artefacts on its floor. These first appear in the
successive floor layers after 10,000 BC, and then become increasingly
numerous as sea level rises and the coast approaches the cave, finishing
no more than 18 kilometres away.

It is unlikely that people stayed for more than a few days on any one
visit to Lang Rongrien. But the lack of plant remains and animal bones
makes it impossible to identify the season and duration of such visits.
About 75 kilometres to the north of Lang Rongrien, Lang Kamnan offers
some better evidence. This cave was used periodically between about
30,000 BC and 5,000 BC – although, as elsewhere, the presence of people
at the LGM seems doubtful.¹⁶ Rasmi Shoocongdej from Silpakorn
University, Bangkok, has excavated the cave and interpreted the animal
and plant remains that were found there, together with stone tools and
marine shells. The animal bones came from many different species
including squirrels, porcupines, turtles and deer; the snails and plant
remains suggested that occupation had been within the wet season. This
is when today’s hunter-gatherer/horticulturalists in the forests of
Southeast Asia collect a wide range of plant foods such as vegetable
roots and bamboo shoots; they hunt the same types of animals that
Shoocongdej found within Lang Kamnan.

The remains in Lang Kamnan suggest that people may have been living in
the rainforests of Southeast Asia ever since 17,000 BC, in a similar
manner to people of recent times, although without the cultivation of
rice and other domesticated plants and animals. Some anthropologists,
however, have questioned the ability of people to live there by hunting
and gathering alone – just as hunter-gatherer occupation of the Amazon
had been doubted until the discoveries in Pedra Pintada.¹⁷

Robert Bailey, an anthropologist from the University of California, has
argued that edible resources in rainforests are so poor, variable and
dispersed that viable hunter-gatherer populations cannot survive.
Although rainforests are the most productive ecosystems on the planet,
their vast stores of energy are trapped within inedible woody tissue –
the massive tree-trunks and boughs which are essential in the
competition to acquire sufficient light. Very little energy goes into
producing edible flowers, fruits and seeds; those that do exist are
often inaccessibly located in the canopy. The key dietary constraint,
Bailey argued, is carbohydrate: to acquire sufficient amounts,
‘hunter-gatherers’ either have to engage in horticulture themselves or
trade with farming communities.

The Hoabinhian culture shows this view to be quite wrong. Farming, in
the form of rice cultivation, did not spread into Southeast Asia until
2500 BC, having originated in China¹⁸ – as Lubbock will discover on the
next stage of his travels. Moreover, the viability of rainforest hunting
and gathering is quite evident from the existing communities – many of
whom are thought to be the direct descendants of those who made the
Hoabinhian tools.

One such community is the Batek of the Malaysian Peninsula, with whom
anthropologists Kirk and Karen Endicott from Dartmouth College, New
Hampshire, USA, spent nine months between 1975 and 1976.¹⁹ They hunted
monkeys and birds with blowpipes; they caught turtles, tortoises, frogs,
fish, prawns and crabs; they dug wild tubers from the forest floor and
collected an immense array of ferns, shoots, berries, fruits and seeds.
Even though the Batek sometimes cleared the forest for growing rice,
corn and manioc, and regularly traded with farmers for flour, sugar and
salt, the Endicotts had no doubt that they could have survived on the
wild foods alone, with the wild tubers providing a source of
carbohydrates.

The Penan of Borneo are also effectively self-sufficient rainforest
hunter-gatherers. Peter Brosius of the University of Georgia lived with
the Penan on the Apau plateau between 1984 and 1987.²⁰ This is a
mountainous and forested landscape, several days’ walk from the long
houses of rice farmers located in the valleys. Although the Penan
engaged in trade, they did not rely on the farmers for food. Like the
Batek, they gathered a wide array of plants and hunted many animals,
with a preference for the bearded pig. Their main source of carbohydrate
came from the sago palm, a tree that stores starch within its trunk.
These palms grow in clumps, many of which were probably individually
owned, and cropped with sufficient care to avoid any long-term
depletion. Like so many other hunter-gatherers encountered in this
history, the Penan managed the wild plants around them.

Brosius describes the Penan as ‘stewards’ of the forest. He explains how
the network of forest streams provides them with a reservoir of
ecological knowledge and memories. Many rivers are named after a
particular type of tree or fruit which occurs either near the
river-mouth or grows abundantly along its course. Others are named after
a natural feature, such as a type of stone, or some event, such as the
killing of a rhino, the loss of a favourite dog or an especially
abundant fruiting season. A large number of rivers are named for
individuals, perhaps signalling the birth and death of a person or their
fondness for hunting along its banks. As the Penan do not mention the
names of the dead, they often use the name of their river instead.

Both the Batek and Penan provide insights into how the Hoabinhian people
may have lived between 17,000 and 5,000 BC. But this leaves us with an
even greater dilemma about the effective absence of people from the
forests during the LGM. Although Robert Bailey and like-minded
anthropologists were wrong to claim that hunter-gatherers could not
survive without agricultural products within the rainforest, they were
quite correct to stress the relative difficulty in doing so. The open,
deciduous forests that were more prevalent during the LGM would have
provided a far more productive landscape for hunters and gatherers than
the forests of today. Mammals, which then lived in herds and on the
ground rather than as scattered individuals within the trees,²¹ would
have been more abundant and easier to hunt. So why does archaeological
evidence only appear after the distribution, density and humidity of the
rainforest had reached their peak?

According to Peter Bellwood of the Australian National University and
author of encyclopaedic works about the prehistory of Southeast Asia,
this may simply be a consequence of the combined pressures of population
growth and rising sea level forcing people into the forests after having
been quite content at the coast.²² But without the ancient coastline it
seems unlikely that we will ever know.

It is 16,000 BC and passage through the forest has eased. At first
Lubbock thinks that the trail he follows is simply another pig track
that runs between the trees. But he finds no need to duck below branches
and twist between creepers and saplings – the ends of such potential
barriers have been cleanly cut, proof at last of a human presence.

It takes several more days of walking through torrential rain and along
a network of forest paths that link one river valley to the next before
any people are actually found. They are at a campsite in the forest –
three shelters made from palm leaves supported on stakes pushed into the
ground. A few small trees have been cleared for the camp, which centres
around a single smouldering fire – no more than a bundle of sticks and a
handful of dry leaves. Standing at its edge Lubbock counts a dozen
people – a few squatting around the fire, others sitting by the
shelters. They are short in stature, with curly black hair and
dark-brown skin. The children are naked. The adults wear no more than
small aprons of leaves; some have faces painted red and noses pierced by
porcupine quills.

It takes less than five minutes to explore the whole campsite – there is
hardly anything else to see. Close to the fire a few wooden blocks have
evidently been used as chopping boards. Hanging from the shelters are
woven bags and scattered on the floor a few flaked stones. A number of
polished wooden sticks and axes with flaked stone heads are propped
against a tree. Knives with bamboo blades tucked into belts complete the
equipment of this family group.

Having passed the night at their camp, Lubbock rises early as his
unknowing hosts gather their belongings together. The group departs in
single file along another tiny track, with Lubbock bringing up the rear.
A backward glance at the flimsy palm-leaf shelters, and ephemeral
scatter of debris on the ground, tells him that archaeologists are
unlikely ever to find this site.

The day is spent hunting and gathering in the forest. After an hour or
so the women and children go one way, and the men another. Lubbock
dithers, follows the men and then turns back to catch up the women. They
have stopped at what appears to be a quite undistinguished patch of
forest, to dig tubers. Sticks go easily into the soft and stoneless
ground; from each hole a woman pulls a swollen knobbly root, pushes it
into a bag and then looks for another. By watching closely Lubbock
discovers the sign to be no more than a spindly stem, seeming much like
any of the other stems growing from the forest floor.

For the rest of the day the group travels from tuber patch to berry bush
and bamboo thicket. The women and children eat as they work,
particularly enjoying the fresh young bamboo sprouts, and find
sufficient also to fill their bags. Although they seem to be following a
familiar route, the women are always looking for something new:
mushrooms, ferns, frogs and lizards. Camp is made at a riverbank. As
palm-leaf shelters are quickly erected, the men arrive with a
far-fetched tale about a monkey that got away.

The next day is spent fishing with the men, or rather they fish while
Lubbock sits wedged among rocks in the shallows as the current washes
away some of the terrible heat from his body. Once again, the camp is
abandoned at dawn and the men set off in a different direction to the
women. First they cut saplings with stone flakes and fashion barbed
points; then they make their way to a deep pool where they dive to spear
the fish. These are easily caught and much of the day is spent sitting
idly by the pool, smoking and eating the bland and bony fish.

After several days of hunting and gathering Lubbock begins to appreciate
that the group is living in a world quite different to his own.
Lubbock’s is simply one of the humid, dark forest that at times he loves
and at times he hates – especially when attacked by leeches, ticks and
biting ants. His companions also live in the forest, but to them it is a
world replete with spirits, ghosts and gods.

This became apparent from tiny, subtle actions that at first went quite
unnoticed.²³ Some foods, for instance, were never cooked on the same
fire; the tracks of deer and tapir were ignored, as were – what seemed
to Lubbock – quite easy opportunities to make a kill. He guessed there
were religious prohibitions against killing such animals or eating
certain foods together. On one occasion he watched a young man being
admonished by an elder for some food he had cooked; at night the
offender cut himself, mixed his blood with water and then threw the
mixture to the sky – apparently as a means of assuaging an angry deity.
Lubbock becomes aware that singing and speeches by members of the group
are often directed to the forest rather than to each other. Sometimes
the singing takes place on specially built platforms of tree bark, set
on logs close to fruit trees from which the people hope to gather
produce later in the year.

As the date moves on to 15,000 BC, Lubbock has to leave. The daily
routine of hunting and gathering in the forest will continue undisturbed
for many millennia to come and it is time for Lubbock to head into
temperate latitudes, those which global warming has already begun to
change. And so, when at a juncture of paths, he goes one way while the
Hoabinhian foragers go another.

The Tasaday people, mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, were a
hoax.²⁴ When the Marcos regime was overthrown in 1986, their caves
attracted a new influx of observers, this time without the strict
supervision of Manuel Elizalde. Any claims to authenticity as a
long-time isolated group with a Stone Age technology soon unravelled –
Zeus Salazar’s original suspicions had been correct. The Tasaday
language was found to be a dialect of that used throughout the southern
Philippines; their caves lacked the debris that would have arisen from
generations of occupation; their knowledge of wild foodstuffs appeared
quite insufficient for real hunter-gatherers; they were never seen to
handle stone tools and, when asked to make some, used quite unsuitable
materials with limited skill. The orchid-leaf clothes had simply been
worn for the cameras. As one of the Tasaday admitted: ‘whenever Elizalde
and his companions were coming, he sent a message to tell us to take off
our clothes and go to the caves. We had to wait there until all the
pictures had been taken. When Elizalde left, we put our clothes back on
and came back to our own houses.’²⁵

The Tasaday themselves were innocent local horticulturalists who were
induced and bribed by Elizalde to act out his Stone Age fantasy. The
affair was just one more example of how Philippine minorities were
victims of the Marcos regime. It provides this history with another
illustration of how the Stone Age past is politically potent, ready to
be exploited by politicians for their own ends. Remember the mental
contortions of Vladislav Iosifovich Ravdonikas to fit Oleneostrovski
Migilnik into his Marxist scheme of human history, and the claims of
Native Americans that the bones of Kennewick Man belonged to them? And,
of course, the writings of Victorian John Lubbock which espoused the
mental superiority of Europeans, conveniently justifying the imperialism
of his day.

There are no isolated Stone Age tribes in the world today. The Penan and
Batek may be direct descendants of the Hoabinhian people and we may draw
upon observations of their lifestyle to propose scenarios for Stone Age
gathering, fishing and religion – as I have done above.²⁶ But we must,
as always, be cautious of such accounts. Archaeologists must not be
tempted by the present; they must keep returning to the analysis of
artefacts and the pursuit of excavation. There are not short cuts to the
prehistoric past.

39 Down the Yangtze

The origin of rice farming, 11,500–6500 BC

Lubbock is taking another canoe journey, this time down the Yangzte
River. His long trek from the rainforests of Southeast Asia has taken
him through the plateaus, broad basins and steep valleys of the Wuling
mountains of southern China, from where he followed the valleys that cut
through the Yunnan plateau. Much of that journey had been through thick
deciduous woodland, the haunts of deer and pig, tapir and pandas. When
the trees gave way to grassland he saw larger animals: rhino, and on one
occasion stegodons – elephant-like creatures with straight tusks,
similar in appearance to the mastodons of North America.¹

Many groups of hunter-gatherers were encountered. They stalked animals
in the woodlands, gathered an assortment of nuts, berries and roots,
collected shellfish from rivers and lakes. In 14,000 BC Lubbock spent
time with a few families at Baiyanjiao Cave, found today in the Guizhou
province of south China. When sitting by their hearth he watched flakes
being struck from stone nodules with little apparent concern for the
shape and size of detached pieces.

Baiyanjiao was just one of several sites used by those hunter-gatherers
during their seasonal round as they moved between hills and valleys,
woodlands and plains. At least we must suppose it was. Archaeological
sites dated to the end of the Pleistocene are extremely rare in southern
China – we know hardly anything about human lifestyles in this region of
the ice-age world. Baiyanjiao was excavated in 1979 and provided a
precious collection of artefacts made from limestone, chert, sandstone
and quartz.² The excavated animal bones were equally valuable,
representing many species including stegodon, tapir, deer and pig. Those
from bear, tiger and hyena were also present. And so until a study of
cut-marks and gnawing patterns has been made, we cannot be sure how many
of the bones derived from human activity and how many were the debris
from carnivore dens.

As Lubbock travelled north from Baiyanjiao, the woodlands became open
and the trees changed from broad-leafed species to fir and spruce.
Temperatures fell and cold winds began to whip across barren hills. The
hunter-gatherers also changed; they had fewer options for finding food
and many were now reliant on annual slaughters of migrating horse and
deer, much as Lubbock had seen in ice-age Europe. Sewn clothing of
animal hides and furs became essential, as did access to caves for
shelter during cold winter months.

When Lubbock reached the Sichuan basin he found the vast expanse of the
Yangtze River. At its shore was a party of hunters, packing their
belongings into a large canoe before heading east, back to the lowlands
after having spent the autumn months hunting goats. Lubbock climbed on
board, settled down between bundles of goat hides and found a spare
paddle to use.

The Sichuan basin marks the limits of navigation for boats on the
Yangtze River today. Chang Jiang – the ‘Long River’ as it is more
properly known – rises in the 5,000-metre-high snows and glaciers of the
Tibetan plateau and makes a 6,300-kilometre journey to the South China
Sea. Very few archaeological sites dating to between 20,000 and 5000 BC
are known along its course, although we must imagine that the river had
been as important to prehistoric hunter-gatherers as it is to the
Chinese people today. Unfortunately we are never likely to know for sure
as the Three Gorges Dam is currently under construction. By 2009 this
will house the largest hydroelectric generator in the world, requiring
the creation of a lake 600 kilometres in length behind the dam. A great
number of known archaeological sites will be flooded, and the
possibility of new discoveries entirely lost. But the loss of sites
potentially equivalent to those of Abu Hureyra, Jerf el Ahmar and Nevali
Çori – those flooded by dams across the Euphrates – is the least of the
problems facing the Chinese people. More than 150 villages and towns
will be inundated by the lake, displacing up to two million people from
their homes.³

The date is 13,000 BC. Lubbock’s fingers and toes are frozen; his stiff
joints and tired muscles can hardly work the paddle as the canoe battles
against icy winds on the Yangtze River. Fortunately, his companions are
hardy individuals and familiar with this route as winter approaches. The
canoe turns around a rocky headland and enters a dark and narrow channel
between perpendicular limestone cliffs. Fantastic towers of curiously
splintered and weathered rock have squeezed the river from many
kilometres to no more than 50 metres wide.

This is the Ichang Gorge, one of the great spectacles of the Yangtze
River as it leaves the rugged country of the Wushu mountains and
approaches the flat wetlands of the Hupei basin.⁴ Time moves quickly
within this tunnel-like passage. With each drag of his paddle Lubbock
sees a decade and then a century pass by. Within minutes he has reached
12,000 BC, and the world beyond the bare walls of rock is transformed.
Temperatures have risen, rainfall increased, and thick woodland has
spread across what had been barren hills and mountain slopes beyond the
gorge.⁵

The late-glacial interstadial has arrived; in western Asia the Natufian
culture is flourishing, while people are building dwellings and drinking
tea at Monte Verde in southern Chile. Here in China, oak, elms and
willows are replacing the scattered pine and spruce, while a thick
undergrowth of ferns is developing between the trees. The river rises
with melt-water pouring from the mountain glaciers. Streams begin to
tumble down the cliffs; rock crevices are suddenly full of maidenhair
fern and wildflowers blossom in profusion on narrow ledges. Lubbock’s
companions also change, their thick furs replaced with tunics of light
hide. Whereas once their faces had been hidden below frost-covered hoods
and beards, they are now gleaming in sunlight. Parcels of goat fat have
been replaced by bamboo baskets containing acorns and berries.

Time moves on to 10,500 BC. The sun disappears behind a cloud and a
chilling wind once again blows along the gorge as a cold spell arrives.⁶
With another few paddle-strokes the water level falls, leaving the
riverbanks stranded high above its course. White clouds of snow swirl
around the peaks as the waterfalls freeze and flowers wilt before
Lubbock’s eyes. Beyond the cliffs, fir and spruce make a comeback as the
oak trees and ferns wither in the face of drought and cold. In the
canoe, fur clothes and goat fat return.

Soon after 10,000 BC, the dramatic spurt of global warming that begins
the Holocene occurs; fir trees and spruce along the Yangtze valley are
once again replaced by broad-leafed and evergreen woodland, the herbs
overcome by ferns. Lubbock leaves the gorge at 9,500 BC, with his
companions once again dressed for life in a warmer world. The baskets
have returned and are joined by something quite new – pottery vessels.
The river carries Lubbock into a landscape with thickly wooded, rolling
hills and lush riverside reeds. It begins to meander, fork and spill
across the flatlands of the Hupei basin. In the distance he sees a plume
of smoke rising from the middle of the tree-covered plain. This is the
village of Pengtoushan, whose inhabitants plant and harvest a wild grass
– one known today as Oryza rufipogen.⁷

These are important people for Lubbock to meet: through their efforts,
along with those of other prehistoric inhabitants of the Yangtze valley,
that grass will become transformed. Having once fed a few thousand
people living in scattered river- and lake-side hamlets, it now sustains
at least two billion people throughout the world as the most important
foodstuff on planet earth. Oryza rufipogen became Oryza sativa, the wild
became the domestic.⁸ John Lubbock is about to watch the first
cultivation of rice, a turning point in the history of the world.

Rice is the most important cereal plant in the world today; China the
largest producer and consumer. When the People’s Republic was created in
1949, 170 million tons of rice were harvested each year. During the
following half-century this output increased at least fourfold, partly
due to the system of collective ownership and partly through selective
breeding of new strains, double cropping, the use of machinery,
fertilisers and pesticides. China is a global power because of its rice
and the story of its domestication begins with the people who first
cultivated the wild plants that grew in the swamps of the Yangtze
valley.⁹

Wild rice comes in at least twenty different variants, all of which can
be conveniently called Oryza rufipogen.¹⁰ Some flourish as perennials in
permanently wet swamps; others grow as annuals, usually where swamps or
ditches become dry for part of the year. The domesticated varieties
differ from these in much the same way as wheat and quinua differ from
their wild ancestors. Not only do the grain-heads ‘wait for the
harvester’ rather than shatter spontaneously, but the plants also
germinate within a few days of each other so that the whole crop ripens
together. Wild rice, like wild wheat, germinates in a piecemeal fashion,
often over many weeks or months. This ensures that at least some of the
seedlings will find benign conditions for growth – something that the
domesticated varieties can be assured of, due to the farmer’s work. A
further contrast is simply size – rice grains from domesticated plants
are significantly larger than those of the wild.¹¹

When the Chinese archaeologist Anping Pei of the Hunan Institute of
Archaeology excavated Pengtoushan in 1988, he found what were then the
earliest known traces of domesticated rice dating to at least 7500 BC.
Before his discovery, most archaeologists believed that rice cultivation
had originated either in India or, more probably, mainland Southeast
Asia where substantial stands of wild rice can be found today. And so,
with the same logic that took archaeologists to the Fertile Crescent to
search for the origin of modern wheat and barley, they looked for the
origin of rice cultivation at sites far to the south of the Yangtze
River.

Initially they appeared to have found success. Grains of rice believed
to date to at least 6000 BC were found in Banyan Valley Cave in the
uplands of Thailand and from the settlement of Khok Phanom Di on the
coast of the Gulf of Siam. But when radiocarbon-dated, these samples
were found to be much younger – no more than 1000 BC at Khok Phanom Di
and a few hundred years old in Banyan Cave.¹²

In 1984 small stands of wild rice were discovered in the Yangtze River
valley.¹³ It was soon realised that its rarity in this region is
explained by the practices of intensive farming that have destroyed
natural habitats. After the excavation of Pengtoushan, the middle
stretches of the Yangtze River were confirmed as the likely place of
origin of cultivated rice. And so a search began for sites older than
Pengtoushan, where the transition from wild to domestic rice could
itself be found – a search for the Chinese equivalent of Netiv Hagdud or
Guilá Naquitz.

Richard MacNeish – whose work in Central Mexico we have already
encountered – and Yan Wenming of Beijing University worked together
exploring caves in the limestone hills just to the south of the Yangtze
River in today’s Jiangxi province.¹⁴ Unlike MacNeish’s experiences in
the dry caves of central Mexico, they found that plants had almost
entirely decayed in the Chinese sites. Fortunately some crucial
microscopic evidence had survived within the cave sediments: phytoliths.

Phytoliths are minute deposits of silica that form within plant cells.
The silica, originating from groundwater, can sometimes completely fill
a cell and then maintain its shape after the plant itself has decayed.
Because they are inorganic, phytoliths often survive in the soil long
after all other traces of plants have disappeared. Moreover, different
species of plants – and indeed different parts of a single plant –
produce different shapes of phytoliths. And hence they can be used to
identify plants which had once grown in the soil, or had perhaps been
placed there as either stored food or discarded waste.

Just as some plants produce more pollen grains than others, some produce
more phytoliths. Grasses are big producers and, while the pollen grains
from different species are near identical, their phytoliths are quite
distinct. Deborah Pearsall from the University of Missouri pioneered the
study of those from rice, finding that the most distinctive are produced
in the cells of the ‘glume’, the husk of the grain, as these have large
conical hairs or peaks.¹⁵ The presence of such phytoliths in an
otherwise empty soil is a definite sign that rice plants had once grown
there.

The crux of Pearsall’s work, however, is that glume phytoliths can be
used to identify whether the long-gone rice plants had been wild or
domestic – whether they had grown in a swamp or been cultivated in a
paddy-field. The phytoliths from domesticated plants are simply bigger
than those from wild varieties, matching the increase in grain size.¹⁶
With this discovery, the cave sediments excavated by Richard MacNeish
and Yan Wenming may hold the key to identifying when and where rice
cultivation began.

Diaotonghuan Cave is located in the side of a small limestone hill
within a region of swamps known as the Dayuan basin, just to the south
of the Yangtze River¹⁷ – no more than 50 kilometres from the recently
discovered stands of wild rice. MacNeish and Wenming excavated a 5-metre
deep trench in the centre of the cave and revealed at least sixteen
occupation layers, neatly layered one on top of another. The eight
uppermost layers covered the period from 12,000 to 2000 BC; the age of
the lower layers was not determined. Each excavated layer contained
animal bones and stone tools; fragments of pottery were present in those
dating back to 10,000 BC.

While plant remains were entirely absent, the phytoliths from each
occupation layer showed that several types of rice had once been
gathered. Rice phytoliths were very rare in the lower layers of the
cave; the few present might have arrived within dry leaves blown by the
wind, on the hoofs or in the faeces of animals while using the cave for
shelter. At about 12,000 BC, however, there is a dramatic increase in
the number of rice phytoliths, which must reflect rice being gathered
and eaten by human occupants of the cave. The phytoliths are small,
indicating that they had come from wild plants, most likely gathered
from the edge of nearby swamps. The date marks the particularly warm and
wet conditions of the late glacial interstadial, a time when stands of
wild rice may have begun to flourish in the Yangtze basin. After 12,000
BC rice phytoliths remain abundant in the cave, except within layers
dating to between 10,800 and 9600 BC – a period coinciding with the
Younger Dryas. During that period of cold and drought, wild rice, a
subtropical water-dependent plant, had evidently, and not surprisingly,
become very scarce.

After the return of warm and wet conditions, rice was once again used as
a major source of food. Successive layers within Diaotonghuan Cave show
a gradual increase in the proportion of large phytoliths, reflecting the
appearance of the first domesticated plants. By 7500 BC there was an
equal use of wild and domesticated rice plants; a thousand years later,
all traces of wild rice had completely disappeared.

It takes Lubbock almost 3,000 years to travel the 250 kilometres from
the mouth of the Ichang Gorge to Pengtoushan, arriving at 6800 BC. That
time was spent paddling slowly along the Yangtze as it meandered through
the lowlands of the Hupei basin. His companions had remained at 9,600
BC; having gone to collect walnuts from a grove of trees, they failed to
secure their canoe. With Lubbock on board, this was taken by the current
downstream and further into the Holocene world.

Each year the river rose a little higher and then fell a little lower as
the rainy and dry seasons became more marked. The rains began in late
March and reached their peak in August. The waters would rise by ten
metres or more, turning much of the lowlands into a seemingly endless
expanse of muddy water spotted with little islands that had previously
been low hills.¹⁸ When the waters fell they left moist blankets of silt
upon the land – foundations for the fertile agricultural soil that
supports millions of people today.

In 6800 BC this watery landscape teems with life: shoals of fish, flocks
of waterfowl, kingfishers and egrets; deer and tapir in the waterside
thickets, horse and rhino on the drier ground. And people. They live in
their boats as much as on land and are spoilt by unlimited opportunities
for fishing and fowling, hunting and gathering. By following a canoe
along an offshoot of the Yangtze, and then through a network of small
streams, Lubbock finds the way to Pengtoushan; he does so just as the
moonsoons arrive, to turn the network of streams into a single muddy
lake.

As he steps on to dry land for the first time in more than six thousand
years, Lubbock still has a short walk to reach the village. He follows a
well-trodden path that passes through dense ferns and finds Pengtoushan
nestled in the side of a knoll, surrounded by trees of fir and pine. As
he approaches, no more than two dwellings can be seen above the ferns:
substantial rectangular houses built with timber posts, wattle-and-daub
walls, and thatched roofs. After another few steps he sees a further
five or six reed-covered roofs belonging to smaller dwellings whose
floors must have been sunk into the ground.¹⁹

Lubbock enters the village as the sun sinks below the trees and a heron
flies towards its roost. There are few people to be seen: an old woman
sleeping upon a doorstep when she should be minding the children; two
men whittling branches with stone blades; a young women kneading clay.
The air is thick with pine-scented wood smoke from fireplaces that
smoulder between the huts.

The potter sits cross-legged on a bamboo mat. She wears no more than a
small leather apron around her slim waist, a string of shells around her
neck and a bone point that dangles between her breasts. Her hair is jet
black and cut short; she has the high cheek-bones, flat nose and narrow
eyes of the Chinese people today; her skin glows in the rays of the
evening sun. She squeezes, rolls and kneads her clay upon a wooden
board; she sings gently, occasionally giving a huff and a puff as she
puts the little weight she has into working the clay.²⁰

Lubbock sits by her, careful not to interrupt the last of the sun that
she so clearly enjoys. Next to her is a pile of dry crumbly clay,
evidently dug from the river-bank some time ago. She gradually adds it
to the moist lump being moulded, together with water poured from a
wooden bowl. Every few moments she leans forward to reach a basket and
takes a handful of its contents to mix with her clay. Lubbock manages to
tilt the basket to look inside – chopped pieces of plant stem, husks and
grains of rice.

As she kneads her clay, people return to the village from their day in
the woods and on the water. A mother who arrives with fish strung around
her neck finds her young children playing among the ferns. Hunters
arrive with a brace of ducks but without the deer they had gone to kill.
Smouldering fires are brought to life; those carving wood finish their
work and sit with others by the flames.

The potter has now prepared rolls of clay and begins to coil, pinching
and then smoothing across the joins. The clay becomes a thick-walled
bowl about 20 centimetres high, with a wide mouth and narrow base. Using
her bone point, she incises a wavy pattern in the soft clay; then she
stands with hands on hips to admire her work. She takes the new pot to
her hut and places it with several others ready to be fired the next day
– high-necked jars, shallow dishes, plates and bowls, all marked with
the same wavy lines.

Lubbock moves to sit closer to the crackling and jumping flames of a
nearby fire; others are also drawn to the light and warmth now that it
is dusk. Much about Pengtoushan seems familiar to him – its sounds and
smells, the arrangement of huts and communal fires, the way that hides
and furs are draped around shoulders as the coolness of evening
descends. When he looks around, the semi-subterranean dwellings bring to
mind another village where people had also lived at the brink of
farming: Abu Hureyra on the banks of the Euphrates at 11,500 BC. But
something is missing here. For a moment Lubbock’s mind flounders, and
then it becomes obvious: there are no grinding stones, no querns, no
stone pestles and mortars. There had been so many of these in the
villages of the Fertile Crescent, both before and after the cultivation
of wheat had begun. And yet there are none at Pengtoushan.

The potter has washed and returns wearing a shawl to sit, unwittingly,
by Lubbock’s side and among her family who have now gathered to eat.
When the flames begin to die, the ducks are roasted upon a spit; once
completely gone, the fish, wrapped in leaves and flavoured with herbs,
are placed within the embers. Finally a ceramic bowl is wedged upon the
hot rocks and glowing wooden stumps. As the ducks and fish are shared
and the tales are told, the water begins to simmer. Soon Lubbock, the
potter and her family will be eating boiled rice at Pengtoushan, as will
every later generation who lives within the Yangtze valley.

That Anping Pei was able to identify rice cultivation at Pengtoushan was
solely due to the presence of burnt rice husks, stems and grain within
the many pottery fragments that he recovered from the site.²¹ The
quantity of plant debris trapped within the fired clay suggests that it
had not arrived by accident. It had been used as a temper – an addition
to prevent pots cracking when fired. While it is quite common for
traditional potters to add sand or crushed shell to their clay, the use
of plant material is most unusual and probably quite ineffective – later
potters in the Yangtze valley had soon adopted sand. And so, at
Pengtoushan, Lubbock might have seen some of the trials and errors that
had to be endured when people first learned about the art and science of
ceramic technology. Another trial is apparent from Diaotonghuan Cave
where the first fragments of pottery had been tempered with coarsely
crushed stone.

Several shapes of vessel had been made at Pengtoushan. Most were black
on the outside because the rice temper had burnt during firing. Many
were decorated, either stabbed and incised by sharp points or impressed
with twisted cords. Coiling wasn’t the only technique employed; some
pots had been made by simply pinching the clay or pasting slabs
together. This slab technique had first been used at Diaotonghuan at
around 10,000 BC to produce the oldest known pottery in China.²²

The near simultaneous invention of pottery and the first cultivation of
rice is unlikely to have been coincidental – the vessels were most
likely used to steam and boil the grain.²³ Direct evidence comes from a
slightly later village known as Hemudu, located at the Yangtze delta,
where cooked rice was found within a pot. Hence the desire to gather and
then cultivate rice appears to have been linked to the manutacture of
pottery, while the vessels so produced provided new opportunities for
storing and cooking rice, thereby encouraging more cultivation. It is
likely that the pottery was as essential for the development of rice
agriculture as were the grinding stones of the Fertile Crescent for that
of wheat and barley. And there could be no better symbol of this
intimate relationship than those fragments of rice-peppered pottery
excavated by Pei at Pengtoushan.

It is September in 6800 BC and the flood waters are beginning to recede.
Lubbock has spent the summer at Pengtoushan, learning how to make and
then fire pots, either in an open fire or within a pit dug in the
ground. Now there is a new task to be undertaken, one that is eagerly
awaited as each day the people watch the riverside mud expand as the
waters fall. All the villagers help with this event: the scattering of
seed. They take baskets of rice from their store and broadcast it over
the newly exposed silt, without preparation of the soil and with neither
irrigation ditches nor banks of mud to retain the retreating water.
Lubbock joins in – standing ankle deep in mud and making great arcs with
his arm to scatter the seed, helping to begin a Chinese farming
revolution.²⁴

Within a few weeks the boggy ground has become green with seedlings – a
mottled green with patches of brown as some seeds take longer to
germinate than others, or fail to do so at all. The plants grow slowly
through the winter; many of those on the highest land – which had been
the first to drain – wither and die. But those on the lower and
permanently waterlogged soil have become lush plants by the spring, just
as the rains return.

In May, tall weeds are removed from the crop; in June the rice blossoms,
and by early August Lubbock is knee-deep in water harvesting the plants
as the flood waters creep towards the village. As each plant is pulled
from the ground some grain falls and is lost in the mire. Nobody cares
as there will be plenty left for threshing. It is exhausting work – not
just the bending and pulling, but the weight of the baskets that must be
carried uphill and emptied on to an ever-growing mound of rice plants
within the village.

Once dry, the plants are threshed by striking the ears of grain; the
stalks are kept to use as thatch and matting, and to mix with clay when
pots are being made. Having helped thresh the grain, Lubbock next gives
a hand with the hulling – removing the tough outer husks by rubbing them
with wooden slabs. And then it is winnowed to leave the grain – some
will be eaten immediately, some stored for winter food, some put aside
to use as seed when the flood waters recede once again.

Whether or not the people of Pengtoushan had sown and harvested their
rice in this fashion is conjecture. Broadcasting seed on to land
naturally and gently watered by annual floods is the simplest method of
rice cultivation, known to have been used by many traditional people of
Southeast Asia.²⁵ There is no evidence from Pei’s excavation to suggest
the use of irrigation ditches or mudbanks; he found neither spades for
digging, hoes for preparing the soil nor knives for cutting the ears of
grain. But all such tools might have once been used at Pengtoushan –
they could have been washed away, decayed without trace, or become too
deeply buried for Pei to discover.²⁶

The flood-water ‘farming’ method described above could easily have
provided the required conditions for the domestic strains of rice to
evolve. Just like the transformation of wild wheat in western Asia,
there had to be some selection by people of those rare mutant rice
plants that had non-brittle ears – those which ‘wait for the harvester’.
Such genetic mutants would not have survived for long in the wild, being
unable to seed themselves. But they were the ideal plants for early
farmers who didn’t want to see ripe grain sinking into the mud as soon
as they began their harvest.

The simple fact that much of the grain from the brittle-eared rice would
have been lost in this manner meant that any baskets of harvested plants
contained a relatively high proportion of the rare non-brittle variants.
The key to ensuring that this amount was further increased was not only
to use some of the grain as seed, but to plant where there would have
been no growth of wild plants.

Only if planted in a wild-rice-free zone could the new crop reflect the
relatively high proportion of seed from the non-brittle-eared rice that
had been sown; this proportion would have been further enhanced when
harvested. Eventually, after many cycles of planting and harvesting,
perhaps as many as the two hundred harvests that Gordon Hillman had
estimated for the domestication of wheat,²⁷ the crop would have become
dominated by non-brittle, simultaneously ripening and large-grained rice
– Oryza sativa. If left alone it would have soon disappeared, being
unable to seed itself and survive; but by that time, of course, it was
being cultivated by farmers.

The Pengtoushan people of 6800 BC may have already become such farmers.
Some of the rice grains preserved within their pottery were certainly
large enough to have come from fully domestic plants. Unfortunately a
detailed study of the grains has not been possible as they become
severely damaged when removed from their protective pottery casing. But
any doubts that domestic rice had appeared by 6800 BC were removed in
1997 when Pei excavated another settlement located no more than twenty
kilometres to the north.

This is the site of Bashidang, which thrived between 7000 and 5000 BC.
Here, Pei found the traces of many dwellings, including some built on
piles. He excavated about a hundred burials and recovered a remarkable
collection of artefacts from waterlogged soil, including part of a
wooden plough, a wooden shovel, reed mats, bamboo baskets and cane
ropes.²⁸ Within a nearby riverbed he discovered an abundant quantity of
plant remains including 15,000 grains of rice. Studies of these have
left no doubts that the Bashidang people were farmers using a fully
domestic strain of rice.²⁹

Back on the Yangtze River time is moving slowly again. It takes a mere
hundred years for Lubbock to complete the 1,000-kilometre journey to the
delta, reaching the coastal plain at 6700 BC. He finds a vast patchwork
of marshes and lakes, scattered woodland and salt marsh, all
criss-crossed by rivers and streams. Sea level still has a few metres to
rise before stabilising at its present height; the final inundation will
further enlarge the estuaries, create new bays and yet more islands to
fringe the coast.

The watery landscape of 6700 BC is a hunter-gatherers’ paradise; some
are stalking deer, others are fishing or collecting shellfish. But the
largest settlements that Lubbock can find are no more than clusters of
reed-built dwellings upon islands of dry ground, none of which approach
Pengtoushan or Bashidang in size. Their inhabitants are doing no more
than harvesting wild, uncultivated rice. The idea of sowing seed on the
flood plain and then tending the seedlings has not yet arrived from
upstream. When it does so, the results will be dramatic as the coastal
wetlands provide the perfect setting for rice farming to take root and
flourish.

Had Lubbock followed rather then pre-empted the arrival of farming, not
reaching the delta until 5000 BC, he would have found a quite different
type of village. He could then have visited Hemudu on the southern shore
of Hang-Chou Bay, the remnants of which were excavated during the
1970s.³⁰ There he could have sat within houses more than 20 metres long,
built with wooden planks using mortise-and-tenon joinery and raised on
piles at least a metre above the shallow waters below. He could have
helped prepare paddy-fields for planting using spades made from the
shoulder blades of water buffalo fixed to wooden handles, or even tended
the domesticated buffalo themselves.³¹ Or perhaps thrown scraps to the
pigs. The quantity of rice excavated from Hemudu suggests that Lubbock
might have spent the early summer transplanting young shoots from
nursery beds to the main paddy-fields – one of the most laborious jobs
for twentieth-century Chinese peasants.³² Alternatively he might have
joined parties going fishing and fowling, hunting and gathering in the
marshes and woodlands of the Yangtze delta, or perhaps developed his
pottery skills to help produce the ornate vessels that were excavated
from Hemudu.

But Hemudu is nothing more than a simple hunter-gatherer campsite as
Lubbock sits at the mouth of the Yangtze River watching egrets at
sunrise on some unmarked day in 6700 BC. It is low tide and glistening
mud-flats stretch far to the east. They are cut by meandering silver
ribbons of flowing water and it is into one of these that he pushes the
same canoe that has brought him from the Sichuan basin. Now it must
carry him across 2,000 kilometres of the Yellow Sea so his travels can
continue in the lands that today we call Japan.³³

40 With the Jomon

Complex hunter-gatherers in Japan and the earliest pottery, 14,500–6000 BC

Everybody stops, looks up and stares in silence. For a brief moment John
Lubbock’s feeling of ‘otherness’ from his new, unknowing hosts is lost.
Rumbling, smoking volcanoes have that effect – emotional responses swell
up to override cultural differences. But within an instant it has
passed. The people of Uenohara are once again watching and listening to
the distant volcano through their own cultural filter – their mythology
and ideological beliefs about which Lubbock knows nothing. As voices and
the sounds of work begin again, he resumes his status as observer rather
than participant in life on Kyushu island, in Japan, 9200 BC. Lubbock
has arrived at Uenohara 2,500 years before he left the Yangtze at 6700
BC.¹

Uenohara is a village on the southern coast of Kyushu, at the head of
what is now known as Kagoshima Bay.² Its occupants are hunter-gatherers
– the ideas and seed-grain for rice cultivation that will spread
eastwards along the Yangtze valley from Pengtoushan will not arrive in
Japan until 5000 BC at the earliest.³ To reach the village, Lubbock had
trekked through the island’s thickly wooded hills after his own arrival
on its western shore. A maze of tiny paths took him between oaks and
chestnuts; the air was pungent with autumn, the boughs heavy with their
seasonal load.⁴ He soon discovered unseen companions in the woods by
recognising deer tracks in the mud, pig hair on brambles and axe-marks
on tree stumps. The paths led him to a clearing with a scatter of
thirteen conical huts. It was mid-afternoon; adults were busy tending
fires and manufacturing tools, while the village’s children chased each
other round the dwellings.

A party of the Uenohara people had also just emerged from the woods
carrying bundles of reeds and sacks that bulged with the produce of the
forest. Lubbock guessed that the reeds were for a new hut whose skeleton
of wooden poles had already been tied into a wigwam shape around a
circular depression.⁵ Several men were felling trees with stone axes to
enlarge the clearing. Their work exposed a view across the sea,
revealing a distant mountain with its summit surrounded by cloud – or so
Lubbock had thought until it rumbled and a new plume of ash-laden smoke
issued forth.

The people of Uenohara looked fit, healthy and happy. They wore few
clothes. The children and some adults went bare. Most had nothing more
than an apron of hide around their waist; a few wore tunics. All except
the very old had vibrant yellow-brown skins with jet-black hair either
tied into plaits or swept back below headbands. Some wore necklaces made
from deer teeth and boars’ tusks; a few men had swirls of red paint upon
their chests.

Just as at Pengtoushan, Lubbock was drawn to sit next to a potter – this
time an elderly lady with wrinkled skin and no teeth. She was completing
a vessel far more elegant than any Lubbock had seen during his travels
around the world – near spherical in shape with a narrow neck and curved
lip, it was about the size of a football. Her bony fingers rolled a thin
wooden rod wrapped with cord across the surface of her pot to make an
intricate geometric pattern. She then moved her dowel and rolled again,
gradually covering the entire surface with her design.

Just as she was about to make the final impressions the volcano erupted
and she lost her rhythm, momentarily freezing, with her cord-wrapped
dowel hovering a few millimetres above the clay. Her hesitation was
brief because she had seen and heard this volcano before – many times.
It had never been quiet throughout her long life living in its shadow.

Uenohara is just one of a great number archaeological sites known
throughout Japan which are placed into the Jomon culture, many of which
appear to have been occupied all year round. The name derives from the
Japanese word for the technique that had been used to decorate pottery –
jomon means ‘cord-marks’.⁶

Edward S. Morse, an American biologist and antiquarian, found the first
signs of this culture in 1877 – twelve years too late for Victorian John
Lubbock’s Prehistoric Times. He excavated a shell midden at Omori close
to modern-day Tokyo City and trained Japanese students in the techniques
of archaeology.⁷ They were soon excavating further sites and beginning
to find the pottery, dwellings and artefacts that became designated as
the Jomon culture. Many different designs of pottery were found, leading
to numerous cultural subdivisions that have been continually revised
throughout the last century as new discoveries were made and radiocarbon
dates acquired. Today six cultural phases are recognised, running from
the Incipient Jomon which begins with the first pottery, to the Final
Jomon which ends at 500 BC. After this date, rice farming appears on a
substantial scale in Japan, probably brought by immigrants from China
and Korea.⁸

Uenohara falls into the Initial Jomon, during which the first sedentary
villages appear. The shift from the traditional mobile hunter-gatherer
lifestyles occurred at around 9500 BC and appears to have been a
response to the warmer temperatures and increased rainfall of the
Holocene – just as was the case with the foundation of Jericho. But the
Jomon people differed from those of the Jordan valley by remaining
entirely reliant on wild foods, having abundant woodland and coastal
resources to exploit.⁹ They also made extensive use of pottery.

Jomon pottery is, in fact, the earliest pottery in the world. It
provides just one example of the cultural precociousness of Japanese
hunter-gatherers as the last ice age came to its close. Fukui
Rockshelter in western Kyushu provided some of the earliest-known
fragments when excavated in 1960–2.¹⁰ This small cave, found at the base
of a sandstone outcrop, is well lit and provides an excellent view
across a nearby river. Ice-age hunter-gatherers favoured the cave,
resulting in more than five metres of artefact-rich deposits that had
begun accumulating before the LGM. The first pottery shards appear in
levels dating to 13,000 BC.

Their discovery caused widespread disbelief. In 1962 two distinguished
Professors, Suago Yamanouchi and Hiroyuki Sato, published an infamous
article entitled ‘The Age of Jomon Pottery’, concluding that either the
dates or the excavation method employed at Fukui must be in error as its
pottery could not be any older than 3000 BC.¹¹ They found it
inconceivable that pottery had arisen in Japan at least six thousand
years earlier than in western Asia and Europe. Their attitude seems
astonishing today when archaeologists are often far too quick to claim
that their own region was the source of some cultural innovation. As
more radiocarbon dates and pottery finds accumulated, and as confidence
in the new dating method increased, Yamanouchi and Sato had to recant:
Japan did indeed have the earliest pottery in the world.¹²

Cultural precociousness was not only manifest in pottery. Ice-age
hunter-gatherers in Japan were grinding the edges of their stone axes to
make better tools several thousand years before this technique was
adopted in the West.¹³ The Jomon people also invented the use of
lacquer, made with sap from the urushi, a type of sumac tree. It needs
collecting, heating and filtering before being painstakingly applied to
the surface of an object. Recent excavations at Kakinoshima in Hokkaido
have found the oldest known lacquered object from anywhere in the world:
a red-lacquered comb placed within a burial at 7000 BC.¹⁴

Why should the Jomon people have been so inventive? Why were they making
pottery so much earlier than anywhere else in the world? Only the
pottery from China comes remotely close to it in date and there it is
explained by the requirements of rice cultivation. Melvin Aitkins from
the University of Oregon, an authority on the Jomon period, believes
that Japanese pottery was invented to cook and store the produce of the
thick broad-leaved woodland that had already covered Kyushu by 13,000
BC. The relationship is evident, he argues, from the simultaneous spread
of broad-leaved woodland and pottery into the northern islands of Japan,
both appearing on the northernmost island of Hokkaido at around 7000
BC.¹⁵

There are, however, two problems with this idea. First, there is no
necessity for hunter-gatherers to have pottery when living in wooded
environments – the inhabitants of ‘Ain Mallaha in western Asia at 12,500
BC and Star Carr in northern Europe at 9,500 BC flourished with an
entire reliance on vessels made from wickerwork, bark, skins, wood and
stone. Pottery no doubt made life easier for those who did the cooking
in the woodlands of Kyushu and we know from food residues that pottery
vessels had indeed been used to make vegetable, meat and fish stews. But
people could have easily survived without such vessels.

A second problem for Aitkins’ theory arose in 1999 when a new sample of
pottery was found at the site of Odaiyamamoto in northern Honshu.
Radiocarbon dates on the residues stuck to the interior of the pot dated
to 14,500 BC, pushing back the origin of pottery by at least another
thousand years.¹⁶ At this date Honshu would have had no more than a
sparse covering of pine and birch. And so the theory that Japanese
pottery was invented to store and cook acorns and other produce of
broad-leaved woodlands cannot be correct.

Brian Hayden of Simon Fraser University has proposed an alternative
explanation. It provides another example of his belief in social
competition as the driving force of culture change that we first
encountered when considering his theory for the origin of squash
cultivation in Mexico.

Hayden suggests that ceramic vessels have a number of important
qualities that makes them prestigious objects to own and ideal
containers for serving food to guests. At the outset, the potter’s art
would have been difficult to master; clay had to be carefully selected,
tempers prepared, construction and firing techniques explored, practised
and refined. Neighbours and more distant visitors would have been struck
with the amount of labour and skill required to produce a pottery
vessel. The display of novel forms with fancy decoration would have
impressed them even more. Most striking of all might have been the
dramatic smashing of vessels during feasts as an ostentatious display of
wealth.¹⁷

Theatrical smashing of pots may have occurred in the later Jomon period
as immense ‘pottery middens’ have been found.¹⁸ And as they come in
astonishingly elaborate forms, there can be no doubt that many later
Jomon vessels were primarily for display. Constructed on a basic
flowerpot design, they have spectacular rims modelled as licking flames
or serpents winding about the vessel with protruding sculptured heads.
Sometimes the decoration is so top-heavy that the pots can hardly stand
alone.¹⁹ Lacquered objects must have been very striking, as indeed they
still are today. But we must be cautious about applying such
interpretations to the earliest, and frankly rather drab, specimens of
pottery from Fukui Cave and elsewhere. We currently know too little
about the very earliest pottery makers of Japan to decide whether they
had been more concerned with impressing their visitors or devising a
means to cook vegetable stew. We do know, however, that by 9500 BC many
were living sedentary lives in permanent settlements such as Uenohara.
Although pottery had already been invented, the sedentary lifestyle must
have been crucial in enabling ceramic technology to flourish.

As Lubbock wanders between dwellings, pausing to spy over shoulders and
taste titbits of food, the feeling of permanence soon reminds him of his
visits to other hunter-gatherer settlements, especially ‘Ain Mallaha in
western Asia and Koster in North America. A substantial number of trees
have been cleared and the dwellings seem built to last. The grinding
stones and pottery vessels are certainly not designed for carrying from
one campsite to another. The contents of cooking pots and rubbish heaps
show that the Uenohara people have an immense range of food supplies at
hand; they evidently take from the woodlands, the freshwater streams,
the seashore and the ocean itself. Just like the people at ‘Ain Mallaha
and Koster, they have used the abundant natural harvests to eschew the
mobile lifestyle of traditional hunter-gatherers and enjoy a settled
village life.

But just like every other village, Uenohara has a unique atmosphere and
a host of cultural particularities. Lubbock watches more potters at
work, some using seashells instead of knotted cord to decorate their
vessels. Joints of pork are being smoked above ingenious cooking pits
that have two openings connected by a short tunnel. The joints are hung
from branches over one, a fire burns in the other and smoke wafts
through the tunnel and over the meat. The stone arrow-heads being made
have deeply serrated sides and are quite unlike any that Lubbock has
seen elsewhere. Body ornaments are also different: the painted designs
are striking and many people wear thick bangles of fired clay as
earrings, incised with swirls and spirals.²⁰

Although elaborate, such body decorations do not seem to denote status.
Uenohara appears to have neither designated leaders nor differences in
wealth. All dwellings are similar in size and construction; each of the
fires are cooking the same type of food; there seems to be no
restriction as to who can sit where and talk to whom.

As the day at Uenohara draws to a close, Lubbock examines the sacks
carried by those coming from the woodland when he arrived. These had
been dumped next to a series of ready-made clay-lined pits, with their
contents spilling across the ground. Acorns. Two women are at work,
placing layers of crushed rock and then chopped reeds in the bottom of
each pit. Acorns are tipped in and packed down into a firm layer.
Further layers of reeds and crushed rock are added until the fill is
almost level with the ground. Finally the women smother each pit with
clay to make a watertight seal. In this manner, the nuts will be safely
stored from rodents and the wet for the lean times which come every
winter; when eaten, they will have lost their bitter taste.²¹

As work finishes and the sun sets, Lubbock is attracted to a fire and
sits within a group that has gathered close to the part-constructed hut.
A stack of reeds still waits to be attached to the wooden poles – there
seems no hurry to complete the work. Oil oozes and sizzles from parcels
of folded leaves containing fish that sit upon hot stones. Some adults
and children have already lain down on plant fibre mats to sleep; others
talk in hushed voices or sing gently to the young. As Lubbock joins
them, the evening sky gives an astonishing display of ever-changing reds
and oranges, and then becomes swamped by deep purple and mauves. There
is a faintly sulphurous flavour to the air as flecks of volcanic ash
fall and fluoresce in the unfolding darkness like a gentle flurry of
pyrotechnic snow.

When Koichi Shinto of the Archaeological Centre of Kagoshima excavated
Uenohara between 1986 and 1997 he found its archaeological remains
sandwiched between layers of volcanic ash. Sakura-jima, the volcano that
was billowing when Lubbock arrived, erupted in 9100 BC and buried the
settlement below its pumice and ash.²² It is not known whether
Uenohara’s people had already left, fled in terror or were buried alive
because the acidic ash destroyed all organic material at the site,
including human and animal bones. Nevertheless, a great number of
ancient hut floors, cooking pits and fireplaces were uncovered. Along
with these, Koichi Shinto found an array of artefacts that included
ceramic earrings, pots, clay figurines and serrated arrow points. Many
had been buried several decades, perhaps centuries, after the 9100 BC
eruption had occurred. Without dwellings to accompany them, it seems
that Uenohara had become a location of ritualistic deposition.

Sakura-jima was not, however, the volcano that sealed the last of the
material remains of Uenohara and the ultimate fate of its people. That
came on a day around 5000 BC with the eruption of Kikai volcano, located
100 kilometres off the southern coast of Kyushu.²³ This was one of the
biggest eruptions of the Holocene world. Pyroclastic flows travelled
across the sea to Kyushu, devastating its southern and central forests
and anything they contained; ash from Kikai was even deposited far to
the north on Hokkaido island. Uenohara – which might have already been
deserted – was buried below one metre of ash. Much of southern Kyushu
remained uninhabited for several centuries and people never returned to
rebuild the village.²⁴

Today, Uenohara has been put on public display and is visited by
thousands of people every year who see where the Jomon hunter-gatherers
had once built their homes and smoked their pork. In this most recent
phase of its life, Uenohara has become quite unlike those other
hunter-gatherer settlements of prehistory with which it had once been so
easily compared. The excavated remnants of Star Carr, ‘Ain Mallaha and
many others lie neglected, quite unknown and inaccessible to the public
who are denied a knowledge of their hunter-gatherer past.

It is 9100 BC. Having dozed until daylight, Lubbock leaves Uenohara to
begin a northward journey through the islands of Japan. First he travels
by foot along deer tracks and well-trodden plant-gathering routes to the
northern coast of Kyushu. There he arrives at cliffs that tower above
the Bungo Channel, 50 kilometres of island-dotted sea beyond which lies
Shikoku, the next of Japan’s islands. Its distant coast is lost in a
salty haze thrown up by crashing waves below.

He has no choice but to follow the cliff-top, descending into bays and
climbing again on to headlands until the far northern point of Kyushu is
reached. Jomon campsites are nestled in sheltered coves, some with
canoes dragged on to their shore. Borrowing one, Lubbock crosses the
narrow strait to the southwesterly tip of Honshu island. From there he
follows its convoluted southern coastline, always in the shadow of high
inland mountains with stone-grey and purple peaks. Winters come and
cover the summits and forest-covered slopes with snow; the summers are
hot and humid, their arrival announced by torrential winds and rains
blown from the Pacific. Soon 9100 BC becomes 8000 and then 7000 BC.

When the coastline swings to the south Lubbock heads inland; steep,
tree-covered valleys lead to passes between mountain peaks. From these
he looks eastwards, across the emerald Pacific towards North America.
When 6500 BC arrives, Lubbock knows that hunters upon the Great Plains
are struggling with the impact of drought as they search for dwindling
bison herds.

On another inland sortie from the coast Lubbock arrives at the marshy
margins of an enormous inland lake – known today as Lake Biwa. The
woodlands are particularly rich, and the lake provides shellfish and
many edible aquatic plants. Not surprisingly, there are several Jomon
campsites; their inhabitants discard the debris from their plant
gathering into the boggy ground – nutshells, unpalatable skins, seeds
and stalks. There it will remain preserved in waterlogged sediment,
until excavated as the site of Awazu and providing one of the few
collections of Jomon plant remains.²⁵

After having covered about 850 kilometres as the crow flies from the
southwesterly tip of Honshu, and at least four or five times that
distance around the intricacies of the coasts and valleys, Lubbock finds
himself resting in the gentle Tama Hills above today’s Tokyo Bay. He has
recently passed close to Mount Fuji, whose perfectly symmetrical and
snow-covered peak dominated a landscape of lakes and waterfalls,
flowering cherry and wild azaleas. But the view before him now is more
prosaic: a troop of wild pigs snorting and snuffling their way through
the undergrowth on the opposite side of a shallow valley.

A single large boar with curly and lethal-looking tusks dominates the
group; with him are three females and a host of stripy piglets. One of
the sows suddenly disappears amid piercing squeals; the others flee, the
little ones desperately trying to keep up with the adults that charge
into the trees, leaving broken boughs and trampled shrubs behind. The
squealing continues from precisely where the pigs had been, a
panic-stricken, painful squeal intermixed with desperate grunts that
echo through the valley. And yet there is no pig to be seen.

It takes several minutes for the cries to cease, becoming replaced by
heavy breathing and sounds of struggle. Slowly, cautiously, Lubbock
approaches and learns that the sow had fallen through the brushwood
cover of a pit, having been tempted by a bait of nuts. The pig is stuck:
her legs dangle helplessly in a ditch, her sides wedged and made firm by
her own hopeless efforts to escape.

For the next few hours Lubbock waits by the pit-trap while the pig
periodically squeals and frantically thrusts her head around. By the
time a party of Jomon hunters step from the woods to check their trap,
she is exhausted and quiet. When they use a flint knife to cut a swollen
artery there is no more than a whimpering acceptance of death.

The hunters drink a little of her blood from a small pottery bowl and
wait for the rest to drain. Work then begins to remove the carcass. They
climb on to her back and undertake butchery with stone axes and knives,
levering out the partitioned carcass with wooden stakes. Then they
return to the woods carrying haunches across their shoulders and the
pig’s head upon a stake. A scatter of blunted, greasy stone tools and a
single bloodstained pottery vessel are left behind.

When Keiji Imamura, now at the University of Tokyo, undertook
excavations prior to a housing development in the Kirigaoka area of
Yokohama City in 1970, he failed to discover Jomon pit-dwellings in any
of the seven localities examined. But he found many oval-shaped pits,
most about 1.5 metres long and more than one metre deep. Too small to be
houses and with very few artefacts around, Imamura thought he might have
found pit-traps for wild boar.²⁶

To pursue his idea, Imamura shunned the usual archaeological tools of
trowels and dental picks in favour of bulldozers. He stripped a vast
area of topsoil from Kirigaoka, removing it from hill slopes, ridges,
terraces and the bottoms of small valleys. The whole area proved to be
peppered with the oval pits, many close to what Imamura thought might
once have been animal trails. The pits came in a range of different
designs. One type had once had poles erected in its base. These may have
been stakes to kill the animal or perhaps just supports to keep trotters
dangling above the ground. Another type was like the one that Lubbock
had seen – an elongated oval with narrowing walls to tightly wedge the
pig once it had fallen in.

A few of the pits at Kirigaoka contained fragments of pottery. These had
presumably been washed in by the rain from broken vessels left around
the trap, along with soil and other debris. The style and decoration of
the pots suggested that some pits dated to the Initial Jomon,
contemporary with the settlement at Uenohara, while others were Early
Jomon in date. Further pits were very recent, having been used for boar
hunting in historic times, as recorded in Japanese folklore.

During the Japanese economic boom of the 1970s and 1980s, thousands of
excavations took place every year in advance of building, and many
similar sites were discovered throughout the country. The majority of
pit-traps dated to the Early Jomon period and were sometimes found in
substantial numbers. One of the most spectacular discoveries was made in
the Tama Hills region of Tokyo’s southern suburbs, where 30 square
kilometres of land was examined prior to a housing development. An
astonishing 10,000 pits were uncovered. Those of the Later Jomon period
were arranged in lines, suggesting that pigs or deer had been chased
towards them, perhaps with the use of fences to channel the animals to
their death. But the Earlier Jomon people appear to have been more
casual about their hunting – they simply left some bait and let fate
play its role as pigs rooted and deer nibbled through the
innocent-looking woodland.

From the Tama Hills Lubbock walks to the coast of Tokyo Bay, now always
watching for suspicious clusters of nuts. On arrival, the shoreline
appears deserted, even though there are many signs of human presence
around the bay: old fireplaces, collapsed brushwood huts, canoes dragged
on to the sands. As Lubbock sits wondering where to go, a wispy spiral
of smoke rises above the trees on a small island within the bay. The
water looks warm and shallow and so he begins to wade to its shore. In
fact it is cold and deep, requiring Lubbock to undertake an unpleasant
and tiring swim.

He finds a few families living on the island; their simple brushwood
dwellings built near a diffuse heap of shells, including those of
oysters, clams and cockles. Animal bones, some still carrying scraps of
skin and sinew, broken tools and pots have also been thrown on to the
stinking heap. A fire burns by the midden’s edge; women are grinding
nuts into a paste and children are playing on the rubbish. They throw
old bones around and decimate discarded pots into tiny fragments. Dogs
lie close to the women and chew bones. The men sit looking out to sea,
wondering whether the incoming tide will reach as high, and perhaps even
surpass, that of the night before.²⁷

Lubbock has reached what will become the archaeological site of
Natsushima. Needing some warmth after his swim he sits by the fire, the
stench of the midden reminding him of days spent at Ertebølle and Namu.
But although familiar with midden sites, he has previously given little
time to learning the arts of coastal gathering. So Lubbock resolves to
remain at Natsushima for a few weeks at least – watching and practising
this further aspect of Jomon life.

Lessons begin at low tide early the next morning when he accompanies the
women to gather shellfish. Many of the small children also come, carried
on shoulders or running to play in the water near by. Molluscs on the
rocks are easy to find but difficult to remove; Lubbock has to learn how
to strike them sharply with a pointed stone but too often scuffs his
knuckles on the rock.

The women also search for clams below the sand, looking for small
depressions where the shells have burrowed and then testing their
potential by dragging their fingers or a digging stick through the sand.
If sufficient shells are felt, some women sit and begin to fill their
baskets; if not, the search continues – heads and shoulders bent for a
better view of the ground. When a particularly dense patch of shells is
found, all the women gather together in a circle to pull enormous clams
from the sand.

The shellfish culinary lesson follows back at the camp. A patch of clean
sand close to the hearth is found and the shells are stacked carefully
against each other with their lips in the sand. Small sticks and dead
grass are placed upon the shells; once lit, the breeze quickly spreads
the flames over the bed of shells. Within minutes sizzling and popping
noises begin, as the shells open and juices begin to escape. When
cooked, the fire is cleared away and the gaping shells arranged on fresh
green leaves to cool.²⁸

Although marine fish and coastal foods dominate the diet at Natsushima,
Lubbock also joins the hunting parties that regularly leave for the
inland hills and forests. They inspect pit-traps and set snares to
capture hare – a skill Lubbock had already learned long ago at Creswell
Crags. Fresh deer tracks are followed but with little success; dogs
flush out game birds; nets are thrown over unwary ducks.

Within a few weeks Lubbock has learned a great deal about how his
unknowing hosts acquire their food but discovered little about their
social life and religious beliefs. The only death to occur has been that
of a dog, its body unceremoniously buried in the midden. So what
happened to the human dead remained unclear. There was the familiar
story-telling and singing around night-time fires, but no memorable
rituals, costume or dance.

Sosuke Sugihara and his colleagues excavated the Natsushima shell midden
in 1955.²⁹ The site played a key role in establishing the antiquity and
character of the Jomon culture by providing the very first radiocarbon
dates relating to Japanese prehistory. Its lowest layers contained tiny
fragments of pottery and charcoal that were dated to 9000 BC; just like
at Fukui Cave, excavated a few years later, this combination of pottery
and radiocarbon-dated charcoal caused some initial disbelief.

The excavation found traces of many coastal activities: fish hooks,
needles, net weights, axe-heads, grinding stones and the bones from an
immense array of shellfish, animals, birds and fish. As at the Ertebølle
midden in Denmark, no traces of dwellings were found, possibly because
they had been erected just outside the excavated area, or because they
were too ephemeral to leave a trace. One must guess at the presence of
sea-going canoes from the tuna, sea bass and dolphin bones found within
the midden. But Jomon canoes have been found elsewhere, notably at Kamo,
another shell midden on the Pacific coast.³⁰

Lubbock’s failure to garner information about the burial customs and
ritual activities of those who lived at Natsushima at 6500 BC was a
consequence of the short duration of his visit – a summer season alone.
He failed to learn whether the families would remain by their midden all
year round or whether they would move to another settlement, perhaps
joining other families in a woodland winter village. That may have been
the time for ceremony and ritual, for dressing-up and dance, a time when
marriages were forged and rites of passage passed through. But Lubbock
had to leave Natsushima with such questions unanswered – just as they
remain unanswered for archaeologists today.³¹

The Jomon culture continued to flourish long after Lubbock’s travels
came to an end. Its apogee came soon after 3000 BC when Jomon pottery
effectively became ornate sculpture, and elaborately carved stone rods
and female figurines were produced. In light of a dramatic increase in
the number of archaeological sites, the human population had evidently
soared in number. The woodlands were intensively harvested, the Jomon
becoming wild gardeners, cultivators and managers of their forest.³²
Shell middens grew from the small spreads of rubbish, such as at
Natsushima, into great horseshoe-shaped mounds containing many millions
of shells and bones. Migratory salmon provided predictable supplies of
food, possibly making the same contribution to cultural complexity as
they did across the Pacific on the northwest coast of America.³³

When full-scale rice farming arrived in Japan at around 500 BC, the
hunting-gathering-cultivating Jomon lifestyle was replaced by a rural
agricultural economy that made use of iron tools and continued into
modern times. Incoming people originating in China and Korea brought
this new economy to Japan.³⁴ It is from these people that almost all
modern-day Japanese people are descended. Because rice was unable to
grow in the colder environments of northern Honshu and Hokkaido the
Jomon culture survived a little longer in the north of Japan. Today, the
Ainu people who maintain a hunting-and-gathering lifestyle inhabit these
regions.³⁵ Many believe that the Ainu are not only the cultural
inheritors of the Jomon way of life, but the biological descendants of
the Jomon people themselves.

41 Summer in the Arctic

The mammoth steppe and colonisation of the High Arctic, 19,000–6500 BC

Having once shared a Tasmanian cave with the southernmost people of the
ice-age world, Lubbock is now heading for the opposite end of planet
earth. His destination is Zhokhov, a peninsula in the Arctic Ocean that
will mark the end of his northward journey through eastern Asia – there
will simply be nowhere else to go.

Today Zhokhov is a tiny island, detached from the Siberian mainland by a
rise in sea-level and no more than 11 kilometres from north to south and
9 kilometres east to west. Its spine of low hills is bordered by
entirely flat lowland pock-marked with waterlogged hollows. An
impoverished tundra of bogs, mosses, lichens and grass covers the
bedrock, except where the basalt has been scraped clean by Arctic
storms. Constantly assaulted by a violent northerly wind, it suffers the
intense cold and darkness of a long Arctic winter. Few would dispute
that Zhokhov island is one of the most inhospitable places on earth; it
was little different in 6400 BC. Yet it was home for a Stone Age
community – the first people known to live in the High Arctic.

To reach Zhokhov, Lubbock must undertake a journey of some 3,500
kilometres from Natsushima; this begins with a canoe trip from the
northern tip of Japan. On his arrival in the Russian Far East, he treks
through a thickly forested landscape of oak, elm and birch that provides
a perfect habitat for bear, fox and wild boar. As he travels north, this
broad-leafed woodland changes to a dark coniferous forest, one of
spruce, larch and fir in which Lubbock feels alone, even though there
are signs that suggest otherwise.¹ He passes recent fireplaces on
riverbanks where stone artefacts have been made, birds plucked and
salmon skinned. Plumes of smoke spiral above distant trees; strange
unnatural noises seem to announce a human presence. But such echoes are
rare additions to the sounds of the Siberian forest – those of trees
creaking in the wind and the rustles of wary animals, moose or maybe
lynx. And up above there are the cries, the honks and the beating wings
of geese; they too are heading north for an Arctic summer.

Halfway through his northward journey a cave provides shelter and a
place to wait for others to arrive. It is within a small limestone cliff
and close to the confluence of two rivers, the larger of which will one
day become called the Aldan and flow through the Sakha Republic of the
Russian Federation. Lubbock scrambles through a thicket upon its steep
bank to reach the entrance; the cave is quite small inside – no more
than 12 metres to its rear and just high enough to stand upright. The
view is daunting: waves of forest-covered hills that rhythmically rise
and fall before fading gently into sky.

The cave is warm and dry; if there are people in the vicinity they will
be sure to come and use it. And so Lubbock waits, just as he had done
elsewhere in the world – at Kulpi Mara in the Central Australian Desert
at 13,000 BC and Sandal Shelter, Arizona, at 7500 BC. Once again he
waits in vain.

Lubbock’s lonesome waiting place is Dyuktai Cave but his arrival is
poorly timed to meet any occupants.² Having been used at 17,000 BC and
12,000 BC, it then suffered a long period of abandonment until being
reoccupied in historic times. So by 6400 BC – the date of Lubbock’s
arrival – the stone tools and food debris of Dyuktai’s ice-age occupants
were sealed within the floor deposits: a mix of wind-blown silt,
limestone collapse and sand left behind by the river when in flood. The
tools remained buried within these sediments until the late 1960s when
excavated by the Russian archaeologist Yuri Mochanov.

Mochanov undertook his excavations as part of the Prilensk
Archaeological Expedition established in 1964 by the Academy of Sciences
of the USSR.³ The Aldan River valley was chosen in the hope of finding
the settlements of people who had migrated to the northeast of Siberia
and whose descendants colonised the Americas. This was, of course, long
before Monte Verde had been discovered and when the Clovis people were
still revered as the first Americans.

The cave contained several metres of floor deposits from which large
numbers of stone artefacts and animal bones were recovered. The former
came from many different species – both large animals, including
reindeer, horse and bison, and smaller ones such as lemmings, hare and
fox. These suggested a quite different landscape to the forested hills
through which Lubbock had travelled, one of tundra and steppe in which,
Mochanov concluded, people had hunted not only bison and reindeer but
the woolly mammoth whose bones were also found within the cave.⁴

The stone tools turned out to be quite different from anything
previously found in Northeast Asia. Some were stone knives and
projectile points made by repeatedly removing chips from the alternate
faces of a large stone flake. This was the same ‘bifacial’ method that
the Clovis people of North America used to make their projectile points
at least a millennium after the final prehistoric occupation of Dyuktai
Cave.⁵ Other tools were made from small, thin blades of flint removed
from ‘wedge-shaped’ cores, while antlers and bones had been worked to
make a variety of other implements including awls and hammers.

As the Prilensk Archaeological Expedition discovered further sites,
similar collections of tools were excavated, which were often associated
with the same range of mammals. And so a new culture was defined, named
after the cave where such tools were first found: the Dyuktai culture.
This was soon recognised as having existed throughout Siberia – or
western Beringia as we should call it – during the final millennia of
the Pleistocene.

The origins of the Dyuktai culture are now known to stretch back to just
a millennium or so after the severest conditions of the LGM. Between
1986 and 1990 Mikhail Konstantinov from the Russian Chita Pedagogical
Institute excavated a remarkable open settlement on the ancient banks of
the Chikoi River, close to Lake Baikal in eastern Russia, approximately
2,000 kilometres southwest of Dyuktai Cave. Known as Studenhoe, this
site revealed that hunter-gatherers had regularly camped upon the
river’s flood plain, their discarded debris being flooded and then
buried in fine sediments immediately after each occupation.⁶ The
consequence was a tremendous sequence of deposits in which individual
hearths and huts were separated by fine layers of silt. One of the
dwellings was marked by a ring of seventy boulders with the remnants of
five hearths situated in a line. The hearths were rock-lined oval
features, containing charcoal, while the hut floors provided thousands
of stone artefacts typical of the Dyuktai culture.

In 1996, an American team collaborated with the Russians to secure
charcoal samples from the hearths for radiocarbon dating. The results
showed that the first riverside campsites had occurred by 19,000 BC, by
which date the Dyuktai-type tools had already been adopted. It became
evident that Studenhoe and the Dyuktai-type technology provided the
basis for the colonisation of the far northeast. Although the Studenhoe
people and their descendants must have endured freezing temperatures,
violent winds and a constant search for firewood and shelter, they
appear to have been driven to colonise the frozen north. By 15,000 BC
they were living at Berelekh, a settlement 1,000 kilometres north of
Dyuktai Cave and 500 kilometres inside the Arctic Circle. And as we know
from sites such as Blue Fish Caves in Alaska, people with a Dyuktai-type
technology had crossed the Bering land bridge by 11,000 BC, becoming
some of the earliest Americans. By 6400 BC, they had colonised the High
Arctic, establishing the settlement of Zhokhov.

Before leaving Dyuktai to resume his northward journey, Lubbock reads a
passage from Prehistoric Times about the ‘Esquimaux’.⁷ Writing in 1865,
his namesake had known that people were living on the shores of the
Arctic Ocean from Siberia to Greenland. Victorian John Lubbock had drawn
on the journals of many Arctic expeditions, especially those from
Captain Parry’s voyages of 1821–3, and was more complimentary about the
Esquimaux than any of his other modern savages. His descriptions of
their dwellings, tools, clothes, boats, hunting, fishing and burial
practices were littered with remarks about ingenuity and skill.

When Victorian John Lubbock found his sources being critical or
dismissive, he was quick to defend the Esquimaux. So when various
‘disgusting accounts’ of meals were cited, along with the Esquimaux
habit of eating raw meat, Victorian Lubbock had commented that several
of the European Arctic expeditions had also eaten raw meat, this being
conducive to good health in high latitudes. Similarly, when describing
how the Esquimaux are ‘excessively dirty’, he stressed how they suffer
from a scarcity of fresh water and how the extreme cold, ‘by preventing
putrefaction, removes one of our principal inducements to cleanliness’.
In the same way, after having cited evidence that the Esquimaux are
‘great thieves’, Victorian Lubbock emphasised that allowances must be
made for the temptations offered by ships’ stores to people familiar
with an extreme shortage of food. He went on to describe the Esquimaux
as ‘strictly honest amongst themselves, kind, generous and trustworthy’.
Some of the women were even ‘beautiful and clever’.

Leaving Dyuktai Cave in 6400 BC, Lubbock continues to travel northwards,
crossing hills and fording rivers. It is often dark below the trees; the
forest floor is springy with a thick mat of pine needles. With every
step the rarity of animals becomes more striking. Moose are occasionally
seen in small meadows between the trees or browsing in thickets of
willow. A bear is sighted, gorging upon berries. But otherwise the
spruce woodland seems quite empty, no more than a few birds within the
trees and wildfowl around the bogs. Only the insects seem plentiful –
biting, drilling and piercing Lubbock’s skin at every opportunity.

While following the course of a valley he notices something white,
smooth and curved protruding from a gully. After scraping away some dirt
it is revealed as a mammoth tusk, exposed after a collapse of sediment
to the valley floor. With a stout branch as a pick and a flat pebble as
a shovel Lubbock begins to dig. More of the tusk appears and with it
part of a skull. Soon an expanse of hairy mammoth hide is exposed. After
hours of digging Lubbock gives up on his own allotted task – it would
take far more than sticks and stones to expose the mighty beast.

The frozen animals of Siberia are the most evocative reminders of the
northern ice-age world. The earliest recorded discovery is a mammoth
from Berezovka, located in the far northeast of Siberia. In 1900 an
ivory dealer had bought tusks from a tribesman who lived on the Kolyma
River and heard how they had been cut from an animal with its hide
intact. After months of reports and telegrams, an expedition set out
from the Imperial Academy of Sciences in Petrograd to investigate the
find. Led by Otto F. Herz, the expedition left in May 1901 and took the
whole summer to reach the mammoth. By the time they arrived, the frosts
and snows of autumn had cemented the mammoth once again within the
refrozen ground. And so a log and canvas structure had to be constructed
over the carcass, stoves lit and the ground thawed out before digging
could begin.⁸

Although much of the head was missing and other parts had decomposed,
preservation of the Berezovka mammoth was remarkable. Large areas of
skin had survived with some internal organs, its tongue, tail and penis.
The mammoth’s last meal remained between its teeth – buttercups and
other flowers. Many of its bones were broken and there were large clots
of blood. Death seemed to have been almost instantaneous, perhaps from
falling into a gully.

During the next fifty years there were several other startling finds,
not only of frozen mammoths but of horses, bison, and woolly rhino, all
coming from before the ice age had reached its end. Several contained
undigested grasses, sedges and flowers within their stomachs – critical
evidence for scientists in their quest to reconstruct how the ancient
landscape had looked before the forests arrived.

Dale Guthrie, a zoologist from the University of Alaska and one of the
most distinguished of such scientists, coined the term ‘mammoth steppe’
for the ice-age landscapes of northern Asia.⁹ Trees had been entirely
absent from a landscape of grasses, herbs and shrubs that supported
herds of large game. Just like the steppe which Gordon Hillman, the
archaeo-botanist from University College, London, has sought to
reconstruct for western Asia, this northern steppe hardly exists today
but had been a vital component of the ice-age world.

An insight into the animal inhabitants of the mammoth steppe was gained
by excavations of a vast natural accumulation of bones at Berelekh,
which became known as a ‘mammoth cemetery’.¹⁰ Having been first reported
in the scientific literature in 1957, a research expedition was launched
in 1970 by the Academy of Sciences of the USSR. N. K. Vereshchagin used
a water cannon to wash away the enclosing sediments, exposing the
remains of perhaps two hundred mammoths along with those from bison,
horse and reindeer. While doing so he found four flint artefacts within
a scatter of bones a short distance from the main deposit. Yuri Mochanov
identified them as belonging to the Dyuktai culture. And so the Prilensk
Archaeological Expedition excavated the human settlement at Berelekh
between 1971–3, and then again in 1981.

Their work discovered many tools made of stone, bone and ivory which had
been discarded around 15,000 BC. Associated with these were mammoth,
bison and reindeer bones; but those from arctic hare and partridge were
far more numerous. So, just as Lubbock had found at Creswell Crags, the
ice-age hunters at Berelekh seem to have preferred trapping small game
to tackling mighty beasts. The mammoth tusks used to make knives and
spears had most likely been scavenged from the ‘cemetery’ – just as
people at Pushkari had collected from a similar accumulation to build
their dwellings at the LGM. Mochanov thinks that a mammoth-bone house
may have once been built at Berelekh, but after millennia of frost
action and disturbance, not to mention the impact of Vereshchagin’s
water pump, no pattern amongst the bones can be discerned.

Soon after 13,000 BC, trees began to spread across the mammoth steppe.
Guthrie believes that they were encouraged to do so not by higher
temperatures but by increasing precipitation – the key to the mammoth
steppe had been its aridity. Most of the new rainfall would have come as
a persistent fine drizzle and mist, just as it does today. It would
never have been substantial: modern-day Alaska receives the same annual
rainfall as the Kalahari Desert. But because evaporation was, and still
is, so low, the soils of the mammoth steppe soon became quite moist as a
watery network of bogs, rivers and lakes seeped into existence.

The conifers that formed the new forests had plenty of water but
struggled to acquire nutrients from the frozen ground. The same applies
today, and growth can be remarkably slow: Guthrie describes how spruce
trees might be one hundred years old but no more than 6 inches from one
side to the other. Such trees cannot risk losing any new growth to
hungry herbivores, and so they pack their leaves and needles with toxic
compounds to make them quite inedible. When shed, they are extremely
slow to decompose, resulting in a thick humic mat on the forest floor.
This insulates the soil, raising the permafrost and further reducing the
availability of nutrients to the trees. Thus growth is further inhibited
and an even greater pressure is placed on the trees to make themselves
unpleasant to eat.

Such trees also need extensive root systems to survive and this keeps
almost the whole of their biomass below ground, safely away from
browsing herbivores. The grasses, herbs and shrubs of the mammoth steppe
had been quite different – quick growers, adapted to short seasonal
bursts of rainfall and then dying back. As such, they could afford to be
eaten; some even benefited from having their dead tissues grazed away so
that sunlight could reach and warm the soil itself.

The spread of forests, bogs and lakes drove the animal herds to the far
north where the mammoth steppe survived. But even there they were put
under pressure by the increased snow cover that buried the grasses and
shrubs and by the flooding of coastal lands by the rising sea. This
combination of factors was sufficient to push the Siberian mammoth into
extinction – no blame can be placed on the Dyuktai people as no kill
sites have been found to compare with the Clovis sites of North America.
Only one mammoth population is known to have survived the burst of
global warming at 9600 BC – that which became trapped on Wrangel Island
after the Siberian plain was inundated by the sea. They were the last of
the woolly mammoths to walk upon planet earth.¹¹

As Lubbock continues his northward journey in 6400 BC the trees become
sparse and the idea that global warming has occurred seems a myth. When
the air is still, clouds of mosquitoes settle upon his eyes, lips and
nostrils and he wishes that the icy wind would blow. Midsummer arrives
and the skies become pastel, often like the mother-of-pearl from inside
a shell. Strange haloes and coronas frequently appear around the sun and
moon. The northern lights provide a distant celestial drapery of
murmuring reds and green.

Eventually Lubbock finds himself on an extensive coastal plain. The few
trees grow upon a variegated quilt of mosses, heather, lichens and
fungi; they are stunted in size and battered by the wind. Lubbock trips
over solid grassy hummocks and slips into boggy pools; but the
moist-looking moss is surprisingly crisp beneath his feet.¹² The sky is
grey and often delivers a sleet-laden wind that whips across the tundra.
In the far distance there is the faint outline of snow-covered hills
within which the village of Zhokhov is nestled.

An incongruous noise halts Lubbock’s step; it is one that recalls other
arrivals – those at ‘Ain Mallaha, Skateholm and Koster. A dog’s bark.
Turning, he sees a sledge approach, pulled by four dogs and steered by a
man dressed in thick hides and fur. It rattles slowly across the tundra,
with a basket of bilberries, a bundle of sticks and a mammoth tusk
carried upon its rear. Taking his chance, Lubbock leaps on board as the
sledge passes by, gaining a lift for the last few kilometres to Zhokhov.

In 1989 a joint expedition by the Leningrad Institute of Archaeology and
the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute discovered a human
settlement on the tiny island of Zhokhov. Initially this appeared as no
more than a series of shallow round pits, scatters of animal bones and
split driftwood within a small valley in the southwest of the island,
close to the foot of an isolated hill. Excavations were undertaken by
Vladimir Pitul’ko who found that the pits had once been dwellings and
that the preservation of wood and bone was excellent due to the
permafrost conditions. The settlement was revealed as the earliest
evidence of human presence in the High Arctic.¹³

During his excavations, Pitul’ko found evidence for both sledges and
dogs and guessed that these might go together,¹⁴ pushing back the
history of dog traction in the Arctic by several thousand years. That
for the sledge was a fragment of wood, probably larch, which had been
shaped and used as a runner. It was just over one metre long with
striations and polish on the underside. With use it had become bevelled,
indicating attachment to the left side of the sledge. A socket bored
into the runner had once held part of the framework – the sledge had
evidently been a substantial construction.

Although further fragments of the sledge were recovered, none provided
direct evidence that it had been pulled by dogs. But dog bones were
excavated, identified as such by being larger than those of the arctic
fox and smaller than those of the wolf. Further evidence for canine
domestication came from large quantities of ‘small rounded deposits’ –
dog faeces – that were excavated from the permafrost. When pulled apart
they were found to contain reindeer hair, fragments of bone and hoof.
Having been found in discrete concentrations, the faeces indicated where
dogs had been tethered to separate posts.

Dogs may have also been used for hunting. The animal bones recovered by
Pitul’ko indicated that while the Zhokhov people hunted reindeer, geese,
swans and the occasional seal, their primary food source had been the
polar bear. This was a unique discovery – no other settlement in which
polar bears were anything other than a minor supplement to the diet has
ever been discovered by archaeologists or visited by anthropologists.
This is not surprising as polar bears are extraordinarily strong and
dangerous animals. The animal bones from Zhokhov also contradicted the
pervasive view among archaeologists that the colonisation of the High
Arctic had been by communities that specialised in the hunting of sea
mammals.

All historically known Arctic cultures have held polar bears in the
highest esteem, often attributing to them a key role in their
mythological world. A pervasive belief among the Inuit of the Canadian
Arctic is that there was once a time when bears and men could easily
change into one another.¹⁵ This may have arisen from the similarities
between polar bears and humans: both are able to stand upright and to
travel on land and sea; both are skilled in hunting and build winter
dwellings, in the polar bears’ case for giving birth. But respect never
prevented killing; after all, polar bears have a lot to offer: good
meat, warm pelts, fat for use in lamps; bones, claws and teeth for tool
making.

When the Inuit people killed a male bear, its bladder, penis, spleen and
tongue were hung up in an igloo with the harpoon and other weapons used
in the hunt. If the animal was a she-bear the bladder and spleen were
hung with the women’s tools – needles and knives – so that the bear’s
soul would feel at home. The women were taught to fear the bear from an
early age by stories about attacks from hungry bears appearing in camp
while the men were away hunting. An Inuit boy’s first bear hunt gave him
adult status, and afterwards he would receive a dog whip with a handle
made from the bear’s penis bone.

Aleksey Kasparov from the Leningrad Institute of Archaeology made a
meticulous study of the polar-bear bones that Vladimir Pitul’ko
excavated at Zhokhov. He identified how initial butchery had taken place
at the kill sites, where the lower legs and feet were discarded.
Kasparov was able to reconstruct how the carcasses were butchered into
joints of meat and the heads cut apart to allow the removal of canine
teeth and brains. The size of the bones suggested that the Zhokhov
people had mainly hunted females, most likely while the bears were
searching for localities to make their winter dens.

A variety of hunting equipment was found, although exactly which had
been used for polar bears and which for reindeer and geese remains
unclear. There were needle-shaped bone projectile points, some of which
might have been hafted on to wooden arrow shafts, fragments of which
were also found. Larger bone points had slots along each side where
flint blades would have been inset. Further pieces of bone had been
carved into barbed points, most likely used for fishing. Ivory and
antler had been used to make pickaxes, while a variety of stone types
had been worked – flint, sandstone, chalcedony and obsidian. Some had
been collected from the local beach; others, such as the obsidian, had
been brought from a great distance and were used sparingly.

The Zhokhov people no longer used the bifacial technique to make their
stone tools as had been favoured by those at Studenhoe, Dyuktai Cave and
Berelekh. Neither did they produce the distinctive ‘wedge-shaped’ cores,
preferring to turn stone nodules into conical or prismatic shapes before
detaching their flakes and blades. Many were removed and used as knife
blades, awls and engraving tools; larger pieces of stone were ground
into axe-heads.

By the date of Zhokhov’s occupation, people throughout Siberia had been
using this new technology for several thousand years, that of the
Dyuktai culture having been abandoned as the landscapes became covered
with trees. Although Lubbock had failed to meet any people on his
northward journey, hunter-gatherers were certainly living in the
Siberian forests at 6400 BC as numerous sites have been found.¹⁶ We know
very little about their way of life as most sites yield no more than a
small scatter of stone artefacts. This is why Pitul’ko’s discovery and
excavation at Zhokhov is so remarkable – the remnants of dwellings, dogs
and sledges, belonging to a community of Stone Age polar bear hunters
who had been living no less than 1,000 kilometres inside the Arctic
Circle.

The sledge arrives at the village while Lubbock is picking bilberry
seeds from between his teeth. He has enjoyed the ride, although feels
disappointed that the runners of the sledge were made from wood rather
than whale jawbones or frozen fish stuffed in skins like those described
in Prehistoric Times.

Dusk also arrives at Zhokhov, the start of a protracted twilight that
will subtly fade rather than darken, repainting the landscape in pale
blues and misty purples. There are at least a dozen circular dwellings
sheltering in the lee of a hill and close to a small brook within a
thicket of willow. Each has split timbers for walls and a cone-shaped
roof covered with turfs and moss. Several children had been waiting for
the sledge; they help the driver tether his dogs, bringing them water in
wooden bowls and bones to gnaw. The load of wood is stacked beside a
dwelling, the tusk stood upright against a wall. The man takes a drink
of water and then shares his now depleted bilberries with some of his
family and friends all male – sitting around a smouldering fire.

Lubbock enters a dwelling, pushing through heavy drapes and stepping
down into a conical-shaped room.¹⁷ It is dark and warm inside; the air
mordant with a blend of odours from fish, hide and blubber. The floor,
like the walls, is made from split driftwood and covered with mats of
knotted heather roots. In the middle there is a fireplace – a scatter of
ash surrounded by stone blocks. Crouching, he examines a cluster of
artefacts: a hollowed stone containing animal fat, a bone awl and blades
of obsidian. Surrounding these are scraps of cut hide, lengths of
thread, fur and feathers. Shelves support wooden bowls; a variety of
implements are hanging up – flint bladed knives, wooden spoons,
harpoons, pieces of clothing, woven baskets. A pile of hides and furs
suggest a sleeping place.

In a second dwelling Lubbock finds some of the women and children of
Zhokhov – a dozen people crammed into the tiny space. They sit relieved
of the thick heavy garments needed for outside wear. Two are
breast-feeding, others hold sleeping infants. The air is even thicker
than before, it now having the additional bouquet of semi-naked bodies
and largely unwashed flesh.¹⁸ They sit quietly, content to listen as one
of the mothers hums to her child. Lubbock sits upon a pile of furs
behind them; beyond the gentle song he can hear the wind, the chatter of
men’s voices and that noise which has followed him around the
prehistoric world: the crack of one stone upon another. With this melody
of Arctic village life he falls asleep.

Knowing that his final travels will be in lower latitudes – southern
Asia and then Africa – Lubbock is conscious that his visit to Zhokhov is
the last opportunity to learn about life in a frozen landscape. Having
already learned how to trap hares at Creswell Crags, ambush reindeer in
the Ahrensburg valley and butcher the kill at Verberie, he is aware that
one very significant gap in his education remains: how to make suitable
clothing for survival in an ice-age world. He knows a little from the
passage about Esquimaux in Prehistoric Times, but he needs to learn
through his own experience.

The people at Zhokhov wear garments made from reindeer skins and spend a
great deal of time on their manufacture and care. And so throughout the
next few days in the village Lubbock takes every opportunity to watch
clothing being made, and whenever possible lends an unseen hand.¹⁹ Most
of this skilful and laborious work is carried out by the women and
Lubbock recalls how the ice-age hunters of Gönnersdorf had appropriately
celebrated their women by depicting them on stone.

The first task they undertake is cleaning reindeer hides – removing all
the fat and sinews that remain after butchery. To do so, the skins are
scraped with stone flakes set in bone handles. This is hard work and
requires a deft hand to ensure that the skin itself isn’t cut.

The skins are rinsed in water and then placed to soak in urine to remove
any remaining traces of fat. While the skins are soaking, the women
prepare thread from reindeer sinews. These are also washed and scraped
to remove traces of blood and fat; they are soaked in sea water, hung to
dry and then split into fine, strong threads. The women draw these
repeatedly across their teeth until they become smooth and supple;
Lubbock tries to do the same but without the rigours of an Arctic
childhood his teeth are far too sharp to be of use. After a couple of
days the skins are removed from the urine and rinsed. Next they are
pegged out and stretched; then folded, rubbed and stretched some more
until they too are completely soft.

Obsidian blades, as sharp as razors, are used to cut the skins into
pieces. Thigh-length outer jackets require eight different segments – a
front, a back, two pieces for the hood, two more for the shoulders and
one for each arm. The skins are cut at angles so that the reindeer hairs
will eventually overlap the seams and each piece is carefully shaped to
allow both warmth and easy movement within the final garment. Holes are
made around their edges using a bone awl and the pieces stitched tightly
with the sinew-thread and bone needles; thick pieces of hide act as
thimbles. Just as Victorian Lubbock had said of nineteenth-century
Esquimaux, with such simple instruments ‘they sew very strongly and
well’. Ruffs of wolf fur are added – for fashion as much as warmth. Wolf
fur is also particularly good at shedding ice crystals that form from
breathing the icy-cold air. Trousers, which reach to the calves, are
made in a similar fashion and are also worn with the caribou hair on the
outside; leggings, in contrast, are made with the hair on the inside.

Two more items of clothing are essential: the inner-jacket and boots.
The former is of most interest to Lubbock as, in all of his travels, he
has never known what is worn under the outer clothing of ice-age
hunters. In the case of the Zhokhov people it is stitched bird skins –
just as Victorian Lubbock had described for the more recent peoples of
the Arctic. Such inner jackets are made following the same pattern as
the outer and with evident knowledge about the particular insulating
effects of different types of feathers. He recognises the use of swan
under-belly in some parts, and complete skins of eider ducks in others.

Stitched bird skins turned inside-out are also used for slippers worn
inside the boots. The boots themselves are made from either reindeer or
polar bear fur; soles are turned up around the side of the foot and
stitched to ankle pieces which have straps attached and are sewn with a
single central seam. Lubbock notices that the boots with polar-bear
soles are principally used for stalking game, when it is essential to be
as quiet as possible upon the snow.

Lubbock is fortunate to see such clothing being made. We lack any direct
evidence for how the Zhokhov people dressed, but we do know sufficient
about life at Zhokhov to be confident that clothing of this type was
essential. To hunt polar bears and reindeer in the Arctic one needs
insulation from the cold, especially when standing or sitting quite
motionless while waiting for game; clothing must also allow sudden,
energetic and precise movement for when the prey comes within range.

Not all of Lubbock’s time is spent within the village. He frequently
joins the groups that leave each day to travel across the tundra for
different tasks. Fresh water has to be collected in bladder-skin bags
from a spring about two kilometres away. Driftwood is gathered from the
shore to use for house repairs, implements and fuel. During such trips
the Zhokhov people are always on the lookout for animal bones, tusks,
shed antlers and any other potentially useful items. All are collected,
often with no specific purpose in mind. The village is littered with
piles of such material, the dwellings cluttered with the bric-à-brac
that nature provides.

As well as accompanying such trips Lubbock goes hunting with the men and
boys. The summer is coming to an end, and with it their seasonal
settlement at Zhokhov.²⁰ The villagers had arrived in the spring,
following the herds of reindeer and the immense flocks of birds that
come to nest upon the Arctic shore. Whereas summer had begun with a
sudden burst of Arctic life, winter now approaches with a slow and quiet
dying-away. The nights are lengthening and people know that a permanent
darkness will soon arrive. The geese have already flown and the few
reindeer that remain will soon be retreating south to avoid the Arctic
winter. The Zhokhov people will follow, being as closely tied to the
rhythms of nature as the animals themselves. But not quite yet. Drifts
have accumulated with the new snowfalls and she-bears are now searching
for sites to make their winter dens. It is time to hunt the polar bear.

The bears are well known; the Zhokhov people seem able to identify each
one, knowing her age, where she had denned before, how many offspring
she has produced, and even her personality. After a shortage of food
over a period of several days, a decision is made to hunt a particular
she-bear that has recently returned. This bear is familiar to all and
the hunt begins with reminiscences about her life – times when she had
been seen stalking seals on ice floes and gathering pawfuls of berries.
The hunters recall seeing her the previous spring when she had sat with
her cubs enjoying the sun after months in her winter den. The hunters
set out from the village on foot and cross the hills to the fractured
ice sheets of the northern coast. She is spotted in the water – an
ivory-white head gliding through glassy blackness. Lubbock lies flat and
perfectly still with the hunters as the bear effortlessly lifts her
great bulk on to the ice. She takes a couple of steps and shakes
herself; sea water whirls off in flat sheets amidst a fountain of spray.
She raises her head and looks directly towards the hunters with
questioning small, dark eyes. But any scent or movement that she had
sensed must have been blown away. The great white bear begins to meander
carelessly along the ice.

Lubbock has never seen a more beautiful beast. He remains lost in
admiration as the hunters begin their stalk, departing silently with
their bows and arrows. Lubbock lets them go, happy to miss this
particular lesson in ice-age life.

The partly butchered carcass is brought back to the village where
Lubbock watches its dismemberment until the head is tossed to the
waiting dogs. With that, he leaves the Zhokhov people to whatever work
and feast will follow. They will soon leave the village, only to return
the following spring, as they have done for as long as anyone can
recall. Such visits will only end when the peninsula is breached by the
sea and the Zhokhov hills became one of many islands in the Arctic
Ocean. The village will be forgotten until the year of 1989 when
Vladimir Pitul’ko arrives to dig in this most unlikely place of human
habitation.

