AFRICA

[images]

46 Baked Fish by the Nile

Hunter-gatherers of North Africa and the Nile valley, 20,000–11,000 BC

A little naked girl toddles on the sandy floor. She falls, crawls, and
then unsteadily stands again to the applause of the adults seated around
her. John Lubbock sits among them, also enjoying her giggles and
faltering steps. It is November in a year close to the LGM and he is
visiting a group of families at their campsite in Wadi Kubbaniya, a
tributary valley of the Nile. Their brushwood huts, grinding stones,
rush mats and fireplaces are positioned on a sand dune below a sandstone
cliff. Beyond these, the Sahara desert spreads west – far more extensive
and arid than it is today. The campsite overlooks a scatter of trees
amidst a mosaic of shrubs, reed-beds, ponds and the braided channels of
the River Nile. The air is scented with wood smoke, camomile and baking
fish.

The girl comes to stand in front of Lubbock and appears to stare him in
the eye. Her hair is jet black and her skin a light chocolate brown; a
sprinkling of sand covers her lips and nose from where she fell. Lubbock
smiles and her face becomes a dimply grin – strange, because he cannot,
of course, be seen. As the little girl turns away and heads for her
mother, a nut-sized lump of light brown faeces falls from her bottom,
landing right between Lubbock’s feet. A man leans and flicks it with his
finger, sending it spinning through the air to land within the fire. It
hisses and soon turns black – a crucial piece of archaeological evidence
in the making.¹

Lubbock’s last continental journey had begun a few hundred years earlier
within a cave on the North African coast. At 20,000 BC he had woken to
look out across a wide coastal plain, one covered by thick woodland that
became grassland and then marsh before meeting the Mediterranean Sea. A
scatter of hunting weapons, some hides, and the remnants of a still warm
hearth surrounded him on the floor, all located behind a stone wall
acting as a vital windbreak. Lubbock climbed the crags above the cave;
looking south, towards the Sahara, he saw an expanse of low, rugged
mountains; to the north, a party of hunters had just emerged from trees
below the cave. They carried the carcass of a wild sheep, one with
extravagant curly horns and a dark brown hairy coat.

Lubbock spent the next few months with the three families who passed the
winter in this cave. Most days he went with the men to hunt wild sheep,
a type known today as barbary sheep or mouflon à manchettes.
Occasionally gazelle were hunted in the grasslands; wild cattle were
stalked whenever their tracks were encountered among the trees. When not
hunting, Lubbock accompanied the women to the nearby river, and on rare
occasions to the distant shore to gather shellfish and seaweed.

Remnants from all of these activities were left within the cave, along
with discarded tools and debris from manufacture and repair. The bones,
baskets, shells, mats, ashes and flakes of stone, all became covered in
rubbish left by later human occupants, by wind-blown sand, and by the
decaying bodies, nest material and food remains of birds and animals who
also sheltered within its walls. Roof-collapse added to the accumulating
deposit. Once buried, the material left behind by Lubbock’s unknowing
hosts at 20,000 BC rotted, decayed and became mixed with both earlier
and later debris by burrowing animals. That which survived eventually
came to light in AD 1973, when excavations were undertaken in what had
become known as Tamar Hat Cave in modern-day Algeria.²

Twenty years earlier, a far larger North African cave had been excavated
by the Cambridge archaeologist Charles McBurney.³ Known as the Haua
Fteah, this is located 2,000 kilometres east of Tamar Hat on the slopes
of the Gebel el-Akhdar – ‘Green Mountain’ – in northeast Libya. On his
first visit in 1948, McBurney described its massive opening as
‘distinctly awe-inspiring’, the cave’s huge domed roof dwarfing the
shepherd’s campsite situated within it. Lubbock had a similar reaction
in 20,000 BC when, after travelling eastwards from Tamar Hat, he looked
at the slopes of Gebel el-Akhdar from the coastal plain and saw the
conspicuous dark oval entrance into the rock. The green scrub on the
hillside lacked the lushness that McBurney would find and the desert to
its south was even more inhospitable than that of Libya today. But the
cave was just as large and, as the sea level was at its LGM low,
overlooked an extensive coastal plan. Not surprisingly, the cave at Haua
Fteah was as attractive to North African hunter-gatherers in prehistory
as it was to McBurney as a site for excavation.

Just as at Tamar Hat, Lubbock remained with the occupants of the Haua
Fteah long enough to discover how they lived. This required no more than
a brief stay as their lifestyle was little different to that along the
whole North African coast, with a reliance on the barbary sheep for
meat, fat and hides. After leaving Haua Fteah, Lubbock continued his
journey east until he reached the Nile delta – a vast expanse of
lagoons, marshes and scrubby woodland, cut apart by a spider’s web of
streams. Spirals of smoke in the evening air told him that
hunter-gatherers were scattered across the delta’s many tiny islands.
Borrowing a canoe that was drifting in the shallows, he began to paddle
upstream.

At 20,000 BC, the River Nile was very different from that known today.
Rather than a single, wide, sinuous-flowing channel, Lubbock found that
it braided into several small streams which meandered slowly across a
flood plain.⁴ Often there seemed to be hardly any water flowing at all.
The small channels joined together when the river passed through gorges
of steep rocky cliffs or massive dunes, and then divided once again.
Some petered out entirely; others ended in ponds blocked by mounds of
silt and sand.

Wild cattle and hartebeest grazed among the reeds, shrubs and thorny
trees that grew at the river’s edge. Once he passed crocodiles resting
on a sandbank; plovers and snipe probed in the shallows while flocks of
quail and lone herons flew overhead. But nature, in general, was quite
impoverished compared to that seen by Lubbock on river journeys
elsewhere in the prehistoric world. Moreover, it ended abruptly where
the desolate desert began, on either side of the flood plain’s narrow
corridor.

Lubbock passed many small encampments of hunter-gatherers and paused to
watch those fishing from canoes and fowling amidst the riverside reeds.
He had travelled 500 kilometres from the delta before making a prolonged
visit to a camping site; this was at the Nile’s junction with its
western tributary of Wadi Kubbaniya. By then it was July and the river
had begun its annual rise, its waters swollen by rainfall in the
highlands far to the south. Several families were in the midst of
re-establishing their seasonal campsite on a dune nestled below the
sandstone cliffs of the wadi.⁵ Some were busy putting the finishing
touches to the small brushwood shelter that had been built on the crest
of the dune; others were sweeping the camp clear of debris left from the
previous year. The oval grinding stones that had also been left behind
were almost entirely buried by blown sand. Lubbock helped a young man
dig them free.

Those making the camp were all dark skinned and well built, wearing neat
clothes made of hide. Two of the men were physically impaired, one
limping from a once broken leg and the other with a stiff arm that
carried substantial scars.⁶ No one individual seemed to assume the role
of leader, and no one family seemed to have a grander hut or more
possessions than any other. A few wore necklaces made with beads carved
from ostrich-egg shells; others had smeared red pigment on their brows
and cheeks.⁷ But these adornments were for vanity rather than to signify
of status.

Lubbock soon discovered why the camp was situated on the dune itself.
Within days of his arrival the annual Nile flood had nearly reached its
peak; with an immense gush of water the river broke its banks, forming a
network of interlinked ponds between the dunes. This was the signal for
much activity in the camp: plants had to be gathered in the marshes
before they became entirely submerged; stacks of firewood were built up;
wooden racks were constructed from stout reeds; rushes woven into
baskets. Meanwhile, the camp’s children kept running to the ponds and
back, evidently on the lookout for some greatly anticipated event.
Lubbock sat beneath a tamarisk tree, watching the excited children and
the adults at work.

Once again microliths were being manufactured in the prehistoric world.
The blades of stone were chipped along one or both edges and then set
into bone handles to make knives; some were used as the tips of arrows
made from reeds, and as barbs in wooden spears⁸ – yet another occurrence
of the plug-in, pull-out technology, although one of the earliest that
Lubbock had seen. Flint was also used but was evidently quite precious
because it was not to be found in the immediate vicinity of the wadi.
The only available nodules were brought to the dune in leather pouches
and worked with immense care so as not to waste any flakes.⁹

When tired of watching sand gusting through the wadi and stone tools
being made, Lubbock read his copy of Prehistoric Times. Although the
site of Wadi Kubbaniya was not known in 1865, his Victorian namesake had
written about the annual flooding of the Nile and the significance for
archaeologists of the depth of silt deposited each year. Long before the
invention of radiocarbon dating, the rate of sedimentation had seemed an
ideal means to estimate the age of artefacts buried in the ground. The
author quoted the research of a Mr Horner who had used the depth of
sediment accumulated against ancient Egyptian monuments, such as the
obelisk at Heliopolis, then believed to date to 2300 BC, to estimate
that 3½ inches accumulated every century. Mr Homer had then dug pits and
found shards of pottery 39 feet below the surface which would, he
calculated, indicate an age of 13,000 BC. Modern John Lubbock was not
surprised that Victorian Lubbock went on to note ‘several reasons which
render the calculations very doubtful’.¹⁰ They were indeed quite wrong
with regard to the pottery, which is now known to appear in the Nile
valley only after 5000 BC.¹¹

A sound of splashing woke Lubbock from an afternoon doze at the water’s
edge. He looked down to see a tangle of catfish thrashing in the
shallows. They were tying themselves in knots while using their tails to
slap each other in the face – the catfish way of looking sexy and
attracting a mate.¹² These were the first of a vast number of catfish
that arrived in the ponds of Wadi Kubbaniya each year to spawn. As the
adults and children watched and waited, mating continued until almost
every piece of underwater weed and much of the sand in the shallows was
coated with glistening eggs. By this time, the fish were exhausted,
hanging listlessly in the water. It was now that fishing could begin.

Lubbock had already done plenty of fishing during his travels – using
poison in the Amazon at 10,500 BC, spearing salmon at Namu in 6500 BC
and by moonlight close to Tybrind Vig in 4400 BC. This new
ichthyological experience was as productive as any of those had been,
but a lot less demanding of both effort and skill. The Wadi Kubbaniya
people simply paddled ankle-deep in the water, scooped the fish up with
baskets and tossed them on to the bank – the baskets having protected
their hands from the fish’s spines. The children waited eagerly for the
fish, these often being more than a metre long: each was gleefully
clubbed to death.

By dusk, when all the uncaught fish had returned to deeper and safer
waters, Lubbock sat on the bank and helped with gutting the catch. The
wooden racks were soon heavy with fish; they were placed over fires so
that most of the catch could be smoked and hence preserved. That evening
Lubbock joined in with the first ‘fish feast’ of the season, eaten with
bread-like griddle-cakes that were cooked on hot stones around the
campsite fire. As the moon rose and the singing and dancing began, he
lay down to sleep and reflected on the delights of life in the Nile
Valley at the LGM.

Lubbock returned to the ponds with his unknowing hosts on the following
day and the day after that as a second and third flush of fish arrived
to spawn. By then, however, the novelty of catching, clubbing and
gutting had worn off for the children, and they played elsewhere. Their
help wasn’t missed – fish numbers had substantially declined as the
short burst of spawning was almost over. As the weeks passed, the
catfish were replaced by eels that came to feast upon the eggs and the
small fry once they hatched. The Wadi Kubbaniya people tried to catch
them, perhaps keen to preserve their future stocks of fish. As the eels
slipped through Lubbock’s fingers, men and women at the campsite were
wrapping smoked and sun-dried fish within rushes before packing them
into baskets to be eaten during the leaner days to come.

While the campsite was safe from even the highest reaches of the flood,
it was exposed to the near constant wind that blew from the western
desert; everything and everyone was frequently coated with a fine layer
of sand. When the wind was strong, Lubbock sat behind a flimsy shelter
on the dune and watched sand accumulate around the tamarisk and acacia
trees that spread along the sides of the wadi; others did likewise while
chipping small pebbles of chert.

By late summer the strong winds had relented and the flood waters had
begun to recede. Lubbock decided to further his interest in Wadi
Kubbaniya cuisine by working with the women to discover which plants
were gathered and how they were converted into food.¹³ As preparation,
he collected a few discarded stone flakes from the campsite floor to
shape a driftwood branch into a digging stick, one with a faint
resemblance to those carried by the women wherever they went.

On most days the women left with empty baskets and infants tied upon
their backs for the newly exposed marshy ground which now bordered the
reedbeds and remaining water of the ponds. Lubbock acquired many lessons
in plant gathering and food preparation: on some occasions he paddled in
the ponds to pick flower buds from waterlilies; on others he helped dig
the roots of bulrushes and papyrus and then to collect the seeds of
camomile plants. There were several types of knee-high shrubs which
provided either leaves, seeds or roots for food.

There was one plant, however, that dominated plant-gathering time. It
grew just a few centimetres high, with purple flowers so thick that they
made a carpet across the ground. Known today as wild purple nut-grass,
it has been described as ‘the worst weed in the world’ owing to its
ability to invade and proliferate in irrigated fields. But to the people
of Wadi Kubbaniya at the LGM, it was the most valued food plant of
all.¹⁴

On his first encounter with this plant, Lubbock knelt with the women and
copied their actions as they thrust their digging sticks into the ground
to lever up the boggy soil. Just below the surface there was a dense mat
of interconnected swollen roots, each tuber no more than a few
centimetres long. A few were black and hard; so these were dug out and
thrown away; the rest were pale brown, torn from the ground and placed
into baskets. The women dug continuously for several hours, gradually
moving from one patch of nut-grass to the next. The tubers were so dense
that many were left in the ground, their future growth enhanced by the
removal of old tubers that had clogged the soil.

Once the baskets were full, the women sat by the pond and washed the
dirt from themselves and the tubers before returning to their camp.
Lubbock now witnessed the laborious process of turning knobbly nut-grass
tubers into griddle-cakes – trying his hand at each step of the process.
First, the tubers were laid out on hot stones within embers of the fire.
After a few minutes of parching, the skins began to peel away and could
be rubbed off by hand. Next, the now brittle tubers were ground into
flour, although many pieces of peel and strands of tough fibres
remained. These were removed by using sieves made from finely woven
reeds, the clean flour collected into skin bags below.

This was still not ready for cooking; the Wadi Kubbaniya people knew
that it would taste acrid and cause upset stomachs. And so Lubbock had
to follow the women to a short stretch of fast-flowing water where the
flour was repeatedly washed by filling the bags, swilling the contents,
letting them stand, and then carefully pouring away the water. This
removed the toxins contained in the flour. Finally the women returned to
their camp and squeezed handfuls of the remaining soggy mush into small
round cakes that were placed on the hot stones to cook. Not all of the
mush was cooked in this manner. Some was saved in small wooden bowls for
the young children, especially a small girl who had only recently
finished feeding at her mother’s breast.

The grinding stones were now in almost constant use for processing
seeds. One fractured. To acquire a replacement, a couple of men went to
the sandstone cliff behind the dune and spent a day flaking large slabs
into oval shapes, closely watched by Lubbock. They also collected
pebbles to use as rubbing and pounding stones. Each slab was pecked and
ground to make it easier to hold, although most remained quite irregular
in shape. All but one of the grinding stone rough-outs were left at the
cliff-face for future use; the one carried back to the campsite was
further flaked into the shape specified by the women who required it.¹⁵

Lubbock also went hunting with the men.¹⁶ Their principal prey were the
geese and ducks that arrived during the winter months. These were
stalked from the reeds and shot with bow and arrow. Sometimes the
hunters left the campsite at dusk and waited in ambush at a distant pond
for wild cattle and hartebeest, striking them with stone-tipped spears.
Gazelle couldn’t be hunted in this manner: they gain all the moisture
they need from vegetation alone and so had to be pursued through the
scrubby woodland of the flood plain and into the edge of the desert
itself. Kills, however, were rare and these two- or three-day hunting
trips seemed more about gaining some freedom from the women and children
of the camp than contributing to the food supply.

By now – November – the Nile waters had almost returned to their lowest
level. The ponds were no longer connected and were merely shallow pools.
This provided another chance for an easy catch as many fish were
stranded and could once again be caught by hand as they swam hopelessly
around in circles. A few still managed to escape to the River Nile. On
some evenings Lubbock would leave the camp and watch the catfish as they
struggled overland from one pond to another and finally to the river –
this being one of the few types of fish that can take in oxygen from the
air.

Within a few days the pools would be gone completely; the hollows
between the dunes would then dry out, crack and become covered with
blown sand until the Nile flooded its banks once again. As he sat at the
campsite in Wadi Kubbaniya watching fish stuffed with camomile being
baked upon the hot stones of the fire and the little girl toddling from
person to person, sometimes leaving her faeces behind to be flicked into
its glowing embers, Lubbock knew that the time had come for him to
continue his prehistoric journey.

Gordon Hillman of the Institute of Archaeology, London, and doyen of
archaeo-botany, identified the infant faeces when he studied the plant
remains excavated from Wadi Kubbaniya. To him they appeared as tiny
fragments, black on the outside and coffee-brown within. Some had a very
fine clay-like texture which, to Hillman’s expert eye, had evidently
once been a finely ground plant ‘mush’. He had to decide whether these
charred lumps derived from food that had accidentally splashed on to a
fire during preparation, vomit, or faeces from either a domesticated dog
or a human donor. He chose the latter because one piece had been
imprinted by the internal surface of a colon. The fine texture of the
one-time food also suggested that this donor had not been canine.
Hillman knew that many accounts of recent hunter-gatherers describe how
children defecate on the spot whenever the need arises, with their
faeces frequently scuffed on to campsite fires. He also found sand
within the faeces, as one would expect from infants who spend their time
crawling on the ground.¹⁷

The journey of that little brown lump from a fireplace in Wadi Kubbaniya
at 20,000 BC to a slide below Hillman’s microscope was due to the
remarkable work of the Combined Prehistoric Expedition in the Nile
valley. Led by Fred Wendorf and Angela Close of Southern Methodist
University, Texas, and Romuald Schild of the Polish Academy of Sciences,
this carried out a remarkable campaign of survey and excavation that has
transformed our knowledge of North African prehistory.

It began in 1960 when the Egyptian government decided to construct a new
dam at Aswan that would flood an extensive area to the south. The
Combined Prehistoric Expedition, working with the Geological Survey of
Egypt, was one of several international efforts to explore the
archaeology of the threatened region. In 1967 it turned its attention to
the Nile valley north of Aswan and almost immediately discovered dense
scatters of chipped stone and grinding slabs on ancient dunes at the
junction of Wadi Kubbaniya and the Nile. But with the outbreak of the
Arab–Israeli War and continuing political turmoil, it wasn’t until 1978
that Wendorf and his colleagues had the opportunity to excavate those
sites.¹⁸ They did so until 1984, finding that some were probably more
than half a million years old while others dated to the LGM.¹⁹

The LGM sites were the most numerous and by far the best preserved. They
were principally located on the dunes themselves, with a few found in
the silty soils of the flood plain. Most contained tens of thousands of
chipped stone artefacts, which had evidently accumulated from many
visits to valued camping sites over an estimated 2,000 years. By
meticulous excavation and the sieving of vast quantities of sand, many
plant remains, fishbones, mammal bones, ostrich-egg-shell beads and
grinding slabs were recovered. Several years of study by many
specialists led to the identification of particular species of plants
and fish, and the reconstruction of those specific hunting, fishing and
gathering practices that Lubbock had enjoyed. The archaeologists not
only made their meticulous analysis of the remains themselves, but
looked to modern studies of, say, the spawning behaviour of catfish, the
use of tubers by living hunter-gatherers and the flooding regime of the
Nile. Such was the extent of the work that publication only occurred in
1989 – more than twenty years after the initial discovery of these sites
which provide such a detailed picture of life at the LGM.

Although the dunes at Wadi Kubbaniya were abandoned as annual campsites
after 19,000 BC, most likely because wind-blown sand had blocked the
wadi mouth, a similar lifestyle continued throughout the Nile valley
until the end of the Pleistocene period. The Combined Prehistoric
Expedition discovered many more scatters of stone tools in the dunes and
flood plain of the Nile. Almost all the tools had been made on small
blades just like those in Wadi Kubbaniya. But the specific manufacturing
techniques and microlith shapes varied according to localities and
dates. This suggested that several localised cultural traditions existed
in the valley – families, and groups of families, had devised their own
particular ways of making tools and passed these down from generation to
generation.²⁰ Many of the sites had grinding stones, several had animal
bones and plant remains, a few had burials. Whenever the dietary
patterns could be established they looked similar to those in Wadi
Kubbaniya with an emphasis on fishing in flood waters, hunting
hartebeest and gathering a wide array of plants. Consequently this
economy, so suited to the river’s regime, appears to have remained
unchanged long after the LGM – continuing, in fact, as late as 12,500
BC, when the dramatic effects of the late glacial interstadial were
first felt.

Ever since 20,000 BC the river has maintained its braided appearance
because it carried far less water than it does today – perhaps no more
than ten or twenty per cent of its current flow. The modern Nile is fed
by two main rivers: the White Nile and the Blue Nile. The former rises
in modern-day Burundi and enters Lake Victoria which is the chief
reservoir of the Nile itself. Between 20,000 and 12,500 BC it was
blocked by sand dunes in southern Sudan and contributed no water to the
main river at all.²¹ The Blue Nile collects its water from the highlands
of East Africa but the wet season between 20,000 and 12,500 BC was much
shorter than that of today and so there was far less water for the River
Nile to carry. Cooler temperatures, together with the presence of
grasslands rather than trees and shrubs in the highlands, led to far
higher levels of erosion. Hence, whatever water did flow in the Nile
carried far more sediment than is currently the case. This was laid down
throughout the river’s course so that the Nile flood plain gradually
rose in height, reaching as much as thirty metres above what it is at
present. Without the constant flow from the White Nile, the annual rise
and fall of the river is likely to have been even greater than today as
its level was entirely dependent upon the highly seasonal rainfall in
the East African highlands.

Between 12,700 and 10,800 BC, however, everything changed as the late
glacial interstadial brought a sudden increase of temperature and
rainfall. The East African highlands became covered in woodland and
hence the extent of erosion and the sediment load carried by the river
were markedly reduced. At the same time, the quantity of its water was
vastly increased, partly due to the new rainfall and partly because the
White Nile broke through its dune barrier. Rather than continuing to
build up its flood plain, the Nile began to do the reverse: to cut down
through its own sediments, those it had been depositing since the LGM.
This had disastrous consequences for the valley’s inhabitants.

The excessive floods of 12,500 BC deposited silt at far higher
elevations than previously, and began a period of turmoil, during which
the river has been described as the ‘Wild Nile’. A vast amount of the
marshes, with their edible plants and flood-plain woodlands in which the
hartebeest and cattle had grazed, were lost completely. They remained
so, as the river became a single fast-flowing channel with a far
narrower flood plain than ever before.

Some, if not all, of the valley’s inhabitants apparently chose to fight
for the remaining campsites and those fishing, gathering and hunting
grounds that survived. During the early 1960s Wendorf and his colleagues
excavated a graveyard known as Jebel Sahaba, located 300 kilometres
south of Wadi Kubbaniya. This dates to the period of the Wild Nile,
between 13,000 and 11,000 BC. Of fifty-nine people buried in the
graveyard, twenty-four had clearly suffered a violent death due to the
presence of embedded arrow points and severe cut-marks on their bones
and skulls. Men, women and children had all been killed. As violent acts
can often leave no skeletal traces it is likely that many more had come
to a brutal end.²²

Whether this graveyard derived from the catastrophic slaughter of one
group by another, or was a gradual accumulation of bodies during a
period of endemic violence, remains unclear. But the inhabitants of the
Nile valley appear never to have been entirely at peace. When excavating
in Wadi Kubbaniya, Wendorf discovered a burial that dated to about
21,000 BC – a young man, aged twenty to twenty-five years, who had a
slender muscular build. He had evidently died from arrows shot into his
abdomen because two pointed blades were found within his pelvis. His
right arm had been fractured when he was about fifteen years old, most
likely while defending himself from attack, and his left arm had a
partially healed wound.²³ Life in Wadi Kubbaniya might not, therefore,
have been quite so idyllic as Lubbock had thought: its people may have
had to use force to gain access to the dunes and the ponds that seethed
with spawning fish.

Between 12,000 and 7000 BC archaeological sites become extremely rare
throughout the Nile valley. Almost complete depopulation had occurred –
most probably because mortality outweighed births due to the Western and
Eastern Deserts remaining completely dry and uninhabitable. The few
sites that are known suggest that relict groups had become reliant on
hunting the hartebeest and wild cattle alone, there being no remains of
grinding stones and few traces of winter birds or fish. Angela Close,
who has studied hundreds of Nile valley sites and many thousands of
stone tools, has used just three words to summarise the impact of global
warming on the inhabitants of the Nile valley: ‘an unmitigated
disaster’.²⁴

Lubbock left Wadi Kubbaniya soon after the LGM. He continued canoeing up
the river, quite innocent of the catastrophe that was to come. By the
time the floods of 12,500 BC and the slaughter at Jebel Sahaba had
occurred he was far away in the southern reaches of the continent. When
he returns to the Nile valley in 5000 BC he will find it densely
populated, with people once again dependent upon plants growing on its
flood plains. They will be farmers laying the basis for Egyptian
civilisation.

47 On Lukenya Hill

The development of East African landscapes and faunas after 20,000 BC

Ice takes on an absolute beauty when seen in the Tropics, when it
appears to float above the savannah in defiance of nature’s laws. That
is Kilimanjaro at the LGM, just as it is Kilimanjaro today. Lubbock had
not expected to be so enthralled as he climbed to the top of Lukenya
Hill, found in today’s southern Kenya. But the early-morning sky had a
rare clarity and a faint, distant white peak – one quite contemptuous of
its latitude – emerged from clouds that dissolved around its base.¹

Mount Kilimanjaro has two peaks, known as Kibo and Mawenzi. At 20,000 BC
both had been covered by ice which reached 1,000 metres lower than it
does today – its past extent marked by the mounds of rock and sediment
left behind when the glaciers retreated to their current diminutive
size.² Now only the peak of Kibo is ice-covered; if our own global
warming continues, this ice will have also entirely disappeared within
the next twenty years.

Because of that forthcoming loss, what has been called ‘Kilimanjaro’s
secret’ has been extracted from its ice just in time – a record of
tropical climate change between 10,000 BC and the present day. This has
been derived by exactly the same methods that scientists use for the
analysis of ice cores from Greenland and the Antarctic: by calculating
changing ratios of oxygen isotopes that are a ‘proxy’ for temperature
change and rainfall. A team led by Lonnie Thompson of Ohio State
University drilled six ice cores from Kilimanjaro’s summit in February
2000 and published their results in October 2002.³

Their key finding of relevance to this history was that between 10,000
and 5000 BC the African climate was much wetter and warmer than it is
today. This confirmed evidence from other sources and is explained by a
reduction in the intensity of the African monsoon; this, in turn, arose
from a slight change in the earth’s orbit around the sun. Thompson and
his colleagues also confirmed evidence of a marked drought occurring at
6300 BC that lasted for a few decades, along with two further droughts
happening in more recent – but still prehistoric – times. One of these
occurred at around 2000 BC and has been related to major disturbances in
the Mesopotamian and Indus valley civilisations. Although such droughts
were previously suspected, the Kilimanjaro ice core has provided a new
level of detail for climate change in the Tropics – it was the first,
and most likely the last, ice-core climate record from Africa.
Unfortunately it does not reach back to 20,000 BC, the date at which
this chapter begins with Lubbock standing on Lukenya Hill.

Lukenya Hill is 200 kilometres northwest of Kilimanjaro. Two young men
stand next to Lubbock, both of whom are also momentarily transfixed by
the sight of floating ice and forget their task of watching for game.
Tall and lean, they wear loincloths that match the tawny grass in
colour. One carries a spear tipped with black obsidian. Turning to the
surrounding plain, he nudges his companion and points towards an
approaching herd of small antelope. As Lubbock follows, both turn and
begin clambering across boulders and through thorny scrub, heading back
to their camp – a shelter beneath a massive boulder perched on top of
another at the base of the hill.

A twisted branch is burning in the middle of the shelter’s floor, around
which ten hunter-gatherers are variously squatting, sitting and lying,
some using small mats of grass. The children wear nothing but strings of
beads around their necks and waists; the adults little more. Although
strong and healthy, the middle-aged already look old, their bodies
having been ravaged by the rigours of life in East Africa at the LGM.
Gourds and bags of arrows hang from wooden pegs forced into crevices in
the cave wall. Having visited many hunter-gatherer caves before, Lubbock
expected the air to be stale and smoky – but it smells of sweet jasmine,
some leaves having just been crushed in a little wooden bowl.

The men’s news is greeted with excitement. Spears are checked, one man
chips a couple of tiny flakes from a stone point, while another shaves
an imaginary bump from his spear’s wooden shaft which might otherwise
deflect its flight. Knives made from wooden handles and microliths are
stuck into belts; fresh lines of red are smeared on to cheeks by fingers
scraped across a stone palette of ochre paint. With that done, the
hunters disperse to spread themselves along the edge of Lukenya Hill and
the slopes to its immediate west. The approaching animals will have to
pass through this natural trap and the hunters feel assured of making a
kill. Lubbock remains with one of the lookouts who positions himself
within a thicket of trees. Around him, the ground is littered with stone
flakes and a few fragments of weathered bone – the slope has evidently
been used for ambush and butchery many times before.

The innocent animals enter the pass. They catch the human scent, pause
and then scatter in panic as one man stands to throw his spear. Three
animals run directly into the path of waiting hunters; two drop down
dead, one is wounded and escapes. The carcasses are dragged to the spot
where Lubbock had watched the action. They are gutted and then draped
across the hunters’ shoulders, being small enough to be carried whole.
Lubbock inspects them closely but cannot name the species. In fact, even
if he could differentiate between wildebeest and hartebeest, between
Thomson’s gazelle, dik-dik, oribi, steinbok and duiker, he would still
have failed to do so as the animals now being carried have no modern
name at all.

Lukenya Hill, a mound of boulders approximately eight by two kilometres,
earth and scrub vegetation upon a mass of granite, rises 200 metres
above the Athi-Kapiti plains of Kenya. Excavations have occurred
sporadically since the early 1970s; the many archaeological sites that
have been discovered in its rockshelters, below its overhangs and in
open settings at its base, provide the best picture we have of life in
East Africa at the LGM and its immediate aftermath.

The most recent work has been done by Sibel Barut Kusimba of the
Department of Anthropology, Lawrence University, Wisconsin, USA.⁴ She
excavated within a rockshelter known as GvJm62 – the first four letters
being the code for locating the site in Kenya’s national grid.
Radiocarbon dating has placed occupation of this and four other sites,
GvJm46, 16, 19, and 22, soon after the LGM – although Kusimba herself
has suggested that some could in fact be much older.⁵

Many of the heavily fragmented bones recovered from Lukenya Hill were
studied by Curtis Marean of Stony Brook University, New York. GvJm46 had
the greatest number, but very few exceeded two centimetres in length and
consequently they were of little value for species identification.
Instead, Marean relied almost entirely on the size and shape of teeth,
from which he identified numerous species that continue to graze on the
African plains today, along with animals such as lions, aardvarks,
baboons and hares. The majority, however, had come from an animal with
no counterpart in the modern world. These teeth belonged to a type of
small antelope which had evolved to graze on short, tough stalks of
grass. The heavy wear upon the remaining teeth suggested that it had
consumed its grass with copious amounts of grit from the dusty ground.

As this species was absent from the bone collections of Holocene date,
it seems likely to have become extinct when global warming altered the
landscape, providing the type of moist grass that favours eland, impala
and gazelle. When writing in 1997, six years after announcing his
discovery of a new species in the journal Nature, Marean thought it was
still ‘premature’ to give this small extinct antelope a species name;
perhaps it was, but 20,000 years does seem an extraordinarily long time
to wait.⁶

Its presence in the earlier but not the later bone collections from
Lukenya Hill is just one sign that the East African landscapes between
20,000 and 12,500 BC were much drier than those of today. Three other
animals represented in the bones from Lukenya Hill are also very
telling. Both the oryx and Grevy’s zebra are still in existence, but
only in landscapes far more arid than that which now surrounds Lukenya
Hill – the oryx is in fact a desert-adapted antelope. Along with these,
the giant buffalo had also grazed on dry, tall grasses close to Lukenya
Hill at the LGM, as it had done throughout much of Africa. Like the
unnamed antelope, this species could not survive the change in climate,
becoming extinct in the south and east by 12,500 BC, although surviving
in the north for another few thousand years. Each of these animals – the
unnamed antelope, Grevy’s zebra, oryx and giant bison – was excluded
from the vicinity of Lukenya Hill by the change to moister grasslands.⁷

Lubbock had discovered the colder and drier nature of East Africa’s
climate at the LGM long before he arrived at Lukenya Hill. After
completing his canoe trip up the Nile, he had crossed the dusty
Ethiopian highlands, which lacked the forest on their lower slopes that
we would see today. He then followed the western shore of Lake Turkana,
its level severely reduced by the lack of rain. Nevertheless, its
sea-blue waters and surrounding grasslands were a haven for flamingos,
pelicans and many other wading birds. At night a host of hartebeest,
zebra and antelope came to drink, while other animals came to hunt.
Lubbock left the lake and headed due west for 800 kilometres, into the
centre of the continent where the arid grasslands changed to scrubby
savannah and would become rainforest in the Congo Basin.

This journey into Central Africa took him to the limestone massif of
Mount Hoyo where he spent a winter sharing one of its forty caves with a
group of hunter-gatherers. The one he chose is now called Matupi Cave;⁸
it was spacious, with a low stone wall separating a cooking area at its
front from a corridor leading to its dark interior. Fireplaces, grinding
stones, digging sticks, spears and bows cluttered up its space, rubbish
was simply discarded on the floor and occasionally brushed aside. Its
people wore beads made from ostrich-egg shell and decorated themselves
with ochre paint. During his visit, Lubbock went with the hunters to
stalk antelope on the savannah and accompanied a party into the forest
which began 20 kilometres to the west. The party returned triumphant
carrying a porcupine and giant forest hog, to the immense delight of the
children who had remained behind. Sometimes he dug tubers with the women
whose digging sticks were weighted with pierced and decorated stones.

When the residents of Matupi Cave left to establish a fishing-camp on a
nearby lakeshore, at a site to be known as Ishango,⁹ Lubbock completed
his journey to Lukenya Hill. This took him back into the drier lands of
East Africa and around the shores of another much diminished lake, that
we know today as Lake Victoria. There he watched egrets probe the same
mud that would one day be cored by scientists studying the history of
the lake.

The hunter-gatherers of Matupi Cave eventually lost, or left, their
digging sticks within the cave; these tools joined an accumulation of
stone flakes, microliths, grinding slabs and food remains. At 3000 BC
this collection was entirely buried below the rubbish of new occupants,
people who used iron for their tools.

Francis van Noten from Leiden University undertook excavations in 1974.
The lower layers had the bones of savannah animals – antelopes, warthogs
and ostriches – along with a few from porcupine and forest hog. Among
these bones and the many pieces of chipped stone, Van Noten found
fragments of decorated stones which he supposed had once been used as
weights on digging sticks. The bones from the upper Iron Age layers came
from quite different types of animals – those that occupy thick forest
such as porcupines, mongoose and giant bats.

The collection of bones from Matupi Cave is one of several direct
indicators of how the tropical forests of Central Africa changed in
extent during the last glacial maximum and its immediate aftermath.
Although the tropical forests of South America and Southeast Asia had
remained largely intact during the LGM, those of Africa were markedly
reduced in size, large areas being replaced by savannah and semi-desert.
Such vegetation change is also apparent from the pollen grains sealed
within cave and lake sediments that show how currently forested regions
had once been covered by grass alone; if one digs below the forest soil,
the sand of former savannah, if not of desert itself, can often be
found.

Yet the forest in the central Congo basin survived intact throughout the
period of most severe aridity. This resilient forest provided a refuge
for the forest-adapted species which is still reflected in its immense
wealth of flora and fauna today. When the rains returned as the Holocene
began, some of its plants and animals spread east and west to reclaim
what had become savannah and semi-desert at the LGM. Localities such as
Matupi Cave became surrounded by forest, leading to the change in animal
fauna within its deposits. This Early Holocene forest initially covered
a much greater region than it does today, having been knocked back again
as rainfall declined after 5000 BC and humans began to shape the African
world themselves.¹⁰

Several weeks have passed since Lubbock watched the ambush of the
unnamed antelope at Lukenya Hill. On this new day in his African travels
he departs from the cave within an hour of sunrise, accompanying three
hunters in their search for game. They walk slowly and quietly through
the savannah woodland.¹¹ Always being alert for signs of animals –
leaves and stems that have been nibbled, footprints and faeces, sleeping
places and noises from the bush – the men are nevertheless frequently
distracted from their task of hunting. A baobab tree with bees hovering
at a hole leads to a prolonged stop. Large pebbles of quartz are
searched for and broken apart, yielding sharp flakes and creating
sparks, from which a smoky fire is lit to ward off the bees as the hole
is enlarged. Honey, comb and larvae are eagerly discovered; Lubbock
finds plenty to eat himself as the hunters take far more than they can
manage. Satiated with honey, the hunters doze while Lubbock watches
migratory plovers upon the plain, birds that will soon return to the
northern tundras that he himself has visited.

Later in the day another pause is made at a shallow water-hole for
drinking and bathing. A further hour of walking follows, before the
party sit to eat berries they had found by chance. This time Lubbock
goes to watch termites, remembering how the African past is said to lie
within their belly.¹² And then, in mid-afternoon, he follows the
hunters’ slow meander back to camp.

This is the type of day often enjoyed by the modern-day Hadza of East
Africa, those belonging to one of the few groups of surviving
hunter-gatherers in the world. I suspect that it differs little from the
days spent by hunters who occupied the caves of Lukenya Hill at 20,000
BC. The Hadza have been studied since the 1960s and despite the obvious
problems involved in imposing a modern lifestyle on to the past, they
provide a compelling vision of what life at the LGM may have been
like.¹³

The prehistoric landscape around Lukenya Hill is likely to have been
similar to the dry, tsetse-infested savannah, dominated by thorn scrub
and acacia trees, which the Hadza now inhabit – although, just like the
mammoth-steppe of the north, no exact modern analogue exists for African
landscapes at the LGM. This is because the extensive short grasslands of
modern-day Africa are as much a product of human activity as of climate
change; they have been regularly and deliberately scorched by fire, a
practice that may have been undertaken by pastoralists for several
thousand years.

Regular burning clears the mature grass which is fibrous and unpalatable
to their goats and cattle, producing the shorter types of grass that can
support more animals; heavy grazing further inhibits the growth of tall
grasses, trees and shrubs. The burning also helps to reduce the tsetse
fly, which spreads sleeping sickness in humans and cattle. Whenever such
burning and grazing is stopped, shrubs and trees readily return along
with tall, tough grasses growing in their shade. Natural fires, as no
doubt occurred around the LGM, are too infrequent to have the same
impact on vegetation. And so, up until the arrival of pastoralists in
East Africa at 2000 BC, the landscape around Lukenya Hill is likely to
have had swards of long and tough grass, many more shrubs, and perhaps
more trees than it does today.¹⁴

Throughout this subtly different landscape, a similar range and
distribution of plant and animal foods would have been available
throughout the year as are found today. This doesn’t mean that the
Lukenya Hill people had necessarily lived in a similar fashion to the
modern-day Hadza, but the people living at 20,000 BC and its aftermath
are likely to have made similar choices about which game to hunt and
which plants to gather. The ambushing of herds, as envisaged by Marean,
is likely to have been restricted to specific seasons, perhaps when rain
was particularly sparse and mammals migrated in search of water. At
other times, hunting would primarily have been done by searching for
tracks and trails and then stalking individual game, or perhaps – as
among the Hadza today – by scavenging from carnivore kills under cover
of darkness.

Lubbock tried both methods, preferring to spend his time hunting rather
than gathering roots, tubers, bulbs, berries and leaves with the women.
While the Lukenya Hill group depended upon such plant foods for the vast
majority of their diet, everyone longed for meat.¹⁵ When in the bush and
grasslands, Lubbock found his companions always alert for circling
vultures and the sound of frenzied hyenas, either of which prompted a
search for a newly available carcass. On one occasion, Lubbock and his
companions encountered lions feeding upon a freshly killed zebra. The
lions remained undaunted by the shouts and thrown stones but fled after
arrows were shot, leaving their kill behind.

For the nocturnal hunt, Lubbock left the cave at Lukenya Hill with a
hunting party late one afternoon. As they walked, spider’s webs within
the grass were illuminated by the setting sun, momentarily exposed in a
narrow band between clouds and distant mountains. After two hours, they
arrived at a rough circle of boulders which enclosed an area about three
metres across and formed a hunting blind beside a game trail that led to
a nearby water-hole. It was evidently in regular use in view of the many
footprints in the sand.

A fire was lit and left to burn within the hide; later its embers would
be periodically fanned into flame by a night-time breeze. The hunters
ate some berries gathered on the way and then settled down to rest, with
their arrows propped against the boulder wall. As the moon rose; Lubbock
crouched down outside and watched for game but he failed to hear the
faint clatter of hoofs on stony ground which alerted the hunters within
the hide despite the constant chirruping of cicadas. Within a few
minutes three impala had been shot with arrows; one was struck in its
side, the other two escaped unharmed. The hunters returned to doze,
waiting until dawn to track the wounded beast. They did so for several
hours, following a trail of blood, broken stems and hoof-prints until
these ceased at a patch of flattened, bloodstained grass. The near-dead
impala had been taken by a leopard and was nowhere to be seen. When
returning to Lukenya Hill the hunters picked up a few nodules of quartz,
not wanting to arrive empty-handed once again.

Quartz, being easily found in the course of hunting or plant-gathering
trips, was the most frequently used type of stone at Lukenya Hill.¹⁶
Chert and obsidian were also used, but Kusimba found these in very small
quantities when studying the excavated collections of stone artefacts.
Although chert and obsidian have better flaking qualities than quartz,
they were more difficult to come by. The closest source of chert to
Lukenya Hill was a river-bed five kilometres away; this also provided
small pieces of obsidian but any larger nodules had to be acquired from
the Central Rift Valley 150 kilometres to the northwest, or from an
escarpment 65 kilometres to the west. Because each outcrop has a
specific chemical signature which is carried in every nodule, Kusimba
was able to determine that most of the obsidian flakes had come from
these distant sources rather than the local river-bed.¹⁷

The nodules of quartz, chert and obsidian were used to make a variety of
tools; microliths were once again the most frequent type. Large flakes
were frequently chipped around one edge to become what archaeologists
call ‘scrapers’, most probably once hafted into short-handled tools and
used for cleaning hides. Tools with a chisel-shaped edge were also made,
these being known as burins. As such, the people at Lukenya Hill were
making the same range of tools as were so many others in the world
between 20,000 and 10,000 BC, although they had their own idiosyncratic
forms such as a ‘fan-shaped’ scraper.

Lubbock has now travelled 250 kilometres southwest of Lukenya Hill and
sits by the remnants of a seasonal stream. Time has moved on a thousand
years to 19,000 BC but the African landscapes remain quite arid. This
river flows whenever the summer rains arrive; indeed, it often floods to
leave layers of silt across the valley floor that become sandwiched
between dustings of wind-blown sand and ash. Rain last fell a month ago
and the stream has become an irregular line of stagnant pools containing
more rhino urine than drinking water. Soon these will be patches of mud
and then gone altogether.

Lubbock is within Olduvai Gorge, explored and made famous by the Leakey
family during their quest for the origins of humankind. The silt and
sand left by the stream, together with the fine volcanic ash blown by
the wind, will be mixed together to create the last of the geological
layers that the Leakeys explored, that known as the Naisiusiu Beds. This
forms throughout the gorge and across the nearby Serengeti plain, a
capping for the two-million-years’-worth of geological strata below.¹⁸

Sitting on a boulder, Lubbock watches as two men butcher an antelope
they had ambushed at dawn as it came to drink, shooting it with
microlith-tipped arrows. Several other people sit near by, some resting
idly in the early-morning sun, others chipping nodules of quartz to make
new blades and butchery tools. One of the men curses as his greasy stone
flake slips to gouge his thigh; blood spurts forth, and continues to do
so as he places his hand in a futile attempt to stem the flow. He is
made to lie down as a young girl darts away to search for a local
healing plant. She returns within minutes carrying a handful of
thick-ridged succulent leaves which are twisted above the wound. A clear
liquid drips into the cut and has immediate effect as the bleeding
ceases. The man is taken into the shade to rest, his bloody legs and
hands washed with water from the pool.

Once the butchery is complete the party leaves, the injured man being
helped to walk, others carrying the joints of meat. Lubbock looks at the
ground before him – a scatter of stone flakes, unwanted microliths,
spilled guts, antelope feet and head, and bloodstains from man as well
as beast.

The scatter of microliths, stone flakes and broken bones was discovered
and part-excavated by Louis Leakey in 1931 and more fully dug by his
wife Mary in 1969. Many more artefacts were present because that shady
spot had often been used for butchery. The Leakeys found several hundred
tools and bones from numerous species, all broken into tiny fragments
like those of Lukenya Hill. One imagines that after each killing, hyenas
had come to chew the discarded bones. Flood waters would have washed
some artefacts away and buried others below their silt deposits. Any
wooden artefacts, woven baskets, and hide bags that had been left or
forgotten rotted away. The scanty remains which the Leakeys recovered
tell us little more than that some people had sat by Olduvai River
around 19,000 BC and butchered their prey. We can also assume that they
are unlikely to have remained there very long because the obsidian they
used had come from a source 200 kilometres away and so they must have
travelled extensively.

However, we have no idea whether they used medicinal plants. My guess is
that they did, especially the one known today as sansaveria, a succulent
growing in many parts of the Rift Valley. Its local name, olduvai, was
given to the gorge itself. Richard Leakey has enthused about the healing
properties of the plant, describing its use by the nomadic peoples of
the Rift Valley and the Leakey family themselves whenever accidents
occurred during their fieldwork.¹⁹ Its juices act both as an antiseptic
and as a natural bandage in binding the wound together. Richard Leakey
believes sansaveria is far better than anything provided by modern
pharmaceuticals and has questioned whether the earliest ape-like human
ancestors who lived at Olduvai two million years ago knew of its
properties. That we will never know, but we should not doubt that they
were known by those modern humans who hunted within Olduvai Gorge soon
after the LGM.

48 Frogs’ Legs and Ostrich Eggs

Hunter-gatherers of the Kalahari Desert, 12,500 BC

A spider’s web. Not strung airily between grass stalks or reeds but
thickly woven across a tunnel in the dusty sand. Two women crouch down
beside their find; John Lubbock is with them, wondering why they look so
pleased. He had assumed they were searching for wispy stems from buried
tubers or thicker and hollow stems with edible grubs inside. But both
were ignored as the women pushed bushes aside, searching the broken
ground around their roots. A digging stick is dipped into the hole and
twisted to wind the web around its tip. Once the stick is wiped, the
women begin to dig as the spider scuttles away. As soon as the sand
becomes a little moist a hand is thrust into the hole and the women’s
next meal is dragged out by its leg, then swiftly struck with a digging
stick before it has a chance to bite. A bullfrog.

The date is 12,500 BC and Lubbock is in the Gcwihaba Valley of the
Western Kalahari Desert, Botswana.¹ He had arrived earlier that morning,
tagging along behind the women as they walked down the well-worn path
from their campsite. They had followed the dry river-bed to a thicket of
bushes and begun their search, knowing that each web-covered hole might
lead to a bullfrog hibernating below the ground. The Kalahari spiders
like to take advantage of the bullfrogs’ work by weaving their webs
across the ready-made holes.

Lubbock looks at the women as they begin searching for another web,
probing around a nearby bush. They have short black, tightly-curled hair
and high cheekbones; their cocoa-coloured skin has been deliberately
scarred on the face and thighs to leave parallel lines of bright red
weals. Apart from the strands of white beads that adorn their necks and
wrists, they wear nothing but hide capes and small tasselled aprons.²

By midday there are eight bullfrogs in their basket and the women have
returned to their campsite outside what we call today Drotsky’s Cave.
The rest of the group are sitting and working in the open; two men are
cleaning hides with quartz flakes hafted in bone handles, old women sit
talking while twisting plant fibres into twine, children play with
sticks. Inside the cave itself an elderly man pokes at the fire.
Everyone stops when the women arrive, gathering round to see what they
have found. Within minutes, the bullfrogs are spread across hot stones
in the fire to cook; the small ones are allowed to turn crispy before
being ground up with a wooden pestle and eaten as a mush;³ the larger
ones are simply pulled apart and shared between all present. Most adults
get a frog’s leg to eat, the soft bones being crunched up with the meat.
Only the heads are wasted – discarded into the ashes after the skin and
eyes have been nibbled away.

Lubbock manages to sneak a frog’s leg, finding it tasty and filling to
eat. While chewing the bones he thinks of what else he has eaten and
drunk around the world at this date of 12,500 BC: bread from wild wheat
at ‘Ain Mallaha, arctic hare at Creswell Crags, tea made from boldo leaf
at Monte Verde, a lizard and figs at Kulpi Mara Cave. He also thinks
back over his journey from Olduvai Gorge that he had left at 19,000 BC.
There is, however, little about human history to recall as the land had
remained arid and largely uninhabited during that journey through
modern-day Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe. If people did exist within
this region, Lubbock thought, they were most likely at the coast or
living on productive grasslands around surviving lakes. Even when
Lubbock passed through what seemed to him to be an attractive place to
live, the most he found were men making transient camps on their way to
more favoured hunting grounds.

There was, for instance, a striking set of hills containing numerous
rockshelters and caves in what we now call Matebeleland in western
Zimbabwe.⁴ Lubbock explored many of the caves and found stone artefacts
scattered on the floors of some. But these were partly buried, and
looked quite different to those he had seen at Wadi Kubbaniya and
Lukenya Hill. The hills were not, however, completely deserted: Lubbock
found a pair of hunters making overnight camp within the most impressive
cave. It had a dome-shaped roof and looked across a small valley whose
river-bed was dry. Lubbock sat by their fire, feeling just as hungry as
the hunters themselves as their search for game had been unsuccessful.
When Lubbock woke the next morning, the hunters had gone, leaving
nothing more than a scatter of ashes and a few stone flakes behind.

This set of hills and caves were the setting for many hunter-gatherer
camps long before the LGM, and would be so again once the Holocene
began. Known as the Matopos, years of excavation have recovered traces
of occupation that reach back 100,000 years, to a time when stone tools
were made from large flakes rather than the small blades that Lubbock
had come to know so well. The most recent study of the Matopos has been
undertaken by Nicholas Walker of Uppsala University, Sweden, who focused
on its use from the LGM until the present day. He found that while
several caves had abundant remains from Holocene hunter-gatherers, just
one – the impressive dome-shaped Pomongwe Cave – had signs of habitation
between 20,000 and 10,000 BC. The few stone flakes that Walker found
could only be tentatively dated to earlier than 13,000 BC.⁵

The history of occupation at the Matopos is likely to reflect that of
sub-Saharan Africa as a whole. That vast areas were completely devoid of
a human presence at the LGM and during its aftermath is certainly the
impression we gain from the sparse number of archaeological sites that
are known. If people were around, they must have been living in small
and highly mobile groups, rather like the desert-adapted Kalahari
Bushmen of recent times. By always being on the move, they would rarely
have left sufficient debris for it to survive the ravages of time. My
guess is that much of the continent was indeed a human desert – the cold
and arid conditions must have had a debilitating impact on population
numbers, increasing the chance of early mortality while reducing female
fertility.

This absence of human company had ended when Lubbock reached Drotsky’s
Cave. Indeed, the region in which it is found appears to have broken the
African rule of a relatively dry Pleistocene followed by a wet Holocene
– the Gcwihaba valley seems to have done the precise reverse.

Ten creamy white spheres clustered in a shallow depression in the sand.
A wonderful and unexpected find for Lubbock’s three companions on a
hunting trip in the low hills with rocky outcrops that surround the
Gcwihaba valley. Until now, they had had little success. Hare tracks had
led them to a burrow where they guessed the nocturnal animal would be
asleep. The hunters searched the scrubby woodland for a straightish
branch at least a couple of metres long. This was pushed down the burrow
until the hunter could feel the hare; he thrust it forward with all his
strength to hold the animal still while his companions began to dig.
Gradually the coarse brown hair became exposed, the animal pinned down
and quite unable to move. But as a rock was raised to deliver a lethal
blow, the branch snapped and the hare escaped, its flight watched with
dismay and delight in equal measure – the loss of a meal but an animal
to admire running across the sands.

The chance discovery of an ostrich nest a little later in the day
provided ample compensation. Each egg is pounded gently but firmly on
the ground. This jars the contents, killing the embryo inside.⁶ The
hunters can carry three eggs each and agree that someone will be sent to
collect the last.

The eggs are heavy. Several rests are taken on the walk back to
Drotsky’s Cave, during which fresh dung is gathered wherever it lies. On
arrival, everyone is eager to see and touch the eggs and there is little
delay in cooking the food. Two eggs are carefully cracked in half to
make four cooking vessels, and their contents saved in a wooden bowl.
Dung is coated thickly around the base of these newly made bowls, which
are then positioned upon hot stones. Holes are carefully drilled into
the ends of the remaining eggs and their contents poured out to cook.
Ostrich egg omelette, strong and more gamey than that from a hen’s egg,
is shared by all – although Lubbock has to make do with scrapings from
the bowls.

During the next few days he watches how the ostrich shells are used. The
cooking bowls had become charred and were left to fragment within the
fire. This was common practice with wasted food and other debris at
Drotsky’s Cave; every few days the hearths were cleaned out, their
ashes, burnt bones, shells and lumps of charcoal being dumped deep
inside the cave. Of the ostrich eggs that remained whole, all but three
were rinsed with water and flavoured by aromatic herbs to replace the
odour of rotting egg. The addition of grass stoppers turned the
ostrich-egg shells into water containers. The three remaining shells
were used for making beads. An old woman – the mother of the man who
first spotted the nest – broke them into jagged fragments and then
drilled a hole in each by rotating a microlith-tipped stick between her
palms.⁷ Once drilled, the beads were strung tightly on a cord and then
rubbed upon a stone to make them smooth and even. The woman wore many of
the beads herself, giving others to her daughters and to their daughters
in the camp.

Music, singing and dancing were essential to the people of Drotsky’s
Cave, just as Lubbock has so frequently found throughout the prehistoric
world. And so were games, here most usually played by the women and
children aged between eight and twelve. Lubbock enjoyed watching these
games, but as he often felt utterly confused as to what was going on he
resisted the temptation to join in.

We do not know, of course, whether games were really played outside of
Drotsky’s Cave in the Kalahari Desert at 12,500 BC. But they were
definitely played just a few kilometres away at Nyae Nyae in AD 1952 by
the !Kung bushmen, as they were observed by the anthropologist Lorna
Marshall. Although not formally trained as an anthropologist, she made a
seminal study of the !Kung of Nyae Nyae during the early 1950s.⁸
Throughout the duration of one of the games, the !Kung children croaked
in near perfect imitation of the bullfrogs which gathered to breed in
the valley when the rains arrived.

When Marshall watched the game in 1952, it began with the players seated
in a circle facing inwards; one girl was chosen to be mother and she
started by tapping each of the others on the ankle with a stick. Once
tapped, they croaked and lay back full-length as if asleep. When all
were lying down she plucked a few hairs from her head and placed them on
an imaginary fire in the centre of the circle – these represented the
frogs that she was cooking for the meal. When these had cooked for long
enough, her children were tapped again and they formed a circle around
their mother. Each was asked in turn to fetch the pestle and mortar so
that she could grind the crispy frogs, but each refused to go; and so,
looking suitably annoyed, she went herself. As soon as the mother left
the circle, her children stole the hairs – the frogs – and ran off to
hide. The mother returned, scowling, making threatening noises and
searching for her children. When found, they croaked, squealed and
struggled before being struck on the head with her forefinger and
pretending to cry. At this point, any semblance of order was lost; all
the children ran chaotically around, shrieking and laughing in wild
excitement.

In light of the apparent similarities in lifestyles between the Drotsky
Cave inhabitants and the !Kung, as observed by Marshall, one is tempted
to believe that such games were also played in 12,500 BC. The cave
acquired its name from Martinus Drotsky, one of the first Europeans to
travel widely in the Kalahari.⁹ The first excavations were made by the
American anthropologist John Yellen in 1969, who dug a trench close to
where Drotsky had painted his name upon the wall. From the cave’s sandy
sediments Yellen acquired stone artefacts, fragments of ostrich-egg
shell, animal bones and charcoal that dated to 12,500 BC – the first
discovered trace of pre-Holocene settlement in the Kalahari Desert.¹⁰

New excavations were made in 1991 by Lawrence Robbins of Michigan State
University and his colleagues. They dug deeper than Yellen had done and
discovered a 30-centimetre-thick layer of charcoal and ash, beginning 50
centimetres below the surface. This contained many more artefacts and
bones than the sandy sediments above and below, and was dated to have
formed between 12,800 and 11,200 BC.¹¹

This layer of charcoal and ash had arisen from many campfires within the
cave, suggesting its intensive use for habitation. It contained a
quantity of burnt bullfrog bones; these were primarily pieces of skull,
which are ridged, robust and hence resistant to decay. Leg bones were
markedly scarce, leading Robbins to suppose that they had been eaten
with the meat. When Marshall lived with the !Kung in the 1950s she had
heard that bullfrogs were eaten, although she never witnessed this; but
in 1859 the missionary David Livingstone described how the Bushmen found
bullfrogs by searching for spiders’ webs, just as Lubbock had seen them
doing.¹²

The !Kung of Nyae Nyae valued ostrich eggs as water containers and as
material for making beads which the young girls particularly liked to
wear. As Robbins excavated many ostrich-egg-shell fragments from the
charcoal layer in Drotsky’s Cave, both uses seem likely at 12,500 BC.
Some were pierced to use as beads, although the layer lacked any debris
from the process of manufacture itself. Other fragments were heavily
burnt. The !Kung of Nyae Nyae had cooked their eggs in metal pots but
the hunter-gatherers of 12,500 BC had lacked any containers to place
over a fire. And so eggs might have been placed directly in the embers,
perhaps having first been coated in dung. This is a method that Robbins
himself had seen being used to cook chicken eggs by modern-day !Kung at
Tsodilo, 50 kilometres north of Drotsky’s Cave.

The bones of Kalahari spring hares and several small antelopes were also
excavated from the layer of charcoal and ash. Such animals were
regularly hunted by the recent !Kung. Richard Lee, an anthropologist who
studied another group of the !Kung during the early 1960s, witnessed the
use of long hooks to trap spring hares in their day-time burrows, in the
same fashion that Lubbock had seen a branch being used.¹³

The accounts of Marshall and Lee can help us to imagine more readily the
daily lives of those who discarded bullfrog bones and eggshells in
Drotsky’s Cave.¹⁴ But we must rely on the archaeological evidence alone
for information about the environmental history of the Kalahari and how
changing climatic conditions impacted on the region’s people. Some of
the most telling evidence is smaller than the stone artefacts and animal
bones, smaller even than fragments of frogs’ skulls and eggshells. It is
the sand itself, more specifically the particles of sand that
accumulated within the cave. These can act as a gauge to the changing
quantities of rainfall in the Kalahari Desert.

When Robbins and his colleagues excavated in Drotsky’s Cave they took
samples of sand at regular intervals from the surface to the bottom of
their 130-centimetre-deep trench, most likely dating to 30,000 BC. Most
of this sand had been blown inside – averaging a depth of 4.45
centimetres every 1,000 years. Some samples of the sand were largely
made up from very fine particles, those less than 0.08 millimetres in
size, which are easily carried on the wind; other samples were coarser
in composition, with many particles more than 0.2 millimetres – the type
of sand deposited by running water. Robbins and his colleagues reasoned
that when outside conditions were very dry, all the sand entering the
cave would be blown from nearby dunes and hence be extremely fine in
composition. During wetter periods, vegetation would have grown across
the dunes and stabilised their surface, providing very few particles of
sand for the wind to carry. But in these conditions, run-off after heavy
rain would wash the coarser grains into the cave.

The evidence indicated quite clearly that the period between 20,000 and
11,500 BC had been the wettest of the last 30,000 years as it contained
the coarser samples of sand. And so, in complete contrast to so much of
sub-Saharan Africa, the LGM and its aftermath had been wetter than the
Holocene in the Kalahari. This result was confirmed by evidence from
outside the cave. From the now dry bed of the Gcwihaba valley, sand and
gravel dating to before 12,000 BC was found to contain diatoms that
require substantial amounts of water to survive – diatoms being
microscopic algae with silica-rich walls, each species having a
distinctive form and particular habitat needs. So before 12,000 BC there
had at least been a seasonal, and maybe even a permanent, stream within
the valley. The remains of a turtle along with the many bullfrogs
provide further evidence that a stream had flowed within the valley when
fires were lit inside the cave.

As there were plenty of water sources around, Robbins and his colleagues
concluded that between 20,000 and 12,500 BC the cave provided no special
advantage over many other localities in the region. Consequently, it was
used by hunting parties for no more than brief overnight stops, or
perhaps simply for shelter during the day. When the climate began to
change, when the rains began to fail, Drotsky’s Cave became a focus for
habitation – perhaps the Gcwihaba valley now provided one of the very
few reliable water sources. For about a thousand years people regularly
lit fires and made camp within the cave while they hunted antelope and
hare, dug bullfrogs from their tunnels and caught them in the wet-season
pools. But as aridity took hold and the valley became quite dry,
Drotsky’s Cave lost its attraction; once more it was just one of many
places used by people continually on the move, searching for water in
the Kalahari Desert. The layer of ash, bones and charcoal became covered
by wind-blown sand. When, in 1969, John Yellen asked the modern-day
!Kung about the cave, they believed it had only ever been used as a
place to collect honey; they had never camped within the cave
themselves.

After leaving Drotsky’s Cave, Lubbock undertakes a journey of almost
2,000 kilometres to the Western Cape of South Africa, reaching the
southern margins of the inhabited world for the third and final time in
his travels – having already visited Tasmania and Tierra del Fuego. In
front of him is a shallow river, known today as the Verlorenvlei, which
flows westwards to reach the Atlantic Ocean a little under twenty
kilometres away. A man stands knee-deep and immobile in its waters, a
fishing spear poised above his head. As Lubbock watches, he strikes at
the water, curses, and then tries again, before giving up and following
the beaten trail back to a cliff-side cave a short way down river. Today
we call it Elands Bay Cave – the first of four caves Lubbock must visit
as he explores what happened in South Africa when global warming changed
the world.

49 A South African Tour

Changing environments, diet and social life, 12,500–7000 BC

The fisherman now sits with two companions by the hot embers of a fire,
observed by Lubbock who stands at the cave’s entrance looking in. Each
man has spears propped against the wall, a leather bag containing quartz
nodules, a hammer-stone, knife and lengths of sinew.¹ Wads of grass have
been placed on the floor, but these do little to cover the debris of
this and many previous campsites in the cave.² After travelling most of
the globe and visiting many similar sites, Lubbock’s sense of smell has
become finely tuned; this, together with the fisherman’s lack of
success, suggests that fishing is a new activity for the inhabitants of
the cave.³

Elands Bay Cave is the Franchthi of the South. Its archaeological
deposits show how people changed their lives as global warming changed
their world, bringing the sea and its products to the doorstep of a once
inland cave. Excavated by John Parkington and his colleagues from Cape
Town University during the 1970s, it has yielded rich collections of
animal, fish and bird bones, mollusc, ostrich and tortoise shells, tools
made from a variety of materials, together with deposits of charcoal and
ash. These date from around 30,000 BC to historic times and have, after
three decades of study, provided a remarkable insight into human history
in the Western Cape of South Africa, which Lubbock has stepped into at
12,500 BC.⁴

The use of Elands Bay Cave as a hunting camp was well under way at the
LGM, when the sea lay some 35 kilometres away – 15 kilometres further
than at the time of Lubbock’s visit. The coastal plain was accordingly
larger, but animals may have been scarce because of the colder and more
arid conditions. Nevertheless, the now extinct Cape horse and giant
buffalo, the eland, steenbok and grysbok are all present in the cave’s
deposits between the LGM and 9000 BC, after which the plain became
entirely inundated by the rising sea and such animals were hunted no
more.

Those who used Elands Bay Cave collected tortoises for food and
ready-made bowls. One excavated layer from around 12,500 BC had so many
carapaces that Parkington called it a ‘tortoise midden’. This suggests
that the annual visit to the cave may have been in the summer when
tortoises and other reptiles were easiest to find. Other than wood
charcoal from fireplaces, no other plant remains were recovered. Whether
this reflects a diet entirely based on game or the complete decay of
vegetable matter remains unclear.

A lifestyle focused on big game in open grasslands appears widespread
throughout South Africa at the LGM and its immediate aftermath. Pollen
grains from cave sediments suggest a landscape of heaths and grasslands.
Charcoal from fireplaces confirms this: that from Boomplaas Cave in the
Southern Cape indicates that its LGM occupants had to find fuel in a
completely treeless landscape.⁵ Those using Rose Cottage Cave now
located in the Orange Free State – further inland and at a higher
elevation – were better off as they collected firewood from shrubs along
the edge of a nearby valley.⁶

Herds of antelopes, eland, buffalo and horse grazed in both the uplands
and lowlands and would have been available to hunt. The large mammals
from Elands Bay Cave, however, are mainly represented by jaws and lower
limb bones – carcass parts that suggest scavenging from carnivore kills.
This may have been a sufficient means of acquiring meat as people are
likely to have been thin on the ground, their numbers having suffered
from the droughts of the LGM. Archaeological sites from this period are
rare and, when found, suggest small mobile groups who remained at each
of their camping sites for no more than a few weeks at a time.
Nevertheless, communal hunts using spears may have been employed in the
open landscapes, perhaps deploying beaters to chase animals into
ambushes just as Lubbock has so often seen elsewhere.

By the time of Lubbock’s arrival at Elands Bay Cave – 12,500 BC –
landscapes and lifestyles had already begun to change. Ever since 16,000
BC annual temperatures and quantities of rainfall had been increasing,
partly due to the arrival of winter rains to supplement those of summer.
The new occupants of Boomplaas Cave collected their firewood from shrubs
and trees. While doing so, they would have watched the gradual
replacement of grazing herds by smaller-bodied and more solitary animals
such as steenbok and klipspringer, ones that browsed within the
scrubland.⁷ New animals would have required new hunting methods; this in
turn would have had consequences for social life.

The browsing animals had to be stalked by stealth; bows and arrows most
likely replaced spears, as had been used in the communal grassland
hunts. Such hunts would have been public affairs, probably involving the
participation of women and children and often producing more than enough
meat for all. Bows and arrows, on the other hand, served to ‘privatise’
the hunt, and with it the ownership of any acquired meat. Social rules
for its distribution became essential, especially as relatively small
quantities were available from the smaller, solitary animals now being
stalked. Lyn Wadley from Witwatersrand University has suggested that the
typical pattern seen among recent African hunter-gatherers, such as the
!Kung, of women as plant gatherers excluded from the hunt, may date to
the adoption of the bow and arrow for hunting, perhaps around 16,000 BC
in this particular region of the world.⁸

While the changes in large mammals represented in Boomplaas and other
caves are most evocative of changing human lifestyles, the rodents are
just as telling about environmental change. During the LGM and its
aftermath, the owls roosting in Boomplaas Cave had eaten shrews, which
are known to inhabit open grasslands; after 12,500 BC their diet had
changed to the mice and voles of a woodland habitat.⁹ The dune molerat
is a particularly useful rodent as it provides a rainfall gauge, rather
like the particles of sand in Drotsky’s Cave. Their size is known to
vary with rainfall: when wet they grow larger, presumably because the
roots they consume are more plentiful and nutritious; when dry they are
relatively small; and when conditions become arid they disappear
entirely from cave deposits. From measurements of their surviving bones,
we know that the molerats trapped by the hunters of Elands Bay Cave
between 12,500 and 7000 BC were substantially larger than those which
come from both earlier and later deposits in the cave.¹⁰

Hunting parties keep coming and going every spring as Lubbock sits
within Elands Bay Cave reading his copy of Prehistoric Times – knowing
that he has little time left to finish the book. He looks up every time
a new party arrives; sometimes they are empty-handed, at other times
they have molerats tied to their waist or a partly butchered carcass in
hand. Most years it is only men that arrive, but occasionally women and
children accompany the hunters and their stay is extended from a few
days to weeks. Lubbock has no idea where they spend the rest of the year
but he notices that they often bring stone flakes made from a coarse
black material unavailable in the vicinity of the cave. This stone is
black hornfels and its nearest source is 200 kilometres east of Elands
Bay.¹¹

Once Lubbock has watched the new arrivals settle, clean out the
fireplaces and eject any unwelcome insects and reptiles that had lodged
within the cave, he returns to the pages of his book. The same annual
routine of hunting and fishing, story-telling and singing, smoking,
joking and tool-making begins anew.

It is only when people arrive in the year of 12,000 BC that Lubbock
realises he has been negligent of the changing world outside.¹² A pair
of penguins have appeared within the cave – not entering by themselves
but draped around a hunter’s neck. This hunter is one of several new
arrivals, soon followed by women and children carrying baskets of
limpets and seaweed instead of roots or tortoises as in previous years.
They look windswept and salty after foraging on the Atlantic shore.
While Lubbock has been sitting reading, the tide has been coming in –
not the daily tide but that which ebbs and flows with climate change.
Global warming has been melting the northern glaciers; billions of
litres of water have poured into the oceans; sea level has risen to
bring the Atlantic shore to within daily walking distance of the cave.
By 12,000 BC it is no more than five kilometres away and so a new type
of debris will soon be discarded upon its floor.¹³

The following day Lubbock accompanies the women and children to the
shore and watches a familiar scene, one he knows is being repeated
throughout the world as the Holocene begins. Shellfish – in this case
mainly limpets – are gathered. Rock pools are probed and boulders
overturned in the search for crabs. As the women work and the children
play, watchful seals are bobbing in the sea. At dusk, when the seals
have come ashore, the tables will be turned as hunters creep stealthily
towards them, ready to make a kill.

When Lubbock is once again left alone within the cave, debris from
coastal foraging litters the floor: mollusc shells, discarded feathers
from gulls, bones from seals, penguin and fish. The same happens the
following year, and the next. As the same people keep returning, Lubbock
watches them age and change. The young boys no longer go with the women
to the shore but accompany the men on hunts; adolescent girls arrive
newly pregnant or with their first child; some do not return – not just
the old, who have died elsewhere, but those who have married and joined
another group.¹⁴

The nature of the cave also begins to change. When Lubbock first
arrived, it was a hunting camp with no signs of domestic work. But now
there are grinding stones upon the floor. Hides are cleaned within the
cave, clothing and ostrich-egg-shell beads are manufactured. Lubbock
watches the burial of a young infant beneath the cave floor; when
Parkington excavates the site, he will find another five.

Visits become both longer and more frequent, twice or three times a
year, evidently designed to target resources at their very best: mussels
in the late spring, limpets in the summer, and seals at the beginning of
winter. The hunter-gatherers are always watching the clouds and the
tides, continually enhancing their knowledge of the seascape – where the
birds will nest, when the fish will spawn. Adjustments are made to the
quantities and range of foods they gather; as soon as the mussels become
more prolific on the shore – a consequence of changing offshore currents
and sea temperatures¹⁵ – time is spent collecting these rather than the
tough and unpleasant-tasting limpets. As the years pass, as the sea
encroaches ever nearer to the cave, the estuary of the Verlorenvlei –
the river that flows past Elands Bay Cave – becomes their favoured
foraging spot: pelicans and flamingos are shot with arrows, a variety of
fish are caught in nets, rock lobsters are gathered, cormorants, gannets
and gulls are snared.

As these new species enter the diet, others become neglected or can no
longer be found. When Lubbock first arrived, the women and children
would spend many hours searching for tortoises in the grasslands around
the cave; now all their time is spent on the shore. The tortoises have
become scarce as the soil and vegetation is now inundated by salt. A few
small antelopes are hunted but the Cape horse has disappeared entirely
from the remnants of the plain. This has become even more arid, its few
freshwater springs have disappeared and knee-high succulents now grow
across the former grassland.

By 10,000 BC the floor of the cave is a stinking shell midden; having
already sat and slept upon such middens elsewhere in the prehistoric
world, Lubbock has no wish to do so again. It is, in fact, time to make
a tour, visiting other caves far inland before returning to the Western
Cape at 7000 BC to see how much life at Elands Bay Cave has changed in
the intervening millennia.

Having climbed the escarpment on to the high plains known today as the
Great Karoo, Lubbock heads northeast across dry grassland scattered with
stunted shrubs. For the most part it is dusty and dull, a mix of parched
yellows and thirsty browns. The air is clear, and every direction is
bounded with hills or mountain-tops. When the summer rain arrives, it
falls in such torrents that water pours from the hard-baked ground into
every fissure and gully before entering the streams and rushing towards
the sea. It hardly seems to moisten the soil at all; and yet a
short-term legacy is left in the sudden appearance of flowers of
exquisite hue – purple, white, crimson and canary yellow – all glowing
brightly upon a carpet of green.

After travelling almost 800 kilometres from Elands Bay Cave, and
crossing high plains, hills, dry pans and lakes, Lubbock arrives at
Wonderwerk Cave in the eastern flanks of the Kuruman hills. Night has
fallen. He approaches beneath a starry sky to the sound of singing and
clapping from within; on entering the cave he sees twenty or thirty
women seated around a fire, swaying to the rhythm of their music; a
similar number of men dance around the circle. Another set of figures,
gigantic in size, perform chaotically upon the walls: human shadows
thrown up by flickering flames. The music echoes in the dark chambers of
the cave.

Lubbock watches for a moment and then joins the seated women, squeezing
himself into the circle and picking up the rhythm with his hands.
Several slabs of stone have been laid around the fire, each engraved
with an animal form. The dancing men frequently burst through or even
leap across the women, they reach down to examine the slabs, grasping
them tightly and uttering incantations to the eland, horse and buffalo
they depict. By now Lubbock is also sweating and swaying, he claps to
the rhythm and sings, engulfed by the music and dancing, the flames and
the hot, pungent, oxygen-drained air. The dancing becomes frenetic;
several men begin to tremble, they shudder and shake and then, in a
trance-like state, leave the earthly world within the cave. Two stagger
around the circle, laying their trembling hands on each seated person in
turn, fingers squeezing scalps in a call for sickness to depart. Others
collapse, shaking uncontrollably on the ground, one bleeding profusely
from the nose.

It ends. The clapping, singing and dancing come to a sudden halt. The
shamans writhe upon the ground and then become still; the others lie
flat upon their backs, panting deeply, relieved to be cured of all their
ills.

Wonderwerk Cave has had a long history of study. Initial excavations
were undertaken in the 1940s, followed by renewed work in the late
1970s, partly by Anne and J. Francis Thackeray of Yale University.¹⁶ The
cave has deposits with stone artefacts that reach back far beyond the
LGM; the layers from 10,000 BC and after contain animal bones from
grazing species such as zebra, hartebeest and wildebeest. The now
extinct Cape horse is found in the lowest of the Holocene layers. In
addition to stone artefacts and animal bones, the Thackerays found
several engraved slabs of stone; all but one of these contained
geometric images and dated to relatively recent Holocene times. One
slab, however, was dated to 10,000 BC and has formed the basis for my
elaborate scenario of the shamanistic medicine dance. It is no more than
8 centimetres across and shows the unfinished image of an unidentifiable
mammal that looks like a horse or an antelope without a head.¹⁷

Many more art works may have been present within Wonderwerk Cave at
10,000 BC as its walls are covered by paintings of an unknown date. We
know that artists were already at work in South Africa by 20,000 BC
because of a collection of painted slabs from Apollo Cave, Namibia, that
depict a giraffe-like creature, a rhino and a wild cat that some believe
to have human legs. Archaeologists remain unsure whether these date
closer to 20,000 or 30,000 BC; whichever is true, they establish that
people had already begun to paint animals on rock-faces before 10,000
BC.¹⁸

We also know that pieces of ostrich-egg shell were being engraved by
12,000 BC – possibly much earlier – and that engravings were made on
rock-faces throughout the Holocene.¹⁹ Painting was widely practised by
indigenous South African peoples – the San Bushmen – throughout historic
times.

The most recent paintings have been extensively studied by
archaeologists and are known to depict shamanistic practices:
communication with, and travel to, a spirit world by the few individuals
who have the ability to do so. In light of similarities between their
imagery and the art of 10,000 BC and earlier, such as the presence of
half-human and half-animal forms, it is quite possible that shamanistic
practices also motivated the creation of South African rock art in
prehistoric times. On this basis rests my scenario of a healing dance in
Wonderwerk Cave at 10,000 BC.²⁰

The first person to realise that trance dances, dreams, visions and
shamans provide the key to understanding nineteenth- and
twentieth-century South African rock art was David Lewis-Williams,
Professor of Cognitive Archaeology at Witwatersrand University. By
undertaking a detailed study of the historical records of San Bushmen
and speaking to those who still survived, he found striking similarities
between the San shamanistic practices and the imagery in their art.²¹ He
discovered that many paintings represent trance dances by showing groups
of swaying bodies; others record the trance experience itself. Shamans
themselves can be recognised in the paintings by blood pouring from a
figure’s nose or by their part-human/part-animal forms – transformation
into another species being a key part of the trance experience.
Paintings of eland are particularly significant as this animal contained
the potency that shamans must harness to enter a trance. When shamans
danced, they often turned to the depictions of eland on the rockshelter
walls – just as I have imagined those in Wonderwerk Cave doing with the
engraved slabs upon the floor. The written accounts record that when the
trance was complete, the shamans would tell the group about their visit
to the spirit world; the rock art indicates that they used paintings on
cave walls to do the same.

Feeling in particularly good spirits after the dance, Lubbock leaves
Wonderwerk Cave to continue his South African tour. The next locality he
must visit is Rose Cottage Cave, 450 kilometres to the southeast, where
he will arrive in 8500 BC. The country is now relatively lush; its
grasslands and shrubs support more animals than Lubbock has previously
seen in this region of the world. This partly reflects further increases
in rainfall and temperature, and partly the fact that Lubbock has
travelled further east, to a region that has always been a more
productive landscape than the Great Karoo.²² Lubbock now passes more
campsites than ever before; he watches hunters stalking game and women
digging tubers from the ground.²³

There is indeed a great increase in the number of known archaeological
sites in South Africa after 12,000 BC, which must reflect a substantial
increase in the human population.²⁴ By 10,000 BC people had evidently
begun to occupy all of the region’s varied habitats. The majority of
sites, however, are no more than small surface scatters of discarded
stone tools and the waste from their manufacture.

Ever since the LGM, South African hunter-gatherers had shaped nodules of
stone into cores that were often conical in shape and from which small,
thin blades could be detached. Archaeologists use the term ‘Robberg’
sites to describe such collections of tools. Very few of the blades
received any further chipping to turn them into specific shapes. Some
may have been hafted on to spears, but would have been little more
effective than tips made from hardened wood. This, though, was not the
only type of stone tool being used in South Africa. Large flakes were
also manufactured, many of which were further chipped into shapes
referred to as scrapers, adzes and spokeshaves. Sites containing such
flakes and tools – known by archaeologists as ‘Oakhurst’ sites – are
found in large numbers across the open landscapes of South Africa’s
interior. Very few can be dated, but most are believed to lie between
12,000 and 7000 BC,²⁵ coinciding with a proliferation of bone points
that implies a marked increase in hunting by bow and arrow.

John Parkington has suggested that the same people made both the Robberg
and the Oakhurst types of tools – that these were in fact complementary.
While the small blades seem appropriate for use in hunting and fishing,
the large flakes and scrapers seem more useful for cleaning plant foods,
preparing hides and working wood. And so different tools may have been
made and discarded depending upon which activities were under way.²⁶ It
could also have been a matter of simple geography, with the available
raw materials dictating which type was made. In the interior,
coarse-grained rocks, such as black hornfels, were found in big blocks,
enabling large flakes to be easily detached. The quartzite nodules found
in the lowlands of the Cape are more conducive to the manufacture of
small and delicate blades.

Cave sites with long sequences of layered deposits, however, such as
Rose Cottage Cave where Lubbock is about to arrive, suggest that
Parkington’s explanation of the two technologies is unlikely to be
entirely correct. These consistently show that the large flakes and
scrapers were made at a later date than the conical cores and small
blades. It looks as if one tradition was completely replaced by another
throughout the region – a marked change in tool manufacture that
coincided with the expansion of human habitation into South Africa’s
interior. After another five thousand years, tool-making styles returned
once again to the production of blades, which archaeologists call the
Wilton tradition.²⁷

A path beaten through a thicket of shrubs leads Lubbock to an unusual
cave, one formed by a huge boulder that has fallen from a cliff-face to
enclose a cavern behind. The sound of talking and laughing comes from
inside, where at least twenty people sit around hearths in a spacious
and warm interior, the boulder sheltering them from the cold wind
outside. Extra light comes from a natural skylight in the roof. With
this, Lubbock can see bundles of grass and leaves to be used for bedding
stacked against the cave walls, and a niche crammed with firewood.
Sticks have been wedged into crevices to act as pegs for bags, clothing,
water-containers, bows and a butchered carcass. Everybody, except the
very young, seems to be at work.

Close to the entrance some men are flaking stone. They use the black,
coarse-grained type and let each new flake fall seemingly unwanted to
the ground, although the odd one is picked from the debris and put aside
for further work. Another group sits towards the rear, cleaning and
preparing hides – scraping the fat away, stretching, twisting and
pummelling to make them supple. On his journey from Elands Bay Cave
Lubbock has learned that such leather work is always done by men – they
hunt the animals and hence they work their skins, making clothing, belts
and bags.²⁸ Three other hearths are surrounded by women, girls and the
infants. At two of these, bulbous roots are being ground into a mush; at
the third, two women sit together turning fragments of ostrich-egg shell
into beads.

There is a constant hubbub of talk around each hearth; every now and
then one person will take centre stage and relate a story to all.

Lyn Wadley of Witwatersrand University excavated the remnants of this
scene, together with that of several others whose debris had all become
intermixed.²⁹ She found concentrations of charcoal and burnt bone
indicating where the hearths had been, dense scatters of chipped stone
near the entrance and clustered fragments of ostrich-egg shells
indicating a locus of bead manufacture. There was also a hearth
surrounded by tools that suggests woodworking, and grinding stones where
pigments had been prepared, while the chemistry of the cave sediments
indicated that a great deal of plant material had been brought inside,
eventually rotting upon the floor.³⁰

Wadley’s work built on a long history of excavation in what is a
particularly striking cave – one that has continually attracted
archaeologists just as it did hunter-gatherers in prehistory.³¹ The
layers dating to around 10,000 BC were formed above those which go back
beyond 50,000 BC and below a sequence of layers that finished just a few
hundred years ago. From the most recent layers, Wadley has discovered
that the cave was a meeting place and ritual centre for the immediate
ancestors of the historically known San Bushmen. One of their many
wall-paintings depicts a medicine dance; another shows a lioness walking
among a herd of eland. Wadley interprets the latter as depicting the
ever-present threat of evil over goodness – the docile, gregarious eland
representing the ideal of human behaviour amongst the San.³²

Back in 8500 BC Lubbock enters the cave, tiptoeing between the hearths
to the rear wall, where he finds some grass to sit on. Soon after he is
settled, further visitors arrive; these call loudly from outside,
causing a sudden silence before everyone rises to greet them. What looks
like a family enters – a couple of young children, three adults, one of
whom carries an infant, an old woman. Following many formal and informal
greetings, everyone is seated again, the new arrivals having spread
themselves between the hearths, each person sitting with their
particular friends or relatives.

The visiting family only remains at Rose Cottage Cave for a couple of
days. When they depart Lubbock notices how the young women are wearing
new beads, while the men carry bone arrow-heads, gifts given in return
for the leather garments they had brought.³³ Lubbock himself remains for
a few more days, spending one of these on a hunt and another searching
for edible plants, before departing very early one morning while the
group remains sleeping within the cave.

Annual gatherings and regular visits between groups, families and
individuals who spend most of the year apart were crucial to the modern
Bushman way of life. It was by these that friendships were renewed,
information shared, marriages and other rites of passage undertaken and
gifts exchanged. The latter was essential, both creating and affirming
bonds of friendship which could be called upon in times of need. Almost
anything could be a gift but the most valued items were stone
arrow-heads and ostrich-egg-shell beads.

Each individual, from the very young to the very old, had their own set
of gift-giving partners, found within their own group and among others.
Some partners may have seen each other just once a year, if that. No two
people had exactly the same set of partners, producing a ‘gift-giving
network’ that stretched for hundreds if not thousands of kilometres
across the landscape.³⁴

When the anthropologist Polly Wiessner studied gift-giving amongst
Kalahari Bushmen in the early 1970s she found that more than two-thirds
of each person’s possessions had been received as gifts from their
gift-giving partners. The remainder had been either made or purchased,
and were destined to be given away.³⁵

This gift-giving network turned out to be crucial to survival in the
Kalahari Desert. With its unpredictable rainfall, every group faced a
constant risk of insufficient food and water. If this did occur, its
members were able to call on help from their gift-giving partners living
elsewhere, as they were obliged to share their food. Wiessner describes
how this worked from her own experiences in 1974. A group of !Kung faced
severe food shortages: high winds throughout the spring had destroyed
the crop of nuts they were hoping to collect, while exceptionally heavy
rainfall had led to unusually tall grass, making snaring difficult and
scattering the larger game. By August the !Kung were spending their time
making handicrafts to serve as gifts and learning from passing visitors
about conditions elsewhere. By September, the group had begun to
disperse, people reporting that they wished to visit relatives ‘because
they missed them and wanted to do gift-giving’. Within two weeks, half
of the population had departed, scattering thinly among other groups and
relieving the pressure on those who remained.

Wadley believes that those who occupied Rose Cottage Cave at 10,000 BC
were also concerned with gift-giving. As from 12,000 BC Rose Cottage
Cave and other archaeological sites start to contain items that would
have been ideal as gifts, notably bone arrow-heads and ostrich-egg-shell
beads. It is no coincidence, Wadley thinks, that these appear in greater
numbers just when people began to colonise the interior landscapes of
South Africa – something reflected in the appearance of so many scatters
of ‘Oakhurst’ tools. By having the security of gift-giving partners,
people could risk exploring new landscapes and settle in those where
sudden food shortages might arise.³⁶

Lubbock has now travelled some 400 kilometres to the fourth cave of his
South African tour, the last before he returns to the Western Cape. This
is Boomplaas Cave, located today in a limestone crag 60 metres above the
floor of the Cango valley. Perched on a rock outside, Lubbock admires
the view across the valley floor, and then once more opens Prehistoric
Times.

Hilary Deacon, now at the University of Stellenbosch, South Africa, made
a search for a cave like Boomplaas during the early 1970s. He wanted to
excavate one that had deposits covering from at least 100,000 years ago
to recent times; he also wanted a cave that contained well-preserved
hearths, animal bones and other organic remains. Boomplaas almost fitted
the bill – its earliest deposits were ‘only’ 80,000 years old and so
Deacon had to dig elsewhere to go back in time beyond that date.³⁷

Boomplaas provides valuable information about the changes in environment
and human lifestyles as the Pleistocene reached its end and the Holocene
began. But it is the most recent layers excavated by Deacon that are
relevant to this history. Deacon found that burnt sheep dung formed the
uppermost layers, a consequence of herders who used the cave as a byre
during the last few hundred years. Such people were once described as
‘Hottentots’ and it is these that Lubbock now reads about in Prehistoric
Times.³⁸

For his account of the Hottentots, Victorian John Lubbock had drawn on a
book written by a man called Kolben that aspired to be a history of the
Cape. It contained the now familiar insults applied to so many of the
‘modern savages’ described in Prehistoric Times. The Hottentots were ‘in
many respects the filthiest people in the world’; one of their customs
was to confine old people within a solitary hut where, ‘without any one
to comfort or assist ‘em’ they would ‘die either of age or hunger, or be
devoured by some wild beast’; unwanted children were – according to
Kolben – ‘buried alive’. Other customs were described as quite unfit for
publication.

Victorian John Lubbock was evidently concerned about the accuracy of
these claims, and noted their incompatibility with earlier descriptions
of the Hottentots as ‘the most friendly, the most liberal, and the most
benevolent people to one another that ever appeared on earth’. Having
visited so many ‘savages’ of the prehistoric world, modern John Lubbock
knew that his namesake was quite right to question this latest barrage
of Victorian racist abuse. He was more interested in the author’s
careful descriptions of Hottentot clothes and iron-working, of the
animal bladders and baskets of tightly platted rushes they had used to
store their milk.

Although the date is 8000 BC, similar containers are already being used
within Boomplaas Cave, not for milk but for water and gathered plants.
Domesticated animals and pastoralists will not arrive for another seven
thousand years at least. Lubbock closes his book and takes shelter in
the cave as rain begins to fall. On the floor are a scatter of mats made
from tightly woven bulrushes, among which is the familiar clutter of a
hunter-gatherer camp – several hearths, partly worked hides, stone
flakes, baskets, bowls and firewood.³⁹ Underneath lie many layers of
compacted earth made from washed-in silt and sand, weathered rock from
the cave wall, and the decomposed remnants of mats, baskets and bags.
This in turn covers the debris of those who used the cave before the
Holocene began, hunting eland, Cape horse and giant buffalo when
grasslands covered the Cango valley.

That had been before thorny shrubs and trees replaced those grasslands
at 12,000 BC. And so when, in 8000 BC, a party of hunters arrive in
Boomplaas Cave, they carry the partly butchered carcass of a small
antelope that had lived by browsing in the bush rather than grazing upon
the ground. It is a steenbok, an animal that can still be found in the
Cango valley today. As this and other browsers spread with the new
scrubland, the grazers had to leave to find their food elsewhere.⁴⁰

Some, such as the white rhinoceros and black wildebeest, managed to do
so and continue to survive today. But six species became extinct: the
Cape horse, giant buffalo, giant hartebeest, Bond’s springbok, the
southern springbok and a large warthog-like pig. Richard Klein from the
University of Chicago – who has studied the bones from South African
caves for more than thirty years – has questioned whether the demise of
these species can be attributed to the change of climate and its impact
on vegetation alone.⁴¹

One of Klein’s main concerns is that the fated species had already
survived several previous periods of equivalent climate change.
Moreover, as several survived to 10,000 BC, there seems to be a gap of
at least two thousand years between the spread of woodland and their
extinction. Bond’s springbok had survived even longer, still being
hunted at 6500 BC in light of bones found within another cave. And so
Klein thinks that the hunter-gatherers of Boomplaas Cave and elsewhere
played a role in the ultimate demise of these animals.

They need not have done very much – merely killing a few of each species
every year might have had a devastating effect on populations that were
already in a fragile state. The switch from spear hunting to the use of
bow and arrow might been a significant factor. So too might the
expansion of the human population into the interior, through the
gift-giving network. During previous climatic periods, when the
grasslands were diminished by the spread of trees, species such as the
Cape horse and giant buffalo might have survived in the interior free
from the threat of human predation. But by 12,000 BC such refugia had
been lost in the face of the new expansion of human settlement. There
was now no safe place to wait until more amenable conditions returned.

Thus, the situation in South Africa seems similar to that of North
America where extinctions were far more extensive in scope. In both
regions, environmental change alone appears insufficient to have caused
extinction. So too was the extent of human hunting. But their combined
impact seems to have been as fatal for the South African Cape horse and
giant buffalo as it was for the North American mammoth and shasta ground
sloth.

From Boomplaas Cave Lubbock heads west, travelling back to the cave in
Elands Bay where his South African tour began. As he does so, the
climate begins to change again. After at least eight thousand years of
increasing rainfall, this trend was reversed, possibly with a return to
summer rainfall alone – something that inhibited vegetation growth and
caused the retreat of some browsing animals from the margins of their
range.

When Lubbock arrives at Elands Bay Cave in 7000 BC, not only has the
coastal plain entirely disappeared but also much of the rocky shore
where he had watched molluscs, seaweed and crabs being gathered. Little
more than an unproductive strip of sand remains. While he had been
travelling inland, the sea level had continued to rise, reaching three
metres higher than it does today. The cave is now isolated upon a
headland, exposed to Atlantic gales and frequently smothered in fog,
while the nearest source of freshwater lies some twenty kilometres away.

Elands Bay Cave is deserted inside.⁴² A layer of blown sand covers the
shells, animal bones and other debris that had once accumulated upon its
floor. A pile of turds tells Lubbock that the cave is now used by
animals; the sediments at its rear have been disturbed by a jackal’s
den. Lubbock sits upon the cold, damp floor, not surprised that people
have left to live elsewhere. Neither was John Parkington when he found a
chronological gap in the otherwise continuous use of Elands Bay Cave. He
decided that people had gone to live inland where freshwater could
readily be found.

With no one to watch and no light by which to read, Lubbock recalls what
else is happening in the world close to this date in human history. In
Jericho a young man is plastering the skull of his father, while at Nea
Nikomedeia in Greece, the first farmers are clearing the land. At the
other end of Europe, hunter-gatherers are roasting hazelnuts on a tiny
Scottish island. A stampede of bison is taking place at Horner on the
Great Plains of North America, while pumpkins are being gathered in the
Oaxaca valley and vicuña herded in the Andes. On the other side of the
world, the rock-faces of Arnhem Land in Australia are being painted with
rainbow serpents and yams. In East Asia wild rice is being sown at
Pengtoushan and pig traps are being dug in the Tama Hills of Japan. At
Damdama on the Ganges plain, a turtle is being hauled from a nearby
river.

Lubbock thinks about the newly settled farmers who are building
mud-brick houses at Mehrgarh and Jeitun, and those of a longer standing
who are making pots and arguing with visiting traders in the town of
Yarim Tepe. But his thoughts are washed away as heavy rain begins to
fall and Atlantic waves crash upon the shore, throwing salt-laden spray
into the cave.⁴³ It is now completely dark. As there is no chance that
moonlight will arrive on this wild stormy night, Lubbock huddles down to
sleep on the cold cave floor.

Elands Bay Cave was destined to remain unused for another 4,000 years –
a period in which the whole of the Western Cape would also be
effectively deserted. It would only be after 2500 BC, once the sea level
had fallen back, that this cave once again became a favoured shelter for
those gathering molluscs on the shore.

50 Thunderbolts in the Tropics

Hunter-gatherers in Central and West Africa; environmental change in East Africa, 7000–5000 BC

John Lubbock takes shelter from relentless rain below a massive granite
boulder. It is perched upon a jumble of rocks and covers the entrance of
a small cave in which three other men are sitting, huddled around a
small hearth. The date is 7000 BC and Lubbock is in western Nigeria. The
cave will become known as Iwo Eleru – a local Yoruban name meaning ‘the
rock of ashes’. Leaning against a wall, Lubbock watches the men eating
shoots taken from the surrounding forest; these are pulled through their
teeth to strip away the flesh, leaving a tangle of stringy remnants on
the floor. The men remain inside the cave, eating and talking until the
rain begins to ease. And then, after a brief exchange of words, they
disappear into the trees outside.

As at the start of his South Asian travels, Lubbock’s glimpse of this
region’s Stone Age inhabitants must remain frustratingly brief because
few archaeological remains are known between 20,000 and 5,000 BC. Sites
of any sort are hard to find; and the ephemeral fireplaces and scatters
of stone tools typically left by hunter-gatherers are near impossible to
locate. Aerial survey cannot penetrate the rainforest canopy to identify
monuments or ruins, while any items on the ground are hidden beneath
thick vegetation. The great majority of campsites, once located on
riverbanks, will have been either washed away by floods or buried by
alluvium. And so archaeologists are largely dependent upon the chance
finds by farmers and those making roads or digging wells.

Caves within the rockier parts of the forest provide the best chance of
finding prehistoric occupation. But as airborne dust is scarce and as
these caves are formed from resilient granite, they lack the floor
deposits needed to seal and preserve human debris left within. Iwo Eleru
is the one exception.

In the late 1960s Thurstan Shaw, then Professor of Archaeology at Ibadan
University, wished to examine the late Stone Age archaeology of Nigeria:
that coming after 15,000 BC. He was particularly interested in the
antiquity of numerous ground stone axes that had been coming to light as
stray finds throughout the West African forests. These were known
locally as ‘thunderbolts’ and were frequently placed by local priests in
venerated positions, such as on altars to Sango, the god of thunder.¹
Suspecting that they were in fact products of the Stone Age, Shaw began
to search for a suitable cave to excavate, eventually finding Iwo Eleru
which was located midway between the southern coast and the northern
edge of the tropical forest.²

It had only ever been used as a temporary shelter. Each occupation is
likely to have lasted little more than a few days and was separated by a
long interval, perhaps of a century or more, from the next. The most
recent had been by farmers from the local village 10 kilometres away –
it was ashes from their fireplaces that gave the cave its name. Below
this modern debris were pieces of pottery and fragments of axes – the
former first being made around 3000 BC, the latter around one thousand
years earlier. Both the pottery and the axe fragments were found in
layers containing microliths and scrapers, together with a large number
of cores and waste flakes. These continued right to the base of the cave
deposit, dated at c. 10,000 BC. And so the chipped-stone technology
remained unchanged throughout the Holocene.

Other than the appearances of axes and pottery, the only evidence Shaw
discovered for changing lifestyles came from a gradual increase in the
use of chert for tool manufacture. This stone is much better for flaking
than the locally available quartz, but the nearest source would have
been at least 50 kilometres from the cave. Only a tiny proportion of the
tools in the lowest levels were made of chert; in the upper levels it
was being used for more than 30 per cent of the tools. This could mean
any number of things: that people were travelling longer distances in
the course of their hunting and plant gathering, that trade networks had
been established, that special trips were being made to collect chert
nodules. Without more evidence it is hard to know which – if any – of
these explanations is correct.

The only other discovery at Iwo Eleru was a poorly preserved male burial
in the lower layers, dating to a few centuries before Lubbock’s
arrival.³ Shaw was unable to locate a burial pit or any items
deliberately placed within the grave; he thinks the body had been left
tightly contracted and covered with a thin layer of soil alone. The
man’s teeth are described as being ‘worn right down to the gums in great
sweeping slopes and scallops, simply leaving little crescents of enamel
round the edge’.⁴ This is, in fact, a characteristic of the dental
remains of hunter-gatherers in equatorial environments arising from
pulling fibrous and sand-covered plants between the teeth to strip off
the fleshy edible parts.

At the LGM, Iwo Eleru had been surrounded by savannah while the West
African rainforest was restricted to small refugia along the coast and
banks of major rivers. From 12,000 BC onwards, increased rainfall and
temperature caused the forest spread to reach far beyond its current
boundaries. Today there is a gap in an otherwise east–west continuity of
West African forest, known as the Dahomey Gap, falling in the Republics
of Togo and Benin. The forest on either side has an identical range of
animals and plants, indicating that they had once been joined.
Elsewhere, the Early Holocene extent of the forest is evident from tree
stumps of rainforest species found within buried soils of savannah that
lie beyond the forest boundaries of today.⁵

Given the lack of animal bones or pollen grains in the deposits within
Iwo Eleru, it is near impossible to tell exactly when the cave became
surrounded by forest as it is today. The microliths and scrapers from
Iwo Eleru are essentially the same as those found at sites in East and
South Africa, such as Lukenya Hill and Rose Cottage Cave, sites known to
have been in open woodland or savannah. Shaw suggested that the
appearance of ground stone axes some time after 4000 BC might mark the
date when Iwo Eleru became enclosed by rainforest, requiring its
occupants to fashion new tools. But despite this, it seems unlikely that
the shelter had remained in open savannah until then. Pollen diagrams
from Lake Bosumtwi in Ghana suggest that substantial re-forestation had
already begun by 10,000 BC.⁶

When making his journey to Iwo Eleru from Elands Bay Cave, Lubbock had
initially revisited localities through which he had passed on his
southward journey. He returned to Pomongwe Cave in the Matopos Hills of
modern-day Zimbabwe where, at 15,000 BC, he had encountered the two
hunters making an overnight camp. On his second visit to the cave, a
party of women and children were spread around nearby bushes and seemed
to be gathering berries. Lubbock paused to help and found that they were
collecting caterpillars instead – altogether more nutritious. The bushes
were heavily laden, allowing the women and children to eat as they
worked and still fill the baskets they carried. These were then taken to
the cave and emptied into storage pits at its rear, sealed under leaves
weighted by stones.

The cave had been transformed since Lubbock’s previous visit eight
thousand years ago, having become a key settlement for the many families
who now regularly hunted and gathered in the now well-watered Matopos
Hills. Firewood and substantial piles of grass were stacked by the walls
to use as bedding, while bunches of dried flowers and herbs hung from
pegs. Near the entrance a large spread of glowing embers was turning to
ash, protected from the outside breeze by a brushwood windbreak. This
seemed to be a fireplace for communal use; around the walls there were
smaller, private-looking hearths. The floor was covered by mats on which
several craft activities had evidently taken place – pieces of cut
leather, ostrich-egg shell, bone needles and grinding stones were
scattered around. The women and children now sat on the mats to await
the return of a hunting party. Lubbock looked inside the storage pits at
the back of the cave. One was lined with roots and contained the
berries, another was empty but had been fitted with a tortoise carapace,
presumably to keep its contents dry.

From Pomongwe Cave, Lubbock retraced his past steps into the western
Kalahari; Drotsky’s Cave was empty, although there was recent debris on
the floor. Fifty kilometres further north, however, he found a gathering
of several families within the three striking Tsolido hills – known
today as male, female and child. The people were based in an
impressive-looking cave with a large overhanging roof, within which
several racks of catfish were being dried, reminding Lubbock of Wadi
Kubbaniya at 20,000 BC. He soon discovered that these Kalahari people
were also catching spawning fish in a nearby lake immediately after the
annual flood. Lubbock spent a few days fishing, once again using his
hands to scoop docile fish from the shallows, although his new
companions preferred to use spears tipped with barbed bone points.

Almost all the other activities under way at this cave were familiar to
Lubbock. Women sat in small groups in the open air making
ostrich-eggshell beads and pounding various roots. Microliths and
scraping tools were made and used to repair hunting weapons and to clean
hides, new bone points were carved from the leg bones of antelope. The
one new thing for Lubbock – in Africa at least – was to watch pigments
being prepared. Lumps of white calcrete and red ochre were ground into a
fine powder which was then mixed with water in tortoise-carapace bowls.
Human figures and enigmatic signs were painted on the wall of what would
appropriately become known as White Paintings Rockshelter.

After leaving the Tsolido hills, the final leg of Lubbock’s journey to
Iwo Eleru took him into the newly expanded rainforest of the Congo
basin. Much of his time was spent on one river or another, having either
‘hitched’ a canoe ride or ‘borrowed’ a craft himself. He enjoyed being
back in the tropics, feeling as overwhelmed by the extravagance of
nature as when he had travelled in Southeast Asia and the Amazon. Great
rapids foamed below high peaks with a beauty matched first by the vivid
hornbills and kingfishers, and then by the orange, crimson and pure
white blooms found upon the forest floor.

Wildlife, from hippos and gorillas to mangrove flies and mosquitoes,
surrounded Lubbock in profusion. The only people he saw were in tiny
groups along the riverbanks; they had always disappeared into the forest
before he could reach them or paddled swiftly downstream in their
canoes. Apart from a lost or discarded stone-bladed knife and a scatter
of flakes from quartz nodules at a locality we now call Besongo, on the
bank of the Busira River, they left no other traces.

As elsewhere in western Africa, archaeologists have had a frustrating
time in the Congo basin – particularly when it comes to establishing how
long people may have been living within the heart of the tropical
forests. Although two stone flakes were discovered in 1945, the first
formal report of stone tools from the Congo basin wasn’t made until
forty years later.⁷ The Dutch archaeologist Johannes Preuss conducted a
systematic survey of the area in 1982–3, working with the National
Museum of Zaire, as the region was then called. He worked around the
shore of Lake Tumba, immediately next to the River Congo itself, and
then along the banks of several tributary rivers in search of
archaeological remains. The riverbanks were particularly challenging to
survey, being either flat and entirely covered in vegetation, or open
but very steep. Nevertheless, after surveying more than 1,000 kilometres
of riverbank, nineteen scatters of artefacts were found to add to those
from the lakeshore. Besongo on the Busira River was one of the most
productive sites – it provided ninety-four flakes. Many others produced
no more than two or three pieces.

The only clue to the age of the quartz flakes, and the few pieces
chipped into scraping tools, is that they must be younger than the
sediments on which they were found. Preuss dated these to 25,000 BC.⁸
But whether the quartz flakes indicate that people were in the Congo
basin at 20,000 BC, 15,000, 10,000 or 5,000 BC, or even just a few
centuries ago, remains unknown. Their age makes a substantial difference
to the type of lifestyle we should associate with them; if from 15,000
BC or earlier, for example, people would have been living within a
savannah rather in than the rainforest habitat in which the stone flakes
were discovered. Whatever their age, the people who discarded them were
evidently travelling long distances as the nearest source of the stone
they used is a least 200 kilometres away.

Another set of problems faced Lawrence Robbins, of Michigan State
University, and his colleagues when analysing the finds from their
excavations at White Paintings Rockshelter in the Tsodilo hills of
Botswana.⁹ Their work had revealed a remarkable depth of deposits,
demonstrating that humans had been using the cave for at least 100,000
years. It is named after the great number of white paintings that cover
its walls, including depictions of an elephant, snakes and figures on
horseback. The latter cannot be much more than a century old as horses
were not seen in the Kalahari until the mid-1800s. Local traditions
attributed the paintings to recent Bushmen – a situation quite different
to the paintings of Arnhem Land, Australia, and Bhimbetka, India, which
were made before living memory and attributed to supernatural beings.
Nevertheless, some of the paintings in White Paintings Rockshelter might
be much older than others; those close to ground level are faded and
were probably made when the cave floor was considerably lower than it is
today.

Below the most recent cave deposits, Robbins and his colleagues found a
layer of sand packed with catfish bones, microliths, ostrich-egg-shell
fragments, grinding stones and barbed bone points. Unfortunately Robbins
is unable to date this layer more accurately than placing it between
21,000 and 3000 BC. The problem is that the large quantities of
fishbones suggest nearby lakes and ponds, the last of which are
documented between 19,000 and 14,000 BC. The Tsodilo hills are supposed
to have been quite dry in the Holocene, just as they are today, with the
nearest opportunities for fishing 45 kilometres away in the Okavango
River. But radiocarbon dates indicate that the fishing had taken place
between 9000 and 3000 BC, which fits with the style of the stone and
bone artefacts.¹⁰

Robbins’s dilemma is exacerbated by the strong likelihood of artefacts
moving within the soft sand of the cave floor: fishbones and pieces of
charcoal might have been dragged up or down by rodents in their burrows.
This has in fact been demonstrated by one fragment of bone harpoon which
was found to match another discovered 20 centimetres lower down. That
depth of sand is likely to have taken 4,500 years to accumulate; it
might have easily been penetrated by many other bones and charcoal
fragments.¹¹

The date at which a series of storage pits were made in the rear of
Pomongwe Cave in the Matopos Hills is also rather vague. These were
excavated in the early 1960s by Cran Cooke who undertook pioneering
archaeological work in what was then Rhodesia. He found thick layers of
ash within the entrance area and stone footings to suggest a
windbreak.¹² The pits contained a host of interesting finds: one had
charred caterpillars; several had been lined with grass, another with a
tortoise carapace; one further pit contained the roots of a poisonous
plant (Boophone disticha), presumably having been used to deter insects
from attacking its original contents. Another pit had been used as a
fireplace and still contained a heavily burnt piece of cord made from
twisted bark fibre, preserved because it had been protected below a slab
of stone.

When Nicholas Walker of Uppsala University made a new study of Pomongwe
in the early 1980s, he had access to Cooke’s unpublished notebooks.
Several radiocarbon dates were available, ranging from 13,000 to 2000
BC. These were not always found to be in the correct order: a layer was
dated to be younger than one directly above it, or quite different dates
came from the same layer, or their aged seemed inappropriate for the
types of tools they purported to date. Walker decided that the pits most
likely dated to about 4000 BC, but the evidence remains contentious.¹³
If he is correct, it does not preclude the possibility that caterpillars
had also been collected three thousand years earlier when Lubbock had
made his second visit to Pomongwe Cave.

By travelling into the Central and then West African rainforests,
Lubbock was unable to appreciate the dramatic change that the lakes of
East Africa had undergone. When he had passed along the shores of Lakes
Turkana and Victoria at the LGM, the water was at levels far below that
found today. Many smaller lakes had disappeared entirely. By 7000 BC the
precise opposite was the case: for several thousand years the lakes had
been far exceeding their present-day levels. Just as the increased
rainfall after 12,000 BC enabled the rainforest to expand further than
it does today, so too did it fill the lake basins of East Africa to
unprecedented levels.¹⁴

The new shorelines are still quite visible as bands of shells and lake
sediment stranded high and dry many metres above the present water
level. Lake Turkana was 85 metres higher than it is now, doubling its
current size and causing it to overflow its basin and feed water into
the Nile river system. Numerous small basins became entirely flooded;
many of the small lakes now found in the Rift Valley of southern
Ethiopia had joined together to make one massive lake which spilled into
the Awash River.

The lake edges had evidently proved attractive places for fishing as
several sites containing microliths and barbed bone points are found
around the exposed shorelines of Lake Turkana. One such site is Lowasera
in Kenya, where the barbed points have thin grooves around their base,
indicating that lines had once been attached. Fishbones, as well as
those of crocodile and hippopotamus, were found.¹⁵

After 12,000 BC, tropical Africa enjoyed the wettest period of its
recent history, perhaps receiving 50 per cent more rain than it does
today.¹⁶ The ultimate cause was a northward shift of the monsoon system
which brought rainfall to the tropics while depriving more southerly
areas such as the Kalahari.¹⁷ This situation was not to last, however.
Soon after 3000 BC, rainfall was reduced once again; lake levels fell
and the forests retreated to their present positions. North Africa had a
similar rainfall history, which temporarily gave the Sahara a very
different landscape to that which we know today. This is what Lubbock
will discover on the penultimate leg of his journey around the world.

51 Sheep and Cattle in the Sahara

The development of pastoralism in North Africa, 9600–5000 BC

The date is 6800 BC – no more than two hundred years have passed since
Lubbock left Iwo Eleru and headed north into what is now the Sahara
Desert. As he walked, the rainforest thinned and he encountered many
parties of hunter-gatherers, resting within their campsites and caves.
But Lubbock wasted little time in reaching the eastern extent of the
Sahara’s central massif, known today as the Tadrart Acacus. This is a
mass of ancient sandstone and schist rising from a surrounding sea of
sand to both east and west.

The wadis of the Acacus are dry when Lubbock arrives, but the region is
evidently well watered by summer rains. Rather than empty sand, the
cliffs and crags are surrounded by a scrubby savannah, with tamarisk and
acacia trees clustering around shallow lakes and ponds. The cliff-like
sides of the wadis house numerous caves and rockshelters, outside of
which people have made their camps. Like many that Lubbock has seen
around the world there are windbreaks and small brushwood shelters,
fireplaces, grinding stones, piles of stone flakes, the debris from
making baskets and cleaning hides. Lubbock watches hunters returning
empty-handed from nearby crags; the women, who carry baskets of seed
knocked from the heads of wild grass, have been more productive. At
first, life seems to have changed little since Lubbock had begun his
global journey at Ohalo. But he soon changes his mind when he visits two
caves, both of which have something strikingly different to offer.¹

The first appears as little more than a recess below an extensive
overhang of the cliff. The ground outside is quite clean of human
debris, and Lubbock notices that people seem to give the cave’s entrance
a wide berth as they pass along the wadi. Inside, the floor is bare:
solid rock with a few patches of wind-blown sand. On the western wall
there is a painting – a procession of schematic figures positioned along
a wavy line. Painted in outline alone, the figures have exaggerated and
rounded heads and wear head-dresses decorated with parallel bands and
feathers. All face east, some seemingly in positions of worship –
bending over or with arms raised and opened wide. Two figures are
anomalous; one is painted solid red and the other stands upon his head
with legs wide apart.²

On leaving this cave, which will become known as Uan Muhuggiag, Lubbock
has walked no more than a few kilometres before he passes a second one
that he feels compelled to visit. It has an enormously high and wide
arch-like entrance and is surrounded by a hunter-gatherer camp. A few
occupants are present, sitting in a group and talking animatedly about
some issue that Lubbock does not understand. As he passes, he sees a
vessel filled with water on the ground; the first pottery he has seen
since leaving Yarim Tepe in Mesopotamia. Picking it up, Lubbock runs his
figures over the wavy lines incised on its walls.

On entering the second cave, the smell of dung and urine announces the
presence of sheep. Five of them are penned in the rear; not domestic,
white woolly sheep but wild animals – the same animals, in fact, that
Lubbock had seen hunted from the caves of Tamar Hat and Haua Fteah at
the start of his African travels. They stand on layers of trampled,
hardened dung and nibble the forage stuffed between the stout branches
that restrain them. They are strong, distinguished creatures, but with
bruised and bloodied legs from attempts to escape the pen. Animals under
human control is something else that Lubbock hasn’t yet seen on his
African journey.

As he turns to leave the stinking cave, Lubbock notices paintings of
round-headed figures similar to those he has just been looking at. These
are faded and partly covered with dirt. Uan Afuda, as this cave is known
today, has evidently lost any religious significance it might once have
had. In the place of gods and ghosts are sheep – less spiritual beings
but of more practical benefit in times of need.³

Uan Afuda was excavated in 1993–4 by Mauro Cremaschi and Savino di
Lernia from the Universities of Milan and Rome, who found that both the
cave itself and the area immediately outside had been used as a campsite
from 9500 BC. Several other sites had already been excavated in the
region, and Uan Afuda initially seemed to fit with an existing pattern
of hunter-gatherer base camps in the Acacus and overnight campsites in
the surrounding lowlands. But Uan Afuda contained one very puzzling
find: a 40-centimetre-thick layer of hardened dung in the rear of the
cave, dating to 7000 BC.⁴

This was first thought to derive from wild sheep sheltering in the cave
when it was unoccupied by humans. But after studying the floors of caves
where wild animals shelter in the Acacus today, di Lernia realised that
such animals produce no more than loose and scattered droppings.
Compared to these, the thick, compacted layer of dung in Uan Afuda
seemed unnatural. When excavated, it was found to contain human debris:
chipped stone, lumps of charcoal, butchered bones. It also contained
pollen and fragments from a narrow range of plants including wild
cereals, figs and Echium – a species known for being toxic. This range
of plants could not have accumulated on its own and no animal would have
chosen such a diet.

The animal that had left the dung was identified as the Barbary sheep,
partly by the size and shape of its dung pellets and partly because no
other candidates could be found. A few bones of other species were
excavated – jackal, hartebeest, porcupine – but those from Barbary sheep
were by far the most numerous. And so di Lernia concluded that at around
7000 BC animals had been corralled within the cave and provided with
fodder. Toxic plants such as Echium might have been included to act as a
soporific to keep excitable animals under control – much as modern
Turkish farmers feed their sheep willow leaves when they want to subdue
them.

The management of wild sheep at Uan Afuda Cave arose as a consequence of
fluctuations between relatively wet and dry conditions in the central
Sahara. By 12,000 BC, substantial summer rains had produced freshwater
lakes and plentiful ponds and swamps within and around the Acacus. This
drew both animals and people back to the central Sahara after the
extreme aridity of the LGM; a lifestyle based around hunting Barbary
sheep arose, supplemented by the gathering of plants and tubers. The
first paintings within Uan Afuda, Uan Muhuggiag and other caves were
made at this relatively affluent time – depictions of wild animals that
preceded the round-headed figures that Lubbock had seen upon the walls.

Di Lernia thinks the shift from hunting to the corralling of Barbary
sheep was due to a marked decline in their availability in the wild. As
from 8000 BC – perhaps a little earlier – rainfall began to diminish
once again, ponds dried up and the quantity of vegetation declined.⁵
Several millennia of hunting may well have already severely reduced
numbers of wild animals in and around the Acacus, but even if not, this
return to aridity required a substantial change in human lifestyle.
Rather than abandoning the region as a whole – as earlier inhabitants
had done – people began to exploit a wider range of resources and
started using existing ones in novel ways. The first grinding stones are
found, indicating a greater use of wild grasses which were laborious to
collect and process. The first pottery vessels also appear, their
surfaces decorated with zig-zags and wavy lines. Perhaps their primary
purpose was to make a more effective use of increasingly scarce water
supplies.

The most important innovation, however, was the capture and penning of
Barbary sheep. Slaughter most likely happened only when need arose,
providing an insurance against seasons of drought and potentially scarce
resources. Di Lernia thinks the animals were communally owned, and hence
corralling would not have interfered with the hunter-gatherer sharing
ethic. But the potential, at least, had now arisen for the private
ownership of a valuable resource.

A similar process may have once led to the domestication of goats and
sheep in western Asia. But, as genetic studies have confirmed, the
Barbary sheep never produced a domesticated cousin. This might be
because the slow transition from wild to domestic was halted when the
people of Uan Afuda had to change their lifestyle once again soon after
7000 BC. This date marks the arrival of a new people within their lands,
one who came from the east, bringing a fully domesticated stock – not
sheep but cattle.

Before the cattle herders arrived, the Acacus hunter-gatherers had
developed a distinctive style of art involving the round-headed figures
Lubbock has seen painted on their cave walls. This art has been studied
since the 1950s by Fabrizio Mori of Rome University, whose work
culminated in a magnificent corpus published in 1998.⁶ By painstakingly
recording paintings and engravings made in a variety of styles, Mori
established three successive periods of art before 5000 BC: large wild
animals, ‘round heads’, and ‘pastoral’ in which cattle predominate.
Traces of pigments on grinding stones, depictions of Barbary sheep and
the absence of cattle from the ‘round-head’ paintings, led Mori to
believe that these were made between 9500 and 7000 BC.⁷

Mori believes that the round-headed figures in Uan Muhuggiag are
worshipping at sunrise, and that the wavy line below depicts water
flowing in the wadi. There are other ‘round-head’ paintings within the
cave, one of which includes two elongated shapes that appear to be
wrapped corpses ready for burial. An actual burial was indeed found
close to the entrance of the cave – a man lying on his back with his
hands drawn up to his face as if in self-defence.⁸ Mori thinks that Uan
Muhuggiag, which was kept quite clean of human debris, had been a place
of deep religious significance for those who hunted and then corralled
Barbary sheep in the Acacus.

The date is 6700 BC and Lubbock stands amidst a crowd that has quickly
gathered in the vicinity of Uan Afuda. They stare at a boy who has
appeared upon the crest of a nearby dune. He, however, is of less
interest than the cattle by his side. These look like the animals
Lubbock had seen at Yarim Tepe in Mesopotamia, having flat backs rather
than the distinctive hump of the South Asian Zebu that became
domesticated at Mehrgarh.⁹ Although the people who use Uan Afuda and
other caves have known about the westward spread of cattle herders for
several years, this is the first time the new pastoral lifestyle has
been seen within the Acacus itself.

The boy – about ten years of age – is joined by a couple of older
youths. For several minutes the hunter-gatherers and cattle herders
stare at each other, before the boys turn on their heels and disappear
behind the dune. The crowd disperses to campfires and caves where they
will no doubt discuss how they should respond to these new people within
their midst. Lubbock already knows what he has to do: he must now visit
this new world of African pastoralism that will continue in the
continent long after his global tour has come to an end.

He travels due east through a landscape of scrubby woodland and
semi-desert punctuated by shallow seasonal lakes.¹⁰ An abandoned
campsite is soon encountered – small rings of stones that had been used
as fireplaces¹¹ and a variety of domestic debris including the bones of
butchered gazelle and hare. Among this clutter are several standing
stones with rope still attached where cattle had once been tethered, and
most likely will be again.¹²

His next stop is Nabta in the eastern Sahara, a cattle herder’s camp
located some 2,000 kilometres from Uan Afuda and no more than 100
kilometres from Wadi Kubbaniya in the Nile valley where he had once
gathered tubers at the LGM.

Lubbock arrives at dusk on a summer’s day in 6700 BC, pushing his way
through knee-high shrubs to find about a dozen circular and oblong huts
clustered by the edge of a shallow lake. A small herd of cattle are
settled upon the ground within an enclosure made by a thorn-branch
fence. A group of men and adolescent boys are sitting outside the huts
enjoying the evening sun, while the women are talking in little groups
around the huts and the children are playing near by. As Lubbock
approaches, fires are lit and the dusk suddenly turns into night. He is
so exhausted that he enters the nearest hut and falls asleep upon a rush
mat on its floor.¹³

The lowing of cattle as they are led from the village for grazing wakes
Lubbock before dawn.¹⁴ His resting place turns out to be a cooking hut;
next to him a woman is preparing food. She is tall and sleek, her body
draped with a finely cut hide and her black hair tied inside a scarf.
She tends to a pottery vessel half buried within the sandy floor amidst
hot embers which heat the gruel-like mixture inside. All the hut
contains, apart from this hearth and several mats, is a small stack of
firewood and a bundle of herbs hanging from the roof. The hut itself is
a simple but robust construction – a circle of tamarisk branches stuck
into the ground, tied at the apex and covered by animal skins to make a
dome. Lubbock watches the woman ladle the gruel into several dried gourd
bowls. She takes them outside where her husband, mother and children are
waiting to eat.

Lubbock spends the day watching life at this herders’ camp. He
encounters this elegant woman again within a nearby oblong hut which has
niches for sleeping along its sides and beds made from stacks of thin
twigs and hides. She is squatting by the fire, singing to herself as she
waits for some lumps of charcoal to begin smouldering within a hearth.
Once they give off a strong aromatic scent, she drops the charcoal into
a couple of buckets made from hide stretched across wooden frames. It is
swilled around and then emptied back into the hearth thus preparing the
buckets to receive that morning’s milk.

Soon after sunrise the cattle return, led by several young men and boys.
There are twenty animals in all but the herd disperses into four smaller
groups, each owned by one of the families at the camp. It is the job of
the young girls to lead their calves from a small enclosure and allow
them to suckle for a short time before the women come to milk the cows
into the fumigated buckets.

Once this has been done, the family gathers in a circle by the oblong
hut, each holding a cup made from half a gourd. Lubbock sits with them
and observes that no one drinks until the woman’s husband has spoken,
perhaps a prayer or a blessing. Each person in turn then scoops up a
little milk and begins to drink.

After everyone has fed and rested the boys take the cattle to find more
grazing; as it is the wet season there is a plentiful supply of both
grass and nourishing acacia pods nearby. The calves are fed with fodder
and taken by the girls to drink at the water’s edge, but otherwise
remain within the camp. Lubbock does likewise, following the woman
around as she takes surplus milk into her cooking hut and performs
domestic chores. The sandy hut floors are sprinkled with water to guard
against dust; water and firewood are collected; aromatic branches for
cleaning the milk-buckets gathered, along with bark fibres and roots for
the repair of mats. The woman’s aged mother helps with the work and
keeps an eye on her two young children who are continually on the verge
of crawling into the open fireplace.

A little later, Lubbock finds himself at the lakeside watching the
children at play: hunting lizards, throwing stones, playing the role of
a herd owner and his wife. They all look under ten years of age, which
seems to be when their adult role begins.

As the older boys and men who are not required to herd the cattle have
left to hunt gazelle and check their snares, the camp becomes very quiet
during the midday heat. Children rest while adults undertake their tasks
within the shade. Old men engage in rope-making and leatherwork, the
women knot roots into mats. In the late afternoon Lubbock helps with
cleaning and smoking the milk pots in preparation for the return of the
cattle.

As the day draws to a close, any available young men leave to meet the
herdsmen and help bring the cattle home. These are milked once again
before it becomes too dark for manual work, and then the men are joined
by visitors from nearby camps who bring some leaves to chew. The women
and children initially hang around listening to the conversation of the
men and then make their own gatherings for gossip and story-telling.
People leave one by one to find their beds. Lubbock returns to the
cooking hut where he again sleeps upon the floor.

Whether Lubbock would have actually seen domesticated cattle at Nabta
and enjoyed a day such as this – similar to that of recent cattle
herders in eastern Africa – are matters of some dispute. The site was
excavated by the same team that worked at Wadi Kubbaniya: the Combined
Prehistoric Expedition led by Fred Wendorf, Angela Close and Romuald
Schild. Several sites were discovered around the ancient lake deposits
of Nabta between 1974 and 1977. One of these – named as E-75-6 –
provided particularly rich collections of plant remains and animal
bones. It was further examined between 1990 and 1992 when the huts and
hearths on which Lubbock’s visit is based were discovered. Wells were
also found, suggesting that people eventually chose to remain at Nabta
throughout the winter months when the lake would have been quite dry.

The most important discovery was cattle bones, some of which dated to
9000 BC when no more than short-term camps were made beside the lake
during the rainy season.¹⁵ Wendorf and his colleagues also found cattle
bones of a similar date at other desert sites, notably Bir Kiseiba,
fifty kilometres to the north-east of Nabta.¹⁶ Neither the shape nor the
size of these bones precluded the possibility that they came from wild
cattle. But Wendorf and his colleagues thought the landscape around
these sites would have been far too dry for them to survive. All the
other animals represented in their bone collections – gazelle, hare,
tortoise and jackal – were small in size and had adapted to desert
conditions. Unlike such species, cattle need to drink every day and
would therefore have required human assistance to survive in the eastern
Sahara.

The significance of this claim is that it makes the date of cattle
domestication in North Africa earlier than that of western Asia,
generally agreed at around 7500 BC. Before the excavation of Nabta and
Bir Kiseiba there had been a consensus that cattle herding spread into
North Africa from western Asia at around 7000 BC – just as it had spread
into Europe – followed a millennium later by domesticated sheep and
goats. Consensual views are not easily overturned and Wendorf’s claims
were quickly disputed by several critics, all of whom were acknowledged
experts on cattle domestication.¹⁸ They questioned the date and
identification of the small number of fragmented ‘cattle’ bones that
Wendorf had found; they asked why desert antelopes were absent from the
bone collections if conditions were so severe, and suggested that the
wells were recent constructions accidentally dug into archaeological
sites.

Wendorf and his colleagues countered such criticisms, and so the debate
ground to a halt. It wasn’t until 1996 that new evidence suddenly
appeared, strongly supporting Wendorf’s case – evidence that came from
modern-day cattle. A team of geneticists from Trinity College Dublin,
led by Daniel Bradley and Ronan Loftus, compared the DNA of African and
European cattle to identify when they had last shared a common
ancestor.¹⁹ They measured the extent of difference between the two
samples of DNA, thereby measuring the number of mutations that had
occurred since the two lineages diverged. Using an estimate for the rate
at which new genetic mutations arise, an actual date for divergence
could be proposed.

Bradley and Loftus concluded that the European and African strains had
been evolving quite separately for at least 20,000 years. And so
domestic cattle in Africa must have had a quite independent origin from
those of Europe, which are known to have originated in western Asia.
Thus, African domestication could indeed have occurred by 9000 BC. In
other words, Wendorf’s interpretation of the bones from Nabta and Bir
Kiseiba was entirely validated by the genetics of modern cattle.

It is, however, harder to say precisely where and exactly when the first
African domestic cattle appeared. One possibility is that this occurred
within the Nile valley at some date before 9000 BC.²⁰ It may have been
only with the support of domestic cattle that people were able to spread
into the more precarious landscapes of the eastern Sahara. Although
substantially wetter than today, any lakes were dry throughout the
winter months and drought was frequent. Unfortunately there is a dearth
of archaeological sites in the Nile valley between 12,000 and 9,000 BC.
But as no site from before 6000 BC has yielded bones of domestic
animals, it seems likely that domestication had arisen elsewhere.

This might have been within the eastern Sahara itself. In this scenario,
people had dispersed from the Nile valley to live an entirely
hunting-and-gathering lifestyle on the shores of the desert lakes by
10,000 BC.²¹ Wild cattle might have been available to hunt during
periods of relatively high rainfall – although no such animals are
known. Calves might have been captured, tethered and sheltered as an
insurance against food shortages in future years of drought – in just
the same fashion that people in the Acacus penned up a few wild sheep
within their caves.²²

Over time, as the climate became drier, winter droughts more frequent
and lake waters less reliable, people would have become as dependent
upon their cattle as the cattle were on humans for access to grazing and
water. People would have been able to use their cattle’s milk and blood,
only slaughtering them for meat when conditions became severe. And when
times were desperate, the eastern Sahara must have been abandoned
altogether. In this manner, domestic stock and a new herding lifestyle
could easily have evolved within the eastern Sahara by 9000 BC, to
spread into – rather than out of – the Nile valley at around 5000 BC.
Here, their milk, meat and traction would eventually become one factor
that underpinned the Egyptian civilisation.

Whether domesticated cattle developed in the Nile valley or in the
eastern Sahara, cattle herders were occupying the caves of the Acacus by
6500 BC²³ – some two hundred years after Lubbock’s visit. The original
hunter-gatherers may have moved to live elsewhere or become intermixed
with the eastern migrants. Whatever the case, Uan Muhuggiag and other
sites were used as cattle shelters, their floors becoming coated with
dung, their walls marked with a new and flourishing art that replaced
the round-headed figures. The depictions of cattle serve to remind us
that the animals of pastoralists were far more than merely economic
assets supplying milk, blood, meat and hides: their social lives and
rituals, and some would say their manner of thought itself,²⁴ were
intimately entwined with their beasts.

In 6700 BC Lubbock remained at Nabta throughout the summer and into the
more challenging winter months when the lake dried and a well was dug.
He learned more about the lives of these first African cattle herders –
how they cultivated wild millet and sorghum,²⁵ and how cattle veins were
cut by stone blades to provide nutritious blood. Lubbock participated in
a sequence of ceremonies throughout the year as children passed into
puberty, marriages were made and the elderly passed away.²⁶

Whenever successive years of drought occurred, the Nabta campsite was
abandoned for the Nile valley or surviving lakes elsewhere. Visitors
were constantly arriving, just as the people of Nabta visited their own
friends and relatives elsewhere. Nabta’s population grew and families
left to establish new campsites, gradually edging their way eastwards
towards the Acacus. At around 5800 BC visitors from the north brought a
small flock of sheep and goats, some of which were soon being herded
along with their cattle.²⁷ After a prolonged period of drought the Nabta
basin was abandoned altogether, this occurring at around 4000 BC.²⁸
Lubbock, however, had departed more than a thousand years before –
heading northwards for the Nile delta where not only his African
travels, but his entire journey around the world, would reach its end.

52 Farmers in the Nile Valley and Beyond

The arrival of cereal agriculture in North Africa, 5500–4000 BC

Clouds have been blown to tattered threads and a lone heron flies lazily
across a sky turned vermilion and orange, violet, mauve and the palest
green. John Lubbock stands at the edge of a promontory that rises above
the lowlands as the sun sets behind the reed-beds of the Nile delta on a
summer’s day in 4500 BC. It is silent, other than the faint croaking of
frogs that comes from a distant marsh. Nature has put on a marvellous
display for Lubbock’s last few hours in the prehistoric world. He turns
and looks towards the cluster of dwellings behind him and wonders
whether culture will do the same.

A single plume of smoke spirals upwards from within the village, one
that is known as Merimde to archaeologists today. Lubbock approaches and
steps into a range of cooking smells: roasted meat, mint and bread
baking upon hot stones. He follows an alley that winds between
mud-walled dwellings with floors sunk so low that his shoulders brush
against the reed-thatched roofs. He hears a murmur of voices and a
crackle of flame; turning a corner, he enters a courtyard where the
villagers are gathered, one hundred of them at least. They wear elegant
robes, headscarves, beads and bangles. They sit or stand in groups
around fireplaces where the food is being cooked.

Lubbock stands amidst this crowd as they look expectantly around. And
then another traveller enters the courtyard, this one visible to all and
accompanied by an elderly local man, perhaps his father. As soon as he
appears, a shout goes up. Everyone turns and raises their hands;
formulaic greetings are voiced, followed by more informal words of
welcome to their long-awaited guest. Children rush to him and he is
dragged towards an empty space prepared with cushions beside a fire
where a whole goat has been roasted on a spit. As he sits down, others
do likewise. Mint tea is served. Now that this traveller has arrived,
the feast and celebrations can begin. Lubbock never discovers who he is,
where he has been and why he is so revered. He sneaks a little bread and
sits in a corner, unobserved.

After leaving the cattle herders of Nabta, Lubbock had followed the Nile
valley northwards, retracing on foot the southward journey he had made
by canoe at 20,000 BC. Life for many people had hardly changed at all
since then: wild cattle and hartebeest were still hunted; catfish were
still caught in vast numbers whenever they spawned; wild plants were
still gathered. A few families also engaged in cultivation and managed
small flocks of sheep and goat. But Lubbock remained at a distance from
any campsite or village until he reached a large lake fed by the Nile,
less than fifty kilometres from where the delta began. This was within
what is now called the Fayum Depression where the earliest-known farming
settlements of the Nile valley are found. These were quite unlike the
farming villages that Lubbock had seen in Europe and Asia, as cultivated
crops and domesticated animals remained as mere supplements to a
hunter-gatherer diet.

Lubbock spent two centuries exploring the settlements located around the
lake after his arrival at Fayum in 5000 BC.¹ None had any dwellings more
substantial than brushwood huts or were used for longer than a few
months at any one time. Their occupants had small flocks of sheep, goats
and sometimes cattle that were often taken to graze on the surrounding
plateau. Barley and wheat were sown in small plots on the flood plain of
the lake, and then left unattended while people hunted for game and
fished elsewhere, both at Fayum and beyond. Immediately after the summer
rains, catfish were obtained in large quantities from marshes and pools
that appeared around the lake. When winter arrived, people turned their
attention to the wildfowl, hunting and trapping them within the marsh.

Cereals were cultivated and many wild plant foods were gathered² – often
in such quantities that stores could be made in case of hardships later
in the year. On one occasion Lubbock helped fill about twenty large,
basket-lined pits with cereal grain and other seed. These were located
upon a small but prominent hill some distance from the lakeside
settlement where the people were based in a cluster of simple huts.
Lubbock remained unsure whether the ridge was used to protect the stores
from dampness and the risk of flooding from the lake, or to conceal them
from the many visitors who came to Fayum on journeys up and down the
Nile.

In 4800 BC Lubbock had sat by the lake’s shore and thought about his
journey around the world, from Ohalo through innumerable campsites,
caves, villages and towns as he travelled through 15,000 years of human
history within each continent of the world. Now only the settlement of
Merimde in the Nile delta was left to visit. It was no more than 100
kilometres further north and would be where his travels would end.

The Fayum Depression has been more intensively explored for Neolithic
settlement than any other region in North Africa. Today it contains a
small brackish and saline lake covering about 200 square kilometres.
When the Greek historian Herodotus visited in 450 BC he marvelled at a
lake that must have been ten times greater in extent; at 5000 BC it
covered more than 20,000 square kilometres.² These ancient shorelines
were first mapped in the nineteenth century and then surveyed for
archaeological sites in the 1920s by the Cambridge archaeologists
Gertrude Caton-Thompson and Elizabeth Gardner.³ One of their first finds
was a low, elongated mound which they called Kom W. This proved to be an
accumulation of debris from a mixed hunting-gathering and farming
lifestyle – charcoal, animal bones, fishbones, pot shards, stone
artefacts and so forth. Around its edge, holes had been hollowed in the
bedrock for use as cooking places; some still had cooking pots in place
containing fish and other bones. Signs of architecture were surprisingly
absent – only simple shelters must have been used while the rubbish
mound accumulated over many brief visits to the lakeshore.

Kom K, a slightly smaller site, was discovered a short distance away. It
was just under one kilometre from here that Caton-Thompson and Gardner
made their most spectacular discovery: fifty-six grain silos, dug into a
small ridge, nine of which still contained cereal grains and other
seeds. A further 109 silos were discovered on an adjacent ridge, one of
which provided charred grain dating to just before 5000 BC.⁴

These silos are suggestive of the manner in which recent pastoralists of
East Africa, such as the Kel Tamasheq people of Mali, have stored the
seed from wild grass.⁵ They do so as an insurance against future
scarcity. The grain is dried and stored in leather sacks or holes in the
sand. If the following harvest provides sufficient grain, the stores
will be replaced or replenished. Otherwise it is kept and said to remain
quite edible for two or three years at least.

Following Caton-Thompson and Gardner’s work, several archaeological
projects have been conducted within the Fayum Depression by British,
American and Egyptian teams – including a survey by the Combined
Prehistoric Expedition. As a consequence, many new sites have been
discovered, including dense clusters of lakeside hearths where fish had
once been dried. But no more silos have been found and neither has any
evidence of architecture more substantial than a brushwood hut. Farming
had evidently remained a marginal activity – the wild resources of the
Fayum appear to have been so abundant and diverse that the laborious
work of tending to domestic plants and animals could be largely ignored.

The earliest farming village of the type we know from western Asia, one
with mud-brick buildings and courtyards, is found at Merimde. This site
is located 45 kilometres northwest of Cairo on the western edge of the
Nile delta and rises as a small tell upon a spur of desert jutting into
the flood plain. Discovered and excavated in the 1930s, Merimde then
received further study between 1978 and 1988,⁶ revealing almost 1,000
years of occupation between 5000 and 4100 BC. It had begun life as a
hunter-gatherer campsite, and its early phases suggest a lifestyle much
like that occurring around the Fayum lake, with substantial amounts of
fishing, hunting and gathering of wild plants. Cereal cultivation and
domestic animals were used as mere supplements to the diet. But as it
evolved into a farming village, its cluster of simple hide-covered huts
were eventually replaced by dome-shaped dwellings built with blocks of
mud mixed with straw. Granaries were constructed, and life at Merimde
became structured by the cultivation of grain and management of herds.

Unlike cattle, the ultimate source of the sheep and goats, wheat and
barley at Merimde, Fayum and Nabta was western Asia. There are no signs
that these were independently domesticated in the Nile valley where they
first appear long after farming had become established in the Jordan
valley and beyond. Quite how the sheep, goats and cereals spread
westwards into Africa remains unclear. Arid spells may have driven
pastoralists out of the Negev and Sinai deserts towards the Nile valley.
Excavations at Merimde and Fayum have recovered many types of tools that
are found in western Asia, such as distinctively notched arrow points
and pear-shaped mace heads.⁷ The arts of spinning and weaving also
appear to have spread from the east.

Both the migration of people and of trade are likely to have played a
role in the arrival of Asian-style Neolithic villages in the Nile
valley, just as they did in the spread of farming into Europe. But why
the goats, sheep and cereals took so long to arrive remains unclear. By
5000 BC substantial farming towns were already thriving in Europe and
southern Asia, to where the sheep, goat and cereals of western Asia had
spread at least two thousand years before. That had required migrants or
traders to travel far greater distances than is needed to reach the Nile
delta from the Jordan valley. The Sinai desert may have provided a
barrier, but this could hardly have been more severe than the Iranian
plateau which had to be crossed for farming to reach southern Asia.

Once present in North Africa, farming settlements similar to that of
Merimde soon spread along the Nile valley. They formed small dispersed
communities with huts, storage pits and animal enclosures. It took
another thousand years before more substantial settlements arose, with
mud-brick houses. Soon after 3500 BC the first traces of canals are
found – the beginning of an irrigation system that would be the key to
crop cultivation, on which Egyptian civilisation would be based as it
emerged during the next two thousand years.⁸

The impact of cereal farming and pastoralism on African history is
beyond the chronological remit of this book.⁹ Suffice it to say that as
from 3500 BC North Africa became severely arid, just as it remains
today. Pastoralists were driven from the Sahara and their lifestyle
gradually spread into the south¹⁰ as people migrated into the savannah
landscapes of West, East and South Africa. The indigenous
hunter-gatherers probably played a role by acquiring cattle, sheep and
goats themselves – perhaps by thieving animals, or gaining them by trade
or as bride-wealth when marriages were arranged.

By 3000 BC cattle pastoralism was present in the West African river
basins and on the savannahs around Lukenya Hill; it took at least
another 3,000 years to reach the Cape. This southward dispersal was a
far more challenging affair than the western spread of farming economies
across Europe several thousand years before. The African herders had to
contend with hot, drought-ridden landscapes, a multitude of predators
and – worst of all – a host of parasites and endemic diseases.

A final aspect of African farming that requires brief comment is the
cultivation of indigenous plants, some of which evolved into
domesticated forms. A great many of these have been known from historic
times, including water melons, millet and sorghum from savannah regions,
together with the cola nut, oil palm and cow pea from the forest
margins. But we have almost no idea as to when the cultivation of such
plants began. As Jack Harlan, the acknowledged authority on native
African crops, has explained: ‘African agriculture could be as old as
any or it could be younger than most.’¹¹

A shroud of sweet-smelling smoke hangs over the Merimde courtyard where
the feast has reached its end. A few people are already sleeping around
their fires, others talk quietly while still drinking tea. Lubbock sits
in his corner and watches the other traveller to Merimde rise to say
farewell. He knows the correct procedure: he bows his head, hugs and
kisses his hosts, says the appropriate words. And then he leaves the
courtyard, accompanied by the elderly man with whom he arrived.

It is also time for John Lubbock to depart. Unseen by all, he also bows
his head in thanks, not just to the people of Merimde but to all of
those he has seen in the prehistoric world. He too then leaves the
courtyard, walking alone into the darkness.

Epilogue: ‘The Blessings of Civilisation’

Past, present and future impacts of global warming on human history

In each continent he visited, John Lubbock stepped into the history of
the world at 20,000 BC and left it 15,000 years later. His travels have
enabled me to write a narrative about human lives rather than a
catalogue of archaeological finds. When they began, it was a time of
global economic equality when everyone lived as hunter-gatherers in a
world of extensive ice sheets, tundra and desert. By their end, many
were living as farmers. Some people grew wheat and barley, others rice,
taro or squash. Some lived by herding animals, some by trade and others
by making crafts. A world of temporary campsites had been replaced by
one with villages and towns, a world with mammoths had been transformed
into one with domesticated sheep and cattle. The path towards the huge
global disparities of wealth with which we live today had been set.

Many hunter-gatherers survived but their fate had been sealed when
agriculture began. The new farmers, eager for land and trade, continued
to disrupt hunter-gatherer lives. They were followed by warlords and
then nation-states building empires in every corner of the world. Some
hunter-gatherers survived until recent times by living in those places
where farmers could not go: the Inuit, the Kalahari Bushmen and the
Desert Aborigines. But even these communities are no more, effectively
killed off by the twentieth century.

It is no coincidence that human history reached a turning point during a
period of global warming. All communities were faced with the impact of
environmental change – sudden catastrophic floods, the gradual loss of
coastal lands, the failure of migratory herds, the spread of thick and
often unproductive forest. And along with the problems, all communities
faced new opportunities to develop, discover, explore and colonise.

The consequences were different on each continent. Western Asia, for
example, happened to have a suite of wild plants suited to cultivation.
North America had wild animals that were liable to extinction once human
hunting combined with climate change. Africa was so well endowed with
edible wild plants that this cultivation had not even begun there by
5000 BC. Australia likewise. Europe lacked its own potential cultivars
but it had the soils and climate in which the cereals and animals
domesticated elsewhere would thrive. South America had its vicuña and
North Africa its wild cattle; Mexico its squash and teosinte, the
Yangtze valley its wild rice.

Continents, and regions within continents, also had their own particular
environmental history, defined by their size, shape and place within the
world. The people who lived in Europe and western Asia had the most
challenging roller-coaster ride of environmental change. Those living in
the central Australian desert and the Amazonian forest had the least.
The type of woodland that spread in northern Europe favoured human
settlement, while that in Tasmania caused the abandonment of its
valleys. The melting of the northern ice sheets caused the loss of
coastal plains throughout the world with the exception of the far north,
where precisely the opposite occurred when the land, freed from its
burden of ice, rose faster than the sea.

Although the history of any region was conditioned by the type of wild
resources it possessed and the specific character of its environmental
change, neither of these determined the historical events that occurred.
People always had choices and made decisions from day to day, albeit
with little thought or knowledge of what consequences might follow. No
one planting wild seed in the vicinity of Jericho or Pengtoushan,
tending squash close to Guilá Naquitz or digging ditches at Kuk Swamp,
anticipated the type of world that farming would create.

Human history arose from accident as much as by design, and the paths of
historical change were many and varied. In western Asia,
hunter-gatherers settled down to live in permanent villages before they
began to farm, just as they did in Japan and on the Ganges plain.
Conversely, plant cultivation in Mexico and New Guinea led to
domesticated plants and farming long before permanent settlement
appeared. In North Africa, cattle came before crops, just as vicuña came
before quinua in the Andes. In Japan and the Sahara the invention of
pottery preceded the start of farming, whereas it occurred
simultaneously with the origin of rice farming in China; its invention
in western Asia came about long after farming towns had begun to
flourish.

Who could have predicted the course that history would take? At 20,000
BC, Southwest Europe set the cultural pace with its ice-age art, by 8000
BC it was an entirely undistinguished region. At 7500 BC, western Asia
had towns housing more than a thousand people, but within a millennium
itinerant pastoralists were making campsites within their ruins. Who
would have imagined that the Americas, the last continent to be
colonised, the last to begin a history of its own, would have become the
most powerful nation on planet earth today, its culture pervading every
corner of the world? Or that the very first civilisation would have
arisen in Mesopotamia? Or that Australia would remain a land of
hunter-gatherers while farming flourished in New Guinea?

While the history of each continent was unique, and has required its own
specific mix of narrative and causal argument to explain, some forces of
historical change were common to all. Global warming was one. Human
population growth was another; this occurred throughout the world as
people were freed from the high mortality imposed by ice-age droughts
and cold and required new forms of society and economy irrespective of
environmental change.

A third common factor was species identity. All people in all continents
at 20,000 BC were members of Homo sapiens, a single and recently evolved
species of humankind. As such, they shared the same biological drives
and the means to achieve them – a mix of co-operation and competition,
sharing and selfishness, virtue and violence. All possessed a peculiar
type of mind, one with an insatiable curiosity and new-found creativity.
This mind – one quite different to that of any human ancestor – enabled
people to colonise, to invent, to solve problems, and to create new
religious beliefs and styles of art. Without it, there would have been
no human history but merely a continuous cycle of the adaptation and
readaptation to environmental change that had begun several million
years ago when our genus first evolved. Instead, all of these common
factors combined, engaging with each continent’s unique conditions and a
succession of historical contingencies and events, to create a world
that included farmers, towns, craftsmen and traders. Indeed, by 5000 BC
there was very little left for later history to do; all the groundwork
for the modern world had been completed. History had simply to unfold
until it reached the present day.

John Lubbock sits on a hilltop in southern England, one close to where I
myself live and work.¹ It is a summer’s day in 2003. He reads the final
chapter of Prehistoric Times and finds his Victorian namesake extolling
the ‘blessings of civilisation’ over the life of a savage, one who was
‘a slave to his own wants, his own passions …’, one who can ‘depend on
no one, and no one can depend on him’². As my own book has shown, the
development of modern-day archaeology has proved such views to be
entirely wrong. Prehistoric hunter-gatherers were no more the starving,
morally decrepit savages depicted in Prehistoric Times than they were
the Noble Savages proposed by Jean-Jacques Rousseau a century before.

There are two main reasons for archaeology’s success in exposing the
error of such views and revealing the true nature of prehistoric times.³
First and foremost is the commitment of its practitioners, all the way
from those distinguished academics I have named within my text to the
thousands of volunteers who have dug holes and washed finds ever since
the discipline begun. Second, and not far behind, is the use of science:
that which allows us to identify cotton inside a corroded copper bead,
reconstruct the pattern of prehistoric migrations from the genes of
people alive today, specify ice-age temperatures from beetle wings and –
most especially – establish the order of events by the use of
radiocarbon dating.

Victorian John Lubbock had valued science, not only for its role in the
nascent discipline of archaeology which he himself helped to create, but
as one of the great ‘blessings of civilisation’ that farming and
industry had delivered to humankind. He lavished praise on the telescope
and the microscope as having improved the eye and provided ‘fresh
sources of interest’ for enquiring minds. He praised the printing press,
which ‘brings all who choose into communion with … the thoughts of a
Shakespeare or a Tennyson, the discoveries of a Newton or a Darwin … the
common property of mankind’. He cited chloroform to illustrate how the
progress of science has diminished the extent of human suffering.⁴

We have no cause to challenge such claims – the idea of living
permanently in a hunter-gatherer world without books and medicines is
quite appalling. But when one sits upon a hilltop in southern England
and looks across the devastated landscape that modern farming has
delivered, one must be less sanguine than Victorian John Lubbock. At
12,500 BC southern England had been an ice-age tundra frequented by
reindeer, snowy owl and arctic hare; by 8000 BC it was smothered in lush
woodland within which red deer browsed and wild boar rooted on the
forest floor. Even in 1950 it had been a richly textured landscape of
woods and fields, of ponds, paths and pastures. But in 2003, there are
vast expanses of southern England where hardly a tree or bush exists,
from which wild animals and birds have been almost entirely expelled by
the industry of modern farming. There are very few hills from which
traffic below and aeroplanes above cannot be heard.

Its polluted air requires one to ponder the circularity of history.
Farming and industry were products of a history brought about by global
warming. Now they themselves are the cause of renewed global warming
that has already had a sizeable impact upon the world and will condition
the future history of humankind. Mass deforestation and the burning of
fossil fuels have increased the level of greenhouse gases and planet
earth is becoming warmer than nature intends. During the last few
decades, glaciers on all continents have receded, snow cover in the
Northern Hemisphere has reduced dramatically, and the Antarctic ice
shelf is on the verge of collapse.⁵

Just as in prehistoric times, the natural world is undergoing change.
The flowering dates of many plants have already advanced, birds are
breeding earlier and changing their habitats. Once again insects have
been some of the first species to respond: flights of aphids are
arriving earlier in the United Kingdom while the butterflies in North
America and Britain are being found at higher altitudes and further
north.

The next century of human-made global warming is predicted to be far
less extreme than that which occurred at 9600 BC. At the end of the
Younger Dryas, mean global temperature had risen by 7°C in fifty years,
whereas the predicted rise for the next hundred years is less than 3°C;
the end of the last ice age led to a 120-metre increase in sea level,
whereas that predicted for the next fifty years is a paltry 32
centimetres at most, rising to 88 centimetres by AD 2100.⁶ However,
while future global warming may be less extreme than that of 9600 BC,
the modern world is in a far more fragile state owing to environmental
pollution and the resource requirements of six billion people. As a
consequence, the threats to human communities and natural ecosystems are
far more severe than those of prehistoric times. When the vast low-lying
regions of the ice-age world were flooded, many were uninhabited; those
settlements that did exist – such as the 7000-BC town of Atlit-Yam on
the Israeli coast – housed a few hundred people at most. Today, 120
million people live in the delta regions of Bangladesh, six million of
them on land less than one metre above current sea level, and 30 million
below three metres. Rising sea level will be accompanied by devastating
storms and the penetration of salt into their freshwater supplies.⁷

When global warming made the Tasmanian valleys uninhabitable after
14,000 BC and the Sahara Desert after 5000 BC, their people found other
places to live – the world was still quite empty of human settlement.
But where will the new displaced populations be able to go? Those from
the flooded delta regions; those from inundated low-lying islands in the
Pacific and Indian Oceans⁸; those from Sub-Saharan Africa where the
frequency and intensity of drought will become too severe to be relieved
by any amount of international aid?

The global warming that brought the ice age to its close created
localities of abundant resource which people claimed as their own and
were prepared to fight for, such as in the Nile valley at 14,000 BC,
northern Australia at 6000 BC and southern Scandinavia at 5000 BC. Such
conflicts were trivial affairs in comparison to those that we know
today; but our modern world seems destined to become yet more violent as
the impacts of renewed global warming are felt.

Shortage of fresh water will become a major source of conflict. Its
supplies are already under pressure owing to the demands of modern
farming and daily human need. Such pressure will become severe with the
predicted reductions of rainfall and increased evaporation in the key
catchments of the world. Water will eclipse land, politics and even
religion as the source of dispute between Middle Eastern states – a
development that has already begun.⁹ Moreover, global warming will
likely exacerbate the existing extremes of wealth and poverty in the
world: agricultural productivity in the developed nations is predicted
to increase, while the reverse will happen in the developing world.
Global terrorism is bound to thrive.

It is ironic that the continent that became habitable as a consequence
of the natural global warming after the LGM, is now the one doing most
to make vast areas of the world uninhabitable for others by its
excessive contribution to the cause of renewed global warming: America
is the main polluter of our skies.

John Lubbock looks beyond the traffic at the countryside of southern
England. It is bleak. Much of the Early Holocene oak woodland had
already been cleared in prehistoric times. But this region only took on
its now desolate appearance during the last fifty years: ponds were left
to silt up and soon disappeared, copses were removed, hedges grubbed-up,
small farms replaced by factory-like enterprises that specialised in
growing wheat and harvesting subsidies.¹⁰ Today’s prairie-like landscape
suffers from soil erosion and has been polluted by an excess of
fertiliser and pesticide.¹¹ As with so much other farmland in the
Western world, it produces far more food than we require.¹² And yet we
live within a world blighted by hunger. Eight hundred million people
live close to starvation – a number predicted to increase with the new
global warming. Over the next hundred years, an additional 80 million
people are likely to become hungry and malnourished because of
environmental change.¹³ Some believe that the only way to end world
hunger is by genetically engineering existing crops to increase their
yields, improve their pest resistance and make them tolerant of
salt-ridden soils.¹⁴

Human-induced genetic modification of plants first arose from the
attempts of hunter-gatherers in western Asia to cope with the droughts
of the Younger Dryas and to feed the gatherings at Göbekli Tepe and
elsewhere. Their cultivation of wild cereals unknowingly created genetic
change and produced the domesticated wheat and barley we grow today. The
genetics of other species were also changed by human action, creating
domesticated squash, maize and beans, rice, quinua, taro and potatoes.
Such plants supported the Early Holocene increase in human population,
and now, via plant breeding and crop management, support our vast global
population. But a further two billion people will need feeding during
the next quarter-century.¹⁵

Some scientists believe that the genetic engineering of plants at the
molecular level – the deliberate insertion of DNA from one species into
another – is simply the next step forward in this history of plant
manipulation for human need.¹⁶ Because new genetic variants solved a
food crisis brought about by past climate change, they argue, additional
genetic variants might do the same for us today.

This may indeed be the case but archaeology has given us another, and
perhaps a far more important, lesson from the past. As soon as farming
had begun, the surpluses arising from the new, high-yielding genetic
variants had come under centralised control, as is evident from the
buildings at Jerf el Ahmar in 9300 BC, Beidha in 8200 BC and Kom K in
5000 BC. From the very start of farming, food had become a commodity, a
source of wealth and power for those who controlled its distribution.
And so one should suspect that the already existing inequities of global
food supply are likely to become enhanced by the creation of yet more
genetic variants with even higher yields. Those who guarded the grain
silos in prehistoric times are being reincarnated as the biotechnology
companies who patent such plants and distribute their seed.¹⁷

The defiled landscape of southern England, and that of so many other
regions of the modern world, poses another question about biotechnology.
As has been evident from this history, when archaeologists study a past
environment they invariably find a far greater diversity of plants and
animals than are known in the same locality today. The flora of the
forest steppe in the vicinity of Ohalo at 20,000 BC and the fauna of
North America at 15,000 BC are just the most obvious examples of a far
richer and more varied natural world in prehistoric times. Biodiversity
was reduced by climate change – the increasing zonation of vegetation
types in northern latitudes favoured the few specialists over the many
generalists. But the consequences of farming for biodiversity have been
far more severe, as can be appreciated by either imagining the
devastated landscape around ‘Ain Ghazal in 6500 BC or by looking at that
of any intensively farmed region of the world today.

Will the cultivation of new genetic variants, plants unnaturally
resistant to pests and disease, take the loss of biodiversity to a new
extreme? Will such plants invade and overrun the communities of wild
species that still survive? Will the remaining refuges of the natural
world, especially the precious wetlands and salt marsh, also be turned
into agricultural land, just as happened to the woodlands of southern
England when people had the first genetic variants to sow?¹⁸

There are no answers. Biotechnology might be the greatest blessing we
have and lead to the end of world hunger; disease-resistant, genetically
engineered crops might protect biodiversity by reducing the need for
chemical sprays. A common need for water might unite the warring
factions of the Middle East. The predicted extent and impact of global
warming might be quite wrong. Our politicians might devise both the will
and the means to curb pollution, to distribute resources fairly
throughout the world, to provide new homes for displaced populations,
and to preserve the natural world. They might do all these things. But
they probably won’t.

So what about the ‘blessings of civilisation’? Are the delights of the
microscope, the thoughts of Darwin, the poetry of Shakespeare and the
advances of medical science, sufficient recompense for the environmental
degradation, social conflict and human suffering that ultimately derive
from the origin of farming 10,000 years ago? Would it have been better
if we had remained as Stone Age hunter-gatherers forsaking the
development of literature and science? The answer is in our hands; it
depends upon what we choose to do during the next hundred years of
global warming – our future, that of planet earth, remains within our
control. All we can know for sure is that by the end of the twenty-first
century the world will be quite different from how it is today – perhaps
as different as the world of 5000 BC was from that of the LGM.

John Lubbock turns his page and reads the final paragraph of Prehistoric
Times. He finds words that remain entirely appropriate for today:

Even in our own time we may hope to see some improvement, but the
unselfish mind will find its highest gratification in the belief that,
whatever may be the case with ourselves, our descendants will understand
many things which are hidden from us now, will better appreciate the
beautiful world in which we live, avoid much of the suffering to which
we are subject, enjoy many blessings of which we are not yet worthy, and
escape many of those temptations which we deplore, but cannot wholly
resist.

John Lubbock, Prehistoric Times, 1865, p. 492

