Cinq-Mars, Angela Close, Creswell Crags Heritage Trust, John Curtis,
Rick Davis, Tom Dillehay, Martin Emele, Phil Geib, Ted Goebel, Jack
Golson, Harald Hauptmann, Ian Hodder, Keiji Imamura, Sibel Kusimba,
Bradley Lepper, Curtis Marean, Paul Mellars, David Meltzer, Andrew
Moore, J. N. Pal, John Parkington, Vladimir Pitul’ko, John Rick,
Lawrence Robbins, Gary Rollefson, Michael Rosenberg, Daniel Sandweiss,
Mike Smith, Lawrence Straus, Paul Taçon, Kathy Tubb, François Valla, Lyn
Wadly and João Zilhão.

I thank my brother Richard Mithen for advice regarding agricultural
practices, plant genetics and crop developments. I am immensely grateful
to those who read and commented upon one or more of my chapters: Angela
Close, Sue Colledge, Tom Dillehay, Kent Flannery, Alan James, Joyce
Marcus, Naoko Matsumato, David Meltzer, James O’Connell, Anne Pirie, and
Lyn Wadley. Two of these – Anne and Sue – need special thanks for
reading more than their fair share and advising about the contents and
style of the book in general. I would also like to thank Toby Mundy who
commissioned this book when at Weidenfeld & Nicolson and to Tom Wharton
who provided detailed editorial advice on the whole text to its immense
benefit.

Four further archaeologists need special mention: Robert Braidwood,
Jacques Cauvin, Rhys Jones and Richard MacNeish. All were outstanding
archaeologists and died while I was in the latter stages of writing.
Their excavations and ideas are documented in After the Ice and I wish
to acknowledge their seminal contribution to our understanding of the
past.

The completion of this book before the end of 2002 was made possible by
the British Academy whose award of a Research Readership in October 2001
provided the necessary relief from my normal academic duties. Before
this, the vast majority of writing, however, was done in stolen time. It
was stolen from my students when I should have been attending to their
essays and preparing lectures, from my colleagues when I should have
been more punctual for departmental meetings, from my field team in Wadi
Faynan when I should have been digging. But most of all, it was stolen
from my family.

It is to them that I offer my apologies and greatest thanks. I
especially thank Heather (now aged eight) for the afternoon that she
came home fresh from a literacy hour at school and reminded me to ‘use
verbs and nouns, as well as adjectives’ in my book. Also to Nicholas
(twelve) for his suggested title of ‘Trudging Through Mud’ – which must
sum up his unfortunate experience of archaeology. And to Hannah
(fifteen) for being the first to recognise that ‘Dad’s book is really a
family project’. Indeed it was, a project that could not have been
completed without their support. It is to Sue, my wife, that I owe my
greatest debt simply for being at the centre of my world. And it is with
immense love and gratitude that I dedicate this book to my parents, Pat
and Bill.

THE BEGINNING

1 The Birth of History

Global warming, archaeological evidence and human history

Human history began in 50,000 BC. Or thereabouts. Perhaps 100,000 BC,
but certainly not before. Human evolution has a far longer pedigree – at
least three billion years have passed since the origin of life, and six
million since our lineage split from that of the chimpanzee. History,
the cumulative development of events and knowledge, is a recent and
remarkably brief affair. Little of significance happened until 20,000 BC
– people simply continued living as hunter-gatherers, just as their
ancestors had been doing for millions of years. They lived in small
communities and never remained within one settlement for very long. A
few cave walls were painted and some rather fine hunting weapons were
made; but there were no events that influenced the course of future
history, that which created the modern world.

Then came an astonishing 15,000 years that saw the origin of farming,
towns and civilisation.¹ By 5000 BC the foundations of the modern world
had been laid and nothing that came after – classical Greece, the
Industrial Revolution, the atomic age, the Internet – has ever matched
the significance of those events. If 50,000 BC marked the birth of
history, 20,000–5000 BC was its coming of age.²

For history to begin, people required the modern mind – one quite
different to that of any human ancestor or other species alive today. It
is a mind with seemingly unlimited powers of imagination, curiosity and
invention. The story of its origin is one that I have already told – or
at least tried to tell – in my 1996 book, The Prehistory of the Mind.³
Whether the theory I proposed – of how multiple specialised
intelligences merged to create a ‘cognitively fluid’ mind – is entirely
right, wrong or somewhere in between is not an issue for the history
that I will now recount. All the reader must accept is that by 50,000
years ago, a peculiarly creative mind had evolved. This book addresses a
simple question: what happened next?

The peak of the last ice age occurred at around 20,000 BC and is known
as the last glacial maximum, or LGM.⁴ Before this date, people were thin
on the ground and struggling with a deteriorating climate. Subtle
changes in the planet’s orbit around the sun had caused massive ice
sheets to expand across much of North America, northern Europe and
Asia.⁵ The planet was inundated by drought; sea level had fallen to
expose vast and often barren coastal plains. Human communities survived
the harshest conditions by retreating to refugia where firewood and
foodstuffs could still be found.

Soon after 20,000 BC global warming began. Initially this was rather
slow and uneven – many small ups and downs of temperature and rainfall.
By 15,000 BC the great ice sheets had begun to melt; by 12,000 BC the
climate had started to fluctuate, with dramatic surges of warmth and
rain followed by sudden returns to cold and drought. Soon after 10,000
BC there was an astonishing spurt of global warming that brought the ice
age to its close and ushered in the Holocene world, that in which we
live today. It was during these 10,000 years of global warming and its
immediate aftermath that the course of human history changed.

By 5000 BC many people throughout the world lived by farming. New types
of animals and plants – domesticated species – had appeared; the farmers
inhabited permanent villages and towns, and supported specialist
craftsmen, priests and chiefs. Indeed, they were little different to us
today: the Rubicon of history had been crossed – from a lifestyle of
hunting and gathering to that of farming. Those who remained as
hunter-gatherers were also now living in a manner quite different to
that of their ancestors at the LGM. The remit of this history is to
explore how and why such developments occurred – whether they led to
farming or new types of hunting and gathering. It is a global history,
the story of all people living upon planet earth between 20,000 and 5000
BC.

This was not the first time that the planet had undergone global
warming. Our ancestors and relatives – the Homo erectus, H.
heidelbergensis and H. neanderthalensis of human evolution – had lived
through equivalent periods of climate change as the planet see-sawed
from ice age and back every 100,000 years.⁶ They had responded by doing
much the same as they had always done: their populations expanded and
contracted, they adapted to changed environments and adjusted the tools
they made. Rather than creating history, they simply engaged in an
endless round of adaptation and readaptation to their changing world.

Neither was it the last. In the early twentieth century ad, global
warming began anew and continues apace today. Once again new types of
plants and animals are being created, this time through intentional
genetic engineering. Like these novel organisms, our modern-day global
warming is a product of human activity alone – the burning of fossil
fuels and mass deforestation.⁷ These have increased the extent of
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and may raise global temperatures far
beyond that which nature alone can do.⁸ The future impacts of renewed
global warming and genetically modified organisms on our environment and
society are quite unknown. One day a history of our future times will be
written to replace the multitude of speculations and forecasts with
which we struggle today. But before that we must have a history of the
past.

The people who lived between 20,000 and 5000 BC have left no letters or
diaries that describe their lives and the events they both made and
witnessed. The towns, trade and craftsmen had to be in place before the
invention of writing could occur. So rather than drawing on written
records, this history examines the rubbish that people left behind –
people whose names and identities will never be known. It relies on
their stone tools, pottery vessels, fireplaces, food debris, deserted
dwellings and many other objects of archaeological study, such as
monuments, burials and rock art. It draws on evidence about past
environmental change, such as pollen grains and beetle wings trapped in
ancient sediments. Occasionally it gains some help from the modern world
because the genes we carry and the languages we speak can tell us about
the past.

The risk in having to rely upon such evidence is that the resulting
history may become little more than a catalogue of artefacts, a
compendium of archaeological sites or a succession of spurious
‘cultures’.⁹ A more accessible and appealing history is one that
provides a narrative about people’s lives; one that addresses the
experience of living in the past and recognises human action as a cause
of social and economic change.¹⁰ To achieve such a history, this book
sends someone from the modern day into prehistoric times: someone to see
the stone tools being made, fires burning in the hearths and the
dwellings occupied; someone to visit the landscapes of the ice-age world
and to watch them change.

I have chosen a young man by the name of John Lubbock for this task. He
will visit each of the continents in turn, starting in western Asia and
working his way round the world: Europe, the Americas, Australia, East
Asia, South Asia and Africa. He will travel in the same manner as an
archaeologist digs – seeing the most intimate details of people’s lives
but being unable to ask any questions and with his presence quite
unknown. I will provide a commentary to explain how the archaeological
sites were discovered, excavated and studied; the ways in which they
contribute to our understanding of how farming, towns and civilisation
arose.

Who is John Lubbock? He resides in my imagination as a young man with an
interest in the past and fear for the future – not his own but that of
planet earth. He shares his name with a Victorian polymath who, in 1865,
published his own book about the past and called it Prehistoric Times.

Victorian John Lubbock (1834–1913) was a neighbour, friend and follower
of Charles Darwin.¹¹ He was a banker who instigated key financial
reforms, a Liberal Member of Parliament who produced the first
legislation for the protection of ancient monuments and bank (public)
holidays, a botanist and entomologist with many scientific publications
to his name. Prehistoric Times became a standard textbook and
best-seller, with the seventh and final edition appearing in 1913. It
was a pioneering work, one of the first to reject the biblical
chronology that claimed the world to be a mere six thousand years old;
it introduced the terms Palaeolithic and Neolithic, the Old and New
Stone Ages, which are now recognised as the key periods of the
prehistoric past.

But Victorian John Lubbock’s insights were matched by an appalling
ignorance. He knew little about the date and duration of the Stone Age;
his evidence for ancient lifestyles and environments was scant; he had
never heard of Lascaux, prehistoric Jericho and innumerable other sites
that are known today as milestones of the human past. When planning this
book I considered sending Victorian John Lubbock to such sites in
gratitude for writing Prehistoric Times. But his time has gone; even
with experience of Lascaux and Jericho I thought it unlikely that he
would have abandoned the standard Victorian attitude that all
hunter-gatherers were savages with child-like minds.

A more appropriate beneficiary of prehistoric travel is one who is yet
to make his mark upon the world. And so I will send a modern-day John
Lubbock into prehistoric times, carrying a copy of his namesake’s book.
By reading it in remote corners of the world he will appreciate both the
achievements of Victorian John Lubbock and the remarkable progress that
archaeologists have made since Prehistoric Times first appeared less
than 150 years ago.

I make use of John Lubbock to ensure that this history is about people’s
lives rather than just the objects that archaeologists find. My own eyes
cannot escape the present. I am unable to see beyond the discarded stone
tools and food debris, the ruins of empty houses and the fireplaces that
are cold to the touch. Although excavations provide doors to other
cultures, such doors can only be forced ajar and never passed through. I
can, however, use my imagination to squeeze John Lubbock through the
gaps so that he can see what is denied to my own eyes, and become what
the travel writer Paul Theroux has described as a ‘stranger in a strange
land’.

Theroux was writing about his own desire to experience ‘otherness to its
limit’; how becoming a stranger allowed him to discover who he was and
what he stood for.¹² This is what archaeology can do for all of us
today. As globalisation leads to a bland cultural homogeneity throughout
the world, imaginative travel to prehistoric times is perhaps the only
way we can now acquire that extreme sense of otherness by which we
recognise ourselves. And it is the only means that I have found to
translate the archaeological evidence I know into the type of human
history I wish to write.

When I peer at the deserted dwellings uncovered by my own excavations I
often share the thoughts of another great travel writer, Wilfred
Thesiger. In 1951 he had lived with the Marsh Arabs of southern Iraq.
When returning the following year he arrived at dawn and looked across
the vast reed beds silhouetted against the sunrise. Thesiger recalled
his first visit – the canoes on the waterways, the crying of geese, reed
houses built upon water, the dripping buffalo, boys singing in the dark,
the croaking of frogs. ‘Once again I experienced’, he later wrote, ‘the
longing to share this life, and to be more than a mere spectator.’¹³

The techniques of archaeology have enabled us all to become spectators
of prehistoric life – albeit through a fuzzy lens. Like Thesiger, I long
to go further: to experience prehistoric life itself and use such
experience to write human history. Thesiger could depart in his canoe;
all I have is my imagination, informed by a meticulous and exhaustive
study of archaeological evidence. And so, within the pages of this book,
John Lubbock fulfils my wish to become more than a mere spectator.
Through him, I become like Theroux and Thesiger, a stranger travelling
through strange lands – in my case, those of prehistoric times.

2 The World at 20,000 BC

Human evolution, the causes of climate change and radiocarbon dating

The world at 20,000 BC is inhospitable, a cold, dry and windy planet
with frequent storms and a dust-laden atmosphere. The lower sea level
has joined some land masses together and created extensive coastal
plains. Tasmania, Australia and New Guinea are one; so are Borneo, Java
and Thailand which form mountain chains within the largest extent of
rainforest on planet earth. The Sahara, Gobi and other sandy deserts are
greatly expanded in extent. Britain is no more than a peninsula of
Europe, its north buried below the ice, its south a polar desert. Much
of North America is smothered by a giant dome of ice.

Human communities have been forced to abandon many regions they had
inhabited before the last glacial maximum, or LGM; others are amenable
for settlement but remain unoccupied because any routes for colonisation
have been blocked by dry desert and walls of ice. People survive
wherever they can, struggling with freezing temperatures and persistent
drought. Consider, for instance, those living at a location in
modern-day Ukraine that will become known to archaeologists as Pushkari.

At this period of time five dwellings form a rough circle on the tundra.
They face south, away from the biting icy wind and close to the meander
of a semi-frozen river.¹ The dwellings are igloo-like but built from
mammoth bone and hide rather than blocks of ice. Each has an imposing
entrance formed by two tusks, up-ended to form an arch. The walls use
massive leg bones as vertical supports, between which jawbones have been
stacked chin-down to create a thick barrier to the cold and wind.
Further tusks are used on the roof to weigh down hides and sods of turf
that are supported on a framework of bones and branches. Smoke seeps
gently from the roof of one dwelling; the cries of a baby pierce the
thick hide of another.

Beyond the village a sledge loaded with massive bones is being hauled
from the river. The faces of those working are misted in clouds of hot
breath, behind which thick beards and long hair leave little flesh
exposed. They are wrapped in fur-lined clothes. No simple draping of
hides but artfully stitched clothing. It is the middle of winter and
this village is no more than 250 kilometres south of the glaciers.
Temperatures can fall to minus 30°C and there are nine months of it to
endure. The river supplies building materials: bones from animals that
have died in the north and had their carcasses washed downstream.

Life is tough: hauling the bones, building and repairing dwellings,
cutting and breaking tusks into sections so that the village craftsmen
can make utensils, weapons and jewellery. Daylight is precious – just a
few hours of it each day, and then long hours in the darkness, telling
stories around their fires. A small fire is already burning between the
huts, its flame provided by a single knotted log. This provides a focus
for half a dozen men and women who sit close together, knees drawn up
and arms folded, minimising their exposure to the wind while stitching
new clothes.

Near the fire an animal is being butchered and the air stinks of flesh
and blood. It was a reindeer found wandering in isolation from its herd
– a welcome surprise for a party who had gone to collect stone from a
nearby outcrop. They killed it and can now eat meat without depleting
that stored within their freezer – a hole in the ground. None of the
carcass will be wasted. The meat will be shared between the five
families who are living at Pushkari this winter. Knife handles and
harpoons will be made from the antlers, clothing and bags from the hide,
the ligaments and sinews will provide thread and cord. The heart, lungs,
liver and other organs will be eaten as delicacies, the teeth drilled to
make decorative pendants, the bone saved for fuel.

One of the dwellings has its interior lit by the small flame of an
animal-fat lamp. It is warm, stuffy and dingy inside. The floor is soft,
carpeted with hides and furs that surround a central ash-filled hearth.
Mammoth skulls and leg bones provide furniture; an assortment of leather
bags, bone and wooden bowls, antler and stone tools are scattered by the
walls and hung from the rafters – a scene of Stone Age domestic clutter.
The flickering light exposes a man’s face. He looks old, but skin and
bone must age rapidly in the ice-age world. This man wears his hair in
plaits, has pendants of ivory and pierced teeth around his neck. His
fingers work quickly with a needle and sinew thread.

Outside the dwelling, a man and some women and children sit together
while striking nodules of stone that rest upon their knees. Flakes of
stone are detached, the largest carefully laid to one side; others are
left where they fall or casually tossed into the scatter of surrounding
flakes. There is chatter and occasional laughter; some cursing as a
thumb rather than a stone is struck.

The interior of another dwelling lacks any signs of domestic life. Its
floor is covered in thick furs; a particularly large mammoth skull
dominates the room, painted with red stripes. Adjacent to it are
drumsticks and flutes made from bird bone. Two ivory figurines, each no
more than a few centimetres long, rest upon a stone slab. Otherwise the
dwelling is quite empty. This is where special gatherings take place;
when visitors arrive, almost the entire village meets inside so that
their news can be heard and gifts exchanged. It gets pretty hot and
smelly; noisy too when they all begin to sing.

But for now the only sound is that of daily life at the LGM: the crack
of stone against stone, the gentle chatter of human voices, the huffing
and puffing from hard labour. These are carried across the tundra by the
icy, relentless wind, one that will gather strength with the howling of
wolves as darkness descends. When it does so, the people of Pushkari are
clustered around a fire. Roasted meat has been shared, stories have been
told. The temperature falls by another fraction to cross an unspoken
threshold and causes the people to disperse to their dwellings for the
comfort of furs.

Those living at Pushkari are Homo sapiens – modern humans, anatomically
and mentally the same as you and me. By 20,000 BC all other human
species had already become extinct so this is the only type that John
Lubbock will encounter on his travels. A brief explanation of when and
why this happened is thus a useful prelude to the history that is about
to begin.

The fossil record for human evolution begins seven million years ago
with a specimen discovered in AD 2002 in Chad, in north central Africa,
one of the most important discoveries of all time and designated as
Sahelanthropus tchadensis.² After 4.5 million years ago, several species
of ape-like creatures that walked on two legs and used stone tools are
known from the fossil record in Africa. Soon after 2 million years ago
the first human-like species appeared, one that archaeologists call Homo
ergaster. This was the first of our ancestors that spread out of Africa.
It did so with extraordinary speed, reaching Southeast Asia perhaps as
long as 1.6 million years ago.³

Homo ergaster had at least two evolutionary descendants, H. erectus in
eastern Asia and H. heidelbergensis in Africa. The latter dispersed into
Europe and gave rise to the Neanderthals – H. neanderthalensis – at
about 250,000 years ago. The Neanderthals were an evolutionary dead-end,
as was H. erectus in Asia. Nevertheless, both of these were extremely
successful species that lived through great swings of climate.

It was during one especially harsh glacial period at c. 130,000 years
ago that H. sapiens evolved in Africa – the earliest specimen being
found at Omo Kibish in Ethiopia. This new species behaved in quite a
different way to those that had preceded them: the archaeological record
begins to show traces of art, ritual and a new range of technology,
reflecting a more creative mind. H. sapiens rapidly replaced all
existing human species, pushing the Neanderthals and H. erectus into
extinction.

Soon after 30,000 BC H. sapiens was the only type of human left on the
planet; it was found throughout Africa, Europe and across much of Asia.
A remarkable thirst for travel took some of its members to the
southernmost reaches of Australasia, which would become the future
island of Tasmania. By then, however, the climate was heading to the
depths of the last ice age: temperatures were plummeting; droughts were
persisting; glaciers, ice sheets and deserts were expanding; sea level
was falling. Plants, animals and people either had to adjust where and
how they lived, or become extinct.

How many people were alive on planet earth at the LGM? Taking into
account the large areas of uninhabitable regions, the harsh climatic
conditions that induced early mortality, and the fact that modern
genetics has suggested that only 10,000 modern humans were alive 130,000
years ago, we can guess at a figure of around one million. But this
really is a guess; trying to estimate past population sizes is one of
the most difficult tasks that archaeologists face.

While the Pushkari hunters build their dwellings and chip their stone, a
mammoth herd forages on the other side of the world in North America, in
a vicinity that will become known as Hot Springs, South Dakota. It is a
winter’s afternoon and the sunlight is fading while the great beasts
rhythmically sweep the snow away with their tusks to find the grass
below. They head towards longer grasses and small shrubs that surround
the steaming waters of a nearby pond.⁴ At 20,000 BC the Americas remain
quite devoid of human settlement, even though its landscapes are rich
with game, so these animals have no fear of human hunters.

The forthcoming global warming will not only condition the human history
that John Lubbock will experience but that of all other species, some of
which – such as the mammoths – will have become extinct before his
travels are complete. Unlike the global warming we face today, that
which came after 20,000 BC was entirely natural. It was just the most
recent switch from a ‘warm and wet’ to a ‘cold and dry’ period in the
earth’s history – from a ‘glacial’ to an ‘interglacial’ state. The
ultimate cause of such climatic change lies in regular alterations in
the earth’s orbit around the sun.⁵

The Serbian scientist Milutin Milankovitch first appreciated the
significance of such orbital change in the 1920s. By building on his
theories, scientists have established that every 95,800 years the
earth’s orbit changes from being roughly circular to elliptical. As this
happens, the Northern Hemisphere develops greater seasonality, while the
converse happens in the south. This sparks off the growth of northern
ice sheets. When a circular orbit returns, the north–south contrasts in
seasonality are reduced, global warming occurs and the ice sheets melt.

Alterations in the earth’s tilt during its orbit also have climatic
implications. Every 41,000 years, the inclination of the earth changes
from 21.39 to 24.36 degrees and back. As this angle increases, the
seasons become more intense: hotter summers, colder winters. The earth
also has a regular wobble on its axis of rotation, which has its own
cycle of 21,700 years. This influences the point on its orbit around the
sun at which the earth is tilted with its Northern Hemisphere directed
towards the sun. If this happens when the earth is relatively close to
the sun, the winters will be short and warm; conversely, if the earth is
relatively distant from the sun when tilted in this fashion, winters
will be longer and colder.

While these changes in the shape, the tilt and the wobble of the earth’s
orbit will alter the earth’s climate, scientists think that they are
insufficient in themselves to account for the immense magnitude and
speed of past climate change. Processes happening on the planet itself
must have substantially amplified the slight changes they induced.
Several of these are known: changes in ocean and atmospheric currents,
the build-up of greenhouse gases (principally carbon dioxide) and the
growth of the ice sheets themselves (which reflect increasing amounts of
solar radiation as they increase in size). The combined impact of
orbital change and amplifying mechanisms has been the see-sawing of
climate from glacial to interglacial and back every 100,000 years, often
with an extraordinarily rapid switch from one state to another.⁶ One of
the most dramatic of these switches came about in 9600 BC, following on
from 10,000 years of ups and downs of rainfall and temperature since the
climatic extreme of the LGM.

[images]

The jagged line in the above figure measures global temperature change
between 20,000 BC and the present day. It is based on changes in the
chemical composition of ice through a core taken from Greenland, this
being a ‘proxy’ – an indirect measure – for global temperature.⁷ More
specifically, ratios between two isotopes of oxygen, ¹⁶O and ¹⁸O, are
recorded as relative deviations from a laboratory standard (δ18
O[images]). When this value is high, the planet was relatively warm and
wet, when low, it was cold and dry. As can be seen in the figure above,
the line measuring this value gradually and irregularly increases from a
low point at 20,000 BC until 12,700 BC is reached; at that date it
shoots upward, marking the start of a period of relative warmth and
wetness known as the late-glacial interstadial. There are several small
peaks within this period, the first being known as the Bølling, and the
second the Allerød, but it is only in Europe that these can be
distinguished. The key feature to note is simply the general period of
warmth between 12,700 and 10,800 BC.

The big dip that follows is called the Younger Dryas. This plays a major
role in human history in the Northern Hemisphere but once again may not
be noticeable in the south. Its very cold and dry conditions come to a
sudden end at 9600 BC when there is a second dramatic increase in
temperature; that marks the true end of the last ice age. In fact, it
marks the transition between two major periods in earth’s history, the
Pleistocene and the Holocene. After that steep rise, the line continues
to fluctuate while gradually climbing to a peak at 7000 BC and having a
noticeable dip at 6200 BC. Otherwise the earth’s Holocene climate has
been remarkably stable – although such stability may now have come to an
end as a new period of human-made global warming has recently begun.

The construction of mammoth-bone dwellings, stitching of clothes, making
of stone tools and acquisition of food are not the only human activities
under way on planet earth at the LGM. Artists are at work in the caves
of Southwest Europe. A cluster of animal-fat lamps burn on the floor of
the cave that will become known as Pech Merle in France. Another lamp is
held aloft by a young boy to provide illumination for the quick
movements of an artist’s hand. The artist is an old but sprightly man
with long grey hair, naked but with painted flesh. He is part of a
community who live by reindeer hunting on the tundra of southern France.
Amidst the lamps are his paints. Lumps of red ochre have been crushed to
powder and then mixed in a wooden bowl with water from puddles on the
cave floor. Another bowl contains a black pigment; sticks of charcoal
are scattered between them along with pieces of leather and fur, frayed
sticks and hairbrushes. There is a sweet smell in the air: herbs are
smouldering upon a fire. Every few moments the artist kneels and inhales
deeply to refresh the vision within his mind.⁸

On the wall two horses have been painted in profile, back to back with
hindquarters overlapping. The artist is creating large spots within the
outlines; he takes mouthfuls of paint and spits it through a leather
stencil to make circles on the wall. His breath is the key ingredient to
make the horses come alive. Then he returns to his herbs, changes the
pigment and now places his hand against the wall to spit and leave its
silhouette.

The artist works hour after hour, pausing only to change his pigment or
his stencil, to switch a brush or sponge, to replenish the fat within
his lamps and intoxicate his mind. He talks and sings to the horses, he
drops to all fours and then rears like a stallion. More spots and hand
stencils are made. The horses’ heads and necks are painted black. As he
comes to an end, the artist is physically exhausted and mentally
drained.⁹

Archaeologists have only learned the date at which the mammoth-bone
dwellings were built at Pushkari and the paintings were made in Pech
Merle by the use of their most precious scientific tool: radiocarbon
dating. Without this technique, writing a human history of prehistoric
times would be quite impossible, as archaeologists would be unable to
place the sites they excavate – the living settlements that John Lubbock
will visit – in the correct chronological order. And so, as a final
prelude to the history that follows, it is appropriate to provide a
brief summary of this most remarkable technique of archaeological
science.

The underlying principle is quite straightforward. The atmosphere
contains three isotopes of carbon: ¹²C, ¹³C and ¹⁴C. These are carbon
atoms with different numbers of neutrons (six, seven and eight
respectively). Living things take the carbon isotopes into their bodies
at the same ratio as they exist within the atmosphere. With death, the
¹⁴C within the body begins to decay while the other carbon isotopes
remain quite stable. The date at which death occurred can be established
by measuring the ratio of ¹²C to ¹⁴C and by knowing the rate at which
¹⁴C decays.¹⁰

In order to be dated, an object must contain carbon, which means that it
must have once been alive. Stone tools, the most ubiquitous find from
prehistory, cannot be directly dated themselves, nor can walls or
pottery vessels. Instead, archaeologists have to rely on finding items
in close association with datable material such as animal bones or plant
remains, ideally charcoal. Also, there must be sufficient ¹⁴C remaining
in the sample. Unfortunately this is not the case for any sample earlier
than 40,000 BC, which provides the chronological limit for radiocarbon
dating.

There are two further complications. The first is that a radiocarbon
date is never an exact value but simply an estimate defined by a mean
and a standard deviation, as in, for instance, 7500±100 BP. ‘BP’ is the
term used by archaeologists to refer to ‘Before Present’ (with the
present having been once agreed upon as 1950). In this example, the 7500
provides the mean and the 100 the standard deviation for a distribution
of dates within which the true date lies. This tells us that there is a
68 per cent chance (i.e. two chances out of three) that the true date
lies within one standard deviation of the mean, in this case between
7400 and 7600, and a 95 per cent chance that it will lie within two
standard deviations, i.e. between 7300 and 7700 BP. The smallest
deviation possible is, of course, preferred. But as this is unlikely
ever to fall below fifty years, the dates for past events will always
remain approximate.

The second complication is that radiocarbon years are not the same
length as calendar years, and indeed they are not the same length as
each other. An artefact with a radiocarbon date of 7500 BP is not 100
calendar years older than an artefact with a date of 7400 BP. This is
because the concentration of ¹⁴C in the atmosphere has decreased through
time and that makes years appear longer. Fortunately this problem can be
resolved by ‘calibrating’ the radiocarbon date through dendrochronology,
otherwise known as tree-ring dating.

With tree-rings, one can count individual calendar years back into the
past. By linking up timbers of different ages, a continuous sequence of
trees for the last 11,000 years has been established.¹¹ Wood from any
one of those rings can be dated by radiocarbon methods and hence the
deviation between the real calendar date and the radiocarbon date
derived. So when a radiocarbon date is acquired from an archaeological
site, that deviation can be taken into account and a date in calendar
years established. When dates are calibrated they are also frequently
converted from BP (before 1950) to BC (before Christ, i.e. ‘0’;
sometimes this is expressed as BCE, ‘Before the Common Era’). So, after
calibration, a radiocarbon date of 7500±100 BP indicates that the true
date has a 68 per cent chance of lying between 6434 and 6329 BC. Tree
rings are not available before 11,000 years ago but archaeologists have
found other means to calibrate their dates. This has shown that the gap
between ‘radiocarbon years’ and ‘calendar years’ gradually widens
(although in an irregular fashion) as one goes back in time. By 13,000
years ago there is more than a 2,000-year difference between a date
given by the radiocarbon method and its true age in calendar years. All
the dates that follow in this book are in calendar years BC; my endnotes
provide the radiocarbon dates themselves along with their precise
calibrated values at one standard deviation.¹²

While the people of Pushkari stitch their clothes and the artist paints
within Pech Merle, others are stalking wallabies on the grasslands of
Tasmania, ambushing antelopes on East African savannahs, fishing in the
Mediterranean and the Nile. This history will visit these and other
hunter-gatherers, and then examine how global warming changed the lives
of their descendants. It begins, however, in the Fertile Crescent – an
arc of rolling hills, rivers valleys and lake basins that is today
covered by Jordan, Israel, Palestine, Syria, southeast Turkey and Iraq.
This is where the first farmers, towns and civilisations will arise.

A hunter-gatherer campsite is flourishing on the western shore of Lake
Tiberias, otherwise known as the Sea of Galilee. When excavated by
archaeologists, the campsite will be called Ohalo and recognised as one
of the best-preserved settlements from the LGM.¹³ Being located far from
the ice sheets and tundra landscapes, oak woodland is not far away. Its
dwellings are made from brushwood, its people wear garments of hide and
vegetable fibres. A new hut is under construction: cut saplings have
been forced into the ground and are being woven together to make a dome.
Piles of leafy branches and animal skins have been prepared to use as
material for the roof. Such building work involves far less effort than
that required at Pushkari; indeed, life at Ohalo seems far more
attractive in every way.

There are many people scattered along the lakeshore: some sitting in
groups chatting, children playing games, old men sleeping in the
afternoon sun. A woman approaches the huts from the water’s edge bearing
a basket of freshly caught fish, while others hang nets across coracles
to dry. She beckons her children to follow her into their dwelling where
the fish will be threaded on to twine and hung to dry.

Two women emerge from the woodland draped with freshly killed fox and
hare. Several men follow with a trussed-up gazelle supported on a pole.
More women and then children appear with bags and baskets carried in
every way imaginable – on their heads, hauled along the ground, slung
across shoulders, tied around the waist. The carcasses are placed close
to a hearth and the bags and baskets emptied on to hides. Piles of
fruits, seeds, leaves, roots, bark and stems have tumbled forth. There
will be a feast tonight. A young man stands amidst this busy village
scene, quite unnoticed by those at work and play. This is John Lubbock
and Ohala at 20,000 BC is where his travels through human history begin.

WESTERN ASIA

[images]

3 Fires and Flowers

Hunter-gatherers and the forest steppe, 20,000–12,300 BC

Unable to sleep, John Lubbock sits by the lakeshore watching bats at
work and enjoying a night-time breeze. Across the water, grazing deer
are silhouetted in moonlight at the woodland edge. The Ohalo huts are
behind him, a few metres from the shore and now quite empty as the
people sleep below the stars and around a smouldering fire. The hut
floors are left unclean – some scattered with flint flakes, others with
the debris from a recent meal. Strings of fish and bouquets of herbs are
hanging from rafters inside, wicker baskets and wooden bowls are stacked
by the walls.

Someone sighs and turns, a child cries out and receives comfort. Trees
rustle as a stiff breeze blows between the Ohalo huts; the fire gives a
crack and a glowing ember is wafted into the air. It spirals upwards and
then floats back down, not to the fire but on to the dry grass that
covers the roof of a brushwood hut.

Wood smoke. Lubbock inhales it deeply, assuming that it comes as a wisp
from the fading fire. But the smoke lingers and then grows; it becomes a
pungent, visible cloud. Coughing and turning, he sees the hut ablaze.
The people have woken and are pulling it apart, stamping out the flames
and rushing for water. But the gentle breeze easily defeats such frantic
efforts – it lifts a score of burning stems, leaves and twigs and
scatters them all around. A second and then a third hut are now alight.
The people retreat. Shielding their faces and holding their children
tightly, they gather by the lake to watch their campsite burn.

The fire at Ohalo may have taken no more than a few minutes to reduce a
cluster of huts to circles of charred stumps. Whether it began in this
fashion or by some other means is quite unknown – perhaps it was a
deliberate firing of huts infested with fleas and lice. But what may
have been tragic for the Ohalo people was a blessing for
twentieth-century archaeologists. Within a few years, water from rising
lake-levels had gently flooded the site, protecting it from decay. Ohalo
became lost from sight and human memory until a drought in 1989 brought
a 9-metre drop in the water level and exposed rings of charcoal where
the brushwood dwellings had been.

Dani Nadel of Haifa University began a meticulous excavation of a truly
remarkable site; both he and archaeologists throughout the world were
astonished at the diversity of plants and animals that had been used by
the Ohalo people at the LGM.¹ After the immense excitement of that first
season of excavation there was a ten-year wait until water levels were
once again sufficiently low for Nadel to continue. By great good fortune
I was there when he began to do so in 1999. His was the most idyllic
excavation I have ever seen – hot sun, glistening blue water, shaded
trenches revealing the debris of ancient lives.

In the morning the Ohalo people rake through hot ashes and the still
smouldering remnants of their settlement. They pick out a few treasured
items – a bone-handled knife inset with flint blades, a woven mat that
had escaped the flames, a burnt bow that could be repaired. With these
they depart, heading westwards into the oak woodland to find another
place to camp.

Had they been farmers rather than hunter-gatherers, the fire would have
destroyed more than brushwood huts: most likely timber-built dwellings,
animal pens, fences, and stored grain; their flocks may have fled or
even died in the flames. Rather than abandoning the site to nature,
farmers would have had to remain and rebuild because of their investment
in the surrounding land: woodland clearance, fence construction and the
planting of crops. But the Ohalo people can simply disappear into the
woodland, heading westwards towards the Mediterranean coastal plain.²
Lubbock decides that the woodlands can wait and departs to encircle the
lake and walk into the grasslands and among the trees on the gentle
hills that lie to the east.

The forest steppe – a landscape of grasses, shrubs and flowers growing
lushly below thinly scattered trees – was critical to the course of
human history. This is because the immense diversity of plant foods it
offered to hunter-gatherers included the wild relatives of the first
domesticated crops: wheat, barley, peas, lentils and flax. Comparable
plant communities hardly exist today and are certainly no longer found
within the Golan Heights, today’s name for the hills to the east of Lake
Tiberias.

Reconstruction of the vegetation cover of prehistoric landscapes is a
requirement for understanding the past. It is often achieved by the
analysis of pollen grains: the male reproductive cells, or gametes, of
seed plants whose purpose is to reach the female part of the flower
where fertilisation takes place. Fortunately, many do not make it and
fall unused to the ground. If recovered by scientists, perhaps many
thousands of years after the flowers have died, they can fulfil a
different role – that of telling us what plants had once flourished in
the evolving landscapes of the ice age world.³

Pollen grains from different species of plants are quite distinct. They
are tiny specks to the naked eye but appear unique when seen below a
binocular microscope. The pollen grains of pine, for example, have two
wing sacs, while that of oak looks granular with three slits around each
edge. When magnified with an electron microscope they present an exotic
range of 3D surreal spiky spheres and other wonderful forms.

Pollen grains rain down from the flowers of grasses, shrubs and trees
and often become embedded in the mud of a pond or lake. They become
buried as further mud, with its own pollen, accumulates. More mud, more
pollen, perhaps coming from a quite different set of plants that had
begun to grow nearby. And so on, perhaps for many thousands of years
until the lake has completely silted up.

A ‘core’ can be extracted from those sediments, a thin column of the mud
or peat, every inch of which takes us back through time. Palynologists –
those who specialise in the study of pollen grains – slice up these
cores like salami. They remove the pollen grains from each separate
slice and discover which plants had been growing in the vicinity when
that particular layer of mud had been at the surface. By comparing the
pollen from successive slices, they reconstruct how the vegetation
changed through time. And by gaining radiocarbon dates from fragments of
stem, leaf or seeds trapped within the core, they can work out the
history of vegetation change.⁴

When Lubbock travels through Europe there will be many ‘pollen cores’
for us to examine. These show how its tundras turned to woodland and
back again. But western Asia has very few cores, and hardly any of these
are very deep or have well-preserved pollen. One core, however, is of
immense value, having been extracted from the sediments of the Hula
basin 20 kilometres north of Lake Galilee.⁵ At 16.5 metres in length, it
reaches back to the sediments laid down at the LGM when the Ohalo people
were camping by the lake; it can tell us what pollen had been floating
in the air.

The pollen evidence makes clear that as the hunters moved eastwards away
from the Mediterranean coastal lands, the woodland disappeared, leaving
a mere scattering of trees within grasses, shrubs and herbs – a woodland
steppe. As soon as the Jordan valley had been crossed trees would have
become less abundant, although surviving on the slopes leading to the
plateau; and as one moved further east, the grasses and shrubs
themselves diminished until there was desert – just as there is today.
But within that desert there were oases, notably at Azraq where inland
lakes attracted not only many birds and animals, but also hunters and
gatherers. And it is to Azraq that Lubbock is now heading after a rest
amid an expanse of vibrant red poppies on the steppe.⁶

Pollen evidence by itself is unable to provide an accurate picture of
the ice-age steppe. Different species of grasses – including the wild
cereals – cannot be easily distinguished by their pollen grains, while
any insect-pollinated plants would be under-represented owing to the
limited amount of pollen they produce. So archaeologists have examined
the few remaining areas of steppe in western Asia, especially those that
escape the heavy grazing of sheep and goat, such as nature reserves and
military training grounds. These provide insights into ancient plant
communities that cannot be garnered from the archaeological evidence
alone.⁷

Gordon Hillman, from the Institute of Archaeology in London, is one of
the foremost ‘archaeo-botanists’ in the world. For more than thirty
years he has been studying modern steppe communities, and has influenced
a whole generation of students to do likewise. He has shown how the
prehistoric steppe would have been composed of knee-high perennial
shrubs with small fleshy leaves, known to botanists as wormwoods and
chenopods (or members of the goosefoot family), and a rich mixture of
grasses. Some of the grasses would have grown in small wiry tussocks,
while the taller ‘feather’ grasses produced – in Hillman’s words – a sea
of silvery plumes billowing in the wind. Each spring the steppe would
have exploded with colour and erupted with scent – the blossoming of
thistles, knapweeds, wild fennel and a myriad of other plants.

Archaeo-botanists have studied not only the surviving steppe
communities, but also how people from traditional societies, such as
Native Americans and Australian Aborigines, have exploited these plants
for food. They have shown that the steppe would have been brimming with
both staples and delicacies for those with the botanical know-how of
what to eat. Plants such as cranesbill, storksbill and wild parsnip
could have provided thick, bulbous roots; the chenopods would have
yielded abundant quantities of seeds; and wild grasses would have
provided grain.

An understanding of the nutritional value of such plants is vital to
reconstructing prehistoric life on the steppe. Unfortunately, there is
very limited evidence as to which specific plants were gathered. Unlike
stone artefacts, plant remains decay almost instantly once discarded
unless this is inhibited by extreme aridity, waterlogging or intense
charring – as was the case at Ohalo. But even within that site’s burnt
remains there were no traces of fleshy vegetables and leaves, both of
which are most likely to have been collected.

With the hindsight of history we know that wild cereals were the most
important plants growing within the forest steppe. The key difference
between the wild and domestic varieties lies within the ears of grain.
In the wild forms these are very brittle, so that when ripe they
spontaneously shatter and the grain is scattered on the ground.
Domesticated forms do not do this; their ears remain intact and the
grain needs to be removed by threshing. So without human management the
domesticated forms cannot survive, as they are unable to reseed
themselves.

It is the same with peas, lentils, bitter vetch and chickpeas – the
other early domesticates. As Daniel Zohary, a specialist on the genetics
of wild and domesticated cereals from the Hebrew University in
Jerusalem, once explained, the domesticated forms of cereals and pulses
‘wait for the harvester’.⁸ He has revealed that the change from one to
the other depends on the mutation of a single gene. Another consequence
is a change in the pattern of germination. Different individuals within
a stand of wild plants will germinate and ripen at slightly different
times – this ensures that some of them at least will mature and provide
seed for the next year in conditions of unpredictable rainfall.
Domesticated varieties, however, all germinate and ripen at the same
time; they not only wait for the harvester, but also make his – or
probably her – life very much easier.

The origin of agriculture is intimately tied up with the emergence of
these domesticated varieties of cereals and legumes, as well as flax
which was used to produce the first linen. As we will see, this could
only have happened with human intervention in the life cycle of plants –
people have been in the business of genetically modifying foods for a
very long time indeed.

But not the Ohalo people and their contemporaries. They would have
harvested wild cereals by beating the plants with sticks so that the
grain fell into baskets held below. This is the method used by many
recent peoples, such as the North American Indians, when collecting seed
from wild grass. To be effective, one must time the collection just
right – if the cereals have not ripened, few of the grains will fall
into the baskets; conversely, if the cereals are past their peak, much
of the grain would have already fallen to the ground. Some would have
entered into cracks, been kept warm and watered by the rain to provide
new shoots in the spring; other grain – probably the vast majority –
would have been eagerly eaten by birds and rodents.

Plants were important to the Ohalo people; so, too, were the animals
that lived in the woodland and steppe. Their favoured prey throughout
the region was the gazelle, present as several different species, each
adapted to a different habitat: the mountain gazelle in the
Mediterranean zone, the dorcas gazelle in craggy regions, the Persian
(or goitred) gazelle on the eastern steppe. Fallow deer browsed in the
mountainous regions of Lebanon, wild ass grazed on the steppe and wild
goat picked its way across the crags of the upland areas. Aurochs (wild
cattle), hartebeest and wild boar would have been found within the
woodlands, along with many smaller mammals, birds and reptiles.

The animal bones excavated from Ohalo tell us that several of these
species were hunted. Fish were caught in the Sea of Galilee, and perhaps
in the Mediterranean. That coastline could have supplied many varieties,
together with crabs, seaweed and shellfish. But whether these were
collected we can but speculate: long before archaeologists could get to
work the coastline was flooded and any coastal settlements washed away
by rising sea level, caused by the melt waters of the great northern ice
sheets.

Azraq, the place T. E. Lawrence called the queen of oases,⁹ comes into
view as John Lubbock climbs the last ridge of lava pebbles. He has
travelled 100 kilometres from the Sea of Galilee, much of it across
barren desert with freezing night-time temperatures. Now he looks across
lake waters that glimmer in the first rays of the morning sun. Gazelle
are delicately picking their way through the surrounding marsh; what had
been a single purple blur beyond is turning into foliage, a rich
selection of greens, yellows and browns as the trees gain their form;
the new day is welcomed by sweetly singing birds and tiny wafts of smoke
from fires in the many campsites that surround the lake.

These are of hunters who have gathered at Azraq for the winter months,
having spent the summer dispersed throughout the steppe and desert. Now
they meet again to exchange their news, to renew friendships and perhaps
to celebrate a marriage. They also bring items to trade: shells from the
shores of the Red Sea and the Mediterranean, carved wooden bowls and
furs.

Lubbock spends the day exploring the marshes, watching the wading birds
and swimming in the lake. When resting, he flicks through his
leather-bound and rather tatty copy of Prehistoric Times, impressed by
the elegant drawings of artefacts and burial tombs. Its full title is
very telling: Prehistoric Times as Illustrated by Ancient Remains and
the Manners and Customs of Modern Savages. Much of the book is devoted
to the latter, with descriptions of tribal peoples such as the
Australian Aborigines and the Esquimaux (Inuit) as living
representatives of the Stone Age past. Lubbock picks a chapter to read
at random, and finds that even though its Victorian author had thought
prehistoric people possessed childlike minds, he had appreciated their
tool-making skills, especially in working flint.

In the late afternoon Lubbock arrives at a small campsite just below a
basalt outcrop and beside a pool of fresh water that arises from a
spring. It has a simple shelter: gazelle hides tied together with sinew
and supported by a ridge-pole and stakes wedged upright with stones.
Nothing of this shelter will be left for archaeologists to find, in
contrast to the activities outside where a man and two women are
generating a huge amount of flint flakes as they make stone tools. They
sit cross-legged wearing necklaces made from tube-like shells known to
us as dentalium. A child sits near them playing with stone nodules and
unknowingly learning the arts of tool making. A much younger child
sleeps in the shade of the shelter, where an old woman slowly grinds
seeds upon a basalt mortar. A hare hangs from the ridge-pole.

Another member of the group is undertaking a task crucial to human
survival throughout the prehistoric world: making fire. A young woman
squats upon the ground, holding a piece of softwood below her toes. She
has a thin stick of a harder wood in her hands that she rotates very
rapidly in a small nick in the softwood, having added a few grains of
sand to increase the friction. Within a few moments a little pile of
dust accumulates; and then it glows. She adds some wisps of dry grass
and soon has a light for a nearby hearth. Lubbock will see this
technique used repeatedly throughout the world; it is one that he
himself will perfect. He will also see another: creating sparks from
chipping brittle stones together. But for now, his interest lies in
watching the manufacture of stone tools to see whether his Victorian
namesake was correct about the amount of skill required.

The nodules of stone – or cores – being worked come from the limestone
outcrops close to Azraq that are peppered with blocks of flint. Using
hammer-stones of basalt, the cores are shaped by detaching thick flakes
of the limestone crust. Once these have been prepared long, thin slivers
of flint are carefully removed from around the edges of the cores. These
slivers, or blades, vary from five to ten centimetres in length; many
are thrown away with the other waste but a few are put aside.

Those working the stone chat as they work, sometimes cursing when a fine
blade accidentally snaps, sometimes commenting upon a fossil shell that
appears when a nodule breaks in half. Lubbock takes a nodule and hammer
stone and tries to make a blade; but all he achieves is a couple of
thick flakes and a bloody finger. He recalls a passage in Prehistoric
Times about flint tools: ‘Easy as it may seem to make such flakes as
these, a little practice will convince any one who attempts to do so,
that a certain knack is required; and that it is also necessary to be
careful in the selection of flint.’¹⁰

The flint knappers shape their selected blades with immense skill, using
pointed stones to chip off minuscule flakes and turning the blades into
an assortment of tiny tools – some with thin points, others with curved
backs or chisel-like ends.¹¹ More accurately they are tool-parts: these
microliths – as archaeologists call them – are inserted into reeds used
as arrow hafts and into bone handles to make knives. The broken points
and blunted blades will already have been removed and discarded on to
the pile of waste. Any new microliths that do not fit are also thrown
away – the craftsmen prefer to spend a few moments making another rather
than risk damaging the far more precious haft.

The Ohalo people had made similar microliths; indeed, such artefacts
have been made throughout western Asia ever since the LGM and will
continue to be produced for many thousands of years. Collections of
microliths – coming in a variety of shapes and sizes – and the waste
from their manufacture dominate the archaeological record of this period
in western Asia and are used to define the ‘Kebaran culture’.¹²

The particular scatter of microliths and stone flakes that Lubbock
watched being created was eventually excavated by Andy Garrard, now at
the University of London. In the 1980s, as director of the British
Institute in Amman, Jordan, Garrard undertook a major programme of
excavations in the Azraq basin, documenting the presence of both
hunter-gatherers and prehistoric farmers. In Wadi el-Uwaynid, 10
kilometres from Azraq Lake, he found two dense scatters of flint flakes
and microliths, along with a basalt grinding stone, a few dentalium
beads, gazelle, tortoise and hare bones.¹³

Garrard’s work exposed a great number of such sites, and demonstrated
that some had been used repeatedly for many thousands of years,
resulting in huge scatters of artefacts.¹⁴ The attraction of Azraq would
have been the herds of gazelle which came to drink and graze on the
lakeside vegetation; they most likely did so in great numbers and at
predictable times of year and day. The hunter-gatherers would have known
those times and arrived in large numbers to capture the vulnerable prey,
probably returning to the campsite they had used the year before.
Worn-out tools, and the waste from making new ones, were discarded on to
the vast piles already present – contributing to what would one day be
Andy Garrard’s excavation challenge.

Almost 20,000 years before Garrard begins his work Lubbock watches two
men arrive at the camping site in Wadi el-Uwaynid. They have been
hunting with little success. As dusk descends, the hare is roasted on a
spit and eaten with a thick porridge served in upturned tortoise
shells.¹⁵ Visitors arrive from nearby camps, requiring more food to be
prepared and more wood for the fire. Soon at least twenty people are
gathered and their talk merges imperceptibly into quiet song. Lubbock
climbs on to the nearby basalt crag and looks down upon the flimsy
shelter, the fire and the seated crowd. Stars appear and the moon rises.
It is a scene repeated not only throughout the Azraq basin but also
across western Asia – a world of hunter-gatherers only known to
archaeologists by the scatters of stone artefacts they left behind.

Over the next four and a half thousand years, both the plants and the
people in this region will become much thicker on the ground. What had
been barren desert to the west of Azraq will be covered by grasses,
shrubs and flowers by 14,500 BC. Trees will spread on to what had been
the open steppe.

As western Asia became warmer and wetter, its plants and animals became
more abundant. Direct evidence for such environmental change comes from
the Hula core which, from around 15,000 BC, shows a marked increase in
thick woodland with oak, pistachio, almond and pear. This period of
increasing warmth and wetness culminates at 12,500 BC – the late-glacial
interstadial.

These changes in vegetation lead to a vast increase in the availability
of plant foods on the steppe.¹⁶ Plants with edible roots that had been
rare are now abundant – wild turnips, crocuses and grape hyacinths. The
wild grasses are flourishing, enjoying not only the more clement
conditions but also an increase in seasonality – cooler, wetter winters
and hotter, drier summers. We must envisage vast stands of wild wheat,
barley and rye appearing across the steppe, surrounded by a scatter of
trees. In effect, there was a massive increase in the availability of
wild plant foods for the hunter-gatherers throughout the whole of the
Fertile Crescent.

Human population increased in this warmer and wetter world; with
improved nutrition women could bear more children, and more of these
survived infancy to reproduce themselves eventually. They dispersed into
the new woodlands and steppe; they began to hunt in the uplands that had
previously been too cold and dry.

Although populations were greater, human lifestyles were little changed
from those of the people who had camped at Ohalo and Azraq at the LGM.
Nevertheless, archaeologists find a new uniformity in human culture.
After 14,500 BC people from the Euphrates River to the Sinai Desert, and
from the Mediterranean to Saudi Arabia, had adopted similarly shaped
microliths and methods of manufacture. With increased numbers, more
extensive travel and frequent gatherings of people, the old diverse
traditions of tool manufacture had been eclipsed. People throughout this
region chose to use rectangular- and trapeze-shaped microliths. These
became favoured over all others for the next 2,000 years.

The largest sites continue to be found within the Azraq basin and in the
woodlands of the Mediterranean hills. New settlements appear, such as
that of Neve David, established at the foot of the western slopes of
Mount Carmel in Israel.¹⁷ Excavations by Daniel Kaufman from Haifa
University revealed the remains of a small stone-built circular hut and
wall, together with many stone tools, a basalt grinding stone and
mortar, limestone bowls, beads made from seashells, and a human burial.
The skeleton had been laid on its right side with the knees tightly bent
up under the body. A flat grinding stone had been placed between the
legs, a broken mortar over the skull, and a broken bowl behind the neck
and shoulder. The placement of plant-grinding tools in the grave
suggests the importance of this activity and food source to the people
of Neve David. Kaufman thinks the fact that the mortar was broken is
significant: as such it was ‘dead’, just as the person in the grave was
dead.

From Wadi el-Uwaynid, Lubbock has travelled through 150 kilometres and
more than six millennia to arrive back in the thick woodlands of the
Mediterranean region. The date is 12,300 BC and he stands on the west
bank of the Hula Lake on an autumn afternoon, looking westwards towards
the hills covered with oak, almond and pistachio. Nestled into the
east-facing slope there is a settlement with the reds, russets and
browns of hide and brush dwellings merging almost seamlessly with the
surrounding woodland. It is much larger than any other settlement he has
seen, one that truly deserves to be called a village.

4 Village Life in the Oak Woodland

Early Natufian hunter-gatherer communities, 12,300–10,800 BC

Through gaps in the leafy trees John Lubbock sees five or six dwellings
aligned along the woodland slope. They are cut into the earth itself,
having subterranean floors and low drystone walls that support roofs of
brushwood and hide. With such well-built and neatly ordered dwellings
the village looks quite different to what now seem haphazardly planned
and hastily built settlements at Ohalo and Azraq. People have evidently
planned to live within this village all year round. It is ‘Ain Mallaha,
a village of the new lifestyle that has emerged within the oak woodlands
that grow across the Mediterranean hills.¹ More than a new lifestyle – a
completely new culture, that which archaeologists call the Natufian.²
Ofer Bar-Yosef, Professor of Archaeology at Harvard and doyen of west
Asian archaeology, believes this culture to be the ‘point of no turning
back’ on the road to farming.³

As he stands on the threshold of the village, Lubbock watches its people
at work. They are tall and healthy, dressed smartly in clothes made from
hide, some wearing pendants of shell and bone beads. Just as at Ohalo,
their main work is turning wild plants into food, plants that have been
gathered in the woodland and on the forest steppe. But their undertaking
is now quite different, far larger in scale and far harder work. The
stone mortars they use are of boulder proportions. There are many hands
at work – grinding, pounding, shelling and cutting. Baskets of acorns
and almonds are waiting to be opened and then ground into flour and
paste.

Lubbock strolls between the workers, peering over their shoulders,
stealing a little almond pulp to taste. Rich crushed-vegetable and
wood-smoke aromas meld with the rhythmic pounding of mortars, the gentle
chatter of adults and laughter of children. But not all the adults are
at work; some sit idly in the afternoon sun, at least two women are
heavily pregnant. Another leans against the wall of a dwelling with a
dog asleep in her lap. Lubbock passes by, stepping between pits lined
with plaster in which nuts are stored for future use, and enters her
dwelling. Its remnants will eventually be excavated by the French
archaeologist Jean Perrot in 1954 and become known unglamorously as no.
131.⁴

Dwelling 131 is a little larger than the others, perhaps 9 metres
across, allowing five or six people to sit or sleep in comfort. Parts of
the interior are dark and musty; elsewhere broken beams of afternoon sun
enter through the brushwood roof, a roof supported by internal posts
wedged upright and stabilised by rocks. The stone walls are draped with
hides and rush mats cover the floor.

Just inside the entrance there is a spread of ash where a fire had
burned the previous night to keep the biting insects at bay. Another
hearth now glows in the centre of the floor; a man squats alongside and
plucks a brace of partridges. He cuts the birds into joints and places
them to cook on hot stone slabs. Behind him a third fire is burning,
providing a focus for a few young people who are repairing bows and
arrows. Flat stones with deep parallel grooves are used to straighten
thin branches to be used as the shafts; razor-sharp flakes of flint are
attached using resin to form points and barbs.

Stone pestles and mortars, wicker baskets and wooden bowls, are stacked
around the walls. Hanging from the rafter is a group of tools quite
unlike any that Lubbock has seen before – sickles. Their bone handles
are either decorated with geometric patterns or have been carved into
the form of a young gazelle.⁵ The blades are made from five or six flint
flakes, set tightly into a groove using resin. As they dangle, spin and
catch the sunlight the blades glisten, having been polished by the many
thousands of plant stems they have cut.

Jean Perrot found the remnants of this domestic scene when he excavated
dwelling 131 at ‘Ain Mallaha – holes and clusters of stones where the
roof supports had been, bird bones scattered around stone slabs within
an ancient hearth, flint cores and flakes, grooved stones, basalt
mortars, and flint blades. Many of the blades hold ‘sickle-gloss’,
indicating that they had been used to cut a great number of plant stems,
most likely of wild wheat and barley. Of course Perrot did not find the
rush mats, the hides, wicker baskets and wooden bowls – we can only
guess at the presence of these to provide some comfort, and to make the
best use of the many materials available in the woodland.

A short distance from dwelling 131 Lubbock finds another that has been
abandoned – its roof and walls have long since collapsed, its stone
foundations robbed for use elsewhere. In the absence of the living, this
deserted and dilapidated dwelling has become a cemetery. The graves are
unmarked but contain richly decorated bodies. Jean Perrot found eleven
men, women and children, all from separate graves and probably members
of one family. Four of them had worn necklaces and bracelets made from
the toe bones of gazelle and seashells, notably the long, thin and
naturally hollow dentalium shells, as already seen at Azraq. One woman
had worn an elaborate bonnet on her head, made from row upon row of such
shells.⁶

Within a few years, dwelling 131 will also be abandoned and will house
the dead of another ‘Ain Mallaha family. Twelve individuals will be
buried there, five of whom will be decorated in a similar fashion. One
of the dead will be an elderly woman; she will lie with a puppy, curled
up as if asleep. Her hand will rest on its little body – much as it had
done throughout the dog’s short life.⁷

There is a large stone mortar carved into a protruding piece of bedrock
close to the centre of the village, on which Lubbock sits to appreciate
the scene. When I sat upon that same stone in 1999, ‘Ain Mallaha had
just undergone renewed excavations by another French archaeologist,
François Valla. It was deserted and silent other than the song of a
woodland bird. But Lubbock sees large nodules of basalt being turned
into pestles and mortars, the surface of one being decorated with an
intricate geometric design.⁸ He listens to the chipping of stone, the
chatter of voices and bark of dogs. He watches people making beads –
cutting dentalium shells into segments and threading them on to twine.
The wooden bowl from which the shells are taken also contains a bivalve
that had originated in the waters of the Nile. Perhaps it had been
traded from person to person, from settlement to settlement until it
travelled at least 500 kilometres north; or perhaps it was the memento
of a long journey made by one of the ‘Ain Mallaha villagers.⁹

As was the case at Ohalo and Azraq, people are chipping stone nodules.
At ‘Ain Mallaha a new design of microlith is being made: thin
rectangular blades of flint are carefully chipped into crescents – or
lunates as archaeologists call them. Some are used in sickles, others as
barbs on arrows. Why this particular design of microlith gained such
popularity remains unclear – probably for no reason other than that
people are such compulsive followers of fashion.

Lubbock leaves the village for the woodland as the light begins to fade.
The pounding slows, the rhythm is lost, and then it stops, as does the
chipping of stone. The ‘Ain Mallaha people return to their dwellings or
congregate around fires. Gentle chatter turns to quiet song. Mice and
rats come out to feed on the nuts and seeds that have been dropped; dogs
come to chase them away.

With the last of the light, Lubbock reads some more of Prehistoric
Times. Although disappointed to find nothing about western Asia, two
passages seem pertinent to ‘Ain Mallaha. In one, his Victorian namesake
has drawn together tiny scraps of evidence to suggest that dogs had been
the first domesticated species.¹⁰ But in another he seems to have been
completely wrong:

the true savage is neither free nor noble; he is a slave to his own
wants, his own passions; imperfectly protected from the weather, he
suffers from cold by night and the heat of the sun by day; ignorant of
agriculture, living by the chase, and improvident in success, hunger
always stares him in the face, and often drives him to the dreadful
alternative of cannibalism or death.¹¹

Modern John Lubbock wishes that he could show his namesake the
substantial houses, the clothing and food now being eaten within the
village – all made by people quite ignorant of agriculture but seeming
to be both noble and free. He drifts to sleep as the Natufian singing
merges imperceptibly with the hooting of owls and scratching of beetles.

‘Ain Mallaha was just one of several Natufian villages established at
around 12,500 BC in the woodlands of the Mediterranean hills. Another
was 20 kilometres to the southwest at Hayonim Cave.¹² Ofer Bar-Yosef and
his colleagues began excavating this cave in 1964, and continued for
eleven seasons of fieldwork. Six circular structures were found within
the cave, each about 2 metres in diameter, some with drystone walls
still standing up to 70 centimetres high and paved floors. One had been
used as a workshop rather than a dwelling, first as a limekiln and then
for working bone. Close to the cave wall a cache of rib bones from wild
cattle were found, some partially turned into sickles. Beads made from
fox teeth and the leg bones of partridges were also recovered – material
never used in this fashion by people at ‘Ain Mallaha. Conversely their
favoured bones for jewellery, the toe bones of gazelle, were extremely
rare at Hayonim.

This difference in jewellery suggests that the Natufian people from each
village were concerned with asserting their own identity. Marriage
between people from ‘Ain Mallaha and Hayonim seems to have been rare, as
the two populations were biologically distinct.¹³ As evident from their
skeletal remains, those from Hayonim were significantly shorter and a
large proportion of them had ‘agenesis’ of the third molar – which means
that it simply never grew – a condition that was very uncommon at ‘Ain
Mallaha. This inherited condition would have been equally present at
both villages had there been regular marriages between their peoples.
Yet it seems unlikely that either village contained sufficient
inhabitants to have been a viable reproductive community in itself. The
people at Hayonim may have been linked with those at another Natufian
village, known today as Kebara. These two villages share decorated bone
objects with almost identical, and complex, geometric designs.¹⁴

Each village had its own cemetery, often containing richly decorated
bodies. Some of the most spectacular burials were found in the cemetery
at El-Wad, a site at Mount Carmel in Israel. Almost one hundred Natufian
people were buried there, mainly as individuals, although some graves
contained several bodies.

El-Wad was one of the first Natufian sites ever found, excavated by
Dorothy Garrod of Cambridge University during the 1930s. She was a
remarkable figure – the first woman professor at Cambridge University
and the leader of several major expeditions to the Near East. She
discovered the Natufian culture when excavating in Shukbah Cave in the
western flank of the Judaean hills¹⁵ and came to believe that the
Natufian people were farmers – an idea now known to be incorrect. Within
the El-Wad cemetery Garrod found some particularly ornate decorations on
several of the bodies. One adult male alone had worn an elaborate
head-dress, a necklace and a band or garter around one leg, all made
with dentalium shells.

Whether such jewellery was worn in life as well as in death remains
unclear. The most elaborate jewellery adorned young adults, both men and
women – although rather more men than women were buried. It may have
denoted social identity, perhaps indicating wealth and power. Much of
the jewellery was made from dentalium shells, which could have been
gathered from the Mediterranean coast by the Natufian people themselves.
But Donald Henry, an archaeologist from the University of Tulsa, USA,
who has undertaken extensive studies in southern Jordan, suggests
another possibility. He thinks that the shells may have been acquired
from hunter-gatherers living in the open steppe of today’s Negev desert
in return for cereals, nuts and meat.

For the Natufians, it may well have been control of this trading
relationship that provided individuals with wealth and power – and the
key to maintaining these may have been to ensure that limited shells
were in circulation within their village. The most effective way of
doing that was the regular removal of large quantities by burying them
with the dead. Those graves were like our gold-filled bank vaults today,
designed to ensure that the small amount remaining in circulation –
whether of gold or seashells – maintains its value so that it confers
status or prestige on the few that have some to own.

The first rays of sunlight through leafy branches dapple the ground;
Lubbock wakes to hear footsteps and voices approaching from the woods.
Four men and a couple of boys are returning to ‘Ain Mallaha after a
hunting trip at dawn. They carry three gazelle carcasses, already gutted
and partially butchered but dripping a trail of blood through the trees.

In the village the carcasses are hung within a dwelling, away from the
sun and the flies. When roasted, the meat will be assiduously shared
between family and friends. The hunters are welcomed back and tell the
tale of the kill – how the men had waited in ambush while the boys
chased startled animals into a flurry of arrows. There is talk about the
various tracks and trails of animals they had seen, and the women learn
about any plant foods that appeared ready for collection. Two young
women take a wicker basket and leave for a spread of mushrooms that had
been seen, hoping to reach them before the deer. Lubbock decides to
follow.

All of the Natufian villages shared the same economic base as that of
‘Ain Mallaha. Indeed, all the villages are found in very similar
settings – at a juncture between thick woodland and forest steppe,
localities likely to have had permanent water supplies, suitable for
hunting gazelle and providing edible plants from the two contrasting
habitats. Gazelle bones are abundant in excavations at Natufian sites.
Other animals were also taken, such as deer and small game – foxes,
lizards, fish and game birds. The gazelle bones reveal more than just
the Natufian diet: they show that people probably lived in the villages
all year round.

We learn this from the gazelle teeth. Like those of all mammals, gazelle
teeth are largely composed of cementum that grows slowly in discrete
layers throughout the animal’s lifetime. During the spring and summer,
when growth is most rapid, these bands are opaque. During the winter,
when growth is restricted, they are black. So by taking a slice through
a tooth and inspecting the last cementum band laid down, one can
identify whether the animal had been killed in the summer or winter.

Daniel Lieberman, an archaeo-zoologist from Rutgers University, New
Jersey, USA, has used this technique to study gazelle teeth from
Natufian sites throughout western Asia.¹⁶ At all those he examined, some
animals had been killed in the spring/summer and some in the
autumn/winter; he took this to mean permanent occupation – or
‘sedentism’ as it is referred to by archaeologists. His findings on
gazelle teeth from earlier sites showed that occupation had occurred
either during the winter or the summer, reflecting the mobile lifestyle
of these hunter-gatherers.

Further lines of evidence support the idea of Natufian sedentism –
although some archaeologists strongly believe that the Early Natufian
people remained as mobile hunter-gatherers.¹⁷ It seems unlikely that so
much effort would have been expended on the construction of stone houses
if they were to be used for only a few weeks or months each year. The
many rat, mouse and sparrow bones within the village rubbish are also
telling; domestic strains appeared for the first time during the
Natufian, and may have evolved to take advantage of the new niche
created by permanent human settlement.¹⁸

This may also have been the case with the dog. The burial of a puppy at
‘Ain Mallaha is the most persuasive sign that wild wolves had evolved
into domesticated dogs by the time of the Natufian. Another dog burial
comes from Hayonim where three humans and two dogs were carefully
arranged together in one grave.¹⁹ These animals were not simply tame
wolves but truly domesticated dogs – they were much smaller than their
wolf ancestors. All animal species become reduced in size when the
domesticated variants arise, as we will see later with sheep, goats and
cows.

The first villages would have been attractive to wolves, coming to
scavenge on the permanent supplies of waste and for the ready supplies
of mice and rats. As such, they would have done a service to the
Natufian people by keeping the vermin under control; some animals may
have been tamed and used for hunting or as companions for the old and
sick. Others may have been used as guard dogs to warn of approaching
strangers. When isolated from the wild populations, these tame animals
may have rapidly become genetically distinct as the Natufian people
controlled their breeding to ensure the proliferation of some
characteristics rather than others. The consequence was a new species
entering the world: the domesticated dog.

Not all the Natufian people lived in villages all year round – perhaps
none of them did so. Several settlements on the east side of the Jordan
valley, such as Tabqa and Beidha, appear to have been used only for
brief periods. These have neither dwellings nor burials and seem most
likely to be temporary hunting camps, perhaps little different from
those that Lubbock saw at Azraq. The people at Beidha had hunted goat,
ibex and gazelle, and had dentalium shells from the Red Sea.²⁰ Whether
they spent part of the year in a proper village or lived an entirely
transient lifestyle like that of the much earlier Kebaran people,
remains unclear.

A dog decides to follow the two young women. It bounds past Lubbock,
looking very wolf-like, and soon disappears into the undergrowth. His
attempt to follow is soon abandoned as the women walk quickly using a
maze of tiny but well-trodden paths that wind between groves of oak and
almond trees, past clusters of lupins and thickets of hawthorn. Lubbock
loses their trail and finds himself in more open woodland close to
marshes that border the lake of the Hula basin. The paths continue and
patches of cultivated plants are found in the under-storey of the oak
trees. These include tangled peas and wild wheat with heavy drooping
ears of grain. Lubbock sits by one such stand to rest, hearing the dog
barking from afar.

Tame dogs, whether treated as pets or kept as working animals, are
rather like children. They need to be cared for and can become the
subject of intense relationships: dogs were as much ‘man’s best friend’
in the Natufian as they are today. This caring attitude to animals may
have spilled over on to the plants gathered by the Natufian people. We
should not think of them collecting cereal grains, picking fruit and
gathering nuts in bland economic terms – with no concern other than to
maximise their immediate yields for the minimum of effort. No
hunter-gatherer groups recorded by anthropologists have been like that,
and there is no reason to think that they were so in prehistory

The Bushmen of South Africa, the Aborigines of Australia and the Indians
of Amazonia have all displayed immense and intimate knowledge about the
plants around them, even those that have no economic value. Parts of
roots and clusters of seed-heads are often left in the ground to ensure
that there will be plants to gather at the same location in the
following year. Fire has frequently been used to burn off old stems and
encourage the growth of new shoots.

Christine Hastorf, an archaeologist from Berkeley, California, stresses
the significance of ‘plant nurturing’ in understanding the earliest
stages of plant domestication.²¹ She reminds us that with very few
exceptions plants have been gathered and cultivated by women who have
often applied the same attitudes and care for the plants in their
gardens as they do to the children within their houses. The Natufian
women may have been like those of the Barasana people of northwest
Colombia who maintain ‘kitchen gardens’ close to their dwellings. Most
of their garden plants are wild species but are nevertheless nurtured
for use as food, medicines, contraceptives and drugs. The Barasana
frequently exchange cuttings with their friends and relatives so that
each plant added to the garden comes with a story that serves to
maintain social links. Moreover many plants have symbolic meanings
associated with the origin myths of the Barasana people. In the words of
Hastorf, ‘To walk through a [Barasana] woman’s garden is to view her
daily life, her ancestral lineage and a history of her family’s social
relations.’²²

Any gardener today will understand this: in my own suburban garden, for
instance, my wife has plants that have been given as gifts, plants that
mark where our deceased pets have been buried, plants that we have
uprooted and taken with us from garden to garden as we have moved during
the last twenty years. Every year my wife meticulously collects marigold
seeds to resow the next. Many years ago her grandmother had given her
seeds from marigolds that she had herself collected and resown each year
throughout her long life.

We have no knowledge of how the Natufian people thought about the plants
around them. But in light of the permanence of their settlements, the
many mouths needing to be fed, and the abundance of grinding stones,
pestles and mortars, wild plants appear to have been managed in a way
that we would recognise as cultivation. I suspect that the stands of
wild cereals, the groves of nut trees, the patches of lupins, wild peas,
and lentils were treated as a wild garden, and that these were
manipulated and managed, used in social relations and infused with
symbolic meanings, just like the plants in the kitchen gardens of the
Barasana. Dorothy Garrod may have been wrong to think of the Natufian
people as farmers; but they were most certainly rather special
gardeners.

In this regard some artefacts from Natufian sites take on added
significance because they may actually depict the gardens themselves. At
Hayonim a rectangular slab of limestone, about 10 by 20 centimetres, was
incised with lines that divide the surface into distinct areas. Ofer
Bar-Yosef and Anna Belfer-Cohen, a specialist on Natufian art from the
Hebrew University in Jerusalem, propose that this pattern ‘can be viewed
as designating definite territories or “fields” of some kind,’²³ perhaps
separated by tiny paths. This slab is not unique; others have similar
designs and while they may not be spatially accurate maps of fields or
gardens, they may represent these in some abstract form – just like the
map of the London underground.

John Lubbock spends the morning reading Prehistoric Times and
bird-watching in the Natufian world of the Hula basin. After the sun had
climbed to burn off the few wispy morning clouds a pair of vultures
circled in the clear blue sky; a flight of geese arrived on the lake and
then song-birds landed on the wild wheat to feed upon the grain. Just as
Lubbock decides to return to ‘Ain Mallaha, a party of women arrive and
stand right beside him to inspect the wheat. They curse a little as it
has ripened more quickly than expected and they know that much will now
be lost. Within minutes the women are at work, cutting the stalks with
the flint-bladed sickles that Lubbock had seen dangling within dwelling
131. They cut the stalks at their base to acquire straw as well as
grain; just as they had feared, the ears shatter when touched,
scattering many of the spikelets – the seed with its long spike attached
– to the floor. Working quickly, they gather up the bundles of stalks
and ears and tie them into sheaths.

Back at the village, the ears are beaten into wooden bowls to release
the remaining spikelets; red-hot stones are added and swilled around.
Lubbock gathers that this parches the spikelets and turns them quite
brittle. Next they are emptied into wooden mortars and crushed to
release the grain; the mortars are emptied on to bark trays that are
agitated to separate and discard the chaff.²⁴ The grain goes back into
the mortars and is now finely ground into flour; after being mixed with
water and made into dough, it is cooked as flat bread-pancakes upon the
hot stones, no more than a few hours after growing within the wild
gardens of ‘Ain Mallaha.

We know that the Natufian people were cutting the wild cereals with
sickles. In the light of their decorated handles, this might have been
an activity infused with symbolic meaning, just as picking marigolds is
for my wife. Cutting with sickles would have been much more efficient
than beating the grain into baskets because it reduced the amount
falling uncollected to the ground.²⁵ Another impact of this new
harvesting method remained unknown to the Natufian people: cutting with
sickles laid the foundations for the transition from the wild to the
domesticated forms.

Recall that the principal difference is the brittleness of the ear – the
wild strains spontaneously fall apart when ripe, scattering their seed
on the ground while the domestic strains remain intact, ‘waiting for the
harvester’. Within the stands of wild cereals there would always have
been a few plants that were relatively non-brittle – rare genetic
mutants, estimated by Gordon Hillman as numbering one or two for every
2–4 million brittle individuals.

Those beating the stalks and catching the grain in baskets held below
would not have collected it from such genetic mutants. Only when cut by
sickles would the grain from these have been collected along with that
from the normal brittle plants. Imagine a situation in which a small
party of Natufians arrived to begin cutting a stand of wild cereals. If
the wheat or barley was already ripe, then much of the grain from the
brittle plants would already have been scattered. But the rare
non-brittle plants would still be intact. So when the stalks were cut,
the grain from those plants would have been relatively more abundant
within the harvest than it had been in the woodlands or on the steppe.

Now imagine what would have happened if the Natufian people began to
reseed the wild stands of cereals by scattering grain saved from a
previous harvest, or perhaps sowing it into holes made with a stick or
even into tilled ground. That seed grain would have had a relatively
high frequency of the non-brittle variants. When the new stand was cut
with sickles, the non-brittle variants would have been favoured once
again and hence gained an even higher presence within the harvested
grain. If this process had been repeated many times, the non-brittle
plants would gradually come to dominate. Eventually they would be the
only type of plant present – the domestic variant that ‘waits for the
harvester’ would have arisen. But if abandoned, the domestic strain
would gradually disappear; being unable to seed itself new genetic
mutants – those with brittle ears just like the original wild plants –
would be the only ones able to reproduce and would rapidly come to
dominate the stand once again.

Gordon Hillman and Stuart Davies, a biologist from the University of
Wales, have used their knowledge of plant genetics and ancient gathering
techniques – much of it acquired by experimentation – to estimate how
long the change from wild to domestic strains would take.²⁶ By using
computer simulation they showed that in ideal circumstances as little as
twenty cycles of harvesting and resowing in new patches could have
transformed a wild, brittle type of wheat into the domesticated
non-brittle variant. Under more realistic conditions, 200 to 250 years
is the most likely period of transition.

The archaeological evidence makes it clear that this transition did not
happen during the Natufian. There are microscopic differences between
the shape of the grain from domestic cereals and wild varieties, and
although cereal grains are rare in the Natufian archaeological record
all of those known are clearly from wild cereals. Not for another
millennium at least do we encounter the first domesticated grains – from
the settlements of Abu Hureyra and Tell Aswad in Syria, and Jericho in
Palestine. So the Natufian people appear to have cut the wild cereal
stands with their sickles for as much as 3,000 years without the
evolutionary leap from brittle to non-brittle plants.

There seems to be a very simple explanation for this, identified in some
remarkable research by Romana Unger-Hamilton during the 1980s while she
worked at the Institute of Archaeology in London.²⁷ Under the guidance
of Gordon Hillman she spent many months replicating the Natufian style
of harvesting wild cereals. Using identical sickles made with bone
handles and flint blades, she cut stands of wild wheat and barley on the
slopes of Mount Carmel, around the Sea of Galilee and in southern Turkey
in a series of controlled experiments. The blades were then
microscopically examined for signs of ‘sickle-gloss’ – the texture,
location and intensity of gloss will vary with different types of
cereals and at different stages of ripeness.

Unger-Hamilton found that the sickle-gloss on the true Natufian blades
was most similar to that on the blades she used to harvest cereals that
were not yet ripe. In that state, the brittle plants would have shed
only a little of their grain, so that it would be collected from the
non-brittle variants in virtually the same minute proportion as from
those plants within the stand. So even if the Natufian people were
sowing seed to generate new stands of wild cereals, non-brittle variants
were unable to become dominant. Harvesting the unripe ears was perfectly
sensible as it avoided the loss of most of the grain from the brittle
plants, which would have already been shed to the ground.

Another factor probably prevented the emergence of domesticated cereals
among the Natufians: their sedentary lifestyle. Patricia Anderson, of
the Jalès Research Institute in Paris, undertook a similar programme of
research to that of Romana Unger-Hamilton and confirmed many of her
results.²⁸ She also found that when wild stands are cut with sickles,
even when still in a ‘green’ stage, the grain that falls to the ground
is quite sufficient to provide for the next year’s crop. So the
Natufians would have only needed to sow if they were beginning a
brand-new plot of cereals – otherwise they could have relied upon
‘growback’ at the existing stands. Even if the grain collected by the
Natufian people did have a higher proportion of the non-brittle
variants, unless they were creating new plots of cereals in new places
these variants would never have had the opportunity to become the
dominant form. And as the Natufian people were sedentary, new plots were
never made. The Natufians remained as cultivators of wild cereals within
the wild gardens of the Mediterranean woodland.

These arguments about the Natufian people, their wild gardens and their
plant-gathering activities have one obvious weakness: very few botanical
remains have been recovered from their settlements. This is partly due
to poor preservation and partly because many excavations predated modern
recovery techniques. For direct evidence of the nature of
plant-gathering at 12,000 BC John Lubbock has to leave the Mediterranean
woodland and the Natufian culture. He has to travel 500 kilometres to
the northeast to another hunter-gatherer village, one found on the flood
plain of the Euphrates: the astonishing site of Abu Hureyra.

5 On the Banks of the Euphrates

Abu Hureyra and the rise of hunter-gatherer sedentism, 12,300–10,800 BC

The grass and flowers of the steppe are wet with dew as John Lubbock
approaches the village of Abu Hureyra. It is dawn on a midsummer’s day
in 11,500 BC. His journey from ‘Ain Mallaha took him from the dense oak
forests of the Mediterranean hills, through open woodland and finally
into the treeless steppe, into what is northwest Syria today. He passed
several villages close to rivers or lakes, all unknown to the modern
world. Now he pauses for the view – in the distance there is a plain,
beyond which a line of trees borders a wide-flowing river, the
Euphrates. Beyond that there are no more than shadowy horizons in the
misty light of the breaking day.

Another few minutes of walking brings the village into view; but it
requires a double take. It blends into its sandstone terrace just as
‘Ain Mallaha blended with its surrounding woods, seeming to have been
grown by the sun and moulded by the wind rather than constructed by
human hands. With every step the low and flat reed-covered roofs
clustered by the rim of the flood plain become a little clearer. Even
so, the boundary between nature and culture remains deeply obscure.¹

The people of Abu Hureyra are sleeping. Dogs are sniffing each other and
the ground, some scratching and some chewing at bones. The roofs are at
waist-height, supported on the small wooden frames of dwellings cut into
the soft stone.² Lubbock steps down into one and finds a small, cramped,
circular room little more than 3 metres across. A man and a woman sleep
on hides and a mattress of dry grass; a young girl does likewise upon a
bundle of hides.

The floor is littered with artefacts and rubbish – not pestles and
mortars as at ‘Ain Mallaha but flat and concave grinding stones. Chipped
stone artefacts are scattered across the floor, along with wicker
baskets and stone bowls, and even a pile of animal bones crawling with
flies. One small bowl contains tiny crescent-shaped microliths made of
flint, much like those at ‘Ain Mallaha. One side of the dwelling
contains a pile of dirt – the wall has crumbled and soil fallen in from
outside. There is a nauseating smell of rotting meat and stale air.

Much of village life occurs beyond these walls – they do not enclose
houses as we think of them today. In the outside spaces there are
cooking places, piles of sticks, bundles of reeds, sheets of bark, and
clusters of grinding stones. Evidently many people work together in
preparing the plants gathered from the wild gardens on the steppe and
the marshy woodland by the river’s edge. Lubbock stoops and lets the
multicoloured husks, stems, twigs and leaves that surround the stones
filter through his fingers. These are the waste, left precisely where
they fell from the grinding stones or were stripped from the gathered
bundles of plants and flowers. Near by there are baskets and stone bowls
brimming with nuts and seeds of assorted shapes and colours.

Elsewhere in the village Lubbock comes across a further cluster of
grinding stones; but these are surrounded by lumps of red stone and
powder instead of seed husks and plant stems. The grinding stones are
stained red from making pigment that is used for decorating human
bodies. Close by, three gazelles have been gutted but have yet to be
butchered; their carcasses are left hanging beyond the reach of dogs.
The Abu Hureyra people are as dependent upon hunting gazelle as on
gathering plants. But such animals are only principally hunted for
little more than a few weeks each summer when vast herds pass by close
to their village.³

Daily life at Abu Hureyra begins. The gazelle do not appear and the
hunters leave to search the river valley for wild pigs and wild ass. Few
animals now live in the vicinity of the village so the hunters will be
disappointed. The women and children work in the wild gardens, weeding,
killing bugs and collecting whatever has ripened in the sun.

Within days the herds arrive and the annual slaughter of gazelle begins.
Visitors are welcomed to the village. They bring shiny black obsidian
from southern Turkey as gifts and receive dentalium shells in return,
shells that had once been collected on Mediterranean shores and were
brought by previous visitors to Abu Hureyra.

For more than a thousand years the hunter-gatherers at Abu Hureyra will
continue to hunt the gazelle. The animals are so numerous that their
slaughter has no impact on the size of the herds. The women and children
will continue to tend their wild gardens and reap a rich harvest. The
accumulation of dirt, sand, lost artefacts and other debris within the
dwellings will become either unbearable or simply make access
impossible. And then the Abu Hureyra people will build new dwellings,
this time totally above the ground. But eventually hard times will
arrive. The drought of the Younger Dryas will disrupt the gazelle and
decimate the productivity of the steppe. The village will be abandoned,
the people returning to a life on the move.

At 9000 BC they will return, not as hunter-gatherers but as farmers.
They will build mud-brick houses and grow wheat and barley on the
alluvial plain. The gazelle herds will have resumed their migrations and
be hunted for another thousand years until the Abu Hureyran people
suddenly switch to herding sheep and goats. The houses will be
repeatedly rebuilt so that a mound – or tell – is formed, half a
kilometre across, 8 metres deep and containing more than one million
cubic metres of deposits. The remnants of the first subterranean
dwellings at Abu Hureyra will be deeply buried and lost from human
memory.

In 1972 the archaeologist Andrew Moore excavated part of the tell. As it
was a salvage operation before dam construction, his work was limited to
two seasons. Today the tell lies drowned beneath the waters of Lake
Assad. In the small area that he could excavate, Moore found several
dwellings and rubbish tips of the earliest inhabitants of Abu Hureyra.
There was no sign of a cemetery or indeed of any burials. This left him
in a quandary. What had they done with their dead, and were there the
same differences in wealth as had been evident at ‘Ain Mallaha?

Nevertheless, within those two seasons of work a wealth of information
was acquired about the village. It was one of the first excavations to
employ methods to ensure that even the tiniest and most fragile plant
remains were recovered. These included ‘flotation’ in which charred
seeds are literally made to float away from the sediment that encased
them, and then scooped off and prepared for study. Gordon Hillman found
that no less than 157 different species had been brought to the village,
and suspected that at least another hundred species had been collected
but left no archaeological trace.⁴

He was able to pinpoint at least two seasons of collection: from spring
to early summer and the autumn. But he thinks the people remained in
their village all year round; where else would they have gone in the
winter when conditions in the steppe and surrounding mountains would
have been bleak? In the high summer the most critical resource was
probably water from the valley. By staying at Abu Hureyra they could
have enjoyed plant foods that reached their prime in the summer, such as
the tubers from club-rush and nut-grass – although neither was found in
the archaeological remains.

Peter Rowley-Conwy and Tony Legge, two of the most prominent
archaeo-zoologists in the United Kingdom, have studied the annual
gazelle slaughter.⁵ From two tons of bone fragments, they showed that
only adults, the newborn and yearlings had been killed. This pinpointed
the slaughter as taking place during the early summer: only at that time
of year would this specific range of ages have been present.

This remarkable work by Moore, Hillman, Rowley-Conwy, Legge and many
other archaeologists shows that the hunter-gatherers of Abu Hureyra
enjoyed the most attractive environmental conditions that had existed
for many thousands of years, since long before the LGM. At no other
times had animals and plants been so abundant, so diverse and so
predictable in their availability – just as they were for the Natufian
inhabitants of the Mediterranean woodlands. This provided them with the
opportunity to give up the mobile lifestyle that had served human
society since its first appearance 3.5 million years ago on the African
savannah. But why do it?

Why create the social tensions that inevitably arise when one has
permanent next-door neighbours within a village? Why expose oneself to
human waste and garbage and the health risks that accompany a more
sedentary lifestyle? Why risk the depletion of the animals and plants
near one’s own village?

We can be almost certain that people were not forced into this lifestyle
by over-population. Natufian sites are no more abundant than those of
the previous times; if there had been a time of population pressure it
was at 14,500 BC when there is a dramatic increase in the number of
Kebaran sites and the standardisation of microlith forms. There is no
evidence for a population increase two millennia later when the first
Natufian villages appear. Moreover, from the evidence of their bones,
the Natufian people were reasonably healthy – quite unlike a people
being forced into an undesirable lifestyle by shortage of food.⁶

Anna Belfer-Cohen of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem has studied the
skeletal evidence and found very few signs of trauma, such as healed
fractures, nutritional deficiencies or infectious diseases. People under
stress tend to develop thin lines in their tooth enamel – called
hypoplasias. These indicate periods of food shortage, often immediately
after weaning. The lines are less frequent in Natufian teeth than in
those of farming people. But both Natufian teeth and those of early
farmers are heavily worn down. This confirms the importance of plants in
their diet: when seeds and nuts were ground down in the stone mortars,
grit would have become incorporated in the resulting flour or paste. And
when the food was eaten, this grit abraded the teeth, often leaving them
with hardly any enamel at all.

The Natufian people appear to have been quite peaceable as well as
healthy. There are no signs of conflict between groups, such as embedded
arrow points in human bones – unlike the situation that Lubbock will
find on his European, Australian and African travels. The Natufian
hunter-gatherer groups were good neighbours; there was plenty of land,
gardens and animals for all.

It is possible that the Natufian and Abu Hureyran people were prepared
to suffer the downside of village life – the social tensions, the human
waste, depletion of resources – to enjoy the benefits. François Valla,
the excavator of ‘Ain Mallaha, believes that the Natufian villages
simply emerged from the seasonal gatherings of the Kebaran people.⁷ He
recalls the work of the social anthropologist Marcel Mauss who lived
with hunter-gatherers in the Arctic at the turn of the century. Mauss
recognised that periodic gatherings were characterised by intense
communal life, by feasts and religious ceremonies, by intellectual
discussion, and by lots of sex. In comparison, the rest of the year,
when people lived in small far-flung groups, was rather dull.

Valla suggests that the aggregation of mobile hunters and gatherers
prior to the Natufian may have been similar, and the Natufian people
simply had the opportunity to stretch out those periods of aggregation,
until they effectively continued for the whole year. Indeed, all the key
elements of the Natufian villages were already present at Neve David:
stone dwellings, grinding stones, dentalium beads, human burials and
gazelle bones. As the climate became warmer and wetter, plants and
animals more diverse and abundant, people stayed longer and returned
earlier to their winter aggregation sites until some people remained all
year round.

The sedentary hunter-gatherers at ‘Ain Mallaha, Abu Hureyra and indeed
throughout western Asia between 12,500 and 11,000 BC were enjoying the
good life. The wealth of the archaeological evidence and the excellence
of the research allows us to capture in our minds some vivid images of
that life. We can readily imagine the acorns being carried in baskets to
‘Ain Mallaha, and then being pounded to a paste, the Abu Hureyran
hunters catching their first sight of the approaching gazelle, and the
dressing of a dead man with a dentalium shell head-dress, necklace and
leg band at El-Wad ready for burial.

But the image to remember is of a few families enjoying a day within the
forest steppe – away from the barking dogs, the smelly rubbish heaps,
the grumpy stay-behinds of their village. They are neither searching for
game nor collecting plants. It is a day of rest and I see them sitting
surrounded by a myriad of summer flowers. Children are making garlands
while young lovers sneak off to the long grass. Some talk, others sleep.
All enjoy the sun. They have full stomachs and no worries.

John Lubbock sits with them, after a few days spent living and working
at Abu Hureyra. He reads his book, discovering what his namesake had
known about climate change – very little. Victorian John Lubbock
appreciated that immense alterations of climate had occurred because he
had visited caves packed with reindeer bones in sunny southern France,
found oak trees within peat bogs and seen valleys cut by ancient rivers.
But in 1865 there had been no awareness of the complexity of climate
change, the idea of multiple glaciations only gaining favour in the
early twentieth century, and key events such as the Younger Dryas
remaining unknown until recent times. Nevertheless modern John Lubbock
was impressed with his namesake’s book, especially when he read that the
suggested causes of climatic change included variation in solar
radiation, alteration in the earth’s axis and changes in ocean currents
– all of which have since been proved and remain at the forefront of
scientific study.⁸

For a while Lubbock forgets his place in history; the butterflies, the
flowers, the sun and the breeze are quite timeless. But the date is
11,000 BC and a dramatic change in the climate is about to happen; the
families sitting on the steppe unknowingly teeter on the edge of an
environmental calamity: the Younger Dryas is about to arrive.

For generation after generation since the LGM, life for the people of
western Asia had been getting better and better. Ups and downs had
occurred: years of relatively cold and dry weather when plant foods and
game had been more difficult to find, years when these had been
particularly abundant. But the trend was towards a warmer and wetter
climate, a greater diversity of plants, increased yields of seeds,
fruits, nuts and tubers, larger and more predictable animal herds, and a
richer cultural and intellectual life. This had culminated in the
village life that Lubbock has seen at ‘Ain Mallaha and on the banks of
the Euphrates. The families from Abu Hureyra enjoying the summer
sunshine on the steppe were certainly the lucky ones and they probably
knew it. But they could not have known quite how lucky they were. For
within a few generations the tide of climate change had turned and life
was never quite so good again.

6 One Thousand Years of Drought

Economy and society during the Younger Dryas 10,800–9600 BC

Once again John Lubbock stands on the west bank of Lake Hula and looks
across to the village of ‘Ain Mallaha. Fifty generations, 1,500 years,
have passed since he watched vibrant activity within the village amidst
the oak, almond and pistachio. Times have changed. The woodland is
sparse. The trees and undergrowth lack the luscious growth that had
seemed to cosset the people of ‘Ain Mallaha with a promise of abundant
food. Within the village, roofs and walls have collapsed and some
dwellings are no more than piles of rubble. There are new circular
structures, but these are small ramshackle affairs.

Fifty kilometres to the southwest, the village of Hayonim has been
abandoned altogether. After two hundred years of occupation, people left
the cave to live on the terrace, using their previous dwellings for the
burial of their dead. But even those new houses are now deserted.
Brambles and weeds, snakes and lizards, lichens and moss are the only
residents as nature begins to reclaim its stone, welcoming the limestone
walls, the basalt mortars, and the flint blades back within the earth.
Abu Hureyra is the same – the people gone, empty dwellings left to
crumble, artefacts abandoned and forgotten.

The date is 10,800 BC. Sedentary village life exists only in the
stories, passed from generation to generation, of people who live in
transient campsites scattered throughout the struggling woodland and the
now desert-like steppe. The cultural achievement of the Natufian remains
as no more than a faint echo in the artefacts, the dress and the social
customs of these people – people whom archaeologists refer to as the
Late Natufians. Many of them periodically meet together at ‘Ain Mallaha,
El-Wad or Hayonim, bringing the bones of their dead to rebury alongside
their ancestors at what have become sacred sites existing in that nether
world between history and myth.

The experiment of sedentary village life lasted for close on two
thousand years but ultimately failed, forcing people to return to a more
ancient peripatetic lifestyle. Before so doing, Natufian culture had
spread far beyond the Mediterranean woodlands claimed by Ofer Bar-Yosef
to have been its ‘homeland’. The signature of this culture – the
crescent-shaped microliths – became widespread throughout western Asia,
with Late Natufian settlements appearing all the way from the southern
deserts of the Arabian peninsula to the banks of the Euphrates.

The spread of Natufian culture suggests that the sedentary villages were
partly victims of their own success. Their inhabitants are likely to
have grown in number unremittingly. Mobile hunter-gatherers have a
natural constraint on their numbers as they have to carry not only their
possessions but also their youngest as they move from site to site.
Childbirth must be spaced at three- to four-yearly intervals as it is
not possible to carry more than one child at a time. The Natufian
residents of ‘Ain Mallaha, Hayonim and other villages were able to
reproduce more freely.

It seems likely that the spread of Natufian culture arose partly from
groups of people leaving their villages to establish new settlements.
This may have been the only way that ambitious young men and women could
gain power for themselves. But another reason for dispersal also
presents itself: there was no longer enough food to go round. Late
Natufians heading into the Negev desert to establish villages such as
Rosh Horesha and Rosh Zin,¹ or those close to the Mediterranean coast as
at Nahal Oren,² or at settlements such as Mureybet on the banks of the
Euphrates,³ may have been some of the original economic migrants.

The village people had begun to over-exploit the wild animals and plants
on which they relied. The gazelle bones from their rubbish heaps provide
a telling story about attempts to manage the herds that ultimately
backfired and led to a shortage of food. Carol Cope, from the Hebrew
University in Jerusalem, has made meticulous studies of the gazelle
bones from Hayonim and ‘Ain Mallaha.⁴ The mountain gazelles hunted from
these villages behaved quite differently to those hunted at Abu Hureyra.
They remained in the vicinity of the Natufian settlements all year
round, never forming the massive herds that were ambushed near the
Euphrates.

Cope found that the Natufian people preferred to kill the male animals.
This was evident because the foot bones (the astragali) she studied were
easily divided into two groups on the basis of size, with the larger
bones outnumbering the smaller by four to one. Big feet imply big
bodies, and for gazelle those bodies would have been male.

When the Kebaran people had used Hayonim Cave, five thousand years
before the Natufian became established, they killed male and female
gazelles in equal proportion.⁵ By preferentially selecting the males,
the Natufians were probably attempting to conserve the gazelle
populations. Although both sexes were born in equal proportions, only a
few male animals were actually needed to maintain the herds. Carol Cope
thinks that the Natufian people decided that the males were expendable
while recognising the need to ensure that as many females as possible
gave birth to young.

If this was their aim, it went horribly wrong. The Natufians made the
mistake of not just hunting the males, but selecting the biggest that
they could find to kill. So the female gazelles were left to breed with
the smaller males – unlikely to have been their natural choice. As small
fathers give rise to small offspring, and as the Natufians killed the
largest offspring, the gazelles reduced in size with each generation.
Hence the gazelle bones found in the rubbish dumps of Hayonim Cave were
from animals much larger than those from the rubbish dumps on the
terrace – the two being five hundred years apart.

Smaller gazelles meant that there was less meat available to feed an
ever-growing population. This shortage was compounded by
over-exploitation of the ‘wild gardens’: too many stalks of the wild
cereals had been cut and excessive quantities of acorns and almonds had
been collected for natural replenishment to occur.

The health of the Natufian people began to suffer, especially that of
the children. This is evident from their teeth.⁶ Those from the Late
Natufian people buried at Hayonim have a much higher frequency of
hypoplasias than their Early Natufian predecessors. They also had fewer
teeth remaining when they died, and those teeth that survived had caries
– two further signs of poor health.

Food shortages can also lead to poor physical growth – as is evident
among famine victims today. This might explain why many of the Later
Natufian people, such as those buried at Nahal Oren, were shorter than
those who had first lived at ‘Ain Mallaha. Just as in the modern world,
the men were affected more than the women, and so the Late Natufian
sexes were more similar in body size than had once been the case.⁷

Food shortages within the Natufian villages, leading to emigration and
eventual abandonment, cannot be blamed solely on the Natufian people
themselves, on their failure to control their own numbers. The problems
of population growth are likely to have been eclipsed by something over
which people had no control at all: climatic change.

The Younger Dryas, one thousand years of cold and drought, was triggered
by the massive influx of glacial melt waters into the North Atlantic
when the North American ice sheets collapsed. Its impact on the
landscapes of western Asia is readily seen in the pollen grains from the
Hula core.⁸ The sediments laid down within that lake after 10,800 BC
show a dramatic reduction in the quantity of tree pollen, indicating
that much of the woodland had died through lack of rain and warmth.
Indeed, within five hundred years conditions little different to those
of the LGM had returned: a devastating collapse of food supplies just as
population levels had reached an all-time high.

With the double-whammy of population pressure and climatic
deterioration, we should not be surprised at the collapse of Early
Natufian village life. But people could not simply return to how their
Kebaran forebears had lived. Not only were population numbers
substantially greater but the Late Natufian people had a legacy of
sedentary life: new technology, new social relationships, new attitudes
to plants and animals, new concepts about land and dwellings, perhaps
even those about ownership and property.

There could be no turning back from such ideas, even though people had
returned to the ancient lifestyle of transient campsites and weary feet.

Before we follow the story of the Late Natufian people of the Jordan
valley and return to Lubbock’s travels, we must make a brief visit 1,000
kilometres to the east. This takes us beyond the now deserted village of
Abu Hureyra, beyond the Euphrates and into the foothills of the Taurus
and Zagros mountains. Here, rather than villages being abandoned during
the Younger Dryas, they were created for the very first time.

The Zagros region has ill-defined boundaries and is topographically
diverse; it includes the upper part of the Mesopotamian plain, rolling
hills, deep valleys, crags and mountain peaks. The changes in exposure
and altitude created dramatic differences in the extent of rainfall and
temperature, producing many localised pockets of lush vegetation even
when the general conditions were cold and dry.

Throughout the whole region temperatures fell and rainfall diminished,
knocking out many of the trees that had recently spread from the
Mediterranean coast. But the sheltered lowland valleys provided a refuge
for copses of oak, pistachio and tamarisk, as well as for game animals
forced down from the now bitterly cold higher slopes.

The hunter-gatherers had to follow the plants and animals and settle
within those valleys at much higher densities than when they roamed
widely across the hills. Within these valleys they built some of the
most elaborate architecture yet seen in the history of the world. Hallan
Çemi Tepesi, found on the banks of a small river in the foothills of the
Taurus Mountains, is the most intriguing of these new villages.⁹ In 1991
the archaeological site was threatened by dam construction. A joint
American and Turkish team undertook excavations, they found traces of
structures with stone foundations and wattle-and-daub walls. Precisely
when these had been built remains unclear; the few radiocarbon dates
span more than two thousand years but the major period of occupation
seems to have been around 10,000 BC. The people at Hallan Çemi Tepesi
had gathered a wide variety of plant foods including almonds,
pistachios, plums and pulses. They hunted wild goats, deer and wild
boar.

Some of the structures were domestic dwellings containing hearths,
grinding stones and utilitarian artefacts. But others had figurines,
decorated stone bowls and obsidian that had originated 100 kilometres to
the north. Domestic tasks had been excluded from these structures,
reserving them for social or ritual activity.

Decorated stone bowls were made from fine sandstone; some had flat bases
while others were rounded, with pierced sides for suspension across a
fire. Many were decorated with incised hashes, zigzags and meanders.
Some had animal images – a line of three dogs parades along the surface
of one vessel. A number of the pestles had been highly polished; one had
its handle carved into a stylised goat’s head. Many beads were found,
coming in a variety of shapes and sizes and made from coloured stones.
So-called figurines were made from the same white stone used for making
bowls.

Hallan Çemi Tepesi appears far too substantial for a seasonal
hunter-gatherer camp; considerable labour had been invested in the
buildings, and the larger stone vessels had evidently been made as
fittings. The highly developed material culture and obsidian trade
suggest a society as complex as that which had flourished at ‘Ain
Mallaha – and perhaps one even more immersed in a world of symbols and
ritual. John Lubbock will only discover the consequence of these
developments much later in his travels – when he arrives in Mesopotamia
in 11,000 BC after having journeyed almost entirely around the world.

Archaeologists are still struggling to understand the new lifestyle that
the Late Natufian people of the Jordan and Euphrates valleys adopted
during the Younger Dryas. A telling source of evidence is their burial
practice, and how this had changed from those of their village-based
ancestors.¹⁰ Perhaps the most striking development is that people were
no longer interred wearing elaborate head-dresses, necklaces, bracelets
and pendants made from animal bones and seashells. The fact that about a
quarter of the Early Natufians had been buried in this fashion suggested
that some had been much more wealthy and powerful than others.

Wealth and power had evidently been dependent on sedentary village life.
This provided an élite with the opportunity to control the trade that
brought seashells and other items to the villages. A return to mobile
lifestyles swept away their power base and society became egalitarian
once again, much as it had been in the Kebaran period. The absence of
seashells adorning the dead was not because such shells were no longer
available – they are found in abundance in Late Natufian settlements.
Rather than being placed with the dead they were simply discarded with
the domestic rubbish, along with bone beads and pendants. The shells had
lost their value because there was no longer any control over their
distribution – mobile hunter-gatherers were able to collect seashells
for themselves and trade with whom they wished.

Another sign of a return to a more egalitarian society was a switch from
burying people predominantly in groups – probably as members of a single
family or lineage – to individual interments. Evidently family
membership no longer held the same significance – people were valued on
the basis of their accomplishments and personality, rather than their
blood ties. But it is a third change in burial practices that is the
most telling about changing society during the Natufian. A large
proportion of the Late Natufian burials are of jumbled collections of
bones, or of a skeleton with parts missing – frequently the skull.

These are known to archaeologists as secondary burials. They show that
funeral rites were far more than the single event of placing a body into
a grave and leaving it there. Instead there were at least two, perhaps
several, stages to the burial ritual – most likely culminating when many
groups gathered together for the final passing of the dead.

It is an autumn day in 10,000 BC. Dusk falls across Lake Hula, seemingly
announced by a flight of geese. John Lubbock settles down close to his
small fire, happy to watch the darkness descend and for sleep to arrive.
But within minutes he is disturbed by human voices coming from a
travel-weary party who pass by on their way to ‘Ain Mallaha. Some are
old and walk with sticks; some are young and carried by weary parents.
Loud barks come from the dilapidated village, answered with little more
than muted yelps by the dogs that travel with these people. To the dogs,
‘Ain Mallaha will be just another of many settlements visited in the
course of a year. But to the people it is a place with no equal – it is
their ancestral home and this is their first visit for many years.

Their journey has taken them to several of their temporary camps – sites
abandoned when the local game and plants had become too depleted to
sustain their presence. They visited places where people had died and
been buried. At each grave, bones were exhumed and placed in baskets to
be taken to ‘Ain Mallaha. From some, they took near-complete skeletons
held together by dried skin and tendons; from others, just the skull.
Whenever they rested on their journey, the old recalled the visits that
their fathers and grandfathers had made to ‘Ain Mallaha, bringing the
bones of their own dead for reburial. The young listened eagerly. They
knew the stories by heart: how their ancestors had dwelt at ‘Ain Mallaha
all year round; how there had been an abundance of food; how they had
adorned their bodies with elaborate jewellery and clothes; how the wolf
had become the dog.

Lubbock joins the party and enters the village of ‘Ain Mallaha where
respectful and formulaic greetings are made with the handful of people
who live in the ramshackle dwellings and guard the site. The baskets and
the few belongings they carry are laid to rest. A fire is lit and a
little food shared before sleep claims them all.

During the next few days three more groups arrive at ‘Ain Mallaha, each
bringing baskets with the bones of their dead. Almost one hundred people
have now gathered together, ready to relive the ancestral past. Two
further days pass by while the woods are scoured for game and plant
foods for the feasts. Stories are retold, and then retold again.

Lubbock helps with the clearance of debris from one of the collapsed
dwellings: boulders, brambles, rotting timbers and the earth. The
ancient cemeteries of ‘Ain Mallaha are reopened. Amid singing and
chanting, the bones of the new-dead are removed from their baskets and
placed within the ground. By doing so, the past and present are joined
as one. The act of reburial, the days of celebration that follow, the
community life, story-telling and feasting recreate for the living the
days of the ancestral past. The challenge of the present – the struggle
for survival during the severity of the drought-ridden Younger Dryas –
is momentarily forgotten.

The people remain at ‘Ain Mallaha for as long their food supplies allow
– ten days, perhaps two weeks at most. They talk endlessly about where
they have been, who they have seen, and what the future might hold. They
exchange gifts: stones, shells and, most intriguing of all, leather
pouches of cereal grain, peas and lentils.

Finally the groups depart and go their separate ways, each having gained
some new members and lost others. They are all grateful for the return
to their transient lifestyle within the arid landscapes of the
Mediterranean hills, the Jordan valley and beyond. It is, after all, the
only lifestyle they have known and it is the one that they love. Lubbock
has grown to love it too, especially when in the company of these people
who have a tale to tell about every valley and every hill, every pool of
water and every grove of trees. He joins a party that sets off walking
towards the southeast, heading for the Jordan valley. Bags of seed
dangle from their waists and swing like pendulums, seemingly conscious
of time itself, knowing that there is little left for those who hunt and
gather for their food.

There is no direct archaeological evidence that the Late Natufian people
carried bags of cereal grain, lentils and peas. But if they had done so,
and then scattered the seed when arriving at their autumn camps and
gathered the summer harvest before moving on to live elsewhere, it would
explain how domesticated wheat and barley evolved.

Patricia Anderson’s experimental work has shown that the reseeding of
existing stands – as the Early Natufians may have done – would have made
little difference to the proportion of the non-brittle variants due to
the amount of grain already in the soil.¹¹ What was needed for
domestication to occur was that brand-new plots of cereals, peas and
lentils were regularly sown and harvested, and this is just what many
Late Natufian people are likely to have done. But what could have caused
them to do so?

We know that times were hard in the increasingly arid landscapes of the
Younger Dryas, but quite how hard remains unclear. The droughts
certainly caused many ponds and rivers to disappear completely, and the
larger lakes to shrink in size. The people who lived in the south, in
today’s deserts of the Negev and Sinai, were most likely hit the
hardest. They returned to a completely transient hunter-gatherer way of
life, one much like that of the Kebaran people. Survival required
improved hunting weapons: game had become scarce and consequently
success had become essential when a kill was possible. And so we see the
invention of the Harif point – a rhombic-shaped arrow-head.¹²

Further north, the impact of the Younger Dryas may have been less
severe. Yet survival still required more than just a return to the
ancient mobile hunter-gatherer lifestyle, especially as there were many
more people now needing food than had been the case during the Kebaran
period, before the Early Natufian experiment with permanent dwellings.
One response was to hunt a much wider range of animals than before; and
hence we find on Late Natufian settlements the bones of many small-game
species as well as the ever-present gazelle.¹³

Another response was to continue, and perhaps expand, the cultivation of
plants. Wild cereals were particularly hard hit by the Younger Dryas
owing to a decrease in the concentration of carbon dioxide (CO₂) in the
atmosphere.¹⁴ This diminution, carefully documented from air bubbles
trapped in the Antarctic ice, inhibited their photosynthesis and
markedly reduced their yields. Consequently, whatever cultivation
practices had begun during the Early Natufian – weeding, transplanting,
watering, pest control – may have now become essential to secure
sufficient food. And these may have created the first domesticated
strains.

This appears to be what occurred at Abu Hureyra just before its
abandonment. When Gordon Hillman studied the cereal grains from the site
he found a few grains of rye from plants that had undergone the
transition into domestic forms. When dated, they were shown to lie
between 11,000 and 10,500 BC – the oldest domesticated cereal grain from
anywhere in the world. Along with these grains, Hillman found seeds from
the weeds that typically grow in cultivated soil. And so it appears
that, as the availability of wild plant foods declined due to the onset
of the Younger Dryas, the Abu Hureyra people invested an ever greater
amount of time and effort in caring for the wild rye, and by doing so
unintentionally transformed it into a domestic crop.¹⁵ But even this
could not support the village – it was abandoned as people were forced
to return to a mobile lifestyle, perhaps carrying pouches of cereal
grain. The domesticated rye of Abu Hureyra reverted to its wild state.

With their increased interest in plant cultivation, the Late Natufians
drifted away from the depleted woodlands where their forebears once
flourished. They were drawn to the alluvial soils of the valleys, not
only those of the River Jordan, but also those found by the great rivers
of the Mesopotamian plain, and in the vicinity of lakes and rivers
throughout the Near East. Large expanses of these rich, fertile soils
became available as the rivers and lakes shrunk in size during the
Younger Dryas. Wild, but cultivated, cereals grew well in such soil,
especially when close to the meagre springs, ponds and streams that
survived in the arid conditions.

The few rye grains from Abu Hureya are the only existing evidence that
such cultivation in the Late Natufian created a domesticated type of
cereal – one that ‘waited for the harvester’. It is possible that wheat,
barley, pulses and flax were similarly transformed by the planting and
harvesting techniques employed during the arid Younger Dryas. The plain
fact is that at present we simply do not know exactly when or where the
very first domestic strains appeared, or whether these evolved just once
for each species, or whether they evolved independently or as a package.
A pioneering study in 1997 compared the genetics of wild wheat from
surviving stands in the Fertile Crescent with those of modern
domesticated wheat and claimed that the hills of southeast Turkey, known
as the Karacadağ, is the likely location of domestication –
approximately 200 kilometres north of Abu Hureyra¹⁶ – although this
needs further verification. We shall shortly see that a remarkable
archaeological site is found in the vicinity of those hills.

It may have taken another thousand years or more for domestic wheat,
barley and pulses to appear – possibly this did not happen until new
villages and even towns had been established. But my guess is that
somewhere in the Fertile Crescent, at some time during the Younger
Dryas, one or more bands of mobile hunter-gatherer-cultivators had begun
to carry new types of seed around. They may have noticed how much better
their yields had become but they were surely quite unaware that those
seeds were cultural dynamite. And their short fuse began to burn when
the Younger Dryas came to its dramatic end.

At 9600 BC global temperatures rose by 7°C in less than a decade. It was
a phenomenal helter-skelter change in climate. There is a sudden upsurge
in the quantity of tree pollen in the sediments of the Hula core,
although woodland never returned to the density and lushness that had
been enjoyed by the Early Natufian people of 12,500 BC.

The impact upon the Late Natufian people was felt within a generation.
Localities that had been able to sustain no more than a seasonal
campsite, offered the possibility of a permanent home. Once again wild
plant foods were abundant, closely followed by burgeoning animal
populations. Streams and rivers flowed with renewed vigour; lakes
reclaimed the soils they had for so long abandoned. Wild cereals
benefited from increased CO₂ in the atmosphere.

The tricks of cultivation, those that had provided no more than meagre
supplements to the diet of wild foods during the drought-ridden Younger
Dryas, now produced abundant quantities of grain, peas and lentils. So
the opportunity arose for the Early Natufian experiment in village life
to be undertaken once again – an experiment perhaps remembered by the
stories passed from generation to generation, an almost mythical way of
life that could again become a reality. The opportunity was grasped –
and this time there really was no turning back.

For the Early Natufians the key to village life had been the gazelle,
the produce from the oak, almond and pistachio, and the wealth of plant
foods gathered from the woodland undergrowth and the forest steppe. When
salvation from the Younger Dryas arrived at 9600 BC a quite different
environment was the key: it was on the alluvial valley soils that the
new phase of human history began. Archaeologists call it the Neolithic –
the New Stone Age.

