7 The Founding of Jericho

Neolithic architecture, burial and technology of the Jordan valley, 9600–8500 BC

John Lubbock stands in the evening shadow of the Palestinian hills,
looking towards a cluster of small round houses in the valley below.
They have flat thatched roofs and are intermixed with brushwood
shelters. The latter are not dissimilar to those he had seen at Ohalo at
20,000 BC, but the houses are completely new. Willows, poplars and fig
trees surround the village, evidently fed by a local spring and growing
luxuriantly in the new warm, wet world of the Holocene. Beyond, there
are marshes that reach to the edge of Lake Lissan – known today as the
Dead Sea.

Many trees have been felled to provide building material and to create
small fields for barley and wheat. Whether such crops are biologically
domestic or wild seems quite unimportant, as the new world of farming
has certainly arrived. The date is 9600 BC and John Lubbock looks upon
Jericho, a village that marks a turning point in the history of western
Asia, perhaps the history of the world.

My own first view of Tell es-Sultan, ancient Jericho, was just as
striking but rather less picturesque. I too stood within the shadow of
the Palestinian hills, about half a kilometre to the west of what had
become a great mound constituted by several millennia-worth of collapsed
buildings and human debris, eroded by the sun, wind and rain. Far to the
east there were bands of brilliant yellows and dazzling whites of the
Jordan valley still burning in the sun; immediately below me the drab
grey, breeze-block buildings of the Palestinian town that now surrounds
the ancient site. But there, in the centre of my view, was Tell
es-Sultan, renowned as the ‘oldest town in the world’. It looked like an
ancient quarry, even a bomb-site.

That, of course, was the fault of my profession – the archaeologists who
began to dig the mound in 1867. A few years later Captain Charles Warren
had come to search for the walls destroyed by the trumpets of Joshua and
his Israelites, believing that Tell es-Sultan was biblical Jericho. A
team of German scholars followed him between 1908 and 1911, and then
John Garstang of Liverpool University in the 1930s. But it was Kathleen
Kenyon’s great excavations between 1952 and 1958 that revealed ancient
Jericho to the world.¹

Kenyon had written how ‘the oasis of Jericho stands rather as one
imagines the Garden of Eden’.² The green trees and arable farmland that
surrounded the Jericho I looked upon sprawled for many kilometres beyond
the neat oasis that Kenyon had seen. Modern irrigation now carries the
water of ‘Ain es-Sultan – the spring which gave rise to the village – to
fields far away in the valley. So I used my imagination to cut down
those distant trees and planted many more palms around the mound. I
demolished the buildings of concrete and breeze-block, and planted
cornfields in their stead. I then pitched the cluster of white tents
that Kenyon had used at the foot of the mound. Once erected, I could see
a stream of workmen leaving the mound at the end of the day’s work, the
archaeologists and students settling down for tea before beginning to
sort the finds.

This was the day that they gained the first hint of the most ancient
buildings within the mound. The Bronze Age town, and that of the Later
Neolithic rectangular buildings were already well known. But on that
day, one which I knew to be some time in 1956, ‘it became clear’, Kenyon
would later write, ‘that we were penetrating down into a different phase
… the floors were of mud and not plaster … the walls were curved and the
plan of the houses seemed to be round.’³

We know that parties of Natufian people had camped by the spring as a
scatter of their crescent-shaped tools have been found. They most likely
planted cereals, peas and lentils and gained one meagre harvest before
departing to live elsewhere in the valley or in the hills.

Around 9600 BC the summer droughts came to an end. Renewed rainfall fed
the streams that gushed between the Palestinian hills; the River Jordan
began to swell. Thick layers of rich fertile soil were deposited across
the Jordan valley by new annual floods, and these were watered by the
spring that flowed with a new-found vigour. The cultivated crops
flourished, most likely replacing the untended wild plants as the main
provider of food. The Late Natufians extended the duration of their
stay, until history repeated itself and sedentary village life was
reborn far from those Mediterranean woodlands favoured by the Early
Natufians. And so Jericho was founded, and with it people became
farmers.

People have continued to live at Jericho right up to the present day.
The first village was buried below houses, storerooms and shrines built
by successive generations, those who used pottery, bronze, and then
entered into the annals of Old Testament history. And thus a giant mound
was created by the spring of ‘Ain es-Sultan, 250 metres in length and
more than 10 metres in height. It consisted of collapsed mud-brick walls
and layer upon layer of house floors and rubbish pits; but as well as
human debris, the mound contained the lost belongings and concealed
burials from 10,000 years of human history.

Kathleen Kenyon (1906–78) arrived at Jericho wanting to apply what to
her were very modern techniques of excavation. Like Dorothy Garrod, who
had discovered the Natufian, Kenyon was one of the great British
archaeologists of the twentieth century. Both women succeeded in what
was still essentially a man’s world, Kenyon studying at Oxford during
the 1920s, and then directing excavations in England and Africa. She
acted as director of the Institute of Archaeology at University College,
London, during the war and eventually became principal of St Hugh’s
College, Oxford. She received many honours, culminating in being made a
Dame of the British Empire in 1973.⁴

Her aim in 1952 was both to further explore the final phases of the
ancient town, that which might relate to the biblical story, and to
discover the earliest remains, which she thought more important and
deserving of ‘thorough exploration’. She was quite right. This became
evident to the world in 1957 when she published a popular account of her
work, Digging Up Jericho. The academics, however, had to wait until the
early 1980s before the suitably massive volumes describing the
architecture, the pottery and the key sequence of layers within the
tell, appeared.⁵ Sadly, Kenyon had died a few years before their
publication.

John Lubbock is now within the village, helping to construct a mud-brick
house. A great deal of building work is under way as the brushwood
shelters are gradually replaced by more permanent constructions. With
the reliable winter rains, productive harvests and abundant wild game
within the valley, the Jericho people have no need to leave. Whenever
they choose to spend several weeks or even months away, visiting friends
and family or on extensive hunting and trading expeditions, they know
that they will return to Jericho. And so they are quite prepared to
invest time and energy in constructing mud-brick houses and clearing
fields. Once a few houses had been built, Jericho attracted new
residents who were prepared to leave their own hunter-gatherer groups to
join the novel lifestyle of cultivating crops.

Lubbock has spent his morning digging clay from the valley floor and
hauling it on a wooden sledge to the village; there it is mixed with
straw and cut into oblong bricks which are left to dry in the sun. They
will be bonded together with a mud mortar to make the walls of round
dwellings, each about 5 metres in diameter and with sunken floors. The
upper walls will be constructed from sticks and branches, the roof from
reeds smeared with clay.

That evening, after Lubbock has washed in the spring, he walks around
the village and counts no less than fifty dwellings – some arranged
around courtyards for use by extended families, others standing alone or
in isolated clusters. There are hearths both inside and out and a heavy
pall of wood smoke hangs within the alleys. People sit in the
courtyards, some at work weaving mats and baskets, others exchanging
news and devising plans for the following day. At 9600 BC there are
likely to be over five hundred people living at Jericho – perhaps the
very first time in human history that a completely viable population was
living in the same place at the same time.

Within a few hundred years Jericho had grown even larger, to more than
seventy dwellings, perhaps with a population of one thousand. A great
deal more of the surrounding woodland had been cleared and large areas
were under cultivation. Many of the original dwellings had already
collapsed or been deliberately knocked down so that others could be
built on their ruins. But the most striking difference to the village
was that its western side, that which faced the Palestine hills, had
been enclosed by a massive stone wall and a large circular tower had
been constructed inside.

Kenyon discovered these constructions during her excavations in 1956.
The wall, 3.6 metres high and 1.8 metres wide at the base, seems
unlikely to have encircled the whole settlement as no trace of it could
be found on its eastern side. Inside this wall she found the remnants of
the tower, 8 metres in height, 9 metres in diameter at its base, and
estimated to weigh 1,000 tons. An internal staircase with twenty-two
stone steps led to its summit. Such architecture was completely
unprecedented in human history, and is the most remarkable of Kenyon’s
discoveries – at least a hundred men working for a hundred days would
have been necessary to build the wall and tower. As she herself
proposed, ‘in conception and construction this tower would not disgrace
one of the more grandiose medieval castles’.⁶ Both the wall and tower
remain quite unique for this period.

Kenyon assumed that these had been constructed to defend the town from
attack, a seemingly irresistible conclusion, given Jericho’s biblical
associations. It wasn’t until 1986 that Ofer Bar-Yosef asked some
obvious questions: who were the enemies of Jericho? Why was the wall not
rebuilt after it had become buried by house debris and refuse after no
more than two hundred years? Why are there no other fortified sites of
the same date in western Asia?

Bar-Yosef concluded that the walls had been for defence but not against
an invading army – the enemy was flood water and mud-flows.⁷ Jericho was
in perpetual danger as increased rainfall and vegetation clearance
destabilised sediments on the Palestinian hills that could then be
carried to the edge of the village by the nearby wadis. By the time the
village rubbish had buried the walls, the level of human settlement had
literally been raised up by the accumulation of collapsed houses and
human debris. This had removed the threats of flood water and mud-flow.
A wall was simply no longer required.

Ofer Bar-Yosef dismissed the idea that the tower had been for
fortification. He was impressed by its fine preservation, and suggested
that this may have been helped by the presence of a mud-brick platform
on top of the stone construction. Kenyon herself had found traces of
buildings attached to its northern side that she thought might have been
used for storing grain. In this light, Bar-Yosef suggested that the
tower had been publicly owned or was at the service of the community,
perhaps as a centre for annual ceremonies. It seems unlikely that a
definitive answer will ever be found – although further excavations in
the vicinity of the tower would certainly help. What is clear is that
with the construction of the wall and tower, people were creating
architecture and communal activity on quite a new scale. A new phase of
human history had begun.

By the late 1950s, comparable village settlements in Europe – although
much younger in age – had already been described as Neolithic. During
the 1920s Gordon Childe, the leading archaeologist of the pre-war
period, had coined the phrase ‘Neolithic Revolution’ to refer to the
sudden appearance of settlements that he believed reflected a complete
sea change in the way of life. This not only involved farming but
architecture, pottery, and stone axes that had been ground smooth.
Childe thought that these formed a ‘Neolithic package’, one that was
always acquired as a single, indivisible whole.⁸

Kenyon discovered that he was wrong. Although their houses, burials and
general lifestyle fitted neatly into the Neolithic mould, the first
villagers at Jericho lacked one of the crucial elements of the Neolithic
package: pottery. Any bowls, vessels, plates or cups that survived were
made from stone; many more are likely to have been made from wood or
vegetable fibres. And so Kenyon coined a new term for early Jericho
culture: the Pre-Pottery Neolithic (PPN). In fact, she designated the
first village at Jericho as belonging to ‘Pre-Pottery Neolithic A’ – a
period now known to have lasted for no more than a thousand years after
the start of the Holocene.

Those who had lived in the ‘PPNA’ village of Jericho had literally lived
with their dead. Kenyon found no fewer than 276 burials even though she
excavated only ten per cent of the settlement. These were all associated
with buildings in one manner or another; they were below floors, under
household structures, between walls and within the tower. The key Late
Natufian burial traditions continued: people tended to be buried alone
rather than within groups; very few artefacts, if any, were placed with
the dead.

After the burials, and most probably when all flesh had decayed, pits
were frequently dug to remove the skulls, many of which were then
reburied elsewhere within the village. One collection of five infant
skulls had been placed within a pit below what Kenyon believed was an
altar. But the majority of the children and infants, who made up forty
per cent of the burials, were left undisturbed – it was principally the
skulls of adults that were removed for display and eventual reburial.

Why was there such an interest in skulls? It was an interest that would
become highly elaborate as the village of Jericho became a town, leading
to the covering of skulls in plaster masks with cowrie-shell eyes.
Kenyon thought there had been a cult of the ancestors and drew
comparison with the people from the Sepik River of New Guinea who in
recent times have used the skulls of venerated ancestors within their
rituals. But we will never know precisely why the Jericho people – and
indeed people throughout western Asia and beyond – exhumed and reburied
human skulls, perhaps after a period of display.⁹

As with their burial practices, the tools used by the villagers of
Jericho are very similar to those of the Late Natufian, although there
are also some major technological innovations. The most dramatic was the
use of mud brick for building – labour-intensive work demonstrating a
commitment to village life. Yet many of the stone artefacts remained
largely unchanged. Microliths were still made, as were a wide range of
blades, scrapers and sickles. Stone axes and adzes are, not
surprisingly, found in much larger numbers than before. These were used
to clear the vegetation for their fields. Such clearance may have
contributed towards soil erosion, adding to the need for a defensive
wall. One item, though, deserves special attention: a new type of
arrow-head, known by archaeologists as the ‘el-Khiam’ point. These are
triangular in shape with two side-notches used for hafting, and were
named after the small site of el-Khiam where they had been first
discovered.¹⁰

Just as geometric microliths and lunate microliths had come and gone in
fashion, so too did el-Khiam points. They reached the height of their
popularity at about 9000 BC when they appear almost simultaneously
throughout the western and central regions of the Fertile Crescent. As
such, it is not clear where this new design originated, or why it became
so widely adopted across this vast region. Many are aerodynamically
designed, and may well have led to a substantial improvement in hunting
efficiency. But new research employing microscopic study has shown that
a great number of these points had been used as awls and bits for
bow-drills rather than as the tips of projectiles, as had been
traditionally assumed.¹¹

Gazelles continued to be the main target for hunters. But with the
spread of woodland a wider range of animals had become available as prey
– and hence the bones of fallow deer and wild boar joined those of the
gazelle and ibex within the rubbish heaps of Jericho. Foxes and birds,
especially birds of prey, also became prominent. These are unlikely to
have been hunted for food: fox fur, talons, elegant wing and tail
feathers may all have been crucial items of body adornment. They may
have been part of the trade networks that were rapidly developing within
the Jordan valley and beyond. For Jericho was not alone in this new
Neolithic world.

8 Pictograms and Pillars

Neolithic ideology, symbolism and trade, 9600–8500 BC

Jericho was the first of the early Neolithic ‘PPNA’ villages to be
discovered and remains the most renowned. But its long-held pre-eminent
position, as constituting the origin of the Neolithic and a farming way
of life, has become severely challenged in recent years by new
discoveries in the Jordan valley and in the northern reaches of the
Fertile Crescent. These have also provided new and quite astonishing
insights into Neolithic religion.

During the 1980s several PPNA villages were discovered and excavated in
the West Bank region of the Jordan valley, most notably Netiv Hagdud and
Gilgal.¹ These were no more than 20 kilometres from Jericho and much
smaller in size, easily imagined as hamlets in the environs of that
thriving village. As these settlements had not developed into tells by
the accumulation and then collapse of later prehistoric mud-brick
buildings, the excavators were able to expose larger areas of the
earliest Neolithic dwellings than was possible at Jericho. Their
excavations added clarity and more detail to the types of architecture,
burial and economic practices that Kenyon had discovered. And so this
West Bank region, rather than Jericho itself, became characterised as
the origin and centre of the Neolithic world.

In the late 1990s early Neolithic PPNA sites also began to be discovered
and excavated on the eastern side of the valley, to the south of the
Dead Sea in modern-day Jordan. These showed that the Early Neolithic
flourished over a more extensive area than had once been supposed. Zad,
currently being excavated by Phillip Edwards of La Trobe University,
Melbourne, Australia, has some particularly impressive architecture, the
walls of horse-shoe-shaped structures having been built from stone.² No
more than two kilometres from Zad the site of Dhra’ is under excavation
by Bill Finlayson, director of the Council for British Research in the
Levant, and Ian Kuijt of Notre-Dame University, Indiana, USA.³ They have
found a particularly impressive circular mud-walled structure with
internal pillars that may have supported a wooden floor.

Seventy-five kilometres due south is my own ongoing excavation
undertaken jointly with Bill Finlayson at the site of WF16 – the
sixteenth site found in a survey of Wadi Faynan in southern Jordan.⁴
When we discovered this site in 1996, a prominent archaeologist
suggested to me that little of significance would be found as WF16 is
located too far from Jericho. But our excavations have revealed some of
the best-preserved floors and rubbish pits of the PPNA, a mix of
architectural styles and a rich assortment of burials, artefacts and art
objects: the earliest Neolithic had evidently flourished in the southern
reaches and on the eastern side of the Jordan valley.⁵

All of these excavations, from Netiv Hagdud to WF16, have confirmed the
character of the PPNA culture that Kenyon first identified at Jericho:
small circular dwellings, burials placed below floors, rituals
associated with skulls, reliance on wild game and the cultivation of
either wild or possibly domestic cereals together with a diverse range
of other plants. There is no question that Jericho remains the largest
PPNA settlement known – nothing comparable to its tower and wall have
been found elsewhere. But it is clear that we can no longer identify
that site with the origin of the Neolithic itself. This has become even
more evident in light of excavations in the northern reaches of the
Fertile Crescent. These suggest that the Jordan valley as a whole may
have been quite peripheral to the social, economic and ideological
developments that created the Neolithic world.⁶

Five hundred kilometres northeast of Jericho is the site of Mureybet –
or rather was, because it has now been flooded by the creation of Lake
Assad by the Tabaka Dam, the same fate that befell Abu Hureyra.⁷ The two
sites were found less than 50 kilometres apart on opposite sides of the
Euphrates. It seems likely that those who abandoned Abu Hureyra simply
crossed the river and began a new village at Mureybet. That resettlement
occurred during the Late Natufian and the new village developed to form
a tell like that at Jericho, constituted by collapsed houses and human
debris from several millennia of occupation.

Excavations in 1971 by Jacques Cauvin identified Early Neolithic levels
contemporary with the first village at Jericho. But Mureybet’s
architecture had been more complex, with interlinked dwellings
consisting of several rooms. Cauvin reconstructs them as
semi-subterranean, with central internal posts holding roof timbers that
radiated to rest upon the surrounding walls. The dwellings had raised
areas, probably used for sleeping, grinding stones set into the floor
and storage areas for grain.

While the range of stone artefacts from Mureybet are similar to those
from the Jordan valley sites, Cauvin found a much greater use of baked
clay than has been discovered elsewhere. Some of this had been used to
make small bowls. These cannot be technically described as pottery
because they lack a tempering material such as crushed bone, shell or
stone to prevent the clay bursting in the kiln. But the bowls had been
hardened by fire and this was perhaps the first step to pottery
production in western Asia.

Clay had also been used to mould female figurines, others of which were
carved from stone. Although these were schematic in character, with
diminutive arms and lacking facial detail, they were more realistic than
the almost completely abstract human forms found at Netiv Hagdud. On the
basis of these figurines, Cauvin proposed that a cult of the ‘mother
goddess’ had existed not only at Mureybet but throughout the Neolithic
world. This deity had – according to Cauvin – been joined by another:
the bull. Although no bull figurines or depictions were found at
Mureybet, Cauvin had excavated skulls and horns of wild cattle buried
below floors and within its walls.⁸

As all plant and animal remains from the site were from wild species,
Cauvin argued that the new Neolithic worship of such deities preceded
and, by some undeclared means, caused the development of farming. Few
archaeologists today subscribe to the notion of a ‘Neolithic mother
goddess’ but the view that ideological change came before economic
change has found support from two further Neolithic sites, Jerf el Ahmar
and Göbekli Tepe.

Jerf el Ahmar is found 120 kilometres north of Mureybet and is another
site that now lies below an artificially created lake.⁹ Danielle
Stordeur of Lyons University, France, excavated the site between 1995
and 1999 as a rescue operation immediately before the flooding occurred.
Its earliest phases are again contemporary with the first village at
Jericho. Distinct architectural similarities between the structures of
Jerf el Ahmar and those at Mureybet and in the Jordan valley are
evident. But once again the architecture is notably complex and two
structures are particularly striking.

One was located in the centre of the village and appears to have been
used for the communal storage of cereal grain from wild, but cultivated,
crops. It was divided into six small rooms around a central area with
two benches and was extraordinarily well preserved, having walls
standing more than a metre high. This building might suggest a highly
co-operative and sharing community. Alternatively, one might take a
bleaker view and wonder whether the centralised storage of grain had
allowed one individual or family to gain power by controlling its
distribution to the community. The final use of this building appears to
have been for a ritual act: below the debris from the collapsed roof an
almost complete human skeleton was found splayed out upon the floor.
Only the skull was missing – the body had been decapitated.

That ritual and ideology played prominent roles in the lives of the
inhabitants of Jerf el Ahmar is evident from another building. This was
small and round, and had been deliberately burned down. On its floor,
Stordeur discovered four large skulls of wild cattle which had once hung
upon its walls, providing further evidence that these animals had been
of religious significance. This room at Jerf el Ahmar recalls one at the
Younger Dryas settlement of Hallan Çemi Tepesi – 300 kilometres to the
northwest in the Zagros hills – where a wild ox skull had also been hung
upon the wall.¹⁰

The architecture of Jerf el Ahmar is just one aspect of the site’s
significance. It also provides several intriguing ritual deposits, such
as three human skulls that had been placed on a fire burning within a
pit and then sealed with a layer of pebbles. The art works from Jerf el
Ahmar are also outstanding, including stone vases intricately carved
with geometric decoration and stone figurines of birds of prey. But
perhaps the most significant find was four stone plaquettes, each about
6 centimetres long and engraved with signs that look like pictograms:
snakes, birds of prey, four-legged animals, insects and abstract
symbols.

If these had not been found at an Early Neolithic site six millennia
before the invention of writing one would have no hesitation in
describing such signs as a symbolic code – Neolithic hieroglyphics.
Danielle Stordeur suggested that they appeared to ‘evoke some kind of
record’ and ‘carry a message’.¹¹ Quite what that message was will remain
unknown until we learn to decipher this Neolithic code. For that we will
need many more pictogram examples, but since Jerf el Ahmar is now below
a lake these will have to be found elsewhere.

The closest examples to the Jerf el Ahmar pictograms that I have seen
were engraved on stone pillars at a site lying a further 100 kilometres
to the north. This has no risk of being flooded as it is found on the
summit of a limestone hill in southeast Turkey. It is known today as
Göbekli Tepe. Excavations since 1994 have astonished the archaeological
world, and given further encouragement to those who wish to make Jericho
and the Jordan valley peripheral to Neolithic origins.¹²

Göbekli Tepe had been first located in the 1960s when a survey conducted
in its region by Istanbul and Chicago Universities recorded ‘a complex
of round-topped knolls of red earth’ upon the summit of an otherwise
barren limestone hill. A dense scatter of flint artefacts and a large
number of limestone slabs were recorded. The slabs were assumed to be
the remains of a cemetery, probably of Byzantine date, which accorded
with the few shards of medieval pottery found by the survey. But no
further comment was made about the very high density of flint artefacts.
In the 1960s the idea of an Early Neolithic site perched upon a hilltop
was simply inconceivable.

The site was ignored or forgotten for thirty years, until Klaus Schmidt
of the German Archaeological Institute of Istanbul climbed the hill in
1994. He immediately recognised the flint artefacts as Neolithic and
suspected that the limestone slabs were the remnants of contemporary
architecture. Excavations have continued every year since then, to
reveal a truly spectacular and unique Neolithic site. When Klaus showed
me around on an October afternoon at the end of his 2002 excavation
season I felt completely overwhelmed by what he had discovered and the
grandeur of its setting.

Very soon after 9600 BC, at the same time as the first circular
dwellings of Jericho were being built, people had come to Göbekli and
carved massive ‘T-shaped’ pillars out of the limestone bedrock. Many
were 8 feet high and seven tons in weight. These were erected within
circular structures that had been sunk into the hill to create what
looked liked cellars in the earth. Two stone pillars were placed in the
centre of each building and up to eight evenly positioned around its
edge, between which benches had been constructed. The faces of many of
the pillars had been carved to display wild animals – snakes, foxes,
wild boar, wild cattle, gazelle and cranes – together with enigmatic
symbols like the pictograms of Jerf el Ahmar. The face of one pillar had
been carved to depict a human arm and the pillars themselves resembled
massive human torsos.¹³

Four adjacent buildings of this type had been exposed when I made my
visit and they simply took my breath away. Schmidt suspects there are
several more still deeply buried below the surface of the hill. When the
site had been abandoned, the Early Neolithic people deliberately buried
their ritual buildings and pillars beneath several tons of soil.

The time and effort involved in quarrying, carving, transporting and
erecting such pillars by people equipped with no more than flint tools
is staggering to consider. And even the 7-ton pillars had not entirely
satisfied their needs. When Klaus showed me the quarries located up to
100 metres from the buildings he pointed to an unfinished ‘T-shaped’
pillar still partly connected to the bedrock – if removed, it would have
been no less than 20 feet long and 50 tons in weight. Not surprisingly,
our feet crunched over a thick carpet of flint flakes from the tools
used to carve the stone. These were made from many thousands of flint
nodules that had been carried up the hill from a source several
kilometres away.

All of this work had been done by people who relied entirely on wild
game and plants for food. Although the excavations have produced a great
number of animal bones and plant remains, not a single one of these is
from a domesticated species. The people at Göbekli had hunted gazelle,
wild cattle and wild pig; we know that they had gathered almonds,
pistachios and wild cereals and I suspect that the ‘wild gardens’ around
Göbekli would have easily provided at least as many plant foods as
identified at Abu Hureyra 200 kilometres to the south. But while the
remnants from such foods were discarded at the mound, there are no
traces of any domestic dwellings – no houses, fireplaces or pits.

Schmidt concludes that Göbekli had been a ritual centre, one that he
describes as a mountain sanctuary, and consequently unique among all the
known Neolithic sites of western Asia. It was, he believes, a meeting
place for many different groups who lived in a 100-kilometre radius of
the hill, or perhaps even further afield. They had gathered at Göbekli
once or twice a year for purposes of an entirely religious nature. Such
gatherings are very likely to have involved people from Jerf el Ahmar.
As well as similarities in the choice of abstract signs and the range of
animals depicted, the two sites share architectural features, especially
in the use of circular buildings with benches.

Quite what the animal and symbolic images mean, and what kind of ritual
activities took place at Göbekli, we are unlikely to discover. The
images may have been clan totems or depictions of Neolithic gods – but
there had been no ‘mother goddess’ at Göbekli. All of the animals are
male, and there is a limestone carving from the site of a human figure
with an erect penis. Indeed, rather than notions of wholesome fertility
and reproduction, the emerging religious themes from both Jerf el Ahmar
and Göbekli are about fear and danger of the wild. Nevertheless,
Cauvin’s idea that ideological change preceded the economic developments
that created farming communities has gained further support.
Unfortunately he died after a long illness in 2001 and never got to see
the pillars of Göbekli Tepe.

That the ideology behind the images and pillars may have played a role
in the development of farming came home to me when Klaus pointed at some
hills lying no less than 30 kilometres across the flat plain below
Göbekli. He casually noted that these were the Karacadağ.

In 1997 the wild wheat still growing on the Karacadağ was identified as
being the closest known genetic relative of modern domestic wheat.¹⁴ The
need to acquire sufficient food for those who had worked and gathered
for ceremonies at Göbekli – perhaps several hundred – may have led to
the intensive cultivation of wild cereals that created the first
domestic strains. In this regard the domestication of wheat may have had
little to do with people struggling against the harsh conditions of the
Younger Dryas. It may have been no more than an accidental by-product of
the ideology that drove hunter-gatherers to carve and erect massive
pillars of stone on a hilltop in southern Turkey.

When standing on that hilltop late on an October afternoon in AD 2002 I
truly felt that it had been at Göbekli and not Jericho that the history
of the world had turned. As I watched the Kurdish workmen returning to
their village and the archaeologists to their camp, I imagined others
making a similar departure – the Neolithic people leaving Göbekli once
their ceremonies were over. Knowing the heavy yields that the Göbekli
Tepe wheat provides, some may have carried bags of grain to sow in their
own wild gardens. As they did so, they were spreading not just new seed
but also a new way of life to the hunter-gatherer-cultivator villages of
Jerf el Ahmar, Mureybet and perhaps even to Jericho itself.

The seed-grain is likely to have featured in the Neolithic trade network
that had extended from Turkey to the southern reaches of the Jordan
valley. We know such trade occurred because obsidian, a very fine,
jet-black and shiny volcanic glass originating from a single source in
the hills of southern Turkey, is found on all the Early Neolithic sites.
For those who relied upon relatively dull flint in the Jordan valley,
obsidian must have been a highly valued material. Many modern
hunter-gatherers, such as the Australian Aborigines, have invested shiny
stones with supernatural powers and the same must surely have been true
of obsidian in the Neolithic period: its thin flakes are effectively
transparent; thick flakes can be used as mirrors; it has the sharpest
edge of any stone, and can be knapped into intricate forms. It is a
truly magical material.

Obsidian was most likely traded from settlement to settlement, along
with a host of other goods that are now invisible: furs, feathers,
grain, meat and nuts. As the amount of obsidian found at Jericho was
disproportionate to the village’s size it must have been a key centre
for the trading network. It was perhaps within this network of exchange
that new seed-grain was gradually spread around western Asia –
seed-grain for the plants that, in Daniel Zohary’s phrase, ‘waited for
the harvester’ and finally transformed the Neolithic cultivators into
fully-fledged farmers. That transition created the earliest settlements
of the next phase of the Neolithic, that which Kenyon called the
Pre-Pottery Neolithic B. To understand how dramatically these contrasted
with the first Neolithic villages of Jericho and its like, we must
travel from the northern to the southern end of the Fertile Crescent and
visit my own excavation site in Wadi Faynan.

Wadi Faynan is an arid but spectacularly beautiful landscape. One finds
it by driving past the southern end of the Dead Sea on the road towards
Aqaba, and then heading west through the village of Qurayqira – a sprawl
of breeze-block houses built for the local Bedouin, many of whom prefer
to remain within their tents. After Qurayqira the road ceases, and one
heads on a dirt track (if one finds it) along the base of the dry wadi,
to the edge of the steep escarpment that climbs to the Jordanian
plateau. It is best to arrive by night, capturing porcupines and jerboas
in one’s headlights, debating whether it is this track or that,
celebrating arrival at the excavation camp with a cold beer in the
moonlight.

At Wadi Faynan we sleep under the stars and leave behind the stresses of
university and family life to regain the child-like thrill of
archaeology – getting our hands dirty, digging things up, exposing the
past. By working with Bill Finlayson I am attempting to reconstruct the
prehistoric settlement in this wadi from very earliest times to the
first farming communities. Many sites have been found, some containing
artefacts made by Neanderthals and possibly even earlier human types.
But the most important site we have discovered is the Early Neolithic
PPNA village to which we have given the unromantic name of WF16.

We found traces of this village on our first ever visit to the wadi, a
time when just the two of us had gone to make a reconnaissance. After
several exhausting days walking in the unrelenting heat, when we were
both feeling dispirited about the lack of finds, I decided to finish the
day by examining two small knolls just above the wadi bottom. To my
immense excitement the ground was littered with stone artefacts: pieces
of chipped flint and grinding stones. Along with these were the faint
traces of small circular structures: rings of stones emerging from below
sediments that had washed down from the surrounding hills and crags to
bury what I hoped might be a village.

Several years later, we know that WF16 was indeed a small Early
Neolithic settlement, contemporary with the earliest phase of Jericho
250 kilometres to the north. It had perhaps ten or twelve circular
dwellings, each a mere four metres in diameter and built a few metres
apart so that one could wander easily between them. The people of WF16
had hunted wild goats, trapped falcons and dug out foxes from their
lairs. They had collected figs, legumes and wild barley. Some of their
dead had been buried within their dwellings, sometimes individually and
left undisturbed, sometimes as jumbles of bones. They acquired shells
from the Mediterranean and the Red Sea, carved geometric designs on to
bone and stone artefacts, and made green beads from copper ore in the
surrounding crags. Obsidian originating in Turkey had also been acquired
– although we have so far found just one single obsidian flake amidst
many thousands of those made from flint.

Our excavations are far from complete. We have yet to ascertain whether
people had lived at WF16 all year round or whether it had been a
seasonal camp. We remain unsure about how many dwellings there were, and
whether those present were built together or in a piecemeal fashion
between 10,000 and 8500 BC – the period of occupation. Had their
inhabitants been hunter-gatherers, cultivators of wild cereals or
farmers with domesticated crops?

My own interpretation of the site is changing in the light of new
discoveries elsewhere. I once thought the foxes had been trapped simply
to provide warm pelts; but having now seen the engravings on the pillars
of Göbekli Tepe I wonder whether there had been ideological rather than
utilitarian motives behind their capture. I have similar concerns about
the many bones we have found from birds of prey – perhaps, in view of
the carvings from Jerf el Ahmar, captured for reasons other than merely
to provide decorative feathers. Just as at Göbekli, male imagery seems
important. We have found a carved stone phallus, while some of the
supposed utilitarian pestles are so phallic in appearance as to suggest
that the grinding of plant foods may have been invested with some kind
of sexual symbolism.

It is 9000 BC and John Lubbock has travelled south from Jericho to stand
on what will become the knoll of WF16. He is surrounded by the grandeur
of the wadi. It is coloured a vibrant green rather than the parched
yellows and browns of today. Where I have looked upon barren desert,
Lubbock can see trees of oak and pistachio; fig, willow and poplar trees
grow by a river that runs along what is an entirely dry and treeless
wadi today. He listens to human chatter, the grating of stone against
stone, and the barking of dogs. The scent of freshly cut juniper
pervades the air. Neolithic people sit outside their dwellings making
and using those very artefacts that we will one day find. They wear
shell necklaces and feathers from the falcons whose bones we will
excavate. El-Khiam points are being hafted onto reeds and bow-drills;
pestles and mortars are in action; walls are being constructed with
juniper stakes.

Visitors arrive bringing obsidian to exchange for greenstone beads and
parcels of goat hair. Lubbock watches the feasts that take place when
hunting has been good and the grinding of tiny dry seeds when it has
been bad. He watches the burial of an old man within a dwelling, his
head placed upon a stone pillow. When the earthen floor has been beaten
flat the skull remains exposed, enabling people to work and sleep around
it, comforted by his continuing presence in their lives.

At 8500 BC, WF16 becomes silent and Lubbock finds himself alone. The
Neolithic villagers have disappeared and their dwellings have been
abandoned to nature and whoever might find and excavate the site.
Lubbock hears voices coming from up the wadi, where it winds around a
corner and the crags turn into cliffs, and where today it becomes known
as Wadi Ghuwayr. Lubbock follows the riverbank, brushing past lush
reeds, startled geese and ducks. He walks for no more than 500 metres on
the bank of the fast-flowing river and finds people at work. Some are
from WF16 but others have come from afar, perhaps from elsewhere in the
Jordan valley or from a much greater distance away. Together they are
building not only a new village but also a brand-new type of village.

They work upon the slope above the riverbank ten or twenty metres from
the water’s edge. Rectangular houses are being built; houses with solid
stone walls and plaster floors. Terraces have been made and the
positions of walls for houses 10 metres long and 5 metres wide have been
marked out in the earth. Some houses are already half built; their walls
are chest-high and constructed with water-worn cobbles. Small stones and
mortar are packed between parallel rows of cobbles to make a solid wall
50 centimetres thick – a far cry from the drystone walls of WF16. In
some houses timber posts have been set just inside the walls, ready to
support the weight of roof beams.

Close to the building site a fire burns to make the lime for plaster
floors. Many hundreds of limestone nodules have been collected from the
upper reaches of Wadi Ghuwayr and are being burned within a pit. When
sufficiently high temperatures are reached the stones will disintegrate
into powdered lime. Elsewhere some of this is already being mixed with
water and then poured thickly over a foundation of stones upon the floor
of a near-completed house. The plaster smothers all corners, cracks, and
a central shallow pit that will become the fireplace. Once dry and hard,
it will be painted red and then polished. More plaster will cover the
walls, both inside and out. This will be kept a brilliant white.

I know this new village well, but neither as a building site nor as a
living place. I know it as ruins exposed by excavation. Mohammed Najjar
of the Jordan Ministry of Antiquities and Alan Simmons of the University
of Nevada¹⁵ have found and excavated the site. They come to Wadi Ghuwayr
each year to gradually reveal its architecture, one remarkably different
to that of WF16 and yet built within a single generation of its demise.

Such villages with rectangular two-storey houses made their appearance
throughout the Fertile Crescent soon after 9000 BC. They most likely
originated at Jerf el Ahmar and Mureybet where structures that are
transitional from round to rectangular have been found. The new
architecture spread rapidly: a sign of the social and economic
transformations that occurred now farming with domesticated crops had
truly begun, and population numbers had soared. These new buildings
typify the phase of the Neolithic that Kathleen Kenyon designated as the
Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB). It is another new Neolithic world that
John Lubbock must now explore.

9 In the Valley of Ravens

Architecture, textiles and animal domestication, 8500–7500 BC

Leaving the crags overlooking Wadi Ghuwayr, John Lubbock walks south
until dusk begins to fall on a spring day in 8000 BC. That takes him
into the spectacular sandstone landscape that runs as a shelf below the
Jordanian plateau. He walks through thick woodland following the paths
of wild goat. Having criss-crossed western Asia from the Mediterranean
to the Euphrates and back again, he is knowledgeable about the trees and
easily recognises the oak, pistachio, and hawthorn even though they have
yet to reach full leaf. While walking he sees not only wild goats upon
the crags, but glimpses a jackal beginning its night’s work and a hare
finishing for the day. He recognises the tracks of wild boar and the
remnants of a leopard kill. With such animals around he sleeps uneasily
in the shelter of a sandstone cliff which changes colour as the sun sets
across the Jordan valley.

The next day Lubbock continues through the woods, occasionally balancing
on the edge of rocky precipices to peer westwards across a vast and
treeless gulf to the future Negev desert. After he has travelled about
30 kilometres from Wadi Ghuwayr, he arrives at the entrance of a wide,
open valley, one with a thick coverage of trees and defined by high
sandstone cliffs. Appropriately he sees a couple of black birds
squawking loudly, for this is Wadi Gharab – the valley of ravens. It
contains the first town¹ that Lubbock has the opportunity to visit; it
is indeed one of the very first towns in the world: Beidha.²

The goat track becomes a well-trodden path through woods in which many
trees have been felled. This soon gives way to small fields with newly
sprouted cereals, peas and little green shoots of an unfamiliar crop –
flax. And then he sees, hears and smells the town – a mass of
rectangular stone buildings, human voices, dogs barking, goats braying,
and wood smoke. Here there is no blurring between the domains of nature
and human culture, as there was at ‘Ain Mallaha and Abu Hureyra. The
town of Beidha is a dramatic statement of human detachment from the
natural world, epitomised by the sharp angles and ordered layout of
buildings, the goats within their pens, the land cleared for farming.

The opportunity to visit Beidha has been provided by the third member of
a trio of remarkable women archaeologists. We have already acknowledged
the contribution of Dorothy Garrod and Kathleen Kenyon. Now we must
appreciate the work of Diana Kirkbride. After having studied Egyptology
at University College, London, in the 1930s, and worked at Jericho with
Kenyon, she spent seven months in 1956 excavating at Petra for the
Jordanian Department of Antiquities. During that time she discovered the
Neolithic town of Beidha.³

The spectacular 2,000-year-old rock-cut temples and tombs of Petra could
not hold Kirkbride’s interest and on her free days she went looking for
nearby ‘flint sites’. With help from Bedouin guides several were found,
some of which were extremely ancient. She also found a small tell that
became the site of Beidha, located about one hour’s walk through the
sandstone hills to the north of Petra.

Kirkbride began excavating there in 1958, and completed the last of her
eight field seasons in 1983, by which time she had uncovered sixty-five
buildings. This was, and remains, by far the most extensive excavation
of a settlement of the Pre-Pottery Neolithic, providing a unique insight
into the layout of an early town. Her work revealed how Beidha had grown
from a small village of interconnected circular dwellings to the town of
two-storey rectangular buildings at which Lubbock has now arrived.

To enter the town he steps across a low wall that surrounds the
buildings. This is a barrier to the sandy soil that threatens to cover
the courtyards, now that it has been untethered by the felling of trees.
A path takes Lubbock between buildings into a walled courtyard about
eight metres in diameter. This is the centre of the town. Opposite him,
there are four stone-built chambers that have floors scattered with
grain – the remnants of a harvest; to his left/right is the façade of a
particularly large building. Lubbock steps through its doorway into a
room that is gleaming white – the floor, walls and even the ceiling are
thickly plastered. The only colour is a thick red stripe around the base
of the walls. In the centre stands a metre-high, uncut stone pillar.
Behind it, there is an entrance into a second and larger room. This is
just as sparse and dazzling, with the same white plaster and red stripe
which also encircles a hearth in the middle of the floor and a stone
basin close to the entrance. In the farthest corner there is a
stone-lined pit. And that is all. No furniture to suggest a house, no
chipped stone or bone fragments to suggest a workshop, no carved
effigies to suggest a place of ritual or worship, and – most frustrating
of all – no people to watch either at work or play.

Although excavated by Kirkbride, the most substantial attempt to
interpret the architecture of Beidha has been made by Brian Byrd of the
University of California.⁴ He was particularly impressed by the size of
the building that Lubbock has entered, estimating that the plaster alone
had required more than 2,000 kilograms of quicklime and 9,000 kilograms
of wood for the kilns. So, even if individual families had built their
own houses within the town, this building had required communal effort,
and the key question – not just in the case of Beidha but of all the new
towns with such buildings – was whether the work had been done willingly
or under the coercion of town leaders. It is indeed difficult to imagine
a community the size of Beidha, one with perhaps five hundred people,
existing without leadership. Perhaps this came from respected elders who
played a prominent role in making the decisions that would affect the
community as a whole. Or perhaps there were individuals who wielded
power by force.

Brian Byrd thought it likely that this building had been used for making
such decisions, a place in which separate households could gather
together. It seemed significant that in the courtyard directly opposite
its entrance was the storage facility for grain. The encircling wall had
been a recent addition – previously people had walked freely across the
courtyard. The new courtyard wall, along with other architectural
developments, was evidently being used to control people’s movements
through the town and to influence what they could see. This was, one
assumes, to the advantage of those who were in authority: the stores of
grain – and knowledge about how much grain they contained – were sources
of power to those who controlled its distribution.

Leaving the large building, Lubbock walks between houses until he
reaches another courtyard – smaller than the last, unpaved and providing
access into two adjacent houses. Each has three or four steps into an
upper storey, and a similar number into a basement below. Lubbock
chooses a house from which he hears voices, climbs the stairs and enters
a room in which eight or nine people sit on rush mats around a central
hearth. There are adults and children, men and women; some are sharing
bread and meat, others are inhaling from smouldering leaves. The whole
room is filled with smoke that can pass only slowly through the reeds
that form the roof. Lubbock’s eyes stream with tears.⁵

The people are squeezed together; it seems likely that one family is
entertaining another. Their clothes are striking – testament to another
small revolution that has happened during the last millennium, one that
has gone by practically unnoticed by archaeologists. All the previous
people in this history have worn clothes made from hides or furs, or
very occasionally from knotted fibres. The people of Beidha are dressed
elegantly in fabrics made from spun yarn; they are wearing the earliest
form of linen, dyed green and turned into tunics and skirts.

Such clothing, made while the arts of spinning and weaving were in their
infancy, was unlikely to last even a few generations before rotting or
falling part, let alone for the many millennia since people had sat
eating at Beidha. Yet some did survive, not in the town ruins but within
the tiny cave of Nahal Hemar, located midway between Beidha and Jericho,
on the northern boundary of the Negev desert far from any known human
settlement. Bedouin had plundered this cave during the 1960s when
searching for a further collection of Dead Sea Scrolls. In 1983 it was
rediscovered by the Israeli archaeologist David Alon who excavated the
surviving deposits with Ofer Bar-Yosef.⁶ They found many pieces of
fabrics, cords and baskets. All were contemporary with the first towns
of western Asia.

The fabrics had survived because the sediments were bone dry – without
moisture, destructive bacteria could not complete their work.⁷ They had
been made from reeds, rushes and grass, using a variety of spinning,
knotting, stitching and hand-weaving techniques. Baskets had been made
from plaited plant-fibre cords, coiled into the shape of a vessel and
waterproofed by coating with asphalt from natural deposits around the
margins of the Dead Sea. Bone spatulas from the cave were most likely
basket-making tools.

Some fabrics had been made from linen yarn that came from the strong
stem fibres of flax plants. These had been spun and then combined either
by knotting or by hand-weaving, using a method known as ‘weft twining’,
which may have been undertaken across a wooden board. This is the
simplest type of weaving, and one used until recently by tribal
societies throughout the world. Several bone shuttles were found which
would have taken the weft, or horizontal yarn, between the warp, or
vertical yarn.

Unfortunately the fragments of fabric from Nahal Hemar are too small to
reconstruct the items of Neolithic clothing – with one exception, a
conical head-dress. A woven band had been made to fit around a forehead
and decorated with a single greenstone; the cap had then risen to form a
diamond-patterned cone finishing in a topknot and tassels. As it is a
unique find, we have no idea whether this was everyday wear for
Neolithic people or an item of ceremonial clothing worn only by special
persons on special occasions. The latter is perhaps more likely in view
of the isolated location of the cave and the other objects it contained.

As with the wheat and barley, flax had also grown as a wild species
within the forest steppe of western Asia, and then been cultivated with
the cereals and legumes. Fragments of flax have been found at Jericho,
Tell Aswad and Abu Hureyra, but it has not been possible to tell whether
they come from wild or domesticated plants. My guess is that flax was
also grown at Beidha; none has been found, but plant preservation and
recovery at this site was particularly poor.

Although the clothing and baskets left in Nahal Hemar may have been used
on ceremonial occasions, they remind us of what must have been a
pervasive aspect of everyday life during the Neolithic. The cutting of
reeds and growing of flax, the spinning, weaving, twisting, sewing and
knotting of fibres are likely to have taken up a large part of many
people’s lives. They would have seen and handled fabrics on a daily
basis, feeling their coarse grain against their flesh. The smell of
asphalt, wickerwork and linen cloth would have always been with them.
And yet practically all that archaeologists know of their clothing are
the few fragments discovered in Nahal Hemar Cave.⁸

Lubbock is still inside the house at Beidha, inspecting waterproofed
baskets on the floor and a pile of knitting. Hot stones from the hearth
are periodically dropped within the baskets to heat the liquid inside –
mint tea. A thick pile of furs, hides and fabrics at the far end of the
room suggests a sleeping area. A young child lies upon them with a pale
and sickly complexion. Just as Lubbock has so frequently seen elsewhere,
infant mortality at Beidha is high – something that Diana Kirkbride
discovered when she unearthed the many tiny skeletons that lay buried
beneath the floors.

Lubbock discovers that work principally takes place in the basement. It
has an earthen floor and thick walls that contain six small chambers,
three on each side of a short corridor.⁹ Stone slabs on the floors
provide solid work surfaces – some are covered with stone flakes, others
with discarded fragments of cut bone and horn. Some chambers have been
used for grinding stone into beads, others for working hide. The two
chambers closest to the entrance have large grinding stones used for
making flour from wheat and barley.

So here is another radical change, not only from the Natufian
settlements but also from the first farming villages of Jericho and
Netiv Hagdud. Many activities have moved indoors and rooms within single
buildings now have defined functions: some are devoted to eating,
sleeping and entertaining, others to craft activities and storage. There
seems to be not only a new order in architecture and town layout, but
also in people’s lives.

The transition from small circular dwellings typical of PPNA settlements
such as Jericho, Netiv Hagdud and WF16 to the relatively large,
rectangular and often two-storey buildings of Beidha and other PPNB
settlements documents a major social transformation.¹⁰ Kent Flannery
from the University of Michigan has argued that this reflects a shift
from a group-oriented society – in which any food surpluses are pooled
and available to all – to one in which families are the key social unit.
Rather than being spread out between several small circular huts, such
families consolidated their presence with multiple rooms within a single
building. They owned and stored some, or perhaps all, of any food
surpluses they generated, often constructing special storerooms as part
of their houses.¹¹

Lubbock’s walk through the alleys and courtyards of Beidha provides him
with other new experiences. In the hunter-gatherer settlements he had
visited there had been few surprises – he could almost always see from
one side of the village to another, most of the work occurred in the
open air, and everyone seemed to know everyone else’s business. Here, as
in the other Neolithic towns, turning almost any corner can lead to a
surprise – unexpected clusters of people, an outdoor hearth, a tethered
goat. People simply cannot know what is happening elsewhere in the town
– even just a few metres away – because so much occurs behind thick
walls. The number of inhabitants has become too great for people to know
one another’s business and relations. There is, Lubbock senses, an
atmosphere of distrust and anxiety, one brought on by the impact of town
life on a mentality that had evolved for living in smaller
communities.¹²

Along with sheep, goats were the first animals to be domesticated after
the dog, and completed the shift from hunting and gathering to a farming
lifestyle. Precisely where, when, and why such domestication occurred is
still much debated by archaeologists.¹³

The goat is very rare in the collections of bones from Natufian and
Early Neolithic villages, these being dominated by gazelle – the
preferred prey ever since the LGM. So the abundance of goats found at
Beidha – 80 per cent of all animals bones – suggests herding rather than
hunting.

The Beidha goats were also small in size compared to known wild goats. A
reduction in body-size occurs with all animals once they become
domesticated – pigs are smaller than wild boar, cows smaller than wild
cattle. This most likely arises from poor maternal nutrition and the
selective killing of the largest adult males for meat. Such a pattern of
slaughter is evident at Beidha where most of the bones come from animals
of about two years of age, suggesting that they had been kept alive
until they reached full size but killed before they ate too much forage.
The fact that very few of the bones from Beidha came from young animals
is a sure sign that the goats were not being kept for milk; in that
practice, the newborn are killed so that the mother’s milk can be taken
for human use.

The early domestication of goats and sheep is not surprising, as their
wild behaviour readily lends itself to human control. Both animals are
highly territorial; they are reluctant to stray from their herd and live
within strongly hierarchical groups. Hence both goats and sheep are
ready to follow the largest ram or ewe, and this makes them susceptible
to becoming imprinted with the idea of a human as leader. Stone-built
dwellings provided substitutes for the caves in which wild goat and
sheep naturally take shelter.

Exactly where and when herding began remains unclear. On the basis of
size and abundance, sheep and goats may have been first domesticated in
the central (i.e. Syria, southeast Turkey) or eastern (i.e. Iraq, Iran)
part of the Fertile Crescent by 8000 BC, possibly much earlier. We know
that the occupants of Abu Hureyra by the Euphrates were herding sheep
and goats at 7500 BC. By this date, a new set of mud-brick houses had
been built, burying the hunter-gatherer village that Lubbock had
visited. The new town’s people had initially continued the Late Natufian
practice of slaughtering the gazelle during their annual migration. By
7500 BC, however, they had switched to killing sheep and goats, animals
which had been kept in managed herds.¹⁴ But we must look further east
for the earliest domesticated goat, to Early Neolithic villages that are
found today in central Iran.

Of these, the village known as Ganj Dareh provides the most compelling
evidence.¹⁵ It is a small mound at the southern end of the Kermanshah
valley, about 40 metres in diameter and 8 metres high. Most of it
consists of collapsed mud-brick buildings that were first constructed at
some date between 10,000 and 8000 BC.¹⁶ The people who lived at Ganj
Dareh had killed large numbers of goats, providing a collection of
almost 5,000 bones for study. Brian Hesse of the University of Alabama
and Melinda Zeder of the Smithsonian Institution undertook this work,
finding a tell-tale sign of domestication in the presence of large
numbers of slaughtered young males.¹⁷

Either the herds themselves, or simply the idea of herding, may have
swept westwards and then to the south, just as the practice of arable
farming spread to the east. As such, goat herding would have reached the
Jordan valley by around 8000 BC. But it is also possible that goats may
have been domesticated quite independently elsewhere, even in the
vicinity of Beidha. At present, archaeologists simply do not know.

Quite how the idea of goat/sheep domestication came about and was put
into practice is also a matter of debate. Frank Hole of Yale University
thinks that hunters became aware of an increasing scarcity of wild
animals and took deliberate steps towards their management. This may
have involved the provision of winter forage, the construction of fences
to control herd movements, and caring for orphan animals.¹⁸

Many historically documented hunter-gatherers, such as Australian
aborigines, kept tame animals as pets and we must assume that this was
the case with the Natufian and PPNA people. When their descendants began
living in permanent settlements some of these ‘pets’ are likely to have
become sexually mature and to have reproduced within the bounds of the
settlement. These animals, isolated from the wild, would have provided
the basis for the domestic herds. Selective breeding intentionally
developed particular traits – placid temperaments, rapid growth, high
milk yield and thick wool. Caring for tame animals in hunter-gatherer
groups is often assumed to have been undertaken by women and children,
so it may have been these, rather than male hunters, who played the most
critical role in animal domestication.

Once sheep and goats had been domesticated, cattle and pigs followed
within a few hundred years. But domesticated horses and donkeys did not
arrive until several thousand years after the Neolithic towns had
flourished. These most probably arose as pack animals for the movement
of ore and fuel to smelting centres once metalworking had begun in the
Bronze Age.

It is time for Lubbock to leave Beidha. Although new buildings are still
being constructed, the town will be abandoned within a few generations.
Beidha had not been situated in the most advantageous of locations: the
southern reaches of the Jordan valley received barely enough rainfall to
support farming, and the nearest permanent spring was more than 5
kilometres and a climb of 400 metres away. Under these conditions the
soils of Wadi Gharab are simply too poor to sustain intensive and
repeated cultivation, and too unstable without the trees. Each year
goats are being taken further and further from the village to find
forage, while crop yields diminish and will soon collapse.¹⁹ And so at
around 7500 BC the last inhabitants of Beidha will leave, following a
steady haemorrhaging as life had become too hard.

Many people will go to a thriving new town a mere 12 kilometres to the
south, known today as Basta.²⁰ This was only discovered by
archaeologists in 1986 and has since provided some of the most
impressive surviving Neolithic architecture, with 2-metre-high
stone-built walls, complete with windows and doors. Basta grew to more
than 12 hectares in extent, one of the largest Neolithic towns. It must
have found itself a particularly fertile niche, allowing it to far
surpass Beidha in size. But even this town did not survive beyond 6000
BC.

Lubbock’s journey is not to Basta but to the north – a return to Jericho
and then to the town of ‘Ain Ghazal. His time at Beidha has provided
only a partial view of the new town-dwellers of the Neolithic age – one
largely concerned with their domestic lives – so he must visit these
settlements to learn more about their sacred world.

10 The Town of Ghosts

Ritual, religion and economic collapse, 7500–6300 BC

From Beidha John Lubbock heads directly west, following a stream through
a wooded valley to the lowlands and eventually the River Jordan. There
is lush woodland, reeds and papyrus on either side of the river, but
otherwise the landscape is dry and barren. Beyond the Jordan the land
climbs and soon becomes today’s Negev desert. It is sunrise. Across the
river a lazy wisp of smoke rises from a fire.

It burns for a party of men from Jericho who are heading south with
baskets of surplus grain. A dozen of them have carried the heavy load,
heading for a rendezvous with hunter-gatherers who live within the
Negev. The grain will be exchanged for seashells and meat from wild
game.¹

The deserts of the Negev and Sinai were recolonised soon after the
Younger Dryas had come to an end. Some new desert settlements were made
at exactly the same location as those of the Late Natufian, such as Abu
Salem in the central Negev.² The new occupants may have remained in the
desert all year round, living as hunter-gatherers; alternatively they
may have simply been summer visitors, spending winters in the Neolithic
towns such as Beidha. In either case they may have supplied the
townspeople with meat.

As domesticated animals became the principal source of meat, wild game
is likely to have become a prestigious foodstuff for people within the
towns. The dwellers of Beidha and other settlements made a variety of
very elegant arrow and spear points, suggesting that the killing of wild
game had now acquired a special status.³ At ‘Ain Ghazal – a town on the
outskirts of modern-day Amman – the remains of no less than forty-five
wild species were present, including three species of gazelle, wild
cattle, pig and small carnivores.⁴ It seems unlikely that such a range
could have been hunted in the immediate vicinity of the town and hence
some of these bones must have arrived in joints of meat acquired from
desert-based hunter-gatherers.

Shells from the Red Sea were also arriving in the towns by some means.
The interest in acquiring seashells, whether by exchange or by
expeditions to the coast, reaches right back to the LGM, and had
previously attained a peak in the Early Natufian. But a change in the
most desirable types had occurred: interest in the tube-like dentalium
shells seems to have been replaced by a desire for cowries.⁵

As the traders head south, Lubbock travels north to visit Jericho for a
second time. He follows the base of the Judaean Hills along the western
shore of the Dead Sea. Wadis, some containing small streams that will
soon dry out under the hot summer sun, dissect the hills. He passes
flocks of goats being taken to pasture by young boys and small groups
collecting asphalt and salt.

Lubbock arrives in 7000 BC. The settlement has changed since the time
when he watched the first wheat being sown: the clusters of small,
circular dwellings have been replaced by sprawling rectangular buildings
amidst not just arable fields and flocks of goats, but row upon row of
mud bricks drying in the sun. Jericho has turned from a village of
hunter-gatherer-cultivators to a town of farmers, craftsmen and
traders.⁶

Lubbock wanders through the courtyards and between the houses, engulfed
by the clamour of Neolithic life. Much work is taking place outdoors –
food preparation, stone-working, the manufacture of baskets, fabrics and
leather goods. He is reminded of Beidha; there are similar packs of
scavenging dogs, and the same flux between the stench of hanging meat,
the earthiness of wood smoke and the fragrance of smouldering herbs as
he walks around the town. He stops to watch a woman at work with her
quern; it is so large that she sits on one end and repetitively bends
her back as she stretches with her hand-stone to the other – the work of
countless generations to come.

The houses are built from sun-dried mud brick rather than stone. They
are single storey and seem rather simpler in design than those at
Beidha, there being no sign of the corridor buildings.⁷ Lubbock chooses
one at random to enter. Wooden doors lead him through three successive
rectangular rooms, each with a burnished red plaster floor and rush
mats. No one is at home and there is little in the way of furniture. A
pile of mats and hides suggests a sleeping area, baskets and stone bowls
appear to be valued possessions.

In the third room three clay figurines, each female and about 5
centimetres high, stand against a wall. One is particularly striking –
it is dressed in what seems to be a flowing robe and has been sculpted
with arms bent, so that one hand is placed below each breast. Next to
them is what looks like a human head. Lubbock lifts it gently – it is
literally a human head, or at least a skull on which the face has been
delicately modelled with plaster.

As he moves around the town, Lubbock finds more plastered heads in other
houses along with plain skulls that have been positioned in corners of
rooms or within wall niches. After much searching, he finds a man seated
within his house working on a face. It is being modelled on to the skull
of his father, the man who had built the house and whose hands had laid
the plaster floor below which his bones now rest. After the body had
remained entirely buried for several years, the grave was reopened, the
skull removed and the floor patched with new plaster.⁸ Now the son
honours his father.

The man at work squats beside bowls of white plaster, red paint and an
assortment of shells. The nasal cavities and eye orbits have already
been packed and left to dry; the base of the skull has been levelled so
it can stand unaided. Now the final coating of a fine white plaster is
being applied which will soon be painted red. Cowrie shells will be
inset for the eyes and then the skull displayed within the house. As he
moulds, pinches and smoothes the plaster, the man’s wife collects
lentils in the fields, struggling with the weight of their baby boy
strapped to her back. One day that son will lovingly exhume and model
his own father’s head to ensure that he too continues to live within the
house, even after his bones have been buried under the floor.

The plastered skulls of Jericho were perhaps the most dramatic of
Kathleen Kenyon’s discoveries. She found seven of them within a single
pit, along with various isolated skulls below house floors. Most were
rather squat in character as whole faces had been modelled over skulls
that lacked their lower jaws. But one skull had been complete and the
plaster sculpture appears as an elegant portrait of a revered ancestor.
Whether the skulls had been displayed, belonged to the ‘founders’ of the
house and aspired to be portraits, are matters for speculation. All we
know is that at some time they were buried in pits, perhaps as a final
act of remembrance or as the last step in reaching the afterlife.

Since Kenyon’s excavations at Jericho, plastered skulls have been found
at numerous Neolithic sites, each settlement making them in a subtly
different manner but conforming to the same basic design.⁹

A different type of decorated skull was found in Nahal Hemar – the cave
from which the fragments of fabric were recovered. Here remnants of six
skulls were found, all of which had strips of asphalt arranged in a net
design across the cranium, perhaps once used to attach hair, but with no
plaster on the facial bones.

These skulls were joined in the cave by a remarkable array of other
ritualistic objects, in addition to the pieces of fabric.¹⁰ This
included the fragments of two stone masks that had been painted in
alternating red and green stripes and are likely to have had hair and
beards attached. Four carvings of human faces were found, each made from
a segment of a long bone and decorated with plaster, red ochre and
asphalt to mark eyes, hair and beard. These had been applied on several
occasions, suggesting that the figurines had been intentionally ‘aged’.
Fragments of plaster were found on wads of grass that, in light of
discoveries I will shortly describe, are likely to have been modelled
plaster figures. There were a great many beads within the cave, several
hundred made from Mediterranean and Red Sea seashells and others from
stone, plaster and wood.

David Alon and Ofer Bar-Yosef, the excavators of Nahal Hemar, have
struggled to explain why such a precious collection of objects had been
placed within a tiny cave located many kilometres from any known
settlement. The cave may have been revered because of its location on
the boundary between two social territories, and indeed two distinct
types of landscape – the Negev and Judaean deserts – and hence used as a
store for ritualistic objects. Little more can be said at present. All
we can do is to visit the cave, describe its objects and admit to our
woeful ignorance about the sacred world of the Neolithic.

From Jericho, a journey of 100 kilometres to the northwest would take
Lubbock into the Nazareth hills and to the funerary centre of Kfar
HaHoresh. This is looked after by resident guardians and is where the
small towns and villages of that region bring their dead for burial – or
more frequently reburial after bones have been exhumed. A host of ritual
practices occurs at Kfar HaHoresh: facial modelling in plaster, the
slaughter and burial of wild animals, the laying of plaster surfaces
surrounded by low walls into which bones are sometimes positioned to
mimic a recent death, and communal feasting. Indeed, as Nigel
Goring-Morris of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem continues his
excavations which began in 1991, an ever greater range of exotic
practices is coming to light.¹¹

From Kfar HaHoresh, a further walk of 30 kilometres would take Lubbock
to the Mediterranean coast below Mount Carmel. Providing that took him
about five hundred years, he could then visit the coastal community of
Atlit-Yam. Although its people grew cereals, and kept cattle, goats and
pigs, this was primarily a fishermen’s village. Boats departed daily to
net the triggerfish that resided on the sandy and rocky seabed.¹² But
the sea will eventually bring about the town’s demise as rising sea
levels flood the Mediterranean coastline, leaving Atlit-Yam entirely
submerged.

Lubbock’s time in the Neolithic age of western Asia is rapidly running
out. He must therefore forgo visits to Kfar HaHoresh and Atlit-Yam and
travel 50 kilometres to the eastern side of the Jordan valley where he
will find the largest of the Neolithic towns, that known today as ‘Ain
Ghazal. And so for two days he travels through the thick woodland of the
Jordan valley, climbing its steep eastern escarpment into grasslands
dotted with scattered trees.¹³

The first sign that a town is near by is when the goat tracks he follows
broaden into well-trodden paths between small fields, some planted with
lentils and peas, others with wheat or barley. Women and children are at
work, harvesting the lentils and departing in twos and threes to carry
heavy loads to the town. Many baskets wait to be taken and so Lubbock
heaves one upon his shoulders and follows a woman with her two tired
children. He follows them into the valley known today as Wadi Zarqa;
stepping-stones cross the river where many goats have been tethered. A
track then leads directly to the heart of the town.

As he walks, Lubbock notices that every available patch of soil has been
planted. The reason soon becomes evident – the town is three or maybe
four times the size of Jericho. The nearby valley sides of Wadi Zarqa,
however, are quite barren – the soils exhausted by repeated cropping,
and then washed away by winter rains after the remaining vegetation had
been cleared for firewood. Some of the slopes have been terraced for the
construction of new houses, while families live in temporary tents and
brushwood shelters. ‘Ain Ghazal is ‘enjoying’ a population explosion,
partly from its own inhabitants, and partly from the influx of people
whose own villages have already been abandoned due to erosion and
exhaustion of the surrounding land.

The date is 6500 BC and the town is a maze of buildings – some brand
new, some being repaired, others dilapidated or abandoned. They are
built from undressed stone, timbers, reeds, mud mortar and plaster.¹⁴
People are returning to their homes as dusk descends; some are embarking
on meals, others preparing to sleep. Lubbock leaves the basket outside
the house of the woman he has followed, who will thank her children for
carrying it, much to their surprise. For the next hour he explores the
town, peering through windows and over people’s shoulders. Much is the
same as at Beidha and Jericho, with plastered heads and small clay
figurines prominently displayed. In one house he sees a delightful model
of a fox – indeed, models of animals seem particularly important to the
people who live here, especially those of cattle, although whether wild
or domestic remains unclear.¹⁵

In another house a group sits around a flaming hearth as obsidian
blades, pieces of coral and brightly coloured stones are passed from
hand to hand. These come from a man with distinctive clothes and
hairstyle – a trader recently arrived from the north. Peering around the
door Lubbock sees small spheres, discs and pyramids of clay being
counted and placed in leather pouches.¹⁶ Such items are quite new to
him, but tiredness overcomes curiosity and he finds an abandoned house
in which to sleep.

The next morning Lubbock awakes to find the town silent and deserted: no
cooking in the courtyards, no women setting off for the fields, no men
erecting timbers and laying plaster floors. As he wanders through the
alleys between the houses, a low murmuring turns into a quiet babbling
of voices. On turning a corner Lubbock finds a gathering of several
hundred people. Young children sit upon parents’ shoulders, older
children have climbed upon walls and window-ledges. Everyone is
clamouring for a view. Just as Lubbock arrives, the wooden doors of a
building swing open and a procession emerges. Silence and stillness
descend.

Six men lead the way, dressed in masks, robes and head-dresses much like
those discovered at Nahal Hemar. They carry a wooden platform supporting
a group of statues, made by plaster-coated bundles of reeds that had
been tied to form torsos, arms and legs.¹⁷ There are perhaps twelve
plaster statues, some about one metre high, others much smaller. They
have flattish bodies, elongated necks, large round faces, wide-open eyes
with deep black centres. The noses are moulded as stubs; the lips hardly
exist at all. The plaster is pure white; some statues are draped with
fine pieces of textile. One has her hands positioned below her breasts,
thrusting them towards the viewer whom she entraps with her steely gaze.

The crowd clamours to see the statues, knowing that it will be their
last chance as they are going for burial. But the people also know that
within a few years another set of statues will be brought through those
wooden doors, and eventually another set, and then another: new life
will always follow death, just as spring growth always follows the
harvest.

Lubbock joins the procession to an abandoned house and squeezes inside
to watch the burial ceremony and listen to the prayers and chanting.
Each statue is held aloft and then carefully placed into a pit dug in
the floor. More prayers, and the pit is closed. The ‘priests’ return to
the building from whence they came, the doors slammed shut. The crowd
disperses; some people appear to be in shock, some mournful, others
confused.

The town of ‘Ain Ghazal was discovered in the late 1970s when the
construction of a new road exposed walls and human bones. The plaster
statues were found in 1983 during the third season of excavation
directed by Gary Rollefson, then of the University of San Diego. He and
his colleagues also found several plaster skulls, many human burials,
evidence for traded items such as obsidian from Turkey and coral from
the Red Sea, together with numerous small clay ‘tokens’ which may have
been accounting devices, perhaps representing the allocation of fields
to particular families. A vast quantity of animal bones was excavated,
too, the majority coming from goats that had evidently been kept in
large herds.

Rollefson was able to document the boom and eventual bust of this
farming town. So, even without the plaster statues, ‘Ain Ghazal would
have provided further insights into the economic, social and religious
life of the early Neolithic farmers. But it is the statues that
distinguish ‘Ain Ghazal from all other Neolithic towns. Although pieces
of plaster with impressions of reeds were found at Nahal Hemar and
Jericho, it has only been at ‘Ain Ghazal that plaster statues have been
found intact.

Two caches were discovered. The first consisted of twelve statues and
thirteen busts, all of which had been placed in a single pit, with the
larger figures aligned on an east–west axis. Two years later a second,
smaller cache was found dating from about two hundred years later in the
history of ‘Ain Ghazal. Its statues were very similar in design,
although a little larger and more standardised. Included in this second
cache were three spectacular busts of a two-headed figure.

Denise Schmandt-Besserat from the University of Texas has looked towards
the religious practices of the much later Babylonian civilisations for
clues as to what the statues represented, believing that the origins of
those Babylonian beliefs lie within the first farming communities of
western Asia.¹⁸ One possibility is that the plaster statues were
depictions of ghosts. The early Babylonian scripts record how ghosts
were sometimes banished from houses by burying effigies at a distance
from occupied buildings. Schmandt-Besserat is sure that the people of
‘Ain Ghazal would have feared these statues, and that their uncanny
appearance – big staring eyes, disproportionate heads, and in one case
six toes – might suggest ghosts.

So perhaps ‘Ain Ghazal had been a town full of ghosts which had to be
repeatedly banished from the houses and courtyards, from the goat pens
and fields, by encasing them within the ground. But Schmandt-Besserat is
more persuaded by another possibility – that these statues represent a
pantheon, the gods and goddesses of the Neolithic.

In Babylonian literature the great god Marduk has two heads, much like
some of the plaster statues and similar to two-headed figures in the art
of the later prehistoric and historic communities in western Asia. The
plaster statue exposing her breasts recalls a Babylonian goddess who
adopts a similar pose. So the possibility arises that the roots of
Babylonian religion lie in the Neolithic culture of the Jordan valley
around 6500 BC.

But why would the statues have been buried? The fact that two caches
have been found within the tiny excavated portion of the town suggests
that many statues were once made. Perhaps this was for no other reason
than wear and tear – the plaster constructions would have soon cracked
and crumbled, so burial was a way of enabling new statues to be made. Or
perhaps, as in later religions, the gods had to ‘die’ and then be reborn
each year to ensure a fertile spring.

The plaster statues indicate a shift to a more public and perhaps
centralised form of religious activity than was present earlier in the
Neolithic. This is also suggested by the appearance of buildings that
were most likely ‘temples’. Such buildings have been associated with
Jericho and Beidha but the most convincing examples come from ‘Ain
Ghazal. Towards the end of this settlement’s existence, three new types
of building appear, diversifying what had been a remarkable degree of
architectural homogeneity of rectangular, domestic dwellings.

Gary Rollefson describes the appearance of buildings with apsidal ends
that became scattered within ‘neighbourhoods’ of the domestic dwellings;
small circular buildings were also constructed. These were repeatedly
refloored and so interpreted by Rollefson as shrines associated with
several families or a lineage. Two ‘special’ buildings are also known
from the final phases of ‘Ain Ghazal. The most impressive was located
high on a slope in full view of the whole settlement. It is unique in
lacking a plaster floor and in the nature of its surviving furniture and
fittings. A square, red-painted hearth was positioned in the centre of
the room, surrounded by seven flat limestone slabs; there were several
standing blocks of limestone and an anthropomorphic stone pillar.
Rollefson suggests that the building may have functioned as a temple for
the whole community.¹⁹

The town of ‘Ain Ghazal made remarkable growth, reaching thirty acres in
extent, spilling over to the east side of Wadi Zarqa, housing 2,000
people and more. By 6300 BC, however, it is in an advanced state of
terminal decline. There are many abandoned houses and the alleys between
them are littered with Neolithic rubbish. There is little more than a
faint echo of the once ebullient town in the few occupied houses and the
men and women who are still working in the courtyards. Any recently
constructed houses are small and shabby compared to those of the
original town.²⁰

The river within Wadi Zarqa still flows but the valley sides are bare –
not just around the village but as far as one can see. Soil exhaustion
and erosion had devastated the farming economy of ‘Ain Ghazal. Not a
single tree remains within walking distance of the town. Its people had
travelled further and further every year to plant their crops and to
find fodder for their goats. Yields declined, fuel became scarce and the
river polluted with human waste. Infant mortality, always high, reached
catastrophic proportions, so that population levels collapsed,
compounded by the steady departure of people back to a life within
scattered hamlets.²¹ Such is the story of all PPNB towns of the Jordan
valley – complete economic collapse.

Lubbock now stands above the Zarqa valley and stares at the shocking
scene of environmental degradation caused by farming.²² Both he and
modern-day archaeologists wonder whether farming could possibly have
been the only cause; the ice cores show that between 6400 and 6000 BC
there was a period of particularly low temperatures and unreliable
rainfall, if not drought. But it seems quite impossible to untangle the
relative impacts of human farming and a changing climate on the now
barren landscape around ‘Ain Ghazal.

In the distance a flock of goats is being herded into the hills. Lubbock
watches as they pick their way over the crags and disappear from sight.
That flock will return to ‘Ain Ghazal, but not for many months as a new
economy has arisen. Town life is no longer sustainable in the Jordan
valley and has been replaced with nomadic pastoralism, the way of life
that continues to the present day. Within a few years ‘Ain Ghazal will
be no more than a seasonal gathering place for nomadic goat herders who
will erect flimsy shelters in the ruins of the town while their animals
feed upon the thistles that have grown over the deserted buildings and
burial places of the gods.²³

11 Heaven and Hell at Çatalhöyük

Florescence of the Neolithic in Turkey, 9000–7000 BC

John Lubbock is approaching the end of his journey through the Neolithic
revolution of western Asia, that which turned the Ohalo hunter-gatherers
into the farmers, craftsmen, traders and priests of ‘Ain Ghazal. From
that town he has travelled northwest for 500 kilometres in the company
of pastoralists and traders, crossing the Syrian desert by moving from
oasis to oasis. This has taken him to the Euphrates, where at the
confluence with the River Khabur he visits the town of Bouqras,
established on a promontory overlooking the flood plain.¹ In its
buildings, he finds wall-paintings – pictures of large water birds,
storks or cranes – the first sight of an ever-increasing quantity of art
work that he is to encounter during the final stages of his West Asia
journey.

But Bouqras, like ‘Ain Ghazal, has passed its heyday; many of its
mud-brick houses have fallen into disrepair. The flood plain had once
provided ample land for hunting game, grazing and cultivation. Now hard
times have arrived and the population has dwindled from a thousand to
little more than a couple of hundred at most. A few specialist craftsmen
remain at work, producing fine stone bowls carved from marble and
alabaster.

Lubbock leaves and heads northeast, following the Euphrates through the
eastern Taurus Mountains and into the rolling foothills of the Anatolian
plateau. There it changes direction, making a westwards arc through
barren hills of limestone interspersed with wooded plains. Here, no more
than three kilometres south of the Euphrates, he finds the village of
Nevali Çori² straddling the banks of a small tributary stream. There are
about twenty-five abandoned buildings – all single storey, rectangular
in shape, and built from limestone blocks bonded with mud mortar – but
no people. The village is deserted except for scurrying mice and rats.

Several houses had been aligned in a terrace with narrow passages
between. Some are particularly large, almost 20 metres in length, and
divided into adjoining rooms. Most have thick plaster floors; where
these are decayed, stone drainage channels and human burials are
exposed.

The floors are scattered with rubbish – animal bones, broken querns,
flint tools and worn baskets. Abandonment of the village had evidently
been a gradual affair, with a slow decline in standards of hygiene and
order. Within the rubbish Lubbock finds clay and stone figurines that
had fallen from wooden shelves. One stylised human face looks familiar;
it seems to recall the masks worn by the ‘priests’ of ‘Ain Ghazal, which
were in turn similar to the masks from Nahal Hemar.

The area outside the houses is also a mess. Several large roasting pits
have begun to fill with silt; others still show their cobbled linings.
Animal pens have collapsed, while clusters of grinding stones still sit
amidst husks and chaff. Whoever had lived at Nevali Çori had evidently
been farmers like those at Beidha, Jericho and ‘Ain Ghazal; but they had
possessed quite different religious beliefs, as Lubbock appreciates when
he enters what archaeologists will call the ‘cult building’.

It is at the northwest end of the terrace, a square building with its
back wall set into the natural slope. The reed-covered roof has almost
entirely collapsed and the walls are crumbling. Lubbock has to squeeze
his way past fallen timbers to descend the few steps into its interior.
As he does so, a host of snakes shoot below the rubble upon the floor.

A stone bench runs around the walls, partitioned into sections by ten
stone pillars. There are further slab-like stone pillars in the middle
of the room. These have T-shaped capitals and appear like human
shoulders; when Lubbock looks closely he sees a pair of human arms
carved in low relief upon each face. From the steps he looks towards a
niche in the opposite wall. It contains a human head upon which a snake
has come to rest – both head and snake carved in stone. The surrounding
walls had once been thickly plastered and covered in exotic murals
painted in red and black. But most of the plaster has collapsed to the
floor, leaving the paintings as the pieces of a broken and jumbled
jigsaw.

Lubbock finds more sculptures, some free-standing, some built into the
walls and pillars. There is a large bird, perhaps a vulture or eagle; a
woman’s head is caught in the talons of another great bird; a third bird
of prey tops a column carved into two female heads. And so it goes on –
more birds, faces that seem part animal and part human, another snake.

Excavations at Nevali Çori were directed by Harald Hauptmann of the
University of Heidelberg between 1983 and 1991, prior to the site being
flooded by the new lake behind the Atatürk Dam. The settlement had
developed at the same time as the PPNB towns of the Jordan valley,
between 8500 and 8000 BC. Its inhabitants had been farmers with
domesticated wheat and herds of sheep and goat, although hunting and
gathering had also been pursued. When first discovered, Nevali Çori’s
sculptures and carvings were quite unprecedented in the Neolithic,
although they now have a clear origin in those at Göbekli Tepe, the
hilltop Early Neolithic ritual centre located no more than 30 kilometres
away. Indeed, it was only because Klaus Schmidt had excavated at Nevali
Çori that he was immediately able to recognise the limestone slabs upon
that hilltop as having come from carved Neolithic pillars.

The design of Nevali Çori’s cult building, with its standing pillars and
benches, is strikingly similar to the PPNA buildings at Göbekli Tepe
with the exception of its rectangular rather than circular form. By 8500
BC, however, rectangular buildings were also all that could be seen upon
that limestone hill. The circular structures with their massive carved
pillars had been deliberately buried by tons of soil and the area where
they had been demarcated by a stone wall. New rectangular buildings had
been constructed beyond this wall, leaving an empty space where the
previous and now buried buildings had stood. Within these new buildings
pillars carved with wild animals were once again erected, identical in
form to those buried beneath the earth but lacking their monumental
size. As Schmidt has yet to find traces of domestic activity associated
with these new buildings he suspects that Göbekli had continued as a
dedicated ritual centre until it became abandoned, probably around 7500
BC.

The cult building at Nevali Çori, however, had been part of a settlement
that was dominated by domestic dwellings, in the same manner that
special buildings were found at the hunter-gatherer village of Hallan
Çemi Tepsi – the 10,000 BC settlement located 200 kilometres east of
Nevali Çori. Cult buildings were also found at a settlement located
midway between the two, known today as Çayönü. This provides further
evidence for the florescence of Neolithic culture in southeast Turkey.³

Çayönü has a much longer excavation history than Nevali Çori and Hallan
Çemi Tepsi – it began in 1962 and continued until 1991.⁴ The site is
found at the most northern extent of the Mesopotamian lowlands, located
in the Ergani plain that is cut by both the Euphrates and the Tigris. It
lies in the shadow of the Taurus Mountains in what is quite an arid
landscape – although a seasonal river still flows by the site. When
occupied, there had been marshes and swamps near by where beavers and
otters had been trapped. It is a stunning site to visit, a place of
immense tranquillity and with a powerful sense of its prehistoric past –
a huge relief after having had to pass through several of the military
barriers that block the roads of eastern Turkey today.

Occupation had begun at Çayönü by at least 9500 BC, making it
contemporary with the first occupations at Jericho and the construction
of the ritual centre at Göbekli Tepe. Its first people had also built
circular dwellings, cultivated wheat and remained reliant on wild
animals, especially pigs, cattle and deer. By 8000 BC, however, they
were engaged in a very different form of architecture. Large rectangular
stone buildings were made using a ‘grille plan’ as a foundation – that
is, a series of parallel low stone walls on which a wooden and plaster
floor had been laid. This was probably a protection from damp ground and
periodic flooding. At least forty of these ‘grille plan’ buildings were
constructed, the largest divided into multiple rooms and workshops. Asli
Özdoğan of Istanbul University, the most recent excavator, believes that
at least six architectural phases are apparent in the slightly new
styles and forms of building that were adopted.

The major expansion of the village reflected the adoption of a
fully-fledged mixed farming economy – probably one of the first
settlements to do so. A central ‘plaza’ was constructed, presumably for
public meetings and ceremonies, along with cult building where multiple
burials took place and human skulls were cached – no fewer than seventy
were found within a single room. Although no monumental art objects have
been found at Çayönü to compare with those from Nevali Çori and Göbekli
Tepe, more than four hundred clay figurines, mainly of humans and
animals, were excavated from amongst the domestic rubbish. But in spite
of this use of clay, and a wide range of craft activities including the
carving of stone bowls, no traces of pottery vessels have been found
within the village. Nevertheless, the people of Çayönü were certainly
pushing forward the boundaries of technology – they took copper ore from
deposits 20 kilometres away and beat these into beads, hooks and metal
sheets.

Lubbock heads west from Nevali Çori and undertakes a vast journey,
crossing the Taurus Mountains and entering the plateau of central
Anatolia. He passes several small villages and some larger towns. For
parts of the journey he travels with pastoralists and for others with
those visiting relatives in distant villages or heading for the ‘shiny
black hills’.

These hills are made out of obsidian and found in the region that we
describe today as Cappadocia. Even at 7500 BC people had already been
visiting them for several thousand years to collect the volcanic glass
that was then traded and exchanged throughout western Asia.⁵ The
obsidian that Lubbock had seen at Abu Hureyra, Jericho and ‘Ain Ghazal
had come from Cappadocia – most likely having passed through many
different hands and households on its way.

It is not surprising, therefore, that large heaps of wasted flakes and
cores surround many of the obsidian workings, from which only the very
best pieces have been taken away. Workshops, from which one can acquire
enormous cores of obsidian in exchange for shells, furs, and copper ore,
are plentiful. But the obsidian covers far too great an area for all
access to be controlled. And so Lubbock passes many small parties either
grubbing large nodules from the ground or simply breaking large flakes
from outcrops of this highly prized shiny black stone.

His companions are heading to the town that we know today as Aşıklı
Höyük, located at the western extent of Cappodocia, a sprawling farming
settlement of mud-brick buildings.⁶ But Lubbock takes a different route,
crossing the Anatolian plateau to its southernmost plain, heading
towards the Neolithic town of Çatalhöyük.

Throughout his journey from Nevali Çori the vegetation has continuously
changed from steppe to woodland and back again, sensitive to the many
variations in topography and water – steep-sided valley, rolling hills
and flat plain dissected by many rivers. Some of the woods are now
composed of massive oaks, through which Lubbock catches fleeting
glimpses of deer and wild cattle. Huge birds of prey seem to be
endlessly circling in the sky.

It is 7000 BC and Çatalhöyük is at its peak.⁷ As Lubbock approaches, he
enters a heavily cultivated landscape. Signs of tree-felling are common
– wood is evidently becoming a precious resource as the freshest cuts
are on the smallest trees. Small fields appear in which women and
children are completing their day’s work while young boys steer flocks
of sheep and goats back to the night-time safety of the town. This has
now become visible, appearing as a solid mass within the half-light of
dusk.

Çatalhöyük is quite unlike any place that Lubbock has seen. It appears
to have a continuous perimeter wall, one that has no entrance and no
desire to welcome uninvited guests. Looking more closely, Lubbock
realises that it is not a single wall at all, but the outcome of many
abutting walls from individual buildings that cling tightly together as
if in fear of what lies beyond. A dirty, rubbish-strewn river stagnates
along one side, leading to stinking swamps and marshes behind the town.
On the other is a muddy pond around which goats are settled for the
night.

Lubbock watches the fieldworkers returning home; they climb wooden
ladders on to the roofs, dispersing and disappearing down a maze of
rooftop pathways, steps and ladders that lead from tier to tier and
house to house. Between the paths are flat mud roofs, some evidently
used as workshops for tool-making and basket-weaving. A few have
collapsed, leaving gaping holes that expose the rooms below. Sometimes
the paths edge around courtyards entirely enclosed by mud-brick walls;
from these come the stench of human waste.

Each house has a trapdoor entrance on its southern side and small
windows in whatever wall is exposed above the adjacent roof. Some doors
are open, releasing smoke and the light of flickering oil-lamps into the
cold night air; sometimes a bolder, stronger glow emanates from a
well-fuelled hearth.

Choosing an open doorway, Lubbock descends a wooden ladder into the
kitchen area of a small rectangular room.⁸ Before him there is a raised
hearth – a platform with a kerb to prevent any spillage of ash. It gives
a deep glow and a low heat from its animal-dung fuel. Near by an oven
has been built into the wall, exposing neat mud bricks, and beside that
a clay bin with a hole at the base from which lentils are spilling.
There are scattered utensils, a basket with root vegetables and a young
goat tethered to the wall. As such it is a familiar domestic scene, one
that could have been found at Jericho or ‘Ain Ghazal. But then Lubbock
turns and sees a monstrous scene of bulls bursting from the wall.

There are three of them at about waist-height – white heads striped with
black and red, from which sprout enormous pointed horns that seem to
threaten all of human life within the room. Beside Lubbock, a woman and
a man sit upon a raised platform adjacent to the bulls, their heads
downcast, eating bread in silence. Between them a child has left her
bread untouched upon its wooden plate.

Around the bulls the walls are painted with bold geometric designs –
sharp, oppressive images above handprints in red and black similar to
those painted in the French cave of Pech Merle at the LGM. But while
those ice-age hunter-gatherer hands were welcoming, outstretched in
greeting to visitors within the cave, these farming hands of Çatalhöyük
seem to be more of a warning or a plea for help – its people are trapped
within a bestiary from which they cannot escape.

And so begins a night-time tour of Çatalhöyük, a nightmare vision of the
world that farming has brought to these particular members of humankind.
First Lubbock crawls through a small doorway to escape the room, but
this leads nowhere, merely into a storeroom where baskets and hides are
stacked. And so he returns to the roof and tries another house, and then
another and another. In each he finds the same – the hearth, the oven,
the grain bin, the platform all positioned identically, in rooms that
are near-identical in size and shape. Many rooms have clay figurines
placed within wall niches, or simply upon the floor; some are evidently
of women, others of men, but many seem quite sexless. The most startling
is of a woman who sits upon a throne that had been placed beside a grain
bin. At each side of her stands a leopard; she rests one hand upon each
head while their tails wrap around her body.⁹

The bulls vary from room to room but are always shocking, especially
when encountered in the hard-edged beams of moonlight that now enter
through the tiny windows, or by flames that bring the beasts alive.¹⁰
There are bulls’ heads with long twisted horns, bulls’ heads with faces
covered in exotic designs, and bulls’ heads stacked one above the other
from floor to ceiling. Some rooms have free-standing stone pillars with
horns, or long lines of horns set into benches daring anyone to sit
within their grasp.

The geometric designs are joined by pictures of great black vultures
viciously attacking headless people, and by scenes of enormous deer and
cattle surrounded by tiny frenzied people. The real people are asleep
upon their platforms. They lie in contorted positions, sometimes jerking
awake and staring at Lubbock as he passes, as if able to see yet another
intruder in their lives.

Lubbock goes up and down the ladders, from room to room and horror to
horror, until he falls exhausted and lies prostrate before another
sculptured wall. He heaves himself up on his knees and faces a pair of
modelled women’s breasts that emerge from the mud-brick and plaster.
Both nipples are split apart and peering from within are the skulls of
vultures, foxes and weasels: motherhood itself violently defiled.
Lubbock can take no more and crawls across the floor into the
pitch-blackness of a storeroom. And there he hides, in the hope that
daylight will bring release from this Neolithic hell.

It was on a cold November day in 1958 when James Mellaart, a scholar at
the British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara, arrived at the mound of
Çatalhöyük. He had been searching for archaeological sites on the Konya
plain of the Anatolian plateau since 1951, and had in fact seen the
mound from a distance in his second year of work. When he eventually
examined it, he found the mound covered in grass and weeds, its surface
scoured by southwesterly winds. These had revealed the unmistakable
traces of mud-brick walls, and exposed artefacts such as obsidian
arrow-heads and fragments of pottery. Mellaart immediately knew that he
had made an important discovery. To his trained eye, the artefacts were
unmistakably Neolithic in date, a period of settlement then unknown in
the region. And the mound was vast, 450 metres in length and covering 32
acres. But he had no idea how important it would prove to be. Çatalhöyük
turned out to be quite simply the most remarkable Neolithic settlement
ever discovered – although that status must now be shared with, or
perhaps even surrendered to, Göbekli Tepe.

Mellaart excavated the settlement between 1961 and 1966, exposing no
more than a tiny fraction of the southwest corner. His discoveries of
painted walls, bulls’ heads, human burials and figurines soon became
renowned throughout the world. Along with these there was an impressive
series of artefacts, including mirrors made from obsidian and daggers
with exquisitely carved bone handles.

But what exactly had he found? There was a series of rooms: the larger
and more elaborate believed to be shrines, the smaller domestic
dwellings. And yet in spite of the sculptures and paintings, signs of
craft specialists and architectural complexity, there was no evidence
for a priestly caste, political leaders, or public buildings.

Mellaart joined the Institute of Archaeology, London, where his lectures
about Çatalhöyük in the 1970s were enthralling, especially to one
undergraduate by the name of Ian Hodder. By 1993, Hodder had become a
professor of archaeology in Cambridge, and was believed by many to be
the most innovative archaeologist of his generation.¹¹ He had pioneered
the study of prehistoric symbolism, and hence it came as little surprise
that he was drawn to Çatalhöyük – the ultimate challenge for those who
wished to enter the symbolic worlds of people from the past.

Hodder had begun planning his own work at Çatalhöyük in 1991, wishing
not only to undertake new excavations but to ensure that the site was
properly conserved, restored and managed as part of Turkey’s heritage.
The result has been one of the largest archaeological projects in the
world today, one that applies the latest advances in archaeological
science, methods and theories. Some of the most informative results have
come from microscopic studies of the floor deposits and wall plaster,
undertaken by Wendy Matthews – a colleague of mine at Reading
University.¹² These have shown that some walls had as many as forty
layers of paint and plaster, suggesting that they may have been
retouched annually, or perhaps every time a new burial was placed below
the wall.

Hodder doubts if there ever had been public buildings, priests or
political leaders at the settlement. He also questions Mellaart’s
distinction between shrines and domestic houses – the microscopic study
of the floor deposits in the so-called shrines has shown that routine
activities such as toolmaking took place within those rooms, just as in
the others. Hodder believes that ritualistic and domestic activities
were so intimately entwined that it is unlikely that the people
themselves could make any distinction between the two.¹³

The economic basis of Çatalhöyük has also come into question. Mellaart
had little doubt that such a settlement must have been reliant upon an
efficient farming economy, based upon cereals and cattle. Yet his
evidence was slight. Some charred cereal grains had been found, but
grinding equipment is rare within the houses and courtyards in
comparison to its abundance in the villages of the Jordan valley. Wild
plants and animals, such as tubers and deer, may have been of far
greater significance than Mellaart had believed. Initial studies of the
newly excavated material suggest an economy no different to any other
settlement of its age, based on domestic sheep and goats, cereals and
legumes.¹⁴

Hodder’s new work has, however, confirmed many of Mellaart’s original
views. Mellaart had stressed the order within the settlement, the manner
in which each room conformed to the same spatial arrangements, and the
remarkable uniformity in artefact design throughout the history of
settlement. Hodder has found further evidence for such order. When
houses needed rebuilding they were constructed to the same design at the
same place, maintaining the same areas for each activity that took place
within them. He suggests that different types of people – old and young,
male and female, specialist tool-makers and those without skills – were
very restricted as to where they could sit and work within each room. To
me it seems as if every aspect of their lives had become ritualised, any
independence of thought and behaviour crushed out of them by an
oppressive ideology manifest in the bulls, breasts, skulls and vultures.

This sounds like living in a Neolithic hell, which is ironic because
when I visited the mound on an autumn afternoon in AD 2002, the site
looked more like an archaeological heaven. It was deserted except for
the custodian and looked splendid in the middle of the Konya plain.
Hodder’s recently excavated trenches were protected by covers and I
could see the wonderfully preserved wall plaster, fireplaces and a whole
range of architectural features: wall slots where the ladders had been,
entrances into storerooms, grain bins and platforms below which the
burials had been made. Just as impressive was the on-site laboratory,
workrooms and facilities for the archaeologists, the displays for the
visiting public, and the reconstructed dwelling for them to see. I
recalled reading an interview that Ian Hodder had given in which he was
asked to describe his dream project. Not surprisingly he answered that
he had already found it and intended to pursue the excavation of
Çatalhöyük for many years to come.¹⁵

It is dawn at Çatalhöyük in 7000 BC. Weary after his tormented night,
Lubbock has climbed on to the roof again and found a vantage point
across the plain. The sun is yet to rise and the air is fresh. A goat
herder has already left the town to find grazing for her flock; another
woman weeds in the fields that surround the town. Lubbock looks east,
towards Nevali Çori and Göbekli Tepe whose art works had seemed to
forewarn of Çatalhöyük. But so too, he thinks, had the painted birds of
Bouqras, the cattle figurines and the plaster figures of ‘Ain Ghazal.

Turning to look southeast, to the modern lands of Israel and Jordan
where his journey had begun, Lubbock recalls that birds of prey had been
revered and heads detached from human bodies at the earliest farming
villages: Jericho, Netiv Hagdud and WF16. And so the paintings and
sculptures of Çatalhöyük are perhaps not so horrific after all – simply
an expression of the mythology that had grown alongside the fields of
wheat as farming was invented and developed in western Asia.

He then looks even further back in time, to his arrival at Ohalo before
its fire, to his travels across the steppe and desert, to cutting wheat
in the wild gardens of ‘Ain Mallaha. What would those Kebaran and
Natufian hunter-gatherers have thought of Çatalhöyük? Most likely they
would have been confused and terrified as they had seemed to trust the
natural world, indeed to be part of it themselves. The people of
Çatalhöyük, on the other hand, seemed to fear and despise the wild.

With another turn Lubbock looks westwards, towards Europe. A journey
through that continent will be the next stage of his travels through
global history. This will begin back in the depths of the ice age in the
far northwest where people are hunting reindeer and clothed in furs. But
first he must visit what still remains a halfway house between European
and West Asian culture – the Mediterranean island of Cyprus.

12 Three Days on Cyprus

Extinctions, colonisation and cultural stasis, 20,000–6000 BC

Alan Simmons was perched precariously on a cliff ledge above a brilliant
blue Mediterranean sea. I listened intently as he described his 1986
excavation of Aetokremnos¹ Cave at Akrotiri – now little more than a
platform in the cliffside, its roof having collapsed many thousands of
years ago. I was crouched upon its floor; Alan faced me a couple of
metres away with his back to the sea and a strong breeze ruffling his
mass of silky grey hair. Way above him birds of prey circled on the
thermals – perhaps they knew that Aetokremnos means cliff of vultures.²

Alan described how there had been two main layers upon the floor, the
upper one with stone tools, a mass of shells and bird bones; the lower
stuffed with hippopotamus bones – but not from animals like those in
Africa today. These were pig-sized pygmy hippos, and more than five
hundred of them had been excavated from the remnants of the tiny cave.

The hippos had been hunted, Alan explained, at around 10,000 BC by the
first people to arrive on Cyprus;³ Aetokremnos was where the carcasses
had been brought, roasted and then pulled apart for their meat, fat and
bone. He was excited, waving his arms, speculating how the hippos had
been chased from their feeding grounds and then forced off the cliff
edge to their death. One step backwards, I thought, and he would be
joining them on the surf-covered rocks below.

Between 20,000 and 10,000 BC there had been no human inhabitants on
Cyprus. Neither had there been any wild goats, wild pig or deer. Being
surrounded by deep seas, Cyprus, like other Mediterranean islands, had
been isolated from other land masses for many millions of years and so
it had hardly any fauna at all.⁴

There was certainly plenty of forage and grazing as the island was
covered in a mixture of thick woodland and steppe, their proportions and
composition changing as the climate went through its ups and downs
towards the Holocene world. By 10,000 BC much of the island was covered
with oak woodland; pines were growing in the uplands along with
magnificent cedar trees with their great spreading boughs and powerful
scent.

Other than mice and their little furry night-time predator, the genet,
the only animals that flourished upon the island were pygmy hippos and
elephants. Their full-sized cousins had once lived in the coastal
marshes of western Asia that had been flooded by the rising sea. At some
very ancient date, full-sized elephants and hippos had swum to the
Cypriot shore. In the absence of a predator threat, evolution turned
their descendants into dwarfs – great bulks being quite unnecessary if
the only worry is to procure sufficient food and sex to ensure the
survival of genes.⁵

Both elephants and hippos gradually assumed the size of large pigs, the
latter far more numerous and seeming to behave like pigs themselves.
They were good swimmers but seemed happier scurrying through the
undergrowth, feeding on leaves and shoots. The hippos had drunk from
freshwater springs on the cliff-tops. In cold weather they had sheltered
in coastal caves, being adept at climbing up and down steep slopes. The
caves may also have been used for giving birth, nursing the young, and
as a place to die in once their hippo life was done.

At 10,000 BC John Lubbock sits unseen upon a scrap of sandy beach with
five other travellers – three men and two women. They have just pulled
their canoe on to the beach below the Aetokremnos Cave, relieved to
arrive on dry land after an exhausting 60-kilometre sea-crossing from
the coast of western Asia. Evidently hungry, they quickly begin
gathering shellfish from the rocks and shallow pools, knowing exactly
where to look. A couple of well-aimed beach pebbles bring down a pair of
ducks which had sat bobbing on the water, quite unconcerned by the
threat presented by these strange arrivals.

The canoeists had spotted the cave as they skirted the southern coast of
Cyprus. Now inside, they find it cramped and stoop to avoid grazing
their heads. Using rocks as picks and shovels, they begin to dig out the
sandy floor to make a fireplace; as they do so, bones begin to appear
which are either discarded or adopted as a better tool. Lubbock crouches
in the rear, knees tucked tightly beneath his chest, his head sporting a
purple bruise from a knock against the cave roof.

Within their shallow pit, Lubbock’s companions light a fire using wood
collected from the shore and snapped from desiccated shrubs.⁶ While the
ducks are roughly plucked, the canoeists take a second look at the bones
unearthed within the cave. Lubbock watches them pass a skull around,
examining its teeth and then shrugging their shoulders as to what animal
it might be. Although experienced hunters, they had never seen such
bones before. A few were gathered up, brushed free of sand and placed
within the flames in the hope that they would burn, to make the firewood
last.

My own arrival on Cyprus had been the day before Alan took me to
Aetokremnos Cave. I had no more than three days to spend on the island
while attending a conference about its early prehistory. While Alan
Simmons was conducting a site tour, another twenty conference delegates
were crouching on the cliffside where Aetokremnos Cave had once been
located.

The cave was the most controversial site discussed by the conference in
September 2001. It had been the subject of almost continual debate since
Alan’s excavations and his provocative claims that a great number of
charred bones from the cave provided conclusive evidence that its
occupants had killed and eaten the hippos. How else could the remains of
so many pygmy hippos have arrived within a small cave halfway up a steep
cliff?⁷

There were some uncontested facts about the site: humans had made a fire
in the cave at about 10,000 BC, leaving a scatter of stone tools and
beads made from seashells. No one questioned that those people had also
been responsible for the thousands of mollusc shells, and the bones from
a variety of ducks and birds.⁸ Some of the hippo bones had
unquestionably been burned, but how they originally came to be within
the cave was keenly disputed.

Alan’s critics pointed to the rarity of stone artefacts found with the
hippo bones themselves, suggesting that the few within the lower layer
could easily have slipped down crevasses or been moved by the rodents
that had burrowed within the cave. They also pointed to the complete
lack of stone-tool cut marks on any of the 218,000 excavated
hippopotamus bones. Only cut marks could provide the incontestable
evidence that the hippos had been hunted and butchered; without them,
the bones might simply be a natural deposit as found in many caves
around the Cypriot coast, perhaps accumulating many tens of thousands of
years before the arrival of people.

When preparing his report, Alan had invited Sandi Olsen from the
Carnegie Museum of Natural History, Pittsburgh, USA – an expert on
identifying human butchery – to examine the bones. Unfortunately for
Alan, she also became his harshest critic.⁹ Olsen suggested that the
people in Aetokremnos Cave had simply dug into its deposits to make more
room for themselves; this had disturbed the hippo bones, some of which
had been burned by their fires and mixed with the debris they left
behind. The occupants might even have tried to use the bones for fuel.
Olsen thought the hippo bones were likely to be several thousand years
older than the human occupation. But any radiocarbon dates on the hippo
bones themselves were unreliable, she explained, due to chemical
alterations by the fire.¹⁰

I weighed up both sides of the argument. Alan was a persuasive advocate
for the existence of hippo hunters, but without cut marks and reliable
radiocarbon dates on the bones I was left unconvinced. The constant
changes of climate and ecology between 20,000 and 10,000 BC would have
upset the reproductive patterns of pygmy hippos; the spread of thick
woodland at 12,500 BC – the late glacial interstadial – may have had a
devastating effect. And so I suspect that by 10,000 BC, when the first
canoe had reached the Cyprus shore, there had been no pygmy hippos and
elephants drinking at the cliff-top springs – merely birds of prey
circling lazily on the thermals. By that date the hippos had already
slipped over the edge – not of the cliff, but of existence itself.¹¹

Whether they were hippo hunters or not, the stone artefacts from
Aetokremnos and the radiocarbon dating of charcoal from their fires of
approximately 10,000 BC provide the earliest known evidence for a human
presence on Cyprus. Why had they come to the island? The date placed the
occupation within the Younger Dryas that had transformed life in western
Asia. Whether people had settled at ‘Ain Mallaha or Hayonim Cave in
Israel, or at Abu Hureyra on the Euphrates, they had returned to a
transient lifestyle as the yields from their wild gardens collapsed.
Their arrival on Cyprus might have been one further consequence of the
economic stress they faced. The island’s existence would surely have
been known, being either visible itself from mountain peaks or suspected
because of distant cloud formations, tell-tale currents or flotsam on
the shore.

What the hunters found there must have been a disappointment – no game
to hunt, few wild cereals to harvest. As Aetokremnos is currently the
only known site of its age on the island, it appears that the first
visitors left without delay. Almost two millennia had to pass before
people returned to Cyprus; when they did so they came better prepared,
bringing not only seed-grain in their boats but wild goats and pigs with
which to stock the island.

On the second day of my visit, I stood looking down a Neolithic well
with Paul Croft, ex-Cambridge graduate and now a resident archaeologist
on Cyprus. He was describing its discovery and excavation. Less than 100
metres away holidaymakers were sunning themselves on the sands of a
sheltered bay or drinking cocktails below the fake-straw umbrellas of a
beach bar.

Since 1989 Paul had worked with a team from the University of Edinburgh
undertaking a ‘watching brief’ in the fast-developing coastal resort of
Mylouthkia in the southwest of the island. An archaeological watching
brief is exactly that – watching what quarrying or building work
exposes, and being able to call a halt if anything of potential
archaeological importance is revealed.¹²

Mylouthkia was already known to be rich in remnants of the Cypriot
Bronze Age, beginning around 2500 BC, but the discovery of such ancient
wells was a complete surprise. The only other Neolithic examples outside
of Cyprus came from the submerged village of Atlit-Yam off the Israeli
coast, but these new discoveries were considerably older. In fact, they
might be the oldest-known wells in the world.

Paul explained how the wells – there were six of them scattered around
and inside a new hotel complex – had been discovered as circles of dark
soil on the ground, or as long columns of soil which had been sliced
lengthways as their stone surround was quarried away. At first the wells
were assumed to be Bronze Age in date and no more than shallow pits. But
excavation revealed them to have gone down at least 10 metres into the
soft rock. The debris that had filled their shafts contained many
tell-tale artefacts of the Neolithic, the complete absence of pottery
being particularly significant. Charred grains of domestic wheat and
barley were also found. Radiocarbon dates confirmed their early
Neolithic age, and by doing so extended the antiquity of farming in
Cyprus by two thousand years at least.

Rather than being abandoned when no longer needed, or when the
underground rivers had dried up, the wells were deliberately filled in.
One well turned out to contain a great number of fragmented stone
vessels, together with the hammer-stones and flint flakes used in their
manufacture. These had most likely come from a rubbish dump near the
well. Another had ritualistic depositions. It contained twenty-three
complete goat carcasses, a carefully positioned human skull and an
elegant mace-head made from polished pink stone.

Paul described how the shafts had been cut with antler picks and that
hand- and foot-holds still survived in their walls for climbing up and
down. I felt a strong desire to do just that. But before I had a chance
to ask permission, Paul had led the party of conference delegates away.
He wished to show us a newly discovered and still unexcavated well in
the backyard of a hotel apartment.

It is 8000 BC and Lubbock is peering into the same well. There is a
protective wicket fence around the opening that has to be clambered
over. Near by three or four adults and a few adolescents are carving
stone vessels below a rickety shelter. They use hammer-stones to break
and then laboriously peck the stone into rough-outs, and then grind and
carve these into bowls and plates. To do so, a continual supply of water
has to be poured over their stone. This, Lubbock guesses, is why they
sit so close to the well.

There are no buildings around the well, not a single hut let alone a
Neolithic village to be seen in the scrubby woodland that reaches to the
shore of a sheltered bay, a couple of hundred metres away. Lubbock sits
down in the workshop and notices that one of the men has a knife with a
glassy black blade stuffed in his belt. As the man is concentrating so
hard on his work, Lubbock carefully slips it out and finds, as he had
guessed, that it is as sharp as a razor – it is exactly the same stone
that he had seen in vast quantities in Cappodocia when travelling to
Çatalhöyük. So either these Cypriot craftsmen had once come from
southern Turkey or were connected with that region by trade.

Their work comes to a sudden halt when a boat appears within the bay.¹³
It is quite different to the log canoe that arrived at Aetokremnos a
millennium and a half earlier; this vessel is built with planks and has
a mast and sail.¹⁴ Within minutes the boat has been anchored and a dozen
or so people are splashing on to the beach, greeted by the craftsmen who
run to meet them.

Lubbock also goes to the boat and is soon helping unload – sacks of
wheat and barley, a few goats and a young fallow deer, each with their
legs firmly tied and looking very poorly. The people – a couple of
families – aren’t looking much better; the children in particular appear
to be quite sick.

As the new arrivals drink thirstily from the well Lubbock reflects on
the date, 8000 BC, and what he should expect to find elsewhere upon the
island. When in western Asia at this date he had been visiting Beidha –
a town with rectangular two-storey buildings, a public meeting-house,
granaries and courtyards. Such villages and small towns were found
throughout the Fertile Crescent. Lubbock recalled the man plastering his
father’s skull at Jericho and watching the burial of statues at ‘Ain
Ghazal. Did Cyprus have similar Neolithic villages or even towns? As the
farmers on the island must have come from western Asia, presumably they
did. So Lubbock leaves the well, craftsmen and new arrivals at
Mylouthkia, heading inland to search for village life.

There are at least two Neolithic settlements on Cyprus contemporary with
the wells at Mylouthkia. One, the site of Shillourokambos, is another
recent discovery.¹⁵ Delightfully situated amidst olive groves a few
kilometres from the southern coast of the island, excavations have been
undertaken since 1992 by the French archaeologist Jean Guilaine. We had
been to visit this site before seeing the wells of Mylouthkia.

Guilaine, as French as they come with his espadrilles, shrugs and charm,
provided a tour of his ongoing excavations. He too had discovered wells,
together with the remnants of an enclosure that had possibly been used
for penning animals, perhaps those still wild in their habits and form.
Guilaine had found cattle bones at his site – another animal that must
have been brought in boats from western Asia.

Shillourokambos had a long history of occupation, but architectural
preservation was poor; in fact it was almost non-existent, as any useful
stone had long been taken away for building elsewhere. As far as
Guilaine could detect from post holes and pits, its dwellings had been
circular in design. As such they matched the buildings at Tenta, the
other Neolithic settlement of a similar date. But they also matched the
houses in all Later Neolithic settlements on the island, right up to
5000 BC and beyond.

This long tradition of circular dwellings on Cyprus has been recognised
ever since the 1930s when excavations began at the largest-known Cypriot
Neolithic site, Khirokitia. The settlement covers the entire side of a
hill a few kilometres from Tenta. It was as large as the small
Pre-Pottery Neolithic B towns in western Asia – although by the time
Khirokitia had reached its peak such towns had long been abandoned. And
yet Khirokitia was built from small, circular, single-storey dwellings.
These are most comparable to those from the very first villages of
western Asia, such as Netiv Hagdud in the Jordan valley and Jerf el
Ahmar in the Euphrates valley, both dating to about 9500 BC.

Tenta was the same, providing evidence of an architectural style that
had evidently survived for many millennia on Cyprus after it had been
replaced elsewhere. Ian Todd, working on behalf of the Cypriot
Department of Antiquities, excavated this village during the 1970s. He
revealed a cluster of small circular dwellings around the summit of a
knoll, some built from stone and others with mud brick. At the summit
itself there was a much larger circular structure with three concentric
walls surrounded by small cells.¹⁶

The structure is almost identical in size, shape and design to one found
more than 500 kilometres to the east and which may have been constructed
one thousand years earlier. This was at the settlement of Jerf el Ahmar,
excavated by Danielle Stordeur in the 1990s and now flooded by Lake
Assad. With its concentric walls and radial cells, Stordeur suggested
that the Jerf el Ahmar structure could have been a central granary for
the village, built by communal effort.

The striking similarity between the structures at Tenta and Jerf el
Ahmar was noticed by Eddie Peltenburg, an archaeologist from Edinburgh
University who directs excavations in both Cyprus and Syria. In a
presentation at the conference, Peltenburg pointed to several other
connections between Neolithic architecture on Cyprus and that of the
earliest Neolithic villages in Iraq, Syria and Turkey, those which date
to the Pre-Pottery Neolithic A.¹⁷ Both, for instance, used thick pillars
inside their dwellings; these had been found at Qermez Dere and Nemrik
in Iraq (as we will see in a later chapter) and at Nevali Çori and
Göbekli Tepe in Turkey. Additionally, at least one of the pillars at
Tenta had been painted with a dancing anthropomorphic figure that
recalled the carvings at the latter two sites. As the dwellings in
Cyprus had thick walls, Peltenburg disregarded the idea that the pillars
were required as roof supports. He thought they lacked any utilitarian
function and were charged with symbolic meaning.

On the basis of such architectural similarities and those found in the
technical details of stone tools, Peltenburg proposed that the first
farmers on Cyprus had originated from western Syria: not from the
settlements of Jerf el Ahmar or Nevali Çori themselves, as these are far
inland, but from contemporary settlements near the coast which had the
same architectural and cultural traditions. No such settlements are
currently known. Any that might have been on the coast itself will now
be far under the sea. Peltenburg speculated that others must still exist
in the present-day coastal strip of Syria, undiscovered simply because
no one has taken the trouble to look for them. That is precisely what he
now intends to do.

Peltenburg made a persuasive case that the first farmers of Cyprus had
sailed from the Syrian coast. Whereas the very first Cypriot arrivals
had been pushed by the economic stress caused by the Younger Dryas,
these new arrivals were driven by the opportunity for colonisation that
a farming economy provides. They brought with them not only seed-grain,
pigs, cattle, sheep and goats, but the architectural and cultural
traditions that were also found further east at Jerf el Ahmar, and
Göbekli Tepe.

Once these colonists had arrived on Cyprus soon after 9000 BC they
maintained their cultural traditions throughout the Neolithic, even
though new architectural styles – the rectangular two-storey buildings –
developed across the mainland of western Asia. By 6000 BC, when small
circular mud-walled houses were still being built at Tenta and
Khirokitia, the Euphrates valley was home to substantial towns; even
larger and with more impressive architecture than Lubbock had seen at
‘Ain Ghazal and Bouqras.

On the third day of my Cyprus visit I went to visit Tenta and
Khirokitia. Both were fascinating and disappointing in equal measure.
The archaeology itself was outstanding. The mud-brick dwellings at Tenta
had walls surviving to waist-height and clustered tightly around the
multi-walled stone-built circular structure at the summit of the hill.
It looked just like the pictures I had seen of the structure at Jerf el
Ahmar. Many of the dwellings had remnants of thick square pillars,
leaving hardly any living space for the occupants.

A wooden walkway had been constructed so one had to view the site from
above. This was below an enormous conical tent that cut out the sun, the
breeze and the view.¹⁸ Such measures served to protect the fragile
mud-brick buildings of Tenta. But however fine the buildings looked, as
I was unable to walk between or within these dwellings, to touch the
stone or crouch down beside the walls, I felt quite unable to imagine
the people who had lived inside.

The archaeology of Khirokitia was more impressive and even less
evocative of the Neolithic past.¹⁹ As a ‘World Heritage’ site it was
carefully managed with walkways and information boards, guidebooks and
reconstructed dwellings. Excavations in the 1930s and 1970s revealed a
mass of circular stone-built houses, so tightly squashed together across
a hillside that from a distance the site looked more like a scree slope
than the ruins of a prehistoric village. On a closer look, the walls of
many circular dwellings survived to knee-height; a few had internal
pillars, hearths and grinding stones.

I didn’t linger. I simply walked the demarcated route up and down the
hill to the sounds and smells of motorway traffic that roared near by,
then went to drink a beer in the local bar. It advertised a ‘Neolithic
salad’ but this turned out to be like any other salad on the island.
Cyprus, it seemed, was determined to keep its prehistoric past firmly in
the present: my visit to Aetokremnos Cave had been disturbed by the roar
of military aircraft from the nearby air base of Akrotiri, while the
Neolithic wells at Mylouthkia were surrounded by tourist development.
The terraces of olive groves around Shillourokambos had been pretty but
such intensive cultivation left no sense of the prehistoric terrain.
Both Tenta and Khirokitia had been admirably conserved and displayed,
but in the process they had lost their prehistoric soul.

I should have been with Lubbock, back on the hillside at Khirokitia in
6000 BC. Then the village was crammed with people, who had to squeeze
past each other to reach their own dwellings or visit one another after
having worked in the fields all day. Clusters of flat-roofed dwellings
were arranged around small courtyards, cluttered with the debris of
domestic life: stone bowls, grinding stones, flint-bladed sickles. The
clusters, housing an extended family, abutted each other so tightly that
people were irritable with those who tried to pass through or had
discarded their rubbish too near. Fortunately Lubbock was able to sit in
a corner quite unseen, sharing it with a couple of farting goats. There
was a cacophony of Neolithic noise dominated by barking dogs and crying
children. The whole village stank of human and animal waste; it was
covered in a thick pall of acrid smoke as each courtyard had its own
fire and cooked its own food.

Life at Khirokitia seemed deeply unpleasant to Lubbock – not in a
menacing way, as at Çatalhöyük, but in a messy, claustrophobic way. The
types of dwellings and courtyards they used had been originally
constructed for communities of fifty people at most. Lubbock reckoned
there to be ten times that number squatting around their fireplaces upon
the hill. Whereas those who lived in western Asia had adopted new types
of architecture as their populations grew, the people of Khirokitia had
simply kept adding more of the same, resulting in their sprawling,
dysfunctional settlement.

The new architecture in western Asia had gone hand in hand with new
rules and regulations for living together. These were imposed by the
priests such as Lubbock had seen in ‘Ain Ghazal, or agreed upon in
public meeting-houses such as that of Beidha. But no such authority or
decision-making for the common good had arisen at Khirokitia. Each
extended family effectively cared for itself alone – producing and
storing its own food, burying its own dead, even having its own
religious beliefs.

Lubbock had searched in vain for public buildings where communal
planning, worship or ritual might have taken place. Neither could he
find any sign of authority-figures that might have provided rules and
resolved disputes. While such independent family groups had been viable
when fresh water, land and firewood were in good supply, these were now
seriously depleted. The result was unremitting tension and conflict in
the over-populated town.

My plane was leaving from Larnaka airport the next morning. I had one
last chance to engage with the Cypriot past. And so I hurried away from
the Khirokitia bar and drove into the Troodos mountains where the
ancient forest of pine and oak that had once covered the island has been
allowed to grow again.

I arrived at dusk. My destination was Cedar Valley in the heart of the
forest, the last natural habitat of the indigenous cedar trees that must
once have flourished across the island. Tarmacked roads had long since
turned to rough forest tracks which repeatedly grated against my quite
unsuitable hired car. The light was fading as the sun sunk below the
tree-covered slopes. I was thinking about giving up when, turning one of
the endless sharp bends, a mouflon appeared on the track and then ambled
into the trees. I stopped, and we stared at each other for an instant;
with its great curved horns, powerful forequarters and deep brown hide,
this was as close to a Neolithic goat as can be found. Suddenly it
turned and fled, leaving me with nothing but the sound of stones kicked
down the rocky slope as it disappeared from sight.

Feeling encouraged, I passed a forester and asked the way to Cedar
Valley. ‘Another twenty kilometres,’ he said – at least an hour’s drive
on the ever-deteriorating track. ‘Come back tomorrow,’ he continued, ‘it
will be pitch black when you arrive.’

That wasn’t an option. But he was right, for when I finally stepped from
my car and turned off the lights there was almost nothing to be seen. I
hesitantly walked into the trees, their thick trunks emerging one by one
as my eyes adjusted. I looked up, hoping to see the flat, umbrella-like
branches of the cedar; but there was neither shape nor form, the
branches from pines, planes, cedars and oaks all silhouetted into one
dark surround pierced irregularly by the moonlit sky.

I shuffled from trunk to trunk feeling their bark and trying to recall
whether the cedar was rough or smooth. Without my eyes, my ears took
over: the cicadas reverberated, tiny drips of water splashed loudly,
scuffles in the undergrowth – beetles or mice – sounded like mouflon,
deer or even wild boar. Quite suddenly I felt closer to the prehistoric
world than I had done at Aetokremnos or Mylouthkia, at Tenta or
Khirokitia. I had become entirely engulfed in an astonishing scent of
cedar and pine, of rotting leaves and decaying bark, of moonlight,
spider’s webs and forest streams. It was perhaps the one sensation I
could share with those who had first arrived to explore and live upon
the island.

